LIVESOF THENECROMANCERS.BAYLIS AND Leighton,J0HN80N*S.C0UKT, Fleet-street.LIVESOF THENECROMANCERS:OR,AN ACCOUNT OF THE MOST EMINENT PERSONS INSUCCESSIVE AGES, WHO HAVE CLAIMED FORTHEMSELVES, OR TO WHOM HASBEEN IMPUTED BY OTHERS,THEEXERCISE OF MAGICAL POWER.rBY WILLIAM GODWIN.LONDON :FREDERICK J. MASON, 444., WEST STRAND.1834. .^V^-PrefacerThe main purpose of this book is to exhibit adelineation of the credulity of the humanind. Such an exhibition cannot fail to be productiveof the most salutary lessons.One view of the subject will teach us a useful^de in the abundance of our faculties. WithoutPride man is in reality of little value. It is pridelat stimulates us to all our great undertakings.Without pride, and the secret persuasion of extraordinarytalents, what man would take up the penwith a view to produce an important work, wheelerof imagination and poetry, or of profoundScience, or of acute and subtle reasoning and in-llectual anatomy? It is pride in this sense thatkes the great general and the consummate relator,that animates us to tasks the most PREFACE.various, and causes us to shrink from no difficulty,and to be confounded and overwhelmed with noobstacle that can be interposed in our path.Nothing can be more striking than the contrastbetween man and the inferior animals. The latterlive only for the day, and see for the most partonly what is immediately before them. But manlives in the past and the future. He reasons uponand improves by the past ; he records the acts ofa long series of generations : and he looks intofuture time, lays down plans which he shall bemonths and years in bringing to maturity, andcontrives machines and delineates systems of educationand government, which may gradually addto the accommodations of all, and raise the speciesgenerally into a nobler and more honourable characterthan our ancestors were capable of sustaining.Man looks through nature, and is able to reduceits parts into a great whole. He classes the beingswhich are found in it, both animate and inanimate,delineates and describes them, investigates theirproperties, and records their capacities, their goodand evil qualities, their dangers and their uses.Nor does he only see all that is ; but he alsoimages all that is not. He takes to pieces thesubstances that, are, and combines their parts intonew arrangements. He peoples all the elementsI som the world of his imagination. It is here thathe is most extraordinary and wonderful. Therecord of what actually is, and has happened inthe series of human events, is perhaps the smallestpart of human history. If we would know man inall his subtleties, we must deviate into the worldI of miracles and sorcery. To know the tilings thatI are not, and cannot be, but have been imaginedI and believed, is the most curious chapter in thef animals of man. To observe the actual results ofI <tbese imaginary phenomena, and the crimes andcruelties they have caused us to commit, is one ofthe most instructive studies in which we can post.sibly be engaged. It is here that man is mostI astonishing, and that we contemplate with mostI .admiration the discursive and unbounded natureprof his faculties.But, if a recollection of the examples of thecredulity of the human mind may in one viewSupply nourishment to our pride, it still more obviouslytends to teach us sobriety and humiliation.Man in his genuine and direct sphere is the dish-2ciple of reason ; it is by this faculty that he drawsinferences, exerts his prudence, and displays theingenuity of machinery, and the subtlety of systemboth in natural and moral philosophy. Yet whatso irrational as man ? Not contented u'ith makinguse o£ the powys we possess, for the purpose ofconducing to our accommodation and well being,we with a daring spirit inquire into the invisiblecauses of what we see, and people all nature withGods " of every shape and size" and angels, withprincipalities and powers, with beneficent beingswho "take charge concerning us lest at any timewe dash our foot against a stone," and with devilswho are perpetually on the watch to perplex usand do us injury. And, having familiarised ourminds with the conceptions of these beings, weimmediately aspire to hold communion with then.We represent to ourselves God, as " walking inthe garden with us in the cool of the day," andteach ourselves "not to forget to entertain strangers,lest by so doing we should repel angels unawares."No sooner are we, even in a slight degree, acquaintedwith the laws of nature, than we fr^neto ourselves the idea, by the aid of some invisibleally, of suspending their operation, of calling outmeteors in the sky, of commanding storms andtempests, of arresting the motion of the heavenlybodies, of producing miraculous cures upon thebodies of our fellow-men, or attracting them withdisease and death, of calling up the deceased fromthe silence of the grave, and compelling them to\ disclose " the secrets of the world unknown."But, what is most deplorable, we are not conftented to endeavour to secure the aid of God andgood angels, but we also aspire to enter into allionce with devils, and beings destined for theirrebellion to suffer eternally the pains of hell. Asthey are supposed to be of a character pervertedI and depraved, we of course apply to them princepally for purposes of wantonness, or of malice andI revenge. And, in the instances which have Cursed only a few centuries back, the most com-I mon idea has been of a compact entered into byI an unprincipled and impious human being withthe sworn enemy of God and man, in the resultI of which the devil engages to serve the capriciousI will and perform the behests of his blasphemousvotary for a certain number of years, while the deludedwretch in return engages to renounce hiaGod and Saviour, and surrender himself body andsoul to the pains of hell from the end of that terrato all eternity. No sooner do we imagine humanbeings invested with these wonderful powers, andconceive them as called into action for the mostmalignant purposes, than we become the passiveand terrified slaves of the creatures of our ownimaginations, and fear to be assailed at every momentby beings to whose power we can set nolimit, and whose modes of hostility no humansagacity can anticipate and provide against. But,what is still more extraordinary, the human creaturesthat pretend to these powers have often beenfound as completely the dupes of this supernaturalmachinery, as the most timid wretch that standsin terror at its expected operation ; and no phenomenonhas been more common than the confessionof these allies of hell, that they have verily andindeed held commerce and formed plots and conspiracieswith Satan.The consequence of this state of things has been,that criminal jurisprudence and the last severitiesof the law have been called forth to an amazingextent to exterminate witches and witchcraft.More especially in the sixteenth century hundredsand thousands were burned alive within the compassof a small territory ; and judges, the directorsI of the scene, a Nicholas Remi, a De Lancre, andmany others, have published copious volumes,I entering into a minute detail of the system and&flhion of the witchcraft of the professors, whomthey sent in multitudes to expiate their depravityat the gallows and the stake.One useful lesson which we may derive from thedetail of these particulars, is the folly in most casesI imputing pure and unmingled hypocrisy to man.The human mind is of so ductile a character that,belike what is affirmed of charity by the apostle, it'* believeth all things, and endure all things."I We are not at liberty to trifle with the sacrednesslos truth. While we persuade others, we begin toDeceive ourselves. Human life is a drama of thatIwrt, that, while we act our part, and endeavour^lo do justice to the sentiments which are put downfor us, we begin to believe wc arc the thing weI would represent.To shew however the modes in which the dehi-K>sioD acts upon the person through whom it open-rates, is not properly the scope of this book. HereI and there I have suggested hints to this purpose,I which the curious reader may follow to their furthestextent, and discover how with perfect goodfaith the artist may bring himself to swallow thegrossest impossibilities. But the work I have writtenis not a treatise of natural magic. It ratherproposes to display the immense wealth of thefaculty of imagination, and to shew the extravagancesof which the man may be guilty who surrendershimself to its guidance.It is fit however that the reader should bear inmind, that what is put down in this book is but asmall part and scantling of the acts of sorcery andwitchcraft which have existed in human society.They have been found in all ages and countries.The torrid zone and the frozen north have neitherof them escaped fi'om a fruitful harvest of this sortof offspring. In ages of ignorance they have beenespecially at home ; and the races of men that haveleft no records behind them to tell almost that theyexisted, have been most of all rife in deeds ofdarkness, and those marvellous incidents whichespecially astonish the spectator, and throw backthe infant reason of man into those shades and thatobscurity from which it had so recently endeavouredto escape.I wind up for the present my literary laboursPREFACE. Nulwith the production of this book. Nor let anyreader imagine that I here put into his hands amere work of idle recreation. It will be found pregnantwith deeper uses. The wildest extravagancesof human fancy, the most deplorable perversion ofhuman faculties, and the most horrible distortionsof jurisprudence, may occasionally afford us a salutarylesson, I love in the foremost place to contemplateman in aU his honours and in all the exaltationof wisdom and virtue ; but it will also beoccasionally of service to us to look into his obliquities,and distinctly to remark how great andportentous have been his absurdities and his follies.May 29, 1834.CONTENTS.PageINTRODUCTION 1AMBITIOUS NATURE OF MAN . . 9HIS DESIRE TO PENETRATE INTO FUTURITY 10DIVINATION 11AUGURY ib.CHIROMANCY 12PHYSIOGNOMY ib.INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS . 13CASTING OF LOTS 14ASTROLOGY ib.ORACLES . 15DELPHI 16THE DESIRE TO COMMAND AND CONTROLFUTURE EVENTS 20XVI CONTENTS.PageCOMMERCE WITH THE INVISIBLE WORLD . 20SORCERY AND ENCHANTMENT . . . .21WITCHCRAFT 24COMPACTS WITH THE DEVIL 25IMPS 26TALISMANS AND AMULETS 27NECROMANCY ib.ALCHEMY 29FAIRIES 32ROSICRUCIANS 35SYLPHS AND GNOMES, SALAMANDERS ANDIndies 36EXAMPLES OF NECROMANCY ANDWITCHCRAFT FROM THE BIBLE 39THE MAGI, OR WISE MEN OF THE EAST . . 44EGYPT 46STATUE OF MEMNON . . . . . .50TEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON : ITS ORACLES 51CHALDEA AND BABYLON 54ZOROASTER 55GREECE 57DEITIES OF GREECE 58DEMIGODS 62DiEDALUS 64THE ARGONAUTS 66MEDEA 67CIRCE 70ORPHEUS ib.AMPHION .74TIRESIAS 75ABARIS 76PYTHAGORAS 77■ •CONTENTS. XVllPageEumenides 92EMPEDOCLES 95Arises 98Harmonious 99THE MOTHER OF DEMARATUS, KING OFSPARTA 100ORACLES 101INVASION OF XERXES INTO GREECE . . 107DEMOCRITUS 110SOCRATES 112ROME 119VIRGIL ib.POLYDORUS ib.DIDO 120ROMULUS 122Numb ib.Tellus Hostility 124ACCIUS NAVIUS ib.Servile TULLIUS 125THE SORCERESS OF VIRGIL 127Candia 129ERICHTHO 138SERTORIUS 146CASTING OUT DEVILS 150SIMON MAGUS ib.ELYMAS, THE SORCERER 153NERO 155VESPASIAN ib.APOLLONIUS OF TYANA 157APULEIUS 164ALEXANDER THE Papal AGON IAN . 165XVlll CONTENTS.PageREVOLUTION PRODUCED IN THEHISTORY OF NECROMANCY ANDWITCHCRAFT UPON THE EstablishmentOF CHRISTIANITY 171MAGICAL CONSULTATIONS RESPECTING THELIFE OF THE EMPEROR 173HISTORY OF NECROMANCY INTHE EAST 177GENERAL SILENCE OF THE EAST RespectingINDIVIDUAL NECROMANCERS . . 185ROCAIL 187Harem, OTHERWISE MAC ANN A . . . 188ARABIAN NIGHTS* ENTERTAINMENTS . 189PERSIAN TALES 195STORY OF A GOULE 201ARABIAN NIGHTS 203RESEMBLANCE OF THE TALES OF THE EASTAND OF EUROPE 204CAUSES OF HUMAN CREDULITY . . .206DARK AGES OF EUROPE . . .211MERLIN 216ST. DUNSTAN 222COMMUNICATION OF EUROPE ANDTHE SARACENS 231Herbert, POPE SILVESTER II . . ib.BENEDICT THE NINTH 234GREGORY THE SEVENTH 235DUFF, KING OF SCOTLAND 241CONTENTS. XIXPageMACBETH 243VIRGIL 249ROBERT OF LINCOLN 252MICHAEL SCOT . 254THE DEAN OF BADAJOZ 255MIRACLE OF THE TUB OF WATER . , . 257INSTITUTION OF FRIARS 259ALBERTUS MAGNUS 260ROGER BACON 263THOMAS AQUINAS 266PETER OF APONO 268ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TREASON . . 269ZIITO 273TRANSMUTATION OF METALS . 277ARTEPHIUS 278RAYMOND LULLI ib.ARNOLD OF VILLENEUVE 281ENGLISH LAWS RESPECTING TRANSMUTATION 282REVIVAL OF LETTERS 285JOAN OF ARC 286ELEANOR COBHAM, DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER 294RICHARD III 297SANGUINARY PROCEEDINGSAGAINST WITCHCRAFT . . 299SAVONAROLA 311TRITHEMIUS 318LUTHER • . 320CORNELIUS AGRIPPA 322FAUSTUS 330SABELLICUS 358PARACELSUS 359CARDAN 362XX CONTENTS.PageQUACKS, WHO IN COOL BLOOD UNDERTOOKTO OVERREACH MANKIND . 364BENVENUTO CELLINI 365NOSTRADAMUS 372DOCTOR DEE 373EARL OF DERBY 398KING JAMES'S VOYAGE TO NORWAY . . 390JOHN Finn 404KING JAMES'S DEMONOLOGY . . . .406STATUTE, 1 JAMES I 407FORMAN AND OTHERS 408LATEST IDEAS OF JAMES ON THE SUBJECT 412LANCASHIRE WITCHES ib.LADY DAVIES 418EDWARD FAIRFAX 419DOCTOR LAMB ih,URBAIN Grander 421ASTROLOGY 423WILLIAM LILLY . . . . . .426MATTHEW HOPKINS 432CROMWEL 437DOROTHY MATELEY 440WITCHES HANGED BY SIR MATTHEW HALE 443WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN 448WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND . 454CONCLUSION 463LIVESNECROMANCERSThe improvements that have been effected innatural philosophy have by degrees convinced theenlightened part of mankind that the materialdiverse is every where subject to laws, fixed inleir weight, measure and duration, capable uf the(st exact calculation, and which in no case admitf variation and exception. Whatever is not thus^be accounted for is of mind, and springs fromvolition of some being, of which the materiali subjected to our senses, and the action of!uch is in Hke manner regulated by the laws ofBeside this, mind, as well as matter, isobject to fixed laws; and thus every phenomenonand occurrence around us is rendered a topic forthe speculations of sagacity and foresight. Suchis the creed which science has universally prescribedto the judicious and reflecting among us.It was otherwise in the infancy and less matureB of human knowledge. The chain of causesLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.and consequences was yet unrecognized ; andevents perpetually occurred, for which no sagacitythat was then in being was able to assign an original.Hence men felt themselves habitually disposedto refer many of the appearances with whichthey were conversant to the agency of invisibleintelligences j sometimes under the influence of abenignant disposition, sometimes of malice, andsometimes perhaps from an inclination to makethemselves sport of the wonder and astonishmentof ignorant mortals. Omens and portents toldthese men of some piece of good or ill fortunespeedily to befal them. The flight of birds waswatched by them, as betokening somewhat important.Thunder excited in them a feeling ofsupernatural terror. Eclipses with fear" of changeperplexed the nations. The phenomena of theheavens, regular and irregular, were anxiously re-rmarked from the same principle. During thehours of darkness men were apt to see a supernaturalbeing in every bush ; and they could notcross a receptacle for the dead, without expectingto encounter some one of the departed uneasilywandering among graves, or commissioned to revealsomewhat momentous and deeply affecting tothe survivors. Fairies danced in the moonlightglade ; and something preternatural perpetuallyoccurred to fill the having with admiration and awe.All this gradually reduced itself into a system.Mankind, particularly in the dark and ignorantIIILIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.^^^ Lou:^^^ftboiwere divided into the strong and the weak ;le strong and weak of animal frame, when cor-treatstrength more decidedly bore sway than in aod of greater cultivation ; and the strong and'weak in reference to intellect ; those who werebold, audacious and enterprising in acquiring anascendancy over their fellow-inn, and those whotruckled, submitted, and were acted upon, from aninnate consciousness of inferiority, and a superstitiouslooking up to such as were of greater naturalacquired endowments than themselves. The■ng in intellect were eager to avail themselvesof their superiority, by means that escaped the penetrationof the multitude, and had recourse tovarious artifices lo effect their ends. Beside this,they became the dupes of their own practices.They set out at first in their conception of things>m the level of the vulgar. They applied themesdiligently to the unravelling of what wasunknown ; wonder mingled with their contemplation; they abstracted their minds from things ofordinary occurrence, and, as we may denominateit, of real life, till at length they lost their tiebalance amidst the astonishment they sought toproduce in their inferiors. They felt a vocationto things extraordinary; and they willingly gavescope and line without limit to that which engenderedin themselves the most gratifying sensations,.at the same time that it answered the purposes oflir ambition.LIVES OF THE Necromancers.As these principles in the two parties, the morerefined anJ the vulgar, are universal, and derivetheir origin from the nature of man, it has necessarilyhappened that this faith in extraordinaryevents, and superstitious fear of what is supernatural,has diffused itself through every climate ofthe world, in a certain stage of human intellect,and while refinement had not yet got the better ofbarbarism. The Celts of antiquity had theirDruids, a branch of whose special profession wasthe exercise of magic. The Chaldeans and Egyptianshad their wise men, their magicians and theirsorcerers. The negroes have their foretellers ofevents, their amulets, and their reporters and believersof miraculous occurrences, A similar raceof men was found by Columbus and the other discoverersof the New World in America; and factsof a parallel nature are attested to us in the islandsof the South Seas. And, as phenomena of thissort were universal in their nature, without distinctionof climate, whether torrid or frozen, andindependently of the discordant manners and customsof different countries, so have they been veryslow and recent in their disappearing. QueenElizabeth sent to consult Dr. Holm Dee, the astrologer,respecting a lucky day for her coronation ;King James the First employed much of hislearned leisure upon questions of witchcraft anddemonology, in which he fully believed j and sirMatthew Hale in the year 1664 caused two oldLIVES OF The NECItOMANCEllS.^^^in a <I and Iwomen to be hanged upon a charge of unlawfulcommunion with infernal agents.The history of mankind therefore will be veryimperfect, and our knowledge of the operationsand eccentricities of the mind lamentably deficient,unless we take into our view what has occurredunder this head. The supernatural appearanceswith which our ancestors conceived themselvesperpetually surrounded must have had astrong tendency to cherish and keep alive thepowers of the imagination, and to penetrate thosewho witnessed or expected such things with anextraordinary sensitiveness. As the course oievents appears to us at present, there is much,though abstractedly within the compass of humansagacity to foresee, which yet the actors on thescene do not foresee : but the blindness and perplexityof short-sighted mortals must have beenwonderfully increased, when ghosts and extraordinaryappearances were conceived liable to crossthe steps and confound the projects of men atevery turn, and a malicious wizard or a powerfulenchanter might involve his unfortunate victimin a chain of calamities, which no prudence couldm, and no virtue could deliver him from.ley were the slaves of an uncontrolable destiny,and must therefore have been eminently deficientin the perseverance and moral courage, which mayitaly be required of us in a more enlightened age.id the men (but these were few compared withLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.the great majority of mankind), who believedthemselves gifted with supernatural endowments,must have felt exempt and privileged from commonrules, somewhat in the same way as the personswhom fiction has delighted to pourtray asendowed with immeasurable wealth, or with thepower of rendering themselves impassive or invisible.But, whatever were their advantages ordisadvantages, at any rate it is good for us to callup in review things, which are now passed away,but which once occupied so large a share of thethoughts and attention of mankind, and in a greatdegree tended to modify their characters and dictatetheir resolutions.As has already been said, numbers of those whowere endowed with the highest powers of humanintellect, such as, if they had lived in these times,would have aspired to eminence in the exactsciences, to the loftiest flights of imagination, orto the discovery of means by which the institutionsof men in society might be rendered morebeneficial and faultless, at that time wasted themidnight oil in endeavouring to trace the occultqualities and virtues of things, to render invisiblespirits subject to their command, and to effectthose wonders, of which they deemed themselvesto have a dim conception, but which more rationalviews of nature have taught us to regard as beyondour power to effect. These sublime wanderingsof the mind are well entitled to our labour to traceILIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.and investigate. The errors of mat) are worthyto be recorded, not only as beacons to warn usfrom the shelves where our ancestors have madeshipwreck, but even as something honourable toour nature, to shew how high a generous ambitioncould soar, though in forbidden paths, and inthings too wonderful for us.Nor only is this subject inexpressibly interestssetting before us how the loftiest and most'enterprising minds of ancient days formerly busiedthemselves. It is also of the highest importanceto an ingenuous curiosity, inasmuch as it vitallyaffected tic fortunes of so considerable a portionof the mass of mankind. The legislatures of remoteages bent all their severity at different periodsagainst what they deemed the unhallowed arts ofthe sons and daughters of reprobation. multitudesof human creatures have been sacrificed inTrent ages and countries, upon the accusationof having exercised arts of the most immoral andsacrilegious character. They were supposed tohave formed a contract with a mighty and invisiblespirit, the great enemy of man, and to have soldthemselves, body and soul, to everlasting perdition,ir the sake of gratifying, for a short term of'ears, their malignant passions against those who'lead been so unfortunate as to give them cause ofoffence. If there were any persona who imaginedthey had entered into such a contract, however'onerous was their belief, they must of necessity8 LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.have been greatly depraved. And it was butnatural that such as believed in this crime, musthave considered it as atrocious beyond all others,and have regarded those who were supposed guiltyof it with inexpressible abhorrence. There aremany instances on record, where the persons accusedof it, either from the depth of their delusion,or, which is more probable, harassed bypersecution, by the hatred of their fellow-creaturesdirected against them, or by torture, actually confessedthemselves guilty. These instances are toonumerous, not to constitute an important chapterin the legislation of past ages. And, now that theillusion has in a manner passed away from the faceof the earth, we are on that account the betterqualified to investigate this error in its causes andconsequences, and to look back on the tempestand hurricane from which we have escaped, withchastened feelings and a sounder estimate of itsnature, its reign, and its effects.AMBITIOUS NATURE OF MAN.MAN is a creature of boundless ambition.It is probably our natural wants that first awakenus from that lethargy and indifference in which manmay be supposed to be plunged previously to theimpulse of any motive, or the accession of any uneasiness.One of our earliest wants may be conceivedto be hunger, or the desire of food.From this simple beginning the history of man inits complex varieties may be regarded as pro-leading.Man in a state of society, more especially wherethere is an inequality of condition and rank, is veryoften the creature of leisure. He finds in himself,either from internal or external impulse, a certain:activity. He finds himself at one time engaged inle accomplishment of his obvious and immediatehires, and at another in a state in which thesehires have for the present been fulfilled, and heno present occasion to repeat those exertions'which led to their fulfilment. This is the periodcontemplation. This is the state which mosteminently distinguishes us from the brutes. Hereit is that the history of man, in its exclusive sense,lay be considered as taking its beginning.Here it is that he specially recognises in himselfle sense of power. ' Power in its simplest acceptor,may be exerted in either of two ways, eitherlU LIVES OF The NECROMANCERS.in his procuring for himself an ample field for morerefined accommodations, or in the exercise of compulsionand authority over other living creatures.,In the pursuit of either of these, and especially thefirst, he is led to the attainment of skill and superioradroitness in the use of his faculties.No sooner has man reached to this degree ofimprovement, than now, if not indeed earlier, heis induced to remark the extreme limitedness of hisfaculties in respect to the future; and he is led, ,first earnestly to desire a clearer insight into thefuture, and next a power of commanding thoseexternal causes upon which the events of the futuredepend. The first of these desires is the parentof divination, augury, chiromancy, astrology, andthe consultation of oracles ^ and the second haS'been the prolific source of enchantment, witchcraft,sorcery, magic, necromancy, and alchemy, inits two branches, the unlimited prolongation o£. ;human life, and the art of converting less precious'metals into gold.HIS DESIRE TO PENETRATE INTO FUTURt^l^^y'^Noticing can suggest to us a more striking and .stupendous idea of the faculties of the human mind,than the consideration of the various arts by whichmen have endeavoured to penetrate into the future,and to command the events of the future, in waySthat in sobriety and truth are entirely out of outLIVES OF THE Necromancers,competence. We spurn impatiently against thenarrow limits which the constitution of things hasfixed to our aspiring, and endeavour by a multiplicityof ways to accomplish that which it is totallyyond the power of man to effect.DIVINATION.Divination has been principally employed inexpecting the entrails of beasts offered for sacrifice,id from their appearance drawing omens of theor ill success of the enterprises in which weareabout to engage.M'hat the divination by the cup was whichJoseph practised, or pretended to practise, we doitperhaps exactly understand. We all of uslow somewhat of the predictions, to this day re-•.d to by maid-servants and others, from theclearance of the sediment to be found at the"bottom of a tea-cup. Predictions of a similar sortare formed from the unpremeditated way in whichwe get out of bed in a morning, or put on ourgarments, from the persons or things we shallencounter when we first leave our chamber or goforth in the air, or any of the indifferent accidentsof life.AUGURY.i Augury has its foundation in observing the flight12 LIVES OF TH£ NECROMANCERS.of birds, the sounds they utter, their motionswhether sluggish or animated, and the avidity orotherwise with which they appear to take theirfood. The college of augurs was one of the mostsolemn institutions of ancient Rome.CHIROMANCY.Chiromancy, or the art of predicting the variousfortunes of the individual, from an inspection ofthe minuter variations of the lines to be found inthe palm of the human hand, has been used perhapsat one time or other in all the nations of the world.PHYSIOGNOMY.Physiognomy is not so properly a prediction offuture events, as an attempt to explain the presentand inherent qualities of a man. By unfolding hispropensities however, it virtually gave the world tounderstand the sort of proceedings in which he wasmost likely to engage. The story of Socrates andthe physiognomist is sufficiently known. Thephysiognomist having inspected the countenanceof the philosopher, pronounced that he was givento intemperance, sensuality, and violent bursts ofpassion, all of which was so contrary to his characteras universally known, that his disciples deridedthe physiognomist as a vain-glorious pretender.Socrates however presently put them toLIVES OF THE Necromancers.silence, by declaiming that he had had an originalpropensity to all the vices imputed to him, andhad only conquered the propensity by dint of asevere and unremitted self-discipline.INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS.Oneirocriticism, or the art of interpreting dreams,seems of all the modes of prediction the most inseparablefrom the nature of man. A considerableportion of every twenty-four hours of our lives isspent in sleep ; and in sleep nothing is at leastmore usual, than for the mind to be occupied in athousand imaginary scenes, which for the time areasrealities, and often excite the passions of themind of the sleeper in no ordinary degree. Many ofthem are wild and rambling ; but many also have aportentous sobriety. Many seem to have a strictconnection with the incidents of our actual lives ;and some appear as if they came for the very purposeto warn us of danger, or prepare us for comingevents. It is therefore no wonder that theseoccasionally fill our waking thoughts with a deepinterest, and impress upon us an anxiety of whichwe feel it difficult to rid ourselves. Accordingly,in ages when men were more prone to superstition,than at present, they sometimes constituted asubject of earnest anxiety and inquisitiveness ; andwe find among the earliest exercises of the art ofdiction, the interpretation of dreams to have14 LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.occupied a principal place, and to have been as itwere reduced into a science.CASTING OF LOTS.The casting of lots seems scarcely to come withinthe enumeration here given. It was intended asan appeal to heaven upon a question involved inuncertainty, with the idea that the supreme Rulerof the skies, thus appealed to, would from his omnisciencesupply the defect of human knowledge.Two examples, among others sufficiently remarkable,occur in the Bible. One of Achan, whosecreted part of the spoil taken in Jericho, whichwas consecrated to the service of God, and who,being taken by lot, confessed, and was stoned todeath*. The other of Jonah, upon whom the lotfell in a mighty tempest, the crew of the ship enquiringby this means what was the cause of thecalamity that had overtaken them, and Jonah beingin consequence cast into the sea.ASTROLOGY.Astrology was one of the modes most ancientlyand universally resorted to for discovering the fortunesof men and nations. Astronomy and astrologywent hand in hand, particularly among theJoshua, vii. 16, et seq.prui^^^ andLIVES OF TH£ Necromancers. 15people of the East. The idea of fate was oiostespecially bound up in this branch of prophecy.If the fortune of a man was intimately connectedwith the position of the heavenly bodies, it becameindent that little was left to the province of hisfree wilL The stars overruled him in all his determinations;and it was in vain for him to resist,^cm. There was something flattering to theman imagination in conceiving that the planetsid the orbs on high were concerned in the convictwe should pursue, and the events that should1 us. Man resigned himself to his fate with asolemn, yet a lofty feeling, that the remotest portionsof the universe were concerned in the catastrophethat awaited him. Beside which, there wassomething peculiarly seducing in the apparentlyprofound investigation of the professors of astrology.They busied themselves with the actualition of the heavenly bodies, their conjunctionsand oppositions ; and of consequence there was agreat apparatus of diagrams and calculation towhich they were prompted to apply themselves,d which addressed itself to the eyes and imaginationsof those who consulted them.But that which seems to have had the greatest'Ague in times of antiquity, relative to the predictionof fixture events, is what is recorded of oracles.l6 LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.Finding the insatiable curiosity of mankind as towhat was to happen hereafter, and the general desirethey felt to be guided in their conduct by ananticipation of things to come, the priests prettygenerally took advantage of this passion, to increasetheir emoluments and offerings, and the moreeffectually to inspire the rest of their species with •veneration and a willing submission to their authority.The oracle was delivered in a temple, orsome sacred place ; and in this particular we plainlydiscover that mixture of nature and art, of genuineenthusiasm and contriving craft, which is so frequentlyexemplified in the character of man.The oracle of Apollo at Delphi is the most remarkable; and respecting it we are furnished withthe greatest body of particulars. The locality of ithis oracle is said to have been occasioned by thefollowing circumstance. A goat-herd fed his flockson the acclivity of mount Parnassus. As the animalswandered here and there in pursuit of food,they happened to approach a deep and long chasmwhich appeared in the rock. From this chasm avapour issued ; and the goats had no sooner inhaleda portion of the vapour, than they began to 'play and frisk about with singular agility. Thegoat-herd, observing this, and curious to discoverthe cause, held his head over the chasm; when, inLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.tate^^^ dowa short time, the fumes having ascended to hisbrain, he threw Himself into a variety of strangeattitudes, and uttered words, which probably hedid not understand himself, but which were supposedto convey a prophetic meaning.This phenomenon was taken advantage of, andtemple to Apollo was erected on the spot. TheCredulous many believed that here was obviouslya centre and focus of divine inspiration. On thismountain Apollo was said to have slain the serpentPython. The apartment of the oracle was immediatelyover the chasm from which the vapourissued. A priestess delivered the responses, whowas called Pythia, probably in commemoration ofthe exploit which had been performed by Apollo.She sat upon a tripod, or three-legged stool, perforatedwith holes, over the seat of the vapours.After a time, her figure enlarged itself, her hairstood on end, her complexion and features becamealtered, lier heart panted and her bosom swelled,and her voice grew more than human. In thiscondition she uttered a number of wild and incoherentphrases, which were supposed to be dictatedby the God. The questions which wereTered by those who came to consult the oracle"e then proposed to her, and her answers takendown by the priest, whose office was to arrangeand methodize them, and put them into hexameterverse, atlcr which they were delivered toLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.the votaries. The priestess could only be consultedon one day in every month.Great ingenuity and contrivance were no doubtrequired to uphold the credit of the oracle ; andno less boldness and self-collectedness on the part ofthose by whom the machinery was conducted.Like the conjurors of modern times, they took careto be extensively informed as to all such mattersrespecting which the oracle was likely to be consulted.They listened probably to the Pythia witha superstitious reverence for the incoherent sen ■fences she uttered. She, like them, spent her lifein being trained for the office to which she wasdevoted. All that was rambling and inapplicablein her wild declamation they consigned to oblivion.Whatever seemed to bear on the question proposedthey preserved. The persons by whom the responseswere digested into hexameter verse, hadof course a commission attended with great discretionarypower. They, as Horace remarks onanother occasion', divided what it was judiciousto say, from what it was prudent to omit, dweltupon one thing, and slurred over and accommodatedanother, just as would best suit the purposethey had in hand. Beside this, for the most partthey clothed the apparent meaning of the oracle inobscurity, and often devised sentences of ambiguousinterpretation, that might suit with■ Tie Arte Poetica, v.or amotgu- iLIVES OF THE NECROM Angels.^^iefissues, whichever might happen to fall out. Thiswas perfectly consistent with a high degree of enthusiasmon the part of the priest. However confidenthe might be in some things, he could notbut of necessity feel that his prognostic were surroundedwith uncertainty. Whatever decisions ofthe oracle were frustrated by the event, and weknow that there were many of this sort, werespeedily forgotten ; while those which succeeded,were conveyed from shore to shore, and repeatedby every echo. Nor is it surprising that the transmittersof the sentences of the God should in timearrive at an extraordinary degree of sagacity andskill. The oracles accordingly readied to so higha degree of reputation, that, as Cicero observes,no expedition for a long time was undertaken, nocolony sent out, and often no affair of any distinguishedfamily or individual entered on, withoutthe previously obtaining their judgment and sanction.Their authority in a word was so high, thatthe first fathers of the Christian church could nootherwise account for a reputation thus universallyreceived, than by supposing that the devils wereomitted by God Almighty to inform the oracleswith a more than human prescience, that all theirld might be concluded in idolatry and unbelief',and the necessity of a Saviour be made moreapparent. The gullibility of man is one of thelost prominent features of our nature. VariousRomans, xi. 32.C 220 LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.periods and times, when whole nations have as itwere with one consent run into the most incredibleand the grossest absurdities, perpetually offerthemselves in the page of history ; and in the recordsof remote antiquity it plainly appears thatsuch delusions continued through successive centuries.THE DESIRE TO COMMAND AND CONTROL FUTUREEVENTS.Next to the consideration of those measures bywhich men have sought to dive into the secrets offuture time, the question presents itself of thosemore daring undertakings, the object of which hasbeen by some supernatural power to control thefuture, and place it in subjection to the will of theunlicensed adventurer. Men have always, especiallyin ages of ignorance, and when they most felttheir individual weakness, figured to themselvesan invisible strength greater than their own ; and,in proportion to their impatience, and the fervourof their desires, have sought to enter into aleague with those beings whose mightier forcemight supply that in which their weakness failed.COMMERCE WITH THE INVISIBLE WORLD.It is an essential feature of different ages andcountries to vary exceedingly in the good or illLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.ouconstruction, the fame or dishonour, which shallattend upon the same conduct or mode of behaviour.In Egypt and throughout the East, especiallyin the early periods of history, the supposedcommerce with invisible powers was openly promised,which, under other circumstances, andring the reign of different prejudices, was afterwardscarefully concealed, and barbarously huntedout of the pale of allowed and authorised practice.The Magi of old, who claimed a power of producingmiraculous appearances, and boasted a familiarintercourse with the world of spirits, were regarded>y their countrymen with peculiar reverence,and considered as the first and chiefs men in thestate. For this mitigated view of such dark andmysterious proceedings the ancients were in agreat degree indebted to their polytheism. TheRomans are computed to have acknowledgedthirty thousand divinities, to all of whom was rendereda legitimate homage ; and other countries inasimilar proportion.SORCERY AND ENCHANTMENT.In Asia, however, the Gods were divided intotwo parties, under Romances, the principle ofgood, and Arimaniu.'*, the principle of evil. Thesepowers were in perpetual contention with eachother, sometimes the one, and sometimes theher gaining the superiority. Arminius and hisLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.legions were therefore scarcely considered as entitledto the homage of mankind. Those whowere actuated by benevolence, and who desired todraw down blessings upon their fellow-creatures,addressed themselves to the principle of good ;while such unhappy beings, with whom spite andill-will had the predominance, may be supposedoften to have invoked in preference the principleof evil. Hence seems to have originated the ideaof sorcery, or an appeal by incantations and wickedarts to the demons who delighted in mischief.These beings rejoiced in the opportunity of'inflicting calamity and misery on mankind. Butby what we read of them we might be induced tosuppose that they were in some way restrainedfrom gratifying their malignant intentions, andwaited in eager hope, till some mortal reprobateshould call out their dormant activity, and demandtheir aid.Various enchantments were therefore employedby those unhappy mortals whose special desire wasto bring down calamity and plagues upon the individualsor tribes of men against whom their animositywas directed. Unlawful and detested wordsand mysteries were called into action to conjureup demons who should yield their powerful andtremendous assistance. Songs of a wild and maniacalcharacter were chaunted. Noisome scentsand the bunting of all unhallowed and odiousthings were resorted to. In later times books andILIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.frigidPolfir'envigoformulas of a terrific character were commonlyplayed, upon the reading or recital of whichle prodigies resorted to began to display themes.The heavens were darkened ; the thunderlied ; and fierce and blinding lightnings flashedini one corner of the heavens to the other,'he earth quaked and rocked from side to side.monstrous and deformed things shewed themselves," Gorgon, and Hydras, and Chimerasenough to cause the stoutest heart to quail,italy, devils, wliosc name was legion, and to'hose forms and distorted and menacing countenancessuperstition Iiad annexed the mostfrightful ideas, crowded in countless multitudesupon the spectator, whose breath was flame, whoseces were full of terror, and whose strengthnicely exceeded every thing human. Such'ere the appalling conceptions which ages of^otry and ignorance annexed to the notion ofsorcery, and with these they scared the unhappybeings over whom this notion lead usurped an ascendancyinto lunacy, and prepared them for theperpetrating flagitious and unheard-of deeds.The result of these horrible incantations wasnot less tremendous, than the preparations mighthave led us to expect. The demons possessed allthe powers of the air, and produced tempests andshipwrecks at their pleasure. *' Castles toppled ontheir warder's heads, and palaces and pyramidssped their summits to their foundations ;" forests34 LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.and mountains were torn from their roots, andcasting the sea. They inflamed the passions ofmen, and caused them to commit the most excesses. They laid their ban on thosewho enjoyed thi; most prosperous health, condemnedthem to peak and pine, wasted them intoa melancholy atrophy, and finally consigned themto a premature grave. They breathed a new andunblest life into beings in whom existence had longbeen extinct, and by their hateful and resistless 'power caused the sepulchres to give up their dead.WITCHCRAFT.Next to sorcery we may recollect the case ofwitchcraft, which occurs oftener, particularly inmodem times, than any other alleged mode of jchanging by supernatural means the future courseof events. The sorcerer, as we shall see here \after, was frequently a man of learning and intellectualabilities, sometimes of comparative opulenceand respectable situation in society. Butthe witch or wizard was almost uniformly old, decrepid,and nearly or altogether in a stale of penury.Tile functions however of the witch and the sorcererwere in a great devisee the same. The earnestaccount of a witch, attended with any degree ofdetail, is that of the witch of Endor in the Bible,who among other things, professed the power of ,'tailing up the dead upon occasion from the peaceLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.sepulchre. Witches also claimed the facultyof raising storms, anil in various ways disturbingthe course of nature. They appear in most cases tohave been brought into action by the impulse of privatemalice. They occasioned mortality of greateror less extent in man and beast. Tliey blightedthe opening prospect of a plentiful harvest. Theycovered the heavens with clouds, and sent abroadwithering and malignant blasts. They underminedthe health of those who were so unfortunate as toincur their animosity, and caused them to wasteway gradually with incurable disease. They werenotorious two or three centuries ago for the powerof the " evil eye." The vulgar, both great and.finally, dreaded their displeasure, and sought, byhall gifts, and fair speeches, but insincere, andle offspring of terror only, to avert the pernicioussequences of their malice. They were famedfabricating small images of wax, to representthe object of their persecution ; and, as these bygradual and often studiously protracted degreeswasted before the fire, so the unfortunate butts ofleir resentment perished with a lingering, but instabledeath.COMPACTS WITH THE DEVIL.The power of these witches, as we find in theirholiest records, originated in their intercourse withl^fiuniliai' spirits," invisible beings who must beLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.supposed to be enlisted in the armies of the princeof darkness. We do not read in these ancientmemorials of any league of mutual benefit enteredinto between the merely human party, and his orher supernatural assistant. But modern timeshave amply supplied this defect. The witch orsorcerer could not secure the assistance of thedemon but by a sure and faithful compact, bywhich the human party obtained the industriousand vigilant service of his familiar for a certainterm of years, only on condition that, when theterm was expired, the demon of undoubted rightwas to obtain possession of the indentured party,and to convey him irresistibly and for ever to theregions of the damned. The contract was drawnout in authentic form, signed by the sorcerer, andattested with his blood, and was then carried awayby the demon, to be produced again at the appointedtime.These familiar spirits often assumed the form ofanimals, and a black dog or cat was considered asafigure in which the attendant devil was secretlyhidden, These subordinate devils were calledImps. Impure and carnal ideas were mingled withthese theories. Tiie witches were said to havepreternatural teats from which their familiars suckedtheir blood. The devil also engaged in sexual in-LIVES OF THE Necromancers. 27recourse with the witch or wizard, being denominatedincubus, if his favourite were a woman,and succubus, if a man. In short, every frightfulnd loathsome idea was carefully heaped up toge-her,to render the unfortunate beings to whomlie crime of witchcraft was imputed the horrornd execration of their species.TALISMANS AND AMULETS.As according to the doctrine of witchcraft, thereirene certain compounds, and matters prepared byrules of art, that proved baleful and deadly to thepersons against whom their activity was directed,there were also preservatives, talismans, amuletsnd charms, for the most to be worn about the pero,which rendered him superior to injury, notKtHily from the operations of witchcraft, but in someses from the sword or any other mortal weapon.I the poet says, he that had this,Might trace huge forests and unhallowed heaths, —Yea their, where very desolation dwells,By grots and cates shrugged with horrid shades,»y, in the midst of every tremendous assailant,might pass on with unblenched majesty," uninjuredand invulnerable.NECROMANCY.Last of all we may speak of" necromancy, which28 LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.has something in it that so strongly takes hold ofthe imagination, that, though it is one only of thevarious modes which have been enumerated forthe exercise of magical power, we have selected itto give a title to the present volume.There is something sacred to common apprehensionin the repose of the dead. They seemplaced beyond our power to disturb. " There isno work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdomin the grave**After life's fitful fever they sleep well :Nor steel, nor poison,Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing.Can touch them further.Their remains moulder in the earth. Neither formnor feature is long continued to them. We shrinkfrom their touch, and their sight. To violate thesepulchre therefore for the purpose of unholyspells and operations, as we read of in the annalsof witchcraft, cannot fail to be exceedingly shocking.To call up the spirits of the departed, afterthey have fulfilled the task of life, and are consignedto their final sleep, is sacrilegious. Wellmay they exclaim, like the ghost of Samuel in thesacred story, " Why hast thou disquieted me ?"There is a further circumstance in the case,which causes us additionally to revolt from thevery idea of necromancy, strictly so called. Manis a mortal, or an immortal being. His frameeither wholly " returns to the earth as it was, orLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS. ^\)his Spirit," the thinking principle within him, " toGod who gave it." The latter is the prevailingsentiment of mankind in modern times. Man isplaced upon earth in a state of probation, to bedealt with hereafter according to the deeds done1 the flesh. " Some shall go away into everlastingpunishment ; and others into life eternal." Inhis case there is something blasphemous in thedea of intermeddling with the state of the dead.tWe must leave them in the hands of God. EvenI the idea of an interval, the "sleep of the soul"Efi'om death to the general resurrection, which isthe creed of no contemptible sect of Christians,it is surely a terrific notion that we should disturbthe pause, which upon that hypothesi-s the laws ofnature have assigned to the departed soul, and cometo awake, or to "torment him before the time."To make our catalogue of supernatural doings,nd the lawless imaginations of man, the morecomplete, it may be further necessary to refer tolie craft, so eagerly cultivated in, successive ageslOf the world of converting the inferior metals intogold, to which was usually joined the elixir vice, oruniversal medicine, having the quality of renewingthe youth of man, and causing him to live for ever.The first authentic record on this subject is andiet of Diocletian about three hundred years afterLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.IChrist, ordering a diligent search to be made inEgypt for all the ancient books which treated ofthe art of making gold and silver, that they mightwithout distinction be consigned to the flames.This edict however necessarily presumes a certainantiquity to the pursuit; and fabulous history hasrecorded Solomon, Pythagoras and Hermes amongits distinguished votaries. From this period thestudy seems to have slept, till it was revivedamong the Arabians after a lapse of five or sixhundred years.It is well known however how eagerly it wascultivated in various countries of the world formany centuries after it was divulged by Geber.Men of the most wonderful talents devoted theirlives to the investigation ; and in multiplied instancesthe discovery was said to have been completed.Vast sums of money were consumedin the fruitless endeavour ; and in a later period itseems to have furnished an excellent handle to,nd specious projectors, to extort moneyfrom those more amply provided with the goodsof fortune than themselves.The art no doubt is in itself sufficiently mystical,having been pursued by multitudes, whoseemed to themselves ever on the eve of consummation,but as constantly baffled when to theirown apprehension most on the verge of success.The discovery indeed appears upon the face of itto be of the most delicate nature, as the benefitI^^^ weaarise^■itaratcLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS. 31must wholly depend upon its being reserved toone or a very few, the object being unboundedwealth, which is nothing unless confined. If theewer of creating gold is diffused, wealth by suchvision becomes poverty, and every thing aftera short time would but return to what it had been.Add to which, that the nature of discovery has ordinarilybeen, that, when once the clue has beenfound, it reveals itself to several about the sameperiod of time.The art, as we have said, is in its own natureefficiently mystical, depending on nice combinationsand proportions of ingredients, and uponthe addition of each ingredient being made exactlyin the critical moment, and in the precise degreeof heat, indicated by the colour of the vapourarising from the crucible or retort. This was'watched by the operator with inexhaustible pace;and it was often found or supposed, thatthe minutest error in this respect caused the mostpromising appearances to fail of the expected success.This circumstance no doubt occasionallyive an opportunity to an artful impostor to ac-huntfor his miscarriage, and thus to prevail uponlis credulous dupe to enable him to begin his:ou experiment again.But, beside this, it appears that those whoseyet was the transmutation of metals, very frequentlyjoined to this pursuit the study of astro-livesOF THE NECROMANCERS.logy, and even the practice of sorcery. So muchdelicacy and nicety were supposed to be requiredin the process for the transmutation of metals,that it coukl not hope to succeed but under afavourable conjunction of the planets ; and themost flourishing pretenders to the art boasted thatthey had also a familiar intercourse with certainspirits of supernatural power, which assisted themin their undertakings, and enabled them to penetrateinto things un discoverable to mere humansagacity, and to predict future events.Another mode in which the wild and erraticimagination of our ancestors manifested itself,was in the creation of a world of visionary beingsof a less terrific character, but which did not failto annoy their thoughts, and perplex their determinations,known by the name of Fairies.There are few things more worthy of contemplation,and that at the same time tend to place thedispositions of our ancestors in a more amiablepoint of view, than the creation of this airy and ifantastic race. They were so diminutive as almostto elude the organs of human sight. They wereat large, even though confined to the smallest dimensions.They '* could be bounded in a nutshell,and count themselves kings of infinite space."LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.^^^^(Their midnight revels, by a forest-aideOr foimtais, the belated peasant saw,Or dreamed he saw, while overhead the moonSat arbitress, and nearer to the earthWheeled her pale course— they, on their mirth and danceIntent, with jocund music charmed his ear ;At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.Small circles marked the grass in solitary places,the trace of their little feet, which, though narrow,were ample enough to afford every accommodationto their pastime.The fairy tribes appear to have been every wheredistinguished for their patronage of truth, simplicityand industry, and their abhorrence of sensualityand prevarication. They left little rewardsin secret, as tokens of their approbation of the virtuesthey loved, and by their supernatural powerafforded a supplement to pure and excellent intentions,when the corporeal powers of the virtuoussank imdcr the pressure of human infirmity. Wherethey conceived displeasure, the punishments theyinflicted were for the most part such as served moderatelyto vex and harass the offending party,rather than to inflict upon him permanent and irremediableevils.Their airy tongues would syllableOn sands, and shores, and desert wildley were supposed to guide the wanderinglights, that in the obscurity of the night beguiledtraveller " through bog, through bush,rake, through briar." But their power3'y LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.of evil only extended, or was only employed, tovex those who by a certain obliquity of conductgave occasion for their reproofs. They besidespinched and otherwise tormented the objects oftheir displeasure; and, though the mischiefs theyexecuted were not of the most vital kind, yet,coming from a supernatural enemy, and being inflictedby invisible hands, they could not fail greatlyto disturb and disorder those who suffered from them.There is at first sight a great inconsistency inthe representations of these imaginary people. Forthe most part they are described to us as of a staytread appearance, almost too slight to be markedby our grosser human organs. At other timeshowever, and especially in the extremely populartales digested by M. Perrault, they shew themselvesin indiscriminate assemblies, brought together forsome solemn festivity or otherwise, and join thehuman frequenters of the scene, without occasioningenquiry or surprise. They are particularlyconcerned in the business of summarily and withoutappeal bestowing miraculous gifts, sometimesas a mark of special friendship and favour, andsometimes with a malicious and hostile intention.But we are to consider that spiritsCan every form assume ; so softAnd uncompounded ia their essence pure ;Not tied or manacled with joint or limb,Like cumbrous flesh ; but, in what shape they choose,Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,Can execute their airy purposes.And works of love or enmity fulfil.ILIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.And then again, as their bounties were shadowy,so were they specially apt to disappear in a moment,the most splendid palaces and magnificentexhibitions vanishing away, and leaving their disconcerteddupe with his robes converted into thepoorest rags, and, instead of glittering state, findinghimself suddenly in the midst of desolation,and removed no man knew whither.One of the mischiefs that were most frequentlyimputed to them, was the changing the beautifulchild of some doating parents, for a babe markedwith ugliness and deformity. But this idea seemsfi'auglit with inconsistency. The natural statureof the fairy is of the smallest dimensions ; and,though they could occasionally dilate their figureso as lo imitate humanity, yet it is to be presumedthat this was only for a special purpose, and, thatpurpose obtained, that they shrank again habituallyinto their characteristic littleness. The changetherefore can only be supposed to have been ofone human child for another.Hbecti^^■laidtiROSICRUCIANS.Nothing very distinct has been ascertained re-:ing a sect, calling itself llosicrucians. It isid to have originated in the East from one of thecrusaders in the fourteenth century ; but it attractedat least no public notice till the beginning of the■etiteenth century. Its adherents appear to haveD '23G LIVES OF THE Necromancers.imbibed their notions from the Arabians, andclaimed the possession of the philosopher's stone,the art of transmuting metals, and the elixir vitcB.SYLPHS AND GNOMES, SALAMANDERS ANDIndies.But that for which they principally excited publicattention, was their creed respecting certain elementarybeings, which to grosser eyes are invisible,but were familiarly known to the initiated. To beadmitted to their acquaintance it was previouslynecessary that the organs of human sight shouldbe purged by the universal medicine, and thatcertain glass globes should be chemically preparedwith one or other of the four elements, and for onemonth exposed to the beams of the sun. Thesepreliminary steps being taken, the initiated immediatelyhad a sight of innumerable beings of a luminoussubstance, but of thin and evanescent structure,that people the elements on all sides of us. Thosewho inhabited the air were called Sylphs ; and thosewho dwelt in the earth bore the name of Gnomes ;such as peopled the fire were Salamanders ; andthose who made their home in the waters wereIndies. Each class appears to have had an extensivepower in the elements to which they belonged.They could raise tempests in the air, andstorms at sea, shake the earth, and alarm the inhabitantsof the globe with the sight of devouringflames. These appear however to have been moreLIVES OF THE Necromancers.ToldweitalwtI sothisformidable in appearance than in reality. And thewhole race was subordinate to man, and particularlysubject to the initiated. The gnomes, inhabitantsthe earth and the mines, liberally supplied to thehuman beings with whom they conversed, thehidden treasures over which they presided. Thefour classes were some of them male, and somefemale ; but the female sex seems to have preponderatedin all.These elementary beings, we are told, were byleir constitution more long-lived than man, butwith this essential disadvantage, that at death theywholly ceased to exist. In the mean time theywere inspired with an earnest desire for immortality;and there was one way left for them, bywhich this desire might he gratified. If they wereso happy as to awaken in any of the initiated apassion the end of which was marriage, then theIph who became the bride of a virtuous man, followedhis nature, and became immortal ; while onthe other hand, if she united herself to an immoralbeing and a profligate, the husband followedle law of the wife, and was rendered entirelymortal. The initiated however were required, as asedition to their being admitted into the secretsthe order, to engage themselves in a vow of perpetualchastity as to women. And they wereabundantly rewarded by the probability of beingunited to a sylph, a gnome, a salamander, or anmine, any one of whom was inexpressibly moreLIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.enchanting than the most beautiful woman, in additionto which lier charms were in a manner perpetual,while a wife of our own nature is in ashort time destined to wrinkles, and all the otherdisadvantages of old age. The initiated of courseenjoyed a beatitude infinitely greater than thatwhich falls to the lot of ordinary mortals, beingconscious of a perpetual commerce with thesewonderful beings from whose society the vulgarare debarred, and having such associates uninterruptedlyanxious to perform their behests, andanticipate their desires".We should have taken but an imperfect surveyof the lawless extravagances of human imagination,if we had not included a survey of this sect. Thereis something particularly soothing to the fancy of 1an erratic mind, in the conception of being conversantwith a race of beings the very existence of 1which is unperceived by ordinary mortals, and ,thus entering into an infinitely numerous and ivariegated society, even when we are apparently Iswallowed up in entire solitude.The Rosicrucians are further entitled to our 1special notice, as their tenets have had the good fortuneto furnish Pope with the beautiful machinery Iwith which he has adorned the Rape of the Lock. IThere is also, of much later date, a wild and poeticalfiction for which we are indebted to the samesource, called Undine, i'rom the pen of MotteFouquet.Comic de Gnbalis.EXAMPLES FllOM THE BIBLE.AMPLES OF NECROMANCY AND WITCHCRAFTFROM THE BIBLE.The oldest and most authentic record fromwhich we can derive our ideas on the subject ofnecromancy and witchcraft, unquestionably is theBible. The Egyptians and Chaldeans were earlydistinguished for their supposed proficiency inmagic, in the production of supernatural phenomena,and in penetrating into the secrets of futureThe first appearance of men thus extraordinarilygifted, or advancing pretensions of thislord, recorded in Scripture, is on occasion oftiara's dream of the seven years of plenty, and!even years of famine. At that period the king■* sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt andI the wise men ; but they could not interpretthe dream," which Joseph afterwards expounded.Their second appearance was upon a mostmemorable occasion, when Moses and Aaron,armed with miraculous powers, came to a subsequentking of Egypt, to demand from him thattheir countrymen might be permitted to depart toanother tract of the world. They produced amiracle as the evidence of their divine mission :and the king, who was also named Pharaoh,• Genesis, xli. fl, 2.'i, &c.EXAMPLES FROM THE BIBLE.called before him the wise men and the sorcerersof Egypt, who with their enchantments did in likemanner" as Moses had done ; till, after some experimentsin which they were apparently successful,they at length were compelled to allow themselvesovercome, and fairly to confess to theirmaster, " This is the finger of God" !"The spirit of the Jewish history loudly affirms,that the Creator of heaven and earth had adoptedthis nation for his chosen people, and thereforedemanded their exclusive Homage, and that theyshould acknowledge no other God. It is on thisprinciple that it is made one of his early commandsto them, " Thou shalt not suffer a witch tolive." And elsewhere the meaning of this prohibitionis more fully explained : " There shall notbe found among you any one thatuseth divination,or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, orawizard, or a necromancer' : these shall surely beput to death ; they shall stone them with stones."The character of an enchanter is elsewheremore fully illustrated in the case of Balaam, thesoothsayer, who was sent for by Balakk, the king rf jMoab, that he might " curse the people of IsraeLThe me-passengers of the king came to Balaam withthe rewards of divination in their hand' ;" but the j•■ Exodus, vii. U : viii. 19. ' Ibid, xxii.Deuteronomy, xviii. 10, II, • Leviticus,I Numbers, xxii. 5, 6, 7.18..27.EXAMPLES FROM THE BIBLE.4.1Gcisoothsayer was restrained from his purpose by the'God of the Jews, and, where he came to curse,was compelled to bless. He therefore " did notI, as at other times, to seek for enchantments,"lut took up his discourse, and began, saying,Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob,[neither is there any divination against Israel'' 1"Another example of necromantic power or pretensionis to be found in the story of Saul and thewitch of Endor. Saul, the first king of the Jews,being rejected by God, and obtaining " no answerto his enquiries, either by dreams, or by prophets,said to his servants, seek me a woman that has afamiliar spirit. And his servants, said, Lo, there isa woman that has a familiar spirit at Endor." Saulaccordingly had recourse to her. But, previouslyto this time, in conformity to the law of God, hehad cut off those that had familiar spirits, andwizards out of the land ;" and the womantherefore was terrified at his present application.Saul re-assured her ; and in consequence the woeconsented to call up the person he should,me Saul demanded of her to bring up the[host of Samuel. The ghost, whether by her enchantmentsor through divine interposition we arelot told, appeared, and prophesied to Saul, thatle and his son should fall in battle on the succeedingday', which accordingly came to pass.Numbers, xxiv, 1.EXAMPLES FROM THE BIBLE.Manasseh, a subsequent king in Jerusalem,*' observed times, and used enchantments, anddealt with familiar spirits and wizards, and so provokedGod to angered."It appears plainly from the same authority, thatthere were good spirits and evil spirits. " TheLord said, Who shall persuade Alias, that he maygo up, and fall before Ramoth Gilead ? And therecame a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said,I will persuade him : I will go forth, and be alying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. Andthe Lord said. Thou shalt persuade him."In like manner, we are told, " Satan stood upagainst Israel, and provoked David to number thepeople y and God was displeased with the thing,and smote Israel, so that there fell of the peopleseventy thousand men's."Satan also, in the Book of Job, presented himselfbefore the Lord among the Sons of God, andasked and obtained leave to try the faithfulness of JJob by " putting forth his hand," and despoiling 'the patriarch of " all that he had."Taking these things into consideration, therecan be no reasonable doubt, though the devil and ,Satan are not mentioned in the story, that the serpentwho in so crafty a way beguiled Eve, was inreality no other than the malevolent enemy of \mankind under that disguise.■■ 1 Chron.1 Kings, xxi[Xi. 1, 7, 14.EXAMPLES FROM THE BIBLE.We are in the same manner informed of the:le of the false Gods ; and au example occursa king of Samaria, who fell sick, and who " sent!singers, and said to them, Go, and enquire of.Izebub, the God of Ekron, whether I shall reiverof this disease." At which proceeding theod of the Jews was displeased, and sent Elijah tothe messengers to say, " Is it because there is notaGod in Israel, that you go to enquire of Beelzebub,the God of Ekron ? Because the kmg hasne this, he shall not recover ; he shall surelyThe appearance of the Wise Men of the Eastagain occurs in considerable detail in the Prophecyof Daniel, though they are only brought forwardhere, as discoverers of hidden things, and interpretersof dreams. Twice, on occasion of dreams,t troubled him, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Baby," commanded to be called to him the magicians,and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, andthe Chaldeans" of his kingdom, and each time withsimilar success. They confessed their incapacity ;and Daniel, the prophets the Jews, expounded tothe king that in which they had failed. Nebuchad-:sar in consequence promoted Daniel to beiter of the magicians. A similar scene occurredcourt of Belshazzar, the son of Nebuchad-:sar, in the case of the hand-writing on the walL2 Kings, i, 2, 3, ■(.44 THE MAGI.It is probable that the Jews considered the Godsof the nations around them as so many of the fallenangels, or spirits of hell, since, among other arguments,the coincidence of the name of Beelzebub,the prince of devils with Beelzebub, theGod of Ekron, could scarcely have fallen out bychance.It seemed necessary to enter into these particulars,as they occur in the oldest and mostauthentic records from which we can derive ourideas on the subject of necromancy, witchcraft, andthe claims that were set up in ancient times to theexercise of martial power. Among these examplesthere is (inly one, that of the contention for superioritybetween Moses and the Wise Men of Egyptin which we are presented with their pretensionsto a visible exhibition of supernatural effects.THE MAGI, OR WISE MEN OF THE EAST.The Magi, or Wise Men of the East, extendedtheir ramifications over Egypt, Babylonia, Persia,India, and probably, though with a different name,over China, and indeed the whole known world.Their profession was of a mysterious nature. Theylaid claim to a familiar intercourse with the Gods.They placed themselves as mediators betweenheaven and earth, assumed the prerogative of re-*> Matthew, xii. 24.THE MAGI.Mnidealing the will of beings of a nature superior toman,and pretended to shew wonders and prodigiesthat surpassed any power wliicli was merely human.To understand this, we must bear in mind the:state of knowledge in ancient times, where for themost part the cultivation of the mind, and an acquaintancewith either science or art, were confinedto a very small part of the population. Ineach of the nations we have mentioned, there wasa particular caste or tribe of men, who, by the prerogativeof their birth, were entitled to the advantagesof science and a superior education, whilethe rest of their countrymen were destined to by manual labour. This of necessity gave,li in the privileged few to an overweening;nse of their own importance. They scarcelyregarded the rest of their countrymen as beings ofle same species with themselves ; and, finding asong line of distinction cutting them off from theherd, they had recourse to every practicable methodfor making that distinction still stronger.Wonder is one of the most obvious means of gene-deference; and, by keeping to themselvesle grounds and process of their skill, and presentingthe results only, they were sure to excite theadmiration and reverence of their contemporaries.This mode of proceeding further produced a re-actionupon themselves. That which supplied andpromised to supply to them so large a harvest ofhonour and fame, unavoidably became precious in4fitheir eyes. They pursued their discoveries withavidity, because few had access to their opportunitiesin that respect, and because, the profounderwere their researches, the more sure they were ofbeing looked up to by the public as having that inthem which was sacred and inviolable. They spenttheir days and nights in these investigations. Theyshrank from no privation and labour. At thesame time that in these labours they lead at all timesan eye to their tai-ling object, an ascendancy overthe minds of their countrymen at large, and theextorting from them a blind and implicit deferenceto their oracular decrees. They however lovedtheir pursuits for the pursuits themselves. Theyfelt their abstraction and their unlimited nature,and on that account contemplated them with admiration.They valued them (for such is the indestructiblecharacter of the human mind) for thepains they had bestowed on them. The sweat oftheir brow grew into a part as it were of the intrinsicmerit of the articles ; and that which hadwith so much pains been attained by them, theycould not but regard as of inestimable worth.IIIThe Egyptians took the lead in early antiquity,with respect to civilisation and the stupendous jproductions of human labour and art, of all otherknown nations of the world. The pyramids standair^^^ neethemselves as a monument of the industry ofmankind. Thebes, with her hundred gates, at eachof which we are told she could send out at oncetwo hundred chariots and ten thousand warriorscompletely accoutred, was one of the noblestcities on record. The whole country of LowerEgypt was intersected with canals giving a beneficentdirection to the periodical inundations of theNile ; and the artificial lake Morris was dug of airas extent, that it might draw off the occasionalexcesses of the overflowing of the river. TheEgyptians had an extraordinary custom of preservingtheir dead, so that the country was peopledalmost as numerously with mummies preparedby extreme assiduity and skill, as with the living.And, in proportion to their edifices and laboursof this durable sort, was their unwearied applicantto all the learning that was then known.Geometry is said to have owed its existence to thenecessity under which they were placed of everyman recognising his own property in land, as soonas the overflowing of the Nile had ceased. Theywere not less assiduous in their application to astronomy.The hieroglyphics of Egypt are of universalnotoriety. Their mythology was of" the most complicatednature. Their Gods were infinitely variedin their kind; and the modes of their' worshipnot less endlessly diversified. All these particularsstill contributed to the abstraction of their studies,id the loftiness of their pretensions to knowledge.They perpetually conversed with the Invisibleworld, and laid claim to the faculty of revealingthings hidden, of foretelling future events, anddisplaying wonders that exceeded human power toproduce.A striking illustration of the state of Egypt inthat respect in early times, occurs incidentally in thehistory of Joseph in the Bible. Jacob had twelvesons, among whom his partiality for Joseph was sonotorious, that his brethren out of envy sold himas a slave to the wandering Midianitcs. Thus itwas Iiiss fortune to be placed in Egypt, where inthe process of events he became the second man inthe country, and chief minister of the king. Asevere famine having visited these climates, Jacobsent his sons into Egypt to buy corn, where onlyit was to be found. As soon as Joseph saw themhe knew them, though they knew not him in hisexalted situation ; and he set himself to deviseexpedients to settle them permanently in thecountry in which he ruled. Among the rest hecaused a precious cup from his stores to be privityconveyed into the corn-sack of Benjamin, his onlybrother by the same mother. The brothers wereno sooner departed, than Joseph sent in pursuit ofthem ; and the messengers accosted them with thewords, " Is not this the cup in which my lordtrinkets, and whereby also he divine ? Ye havedone evil in taking it away." They brought the !• Genesis, xliv. 5.thecarolU'plamaM(Ianfro1 pracistrangers again into the presence of Joseph, whoaddressed them with severity, saying, " What isthis deed that ye have done ? Wot ye not thattch a man as I could certainly divine'' ?"From this story it plainly appears, that the artof divination was extensively exercised in Egypt,that the practice was held in honour, and thatsuch was the state of the country, that it was tohe presumed as a thing of course, that a man ofthe high rank and distinction of Joseph shouldifessedly be an adept in it.In the great contention for supernatural powerbetween Moses and the magicians of Egypt, it isplain that they came forward with confidence, and,did not shrink from the debate. Moses's rod wasironed into a serpent ; so we're their rods : Mosesangel the waters of Egypt into blood ; and themagicians did the like with their enchantments :Moses caused frogs to come up, and cover theland of Egypt ; and the magicians also broughtfrogs upon the country. Without its being in anywaynecessary to enquire how they effected theseideas, it is evident from the whole train of thenative, that they must have been much in thepractice of astonishing their countrymen with theirfeats in such a kind, and, whether it were delusion,or to whatever else we may attribute their success,that they were universally looked up to for theextraordinariness of their performances.*> Genesis, xHv. 15.50 STATUE OF MEMNON.While we are on this subject of illustrationsfrom the Bible, it may be worth while to revertmore particularly to the story of Balakkam. Balakkthe king of Moab, sent for Balaam that hemight come and curse the invaders of his country ;and in the sequel we are told, when the prophetchanged his curses into a blessing, that he did notgo forth, as at other times, to seek for enchantments'It is plain therefore that Balakk did notrely singly upon the eloquence and fervour ofBalaam to pour out vituperations upon the peopleof Israel, but that it was expected that the prophetshould use incantations and certain mysticalrites, upon which the efficacy of his foretellingdisaster to the enemy principally depended.STATUE OF MEMNON.The Magi of Egypt looked round in everyquarter for phenomena that might produce astonishmentamong their countrymen, and inducethem to believe that they dwelt in a land whichoverflowed with the testimonies and presence of adivine power. Among others the statue of Memnon,erected over his tomb near Thebes, is recordedby many authors. Memnon is said tohave been the son of Aurora, the Goddess of themorning; and his statue is related to have hadthe peculiar faculty of uttering a melodious soundevery morning when touched by the first beams ofTEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON.s if to salute his mother ; and every night atsunset to have imparted another sound, low andmournful, as lamenting the departure of the day.This prodigy is spoken of by Tacitus, Strabo, Juvenaland Philostratus. The statue uttered thesefunds, while perfect ; and, when it was mutilated7 human violence, or by a convulsion of nature,it still retained the property with which it hadbeen originally endowed. Modern travellers, forthe same phenomenon has still been observed,lave asserted that it does not owe its existence totoy prodigy, but to a property of the granite, ofwhich the statue or its pedestal is formed, which,being hollow, is found in various parts of theworld to exhibit this quality. It has thereforebeen suggested, that the priests, having ascertainedits peculiarity, expressly formed the statuepf that material, for the purpose of impressing onpt a supernatural character, and thus being enabledlo extend their influence with a credulous people'.nfFTEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON : ITS ORACLES.Another of what maybe considered as the wondersof Egypt, is the temple of Jupiter Ammon in themidst of the Great Desert. This temple was situatedat a distance no less than twelve days' journeyfrom Menipiiis, the capital of the Ixiwer Egypt.—The principal part of this space consisted of onerewslcr on Natural Magic, Letter IX.e35-iTEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON.immense tract of moving sand, so hot as to be intolerableto the sole of the foot, while the air waspregnant with fire, so that it was almost impossibleto breathe in it. Not a drop of water, not a tree,not a blade of grass, was to be found through thisvast surface. It was here that Cambyses, engagedin an impious expedition to demolish the temple, issaid to have lost an army of fifty thousand men,buried in the sands. When you arrived however,you were presented with a wood of great circumference,the foliage of which was so thick that thebeams of the sun could not pierce it. The atmosphereof the place was of a delicious temperature ; 'the scene was every where interspersed with foundpains ; and all the fruits of the earth were found in 'the highest perfection. In the midst was the templeand oracle of the God, who was worshipped inthe likeness of a ram. The Egyptian priests chose Jthis site as furnishing a test of the zeal of their vota Iries ; the journey being like the pilgrimage to Jerusalemor Mecca, if not from so great a distance,yet attended in many respects with perils moreformidable. It was not safe to attempt the pas Jsage but with moderate numbers, and those expresslyequipped for expedition.Bacchus is said to have visited this spot in his jgreat expedition to the East, when Jupiter appearedto him in the form of a ram, having struck Jhis foot upon the soil, and for the first time occa. 'signed that supply of water, with which the place ITEMPLE OF JUPITER AMMON.was ever after plentifully supplied. Alexanderthe Great in a subsequent age undertook thesame journey with his any, that he might causehimself to be acknowledged for the son of therod, under which character he was in all due formrecognised. The priests no doubt had heard ofthe successful battles of the Gracious and of Issus,jOf the capture of Tyre after a seven months' siege,id of the march of the great conqueror in Egypt,'where he carried every thing before him.Here we are presented with a striking specimenlOf the mode and spirit in which the oracles of oldwere accustomed to be conducted. It may besaid that the priests were corrupted by the richpresents which Alexander bestowed on them withliberal hand. But this was not the prime impulsethe business. They were astonished at thedaring with which Alexander with a comparativehandful of men set out from Greece, having meditatedthe overthrow of the great Persian empire,'hey were astonished with his perpetual success,and his victorious progress from the Hellespont tomount Taurus, from mount Taurus to Elysium,and from Elysium quite across the ancient king-lornof Egj'pt to the Palus Parentis. Accustomedto the practice of adulation, and to thelief that mortal power and true intellectual great-lesswere the same, they with a genuine enthusiasticfervour regarded Alexander as the son ofleir God, and acknowledged him as such. —CHALDEA AND BABYLON.Nothing can be more memorable than the way inwhich belief and unbelief hold a divided empireover the human mind, our passions hurrying usinto belief, at the same time that our intervals ofsobriety suggest to us that it is all pure imposition.CHALDEA AND BABYLON.The history of the Babylonian monarchy nothaving been handed down to us, except incidentallyas it is touched upon by the historians ofother countries, we know little of those anecdotesrespecting it which are best calculated to illustratethe habits and manners of a people. We know thatthey in probability preceded all other nations inthe accuracy of their observations on the phenomenaof the heavenly bodies. We know that theMagi were highly respected among them as an .order in the state ; and that, when questions oo |cursed exciting great alarm in the rulers, " themagicians, the astrologers, the sorcerers, and theChaldeans," were called together, to see whetherby their arts they could throw light upon questions .■so mysterious and perplexing, and we find suffancient reason, both from analogy, and from the very 1circumstance that sorcerers are specifically named Iamong the classes of which their Wise Men con jsister, to believe that the Babylonian Magi ad 1danced no dubious pretensions to the exercise (^ Jmagical power.Zoroaster,ZOROASTER.Among the Chaldeans the most famous name isI that of Zoroaster, who is held to have been theI author of their religion, their civil policy, theirI sciences, and their magic. He taught the docstrine of two great principles, the one the authorof good, the other of evd. He prohibited the useof images in the ceremonies of religion, and pronouncedthat nothing deserved homage but fire,and the sun, the centre and the source of fire,and these perhaps to be venerated not for themselves,but as emblematical of the principle of allgood things. He taught astronomy and astrology.We may with sufficient probability infer hisdoctrines from those of the Magi, who were hisfollowers. He practised enchantments, by meansof which he would send a panic among the forcesthat were brought to make war against him, renderingthe conflict by force of arms unnecessary.He prescribed the use of certain herbs as all-powerfulfor the production of supernatural effects.He pretended to the faculty of working miracles,and of superseding and altering the ordinarycourse of nature. — There was, beside the ChaldeanZoroaster, a Persian known by the samele, who is said to Have been a contemporary ofDarius Hystaspes.^GREECE.Thus obscure and general is our information respectingthe Babylonians. But it was far otherwisewith the Greeks. Long before the period, when,by their successful resistance to the Persian invasion,they had rendered themselves of paramountimportance in the history of the civilised world,they had their poets and annalists, who preservedto future time the memory of their tastes, theirmanners and superstitions, their strength, andtheir weakness. Homer in particular had alreadycomposed his two great poems, rendering the peculiaritiesof his countrymen familiar to the latestposterity. The consequence of this is, that thewonderful things of early Greece are even morefrequent than the record of its sober facts. Asmen advance in observation and experience, theyare compelled more and more to perceive that allthe phenomena of nature are one vast chain of uninterruptedcauses and consequences : but to theeye of uninstructed ignorance every thing is astonishing,every thing is unexpected. The remotegenerations of mankind are in all cases full of pro-dies: but it is the fortune of Greece to havepreserved its early adventures, so as to render thebeginning pages of its history one massfalshoods.58 DEITIES OF GREECE.DEITIES OF GREECE.The Gods of the Greeks appear all of them onceto have been men. Their real or supposed adventurestherefore make a part of what is recordedrespecting them. Jupiter was born in Crete, andbeing secreted by his mother in a cave, wassuckled by a goat. Being come to man's estate,he warred with the giants, one of whom had anhundred hands, and two others brethren, grewnine inches every month, and. when nine yearsold, were fully qualified to engage in all exploitsof corporeal strength. The war was finished, bythe giants being overwhelmed with the thunderboltsof heaven, and buried under mountains.Minerva was born from the head of her father,without a mother ; and Bacchus, coming into theworld after the death of his female parent, wasinclosed in the thigh of Jupiter, and was thusproduced at the proper time in full vigour andstrength. Minerva had a shield, in which waspreserved the real head of Medusa, that had theproperty of turning every one that 'looked on itinto stone. Bacchus, when a child, was seized onby pirates with the intention to sell him for aslave : but he waved a spear, and the oars of thesailors were turned into vines, which climbed themasts, and spread their clusters over the sails ;and tigers, lynxes and panthers, appeared to swimround the ship, so terrifying the crew that theyDEITIES OF GREECE.^leaped overboard, and were changed into dolphins.Bacchus, in his maturity, is described as havingbeen the conqueror of India. He did not set outon this expedition like other conquerors, at thehead of an array. He rode in an open chariot,which was drawn by tame lions. His attendantswere men and women in great multitudes, eminentlyaccomplished in the arts of rural industry.Wherever he came, he taught men the scienceof husbandry, and the cultivation of the vine.Wherever he came, he was received, not withhostility, but with festivity and welcome. On hisreturn however, Lycurgus, king of Thrace, andPentheus, king of Thebes, set themselves in oppositionto the improvements which the East hadreceived with the most lively gratitude ; andBacchus, to punish them, caused Lycurgus to betorn to pieces by wild horses, and spread a delusionamong the family of Pentheus, so that they mistookhim for a wild boar which had broken intotheir vineyards, and of consequence fell upon him,and he expired amidst a thousand wounds.Apollo was the author of plagues and contagiousdiseases ; at the same time that, whenhe pleased, he could restore salubrity to a climate,and health and vigour to the sons of men.He was the father of poetry, and possessed inan eminent degree the gift of foretelling futureevents. Hecate, which was one of the names ofDiana, was distinguished as the Goddess of magicDEITIES OK GREECE.and enchantments. Venus was the Goddess oflove, the most irresistible and omnipotent impulseof which the heart of man is susceptible. Thewand of Mercury was endowed with such virtues,that whoever it touched, if asleep, would start upinto life and alacrity, and, if awake, would immediatelyfall into a profound sleep. When ittouched the dying, their souls gently parted fromtheir mortal frame ; and, when it was applied tothe dead, the dead returned to life. Neptune hadthe attribute of raising and appeasing tempests :and Vulcan, the artificer of heaven and earth, notonly produced the most exquisite specimens ofskill, but also constructed furniture that was endowedwith a self-moving principle, and wouldpresent itself for use or recede at the will of itsproprietor. Pluto, in perpetrating the rape ofProserpine, started up in his chariot through acleft of the earth in the vale of Anna in Sicily,sand, having seized his prize, disappeared again bythe way that he came.Ceres, the mother of Proserpine, in her searchafter her lost daughter, was received with peculiarhospitality Celsus, kingofEleusis. She becamedesirous of remunerating his liberality by somespecial favour. She saw Iiiss only child laid in acradle, and labouring under a fatal distemper.She took him under her protection. She fed himwith milk from her own breast, and at nightcovered him with coals of fire. Under this treat-deitiesOF GREECE.GlIment be not only recovered his strength, but shotup miraculously into manhood, so that what inother men is the effect of years, was accomplishedin Triptolemus in as many hours. She gave himfor a gift the art of agriculture, so that he is said tohave been the first to teach mankind to sow and toreap corn, and to make bread of the produce.Prometheus, one of the race of the giants, waspeculiarly distinguished for his proficiency in thearts. Among other extraordinary productions heformed a man of clay, of such exquisite workmanship,as to have wanted nothing but a living soulto cause him to be acknowledged as the paragon ofthe world. Minerva beheld the performance ofPrometheus with approbation, and offered him herassistance. She conducted him to heaven, wherelie watched his opportunity to carry off on the tipof his wand a portion of celestial fire from thechariot of the sun. With this he animated hisimage ; and the man of Prometheus moved, andthought, and spoke, and became every thing thatthe fondest wishes of his creator could ask, Jupiterordered Vulcan to make a woman, thatshould surpass this man. All the Gods gave hereach one a several gift : Venus gave her thepower to charm ; the Graces bestowed on hersymmetry of limb, and elegance of motion ; Apollothe accomplishments of vocal and instrumentalmusic ; Mercury the art of persuasive speech ;Juno a multitude of rich and gorgeous ornaments;62 DEMIGODS.and Minerva the management of the loom andthe needle. Last of all, Jupiter presented herwith a sealed box, of which the lid was no soonerunclosed, than a multitude of calamities and evilsof all imaginable sorts flew out, only Hope remainingat the bottom.Deucalion was the son of Prometheus andP3aTha, his niece. They married. In their timea flood occurred, which as they imagined destroyedthe whole human race ; they were the only survivors.By the direction of an oracle they caststones over their shoulders ; when, by the divineinterposition, the stones cast by Deucalion becamemen, and those cast by Pyrrha women. Thus theearth was re-peopled.I have put down a few of these particulars,as containing in several instances the qualities ofwhat is called magic, and thus furnishing examplesof some of the earliest occasions upon which supernaturalpowers have been alleged to mix withhuman affairs.DEMIGODS.The early history of mortals in Greece is scarcelyseparated from that of the Gods. The first adventurerthat it is perhaps proper to notice, as hisexploits have I know not what of magic in themisPerseus, the founder of the metropolis and kingdomof Mycenae. By way of rendering his birthDemigods.fiIllustrious, he is said to have been the son ofJupiter, by Dance, the daughter of Crisis, kingof Argos. The king, being forewarned by anI oracle that his daughter should bear a son, bywhose hand Lier father should be deprived of life,I thought proper to shut her up in a tower of brass,I Jupiter, having metamorphosed himself into aI shower of gold, found his way into her place ofconfinement, and became the father of Perseus.On the discovery of this circumstance, Crisiscaused both mother and child to be inclosed in aI chest, and committed to the waves. The chesthowever drifted upon the lands of a person ofroyal descent in the island of Seriphos, who extendedhis care and hospitality to both. WhenL Perseus grew to man's estate, he was commissionedby the king of Seriphos to bring him the Iiead ofMedusa, one of the Gorgon. Medusa had thewonderful faculty, that whoever met her eyes wasimmediately turned into stone ; and the king, whoI had conceived a passion for Dance, sent her sonI on this enterprise, with the hope that he wouldI never come back alive. He was however favouredby the Gods ; Mercury gave him wings tofly, Pluto an invisible helmet, and Minerva aI mirror shield, by looking in which he could discoverhow his enemy was disposed, without thedanger of meeting her eyes. Thus equipped, heaccomplished his undertaking, cut off' the head of• Gorgon, and pursed it in a bag. From thisG4 Daedalus.exploit he proceeded to visit Atlas, king of Mauritania,who refused him hospitality, and in revengePerseus turned him into stone. He nextrescued Andromeda, daughter of the king ofEthiopia, from a monster sent by Neptune todevour her. And, lastly, returning to his mother,and finding the king of Seriphos still incredulousand obstinate, he turned him likewise into a stone.The labours of Hercules, the most celebrated ofthe Greeks of the heroic age, appear to have hadlittle of magic in them, but to have been indebtedfor their success to a corporal strength, superior tothat of all other' mortals, united with an invincibleenergy of mind, which disdained to yield to anyobstacle that could be opposed to him. Hisachievements are characteristic of the rude andbarbarous age in which he lived : be strangled serpents,and killed the Erymanthian boar, the Ne-meanlion, and the Hydra.Nearly contemporary with the labours of Herculesis the history of Pasiphae and the Minotaur ;and this brings us again within the sphere of magic.Pasiphae was the wife of Minos, king of Crete, whoconceived an unnatural passion for a beautifulwhite bull, which Neptune had presented to theking. Having found the moans of gratifying herpassion, she became the mother of a monster, ^^ tartillman and half-bull, called the Minotaur. Minoswas desirous of hiding this monster from the observationof mankind, and for this purpose appliedto Daedalus, an Athenian, the most skilful artist ofhis time, who is said to have invented the axe, thewedge, and the plummet, and to have found outthe use of glue. He first contrived masts andBails for ships, and carved statues so admirably,that they not only looked as if they were alive, buthad actually the power of self-motion, and wouldhave escaped from the custody of their possessor,if they had not been chained to the wall.Daedalus contrived for Minos a labyrinth, awonderful structure, that covered many acres ofground. The passages in this edifice met andcrossed each other with such intricacy, that astranger who had once entered the building, wouldive been starved to death before he could find hisly out. In this labyrinth Minos shut up the Minotaur.Having conceived a deep resentment againstthe people of Athens, where his only son had beenkilled in a riot, he imposed upon them an annualtribute of seven noble youths, and as many virginsbe devoured by the Minotaur. Theseus, son ofthe king of Athens, put an end to this disgrace.He was taught by Ariadne, the daughter of Minos,how to destroy the monster, and furnished with aclue by which afterwards to find his way out oflabyrinth.G6THE ARGONAUTS.Dffidalus for some reason having incurred thedispleasure of Minos, was made a prisoner by himin his own labyrinth. But the artist being neverat an end of his inventions, contrived with feathersand wax to make a pair of wings for himself, andescaped. Icarus, his son, who was prisoner alongwith him, was provided by his father with a similarequipment. But the son, who was inexperiencedand heedless, approached too near to thesun in his flight ; and, the wax of his wings beingmelted with the heat, he fell into the sea and was ^drowned.THE ARGONAUTS.Contemporary with the reign of Minos oo Jcursed the expedition of the Argonauts. Jasoiii \the son of the king of colchis in Thessaly, was at jthe head of this expedition. Its object was to Ifetch the golden fleece, which was hung up in a 'grove sacred to Mars, in the kingdom of Colchis,at the eastern extremity of the Euxine sea. Heenlisted in this enterprise all the most gallantspirits existing in the country, and among the restHercules, Theseus, Orpheus and Amphion. Afterhaving passed through a multitude of perils, one of Jwhich was occasioned by the Canaan rocks at theentrance of the Euxine, that had the quality ofclosing upon every vessel which attempted toIMEDEA. C7ts way between them and crushing it topieces, a danger that could only be avoided bysending a dove before as their harbinger, they atlength arrived.The golden fleece was defended by bulls, whosehoofs were brass, and whose breath was fire, andby a never-sleeping dragon that planted itself atthe foot of the tree upon which the fleece was suspended.Jason was prepared for his undertakingby Medea, the daughter of the king of the country,herself an accomplished magician, and furnishedwith philtres, drugs and enchantments.Thus equipped, he tamed the bulls, put a yoke ontheir necks, and caused them to plough two acresthe stiifest land. He killed the dragon, and, tocomplete the adventure, drew the monster's teeth,owed them in the ground, and saw an army ofTiers spring from the seed. The army hastenedsward to attack him ; but he threw a huge stoneito the midst of their ranks, when they immediatelyturned from him, and, falling on eacli otiicr,re all killed with their mutual weapons.The adventure being accomplished, Medea setout with Jason mi his return to Thessaly. Ontheir arrival, they found jason, the father of Jason,lias, his uncle, who had usurped the thronedand decrepid. Jason applied to Medea,and asked her whether among her charms she hadnone to make an old man young again. She repliedshe had: she drew the impoverished andwatery blood from the body of son ; she infusedthe juice of certain potent herbs into his veins jand he rose from the operation as fresh and vigorousa man as his son.The daughters of Pelias professed a perfect willingnessto abdicate the throne of colchis ; but,before they retired, they requested Medea to dothe same kindness for their father which she hadalready done for son. She said she would. Shetold them the method was to cut the old man inpieces, and boil him in a kettle with an infusion ofcertain herbs, and he would come out as smoothand active as a child.The daughters of Pelias a little scrupled theoperation. Medea, seeing tJiis, begged they wouldnot think she was deceiving them. If howeverthey doubted, she desired they would bring herthe oldest ram from their flocks, and they shoiddsee the experiment. Medea cut up the ram, castin certain herbs, and the old bell-wether came outas beautiful and innocent a he-lamb as was everbeheld. The daughters of Pelias were satisfied.They divided their father in pieces ; but he wasnever restored either to health or life.From colchis, upon some insurrection of thepeople, Medea and Jason Hed to Corinth. Herethey lived ten years in much harmony. At theIend of that time Jason grew tired of his wife, andfell in love with Glauce, daughter of the king ofCorinth. Medea was greatly exasperated with hisfidelity, and, among other enormities, slew with)her own hand the two children she bad borne himbefore bis face. Jason hastened to punish herbarbarity ; but Medea mounted a chariot drawntby fiery dragons, fled through the air to Athens,*nd escaped.At Athens she married JEgeus, king of thatdeity. ^geus by a former wife had a son, namedTheseus, who for some reason had been broughtOp obscure, unknown and in exile. At a suitableTime he returned home to Iiiss father with the intentionto avow his parentage. But Medea wasbeforehand with him. She put a poisoned gobletinto the hands of JEgeus at an entertainment hegave to Theseus, with the intent that he shoulddeliver it to his son. At the critical moment^geus cast his eyes on the sword of Theseus,which he recognised as that which lie had deliveredwith his son, when a child, and had directed that itshould be brought by him, when a man, as a tokenof the mystery of his birth. The goblet wascastaway; the father and son rushed into eachother's arms ; and Medea fled from Athens in herchariot drawn by dragons through the air, as shehad years before fled from Corinth,CIRCE.Circe was the sister of fetes and Pasiphae, andwas, like Medea, her niece, skilful in sorcery. Shehad besides the gift of immortality. She was exquisitelybeautiful ; but she employed the charmsof her person, and the seducing grace of her mannersto a bad purpose. She presented to everystranger who landed in Lier territory an enchantedcup, of which she intreated him to drink. Heno sooner tasted it, than he was turned into a hog,and was driven by the magician to her sty. Theunfortunate stranger retained under this loathsomeappearance the consciousness of what he had been,and mourned for ever the criminal complianceby which he was brought to so melancholypass.ORPHEUS.Cicero' quotes Aristotle as affirming that therewas no such man as Orpheus. Hut Aristotle is atleast single in that opinion. And there are toomany circumstances known respecting Orpheus,and which have obtained the consenting voice ofall antiquity, to allow us to call in question hisexistence. He was a native of Thrace, and fromthat country migrated into Greece. He travelledinto Egypt for the purpose of collecting there theinformation necessary to the accomplishment of hisends. He died a violent death ; and, as is almostDe Natura Dearum, Lib. 1, c S8.IIuniversally affirmed, fell a sacrifice to the resentmentand fury of the women of his native soil.Orpheus was doubtless a poet ; though it is notprobable that any of his genuine productions havebeen handed down to us. He was, as all the poetsof so remote a period were, extremely accomplishedin all the arts of vocal and instrumental music.He civilised the rude inhabitants of Greece, andsubjected them to order and law. He formedthem into communities. He is said by Aristophanes*and Horace' to Have reclaimed thesavage, man, from slaughter, and an indulgence it)food that was loathsome and foul. And this haswith sufficient probability been interpreted tomean, that he found the race of men among whomhe lived cannibals, and that, to cure them themore completely of this horrible practice, be.taught them to be contented to subsist upon thefruits of the earth'. Music and poetry are understoodto have been made specially instrumental byhim to the effecting this purpose. He is said tohave made the hungry Hon and the famished tigerobedient to his bidding, and to put off their wildand furious natures.This is interpreted by Horace' and other recentexpositors to mean no more than that he reduced•* Plato, De Republica, Lib. X, tubfiaeDe Arte Poetica, v. 391.■ Memoires di.- rAcodctnic des Inscription:De Arte Poetic, v. 3i)l, 2. 3.72 ORPHEUS.the race of savages as he found them, to order andcivilisation. But it was at first perhaps understoodmore literally. We shall not do justice tothe traditions of these remote times, if we do notin imagination transport ourselves among them,and teach ourselves to feel their feelings, and conceivetheir conceptions. Orpheus lived in a timewhen all was enchantment and prodigy. Giftedand extraordinary persons in those ages believedthat they were endowed with marvellous prerogatives,and acted upon that belief. We may occasionallyobserve, even in these days of the dull andthe literal, how great is the ascendancy of the manover the beast, when he feels a full and entireconfidence in that ascendancy. The eye and thegesture of man cannot fail to produce effects, incredibletill they are seen. Magic was the orderof the day ; and the enthusiasm of its heroes wasraised to the highest pitch, and attended with nosecret misgivings. We are also to consider that,in all operations of a magical nature, there is awonderful mixture of frankness and bonlwmmiewith a strong vein of cunning and craft. Man inevery age is full of incongruous and incompatibleprinciples ; and, when we shall cease to be inconsistent,we shall cease to be men.It is difficult fully to explain what is meant bythe story of Orpheus and Eurydice; but in itscircumstances it bears a striking resemblance towhat has been a thousand times recorded respectwORPHEUS. 73ing the calling up of the ghosts of the dead bymeans of sorcery. The disconsolate husband hasin the first place recourse to the resistless aid ofmusic. After many preparatives he appears tohave effected his purpose, and prevailed upon thepowers of darkness to allow him the presence ofhis beloved. She appears in the sequel howeverto have been a thin and a fleeting shadow. He isforbidden to cast his eyes on her ; and, if he hadobeyed this injunction, it is uncertain how theexperiment would have ended. He proceeds however,as he is commanded, towards the light of day.He is led to believe that his consort is followinghis steps. He is beset with a multitude of unearthlyphenomena. He advances forsake timewith confidence. At length he is assailed withdoubts. He has recourse to the auricular sense,sto know if she is following him. He can hearNothing. Finally he can endure this uncertaintyDO longer ; and, in defiance of the prohibition hehas received, cannot refrain from turning his headto ascertain whether he is baffled, and has spent allhis labour in vain. He sees her ; but no soonerhe sees her, than she becomes evanescent and impalpable; farther and farther she retreats beforehim ; she utters a shrill cry, and endeavours toarticulate; but she grows more and more imperceptible; and in the conclusion he is left with the'scene around him in all respects the same as itVirgil, Georgia, Lib, IV. v. iGA, el seifq.had been before his incantations. The result ofthe whole that is known of Orpheus, is, that he wasan eminently great and virtuous man, but was thevictim of singular calamity.We have not yet done with the history of Orpheus.As has been said, he fell a sacrifice to theresentment and fury of the women of his nativesoil. They are affirmed to have torn him limbfrom limb. His head, divided from his body,floated down the waters of the Hebrus, and miraculously,as it passed along to the sea, it was stillheard to exclaim in mournful accents, Eurydice,Eurydice'! At length it was carried ashore onthe island of Lesbos'. Here, by some extraordinaryconcurrence of circumstances, it found a in a fissure of a rock over-arched by acave, and, thus domiciliated, is said to have retainedthe power of speech, and to have uttered oracles.Not only the people of Lesbos resorted to it forguidance in difficult questions, but also the AsiaticGreeks from Ionia and jEtolia ; and its fame andcharacter for predicting future events even extendedto Babylon".IThe story of Amphion is more perplexing thanthat of the living Orpheus. Both of them turn in'' Georgia, iv, .'i'25. ' Metamorphoses, xi, 55.'' Philostratus, Heroic, cap. v.TIRESIAS. 751 great degree upon the miraculous effects of musc.Amphion was of the royal family of Thebes,1 and ultimately became ruler of the territory. HeI is said, by the potency of his lyre, or his skill in1 the magic art, to have caused the stones to followL him, to arrange themselves in the way he proposed,I and without the intervention of a human hand tohave raised a wall about his metropolis". It is cerevainly less ditHcult to conceive the savage man tobe rendered placable, and to conform to the dickstates of civilisation, or even wild beasts to be made\ tame, than to imagine stones to obey the voice andthe will of a human being. The example howeveris not singular ; and hereafter we shall find relatedthat Merlin, the British enchanter, by the powerI of magic caused the rocks of Stonehenge, thoughof such vast dimensions, to be carried through theI MI from Ireland to the place where we at presentI find them. — Homer mentions that Amphion, andI his brother Zethus built the walls of Thebes, butI does not describe it as having been done by miracle'.Tiresias was one of the most celebrated soothesayers of the early ages of Greece. He lived inL the times of Oedipus, and the war of the sevenChiefs against Thebes. He was afflicted by the■ Hoist, do Arte Poetic, v. 3'M. Pausuiiiiis.'' Odyasi^y. Lib. XI, v-202.76 Aris.Gods with blindness, in consequence of some displeasurethey conceived against him ; but in compensationthey endowed him beyond all other mortalswith the gift of prophecy. He is said to haveunderstood the language of birds. He possessedthe art of divining future events from the variousindications that manifest themselves in fire, insmoke, and in other ways", but to have set thehighest value upon the communications of thedead, whom by spells and incantations he constrainedto appear and answer his enquiries*; andhe is represented as pouring out tremendous menacesagainst them, when they shewed themselvestardy to attend upon his commands".Aris.Abaris, the Scythian, known to us for his visitto Greece, was by all accounts a great magician.Herodotus says that he is reported to have travelledover the world with an arrow, eating nothingduring his journey. Other authors relate that thisarrow was given to him by Apollo, and that herode upon it through the air, over lands, and seas,and all inaccessible places. The time in whichhe flourished is very uncertain, some having representedhim as having constructed the PallasStatius, Thebaid, Lib. X. v. 599. 'ibid, Lib. IV, v. 599.« Ibid, Lib. IV, v. 409. etseqq,« Lib. IV, c. 36. »> lamblicbus.IPYTHAGORAS, 77drum, which, as long as it was preserved, keptTroy from being taken by an enemy', and othersaffirming that he was familiar with Pythagoras, whoI lived six hundred years later, and that he was mitted into his special confidence He is said toJ have possessed the faculty of foretelling earth'quakes, allaying storms, and driving away pestilencei he gave out predictions wherever he went ;and is described as an enchanter, professing to cureI diseases by virtue of certain words which hepronounced over those who were afflicted withthem'.bitlitigwiPYTHAGORAS.The name of Pythagoras is one of the most memorablein the records of the human species ; and'this character is well worthy of the minutest investigation.By this name we are brought at oncewithin the limits of history properly so called.He lived in the time of Cyrus and Darius Hys-tastes,of Croesus, of Pisistratus, of Polycrates,tyrant of Samos, and Amass, king of Egypt.-Many hypotheses have been laid down respectingle precise period of his birth and death ; but, as'it is not to our purpose to enter into any length-leddiscussions of that sort, we will adopt atonce the statement that appears to be the mostJulius Finnious, apud Scaliger, in Eusebius.lambllclius. Vita Pythagoras. * Plato, ChannidiiB.Pythagoras.probable, which is that of Lloyd", who fixes hisbirth about the year before Christ 586, and hisdeath about the year 506.Pythagoras was a man of the most various accomplishments,and appears to have penetratedin different directions into the depths of humanknowledge. He sought wisdom in its retreats offairest promise, in Egypt and other distant countriesIn this investigation he employed theearlier period of his life, probably till he was forty,and devoted the remainder to such modes of pro ,feeding, as appeared to him the most likely to securethe advantage of what he had acquired to a 'late posterity'.He founded a school, and delivered his acquisi- itons by oral communication to a numerous bodyof followers. He divided his pupils into twoclasses, the one neophytes, to whom was explainedonly the most obvious and general truths, theother who were admitted into the entire confidenceof the master. These last he caused to throwtheir property into a common stock, and to livetogether in the same place of resort'. He appearsto have spent the latter half of his life in that partof Italy, called Magna Graeca, so denominated insane degree from the numerous colonies of Greciansby whom it was planted, and partly perhaps |■ Chronological Account of Pythagoras and hia Contemporaries." LacTtius, Lib. VIII, c. 3.■^ I.lnyri, filii supra. '' lamblichus, c. 17PYTHAGORAS. 79from the memory of the illustrious things whichPythagoras achieved there'. He is said to havespread the seeds of political liberty in Croton,Sybaris, Metapontum, and Rhegiiim, and fromthence in Sicily to Tauromenium, Catania, Argentumand Chimera'. Charondas and Zaieucus,themselves famous legislators, derived the rudimentsof their political wisdom from the instructionsof Pythagoras*.But this marvellous man in some way, whetherfrom the knowlege he received, or from his ownproper discoveries, has secured to his species benefitsof a more permanent nature, and which shalloutlive the revolutions of ages, and the instabilityof political institutions. He was a profound geometrician.The two theorems, that the internalangles of every right-line triangle are equal totwo right angles', and That the square of the hypothenuseof every right angled triangle is equal tothe sum of the squares of the other two sides', areascribed to him. In memory of the latter of thesediscoveries he is said to have offered a public sacrificeto the Gods ; and the theorem is still known bythe name of the Pythagorean theorem. He ascertainedfrom the length of the Olympic course, whichwas understood to have measured six hundred oflamblichus, c. 29. ' Ibid. c. 7.> Laertiua, c. 15. " Ibid, c. 11.Plutarch, Symposium, Lib, VIII, Q.usBtio 2.PYTHAGORAS.^Hercules's feet, the precise stature of that hero'.Lastly, Pythagoras is the first person, who isknown to have taught the spherical figure of theearth, and that we have antipodes'; and he propagatedthe doctrine that the earth is a planet,and that the sun is the centre round which theearth and the other planets move, now known bythe name of the Copernican system".To inculcate a pure and a simple mode of subsistencewas also an express object of pursuit toPythagoras. He taught a total abstinence fromevery thing having had the property of animallife. It has been affirmed, as we have seen", thatOrpheus before him taught the same thing. Butthe claim of Orpheus to this distinction is ambiguous; while the theories and dogmas of the Sa-rainsage, as he has frequently been styled, were imore methodically digested, and produced more Ilasting and unequivocal effects. He taught temperancein all its branches, and a resolute subjectionof the appetites of the body to contemplationand the exercises of the mind ; and, by the unremitteddiscipline and authority he exerted over ihis followers, he caused his lessons to be constantlyobserved. There was therefore an edifyAulis Gallia, Lib. I, c. 1, from Plutarch.Laertius, c. \y.■" Bailly, Histoire de rAstiononiu PtuCorchus, de Esu Cadmium.Lib. XV. Laertius, c. 12.!, Lib. VIII, 5 3.OvidiuB, Metamorphose),PYTHAGORAS.Tnu^^^ ericing and an exemplary simplicity that prevailed asfar as the influence of Pythagoras extended, thatwon golden opinions to his adherents at all timeslat they appeared, and in all places".One revolution that Pythagoras worked, wasthat, whereas, immediately before, those who weremost conspicuous among the Greeks as instructorsof mankind in understanding and virtue, styledthemselves sophists, professors of wisdom, thisillustrious man desired to be known only by theappellation of a philosopher, a lover of wisdom'.The sophists had previously brought their denominationinto discredit and reproach, by the arroganceof their pretensions, and the imperious wayin which they attempted to lay down the law tothe world,The modesty of this appellation however did nottogether suit with the deep designs of Pythias,the ascendancy he resolved to acquire, andle oracular subjection in which he deemed it necessaryto hold those who placed themselves underhis instruction. This wonderful man set out withmaking himself a model of the passive and unscrupulousdocility which he afterwards required from:her. lie did not begin to teach till he waswitty years of age, and from eighteen to that periodhe studied in foreign countries, with the resolutionto submit to all his teachers enjoined, andto make himself master of their least communicatedPythagorasand most secret wisdom. In Egypt in particular,we are told that, though he brought a letter of recommendationfrom Polycrates, his native sovereign,to Amass, king of that country, whofully concurred with the views of the writer,the priests, jealous of admitting a foreigner into .their secrets, baffled him as long as they could,referring him from one college to another, and ]prescribing to him the most rigorous preparatives,not excluding the rite of circumcision'. ButPythagoras endured and underwent every thing,till at length their unwillingness was conquered,and his perseverance received its suitable reward.When in the end Pythagoras thought himself ]fully qualified for the task he had all along had in ,view, he was no less strict in prescribing ample ipreliminaries to his own scholars. At the time Jthat a pupil was proposed to him, the master, we Iare told, examined him with multiplied questions ]as to his principles, his habits and intentions, ob jserved minutely his voice and manner of speaking,his walk and his gestures, the lines of his count jpenance, and the expression and management of Ihis eye, and, when he was satisfied with these,then and not till then admitted him as a probationer'.It is to be supposed that all this must Jhave been personal. As soon however as this wasover, the master was withdrawn from the sight of ]1 Clemens Alexandrine, Stromata, Lii. I, p. ;t02.lamblichuB. c. 17-Pythagoras. 83rpijpil ; and a noviciate of three and five, in alleight years', was prescribed to the scholar, duringwhich time he was only to hear his instructorfrom behind a curtain, and the strictest silencewas enjoined him through the whole period. Asthe instructions Pythagoras received in Egypt andthe East admitted of no dispute, so in his turn herequired an unreserved submission from those whoheard him : auro,- <pi,, " the master has said it," wasdeemed a sufficient solution to all doubt and uncertainty'.To give the greater authority and effect to hiscommunications Pythagoras hid himself duringthe day at least from the great body of his pupils,and was only seen by them at night. Indeedthere is no rea-son to suppose that any one was admittedinto his entire familiarity. When he cameforth, he appeared in a long garment of the purestwhite, with a flowing beard, and a garland uponhis head. He is said to have been of the finestsymmetrical form, with a majestic carriage, and agrave and awful countenance". He suffered hisfollowers to believe that he was one of the Gods,the Hyperborean Apollo", and is said to have toldaris that he assumed the human form, that hesight the better invite men to an easiness of and to confidence in him'. What how-laertes,c. 8. lamiiliclius, c. IT.* Cicero de Natura Decorum, Lily. I, l-. ,'>.Laertius, c. 9, " Ibid. " lamhiichiis, c. 19.G 2Pythagoras.ever seems to be agreed in by all his biographers,is that he professed to have already in differentages appeared ill the likeness of man ; first asinvalides, the son of Mercury ; and, when hisrather expressed himself ready to invest lily withany gift short of immortality, he prayed that, asthe human soul is destined successively to dweltin various forms, he might Have the privilege ineach to remember his former state of being, whichwas granted him. From jEthalides he became, JEuphorbia, who stew Patroclus at the siege of 'Troy. He then appeared as Herraotimus, thenPyrrhus, a fisherman of Delos, and finally Pythagoras.He said that a period of time was interposedbetween eacli transmigration, during which;he visited the seat of departed souls ; and heprofessed to relate a part of the wonders he hadseen'. He is said to have eaten sparingly and, 'in secret, and in all respects to have given Iiim-, Iself out for a being not subject to the ordinarylaws of nature'.Pythagoras therefore pretended to miraculousendowments. Happening to be on the sea-shorewhen certain fishermen drew to land an enormousmultitude of fishes, lie desired them to allow himto dispose of the capture, which they consented to,provided he would name the precise number theyhad caught. He did so, and required that theyshoidd throw their prize into the sea again, at the> Laertius. c. i. ' Ibid, c. IH.PYTHAGORAS.Hi^^ eatm^"-frosame time paying them the value of the fish".He tamed a Duncan bear by whispering in hisand prevailed on him henceforth to retrainsom the flesh of animals, and to feed on vegc-isles. By the same means lie induced an ox noteat beans, which was a diet specially prohibitedPythagoras ; and he called down an eaglefrom his flight, causing him to sit on his hand,and submit to be stroked down by the philosphere In Greece, when lie passed the river'issus in Macedon, the stream was heard toutehim with the words " Hail, Pythagoras!"When Abaris addressed him as one of the heavenlyhost, he took the stranger aside, and convincedhim that he was under no mistake, byexhibiting to him his thigh of gold: or, accordingto another account, he used the same sort ofevidence at a certain time, to satisfy his pupils ofhis celestial descent'. He is said to have beenseen on the same day at Metapontum in Italy,and at Taurominium in Sicily, though theseplaces are divided by the sea, so that it was conceivedthat it would cost several days to passfrom one to the other'. In one instance he absentedhimself from his associates in Italy for awhole year; and when he appeared again, relatedThat he had passed that time in the infernal re-•■ Ibid, c. 13.lamblichus. c8.Laertiuac. 9.ImnblichusLibertiesc. !)lamb lie buPYTHAGORAS.lions, describing likewise the marvellous thingshe had seen'. Diogenes Laertius, speaking ofthis circumstance affirms however that he remainedduring this period in a cave, where hismother conveyed to him intelligence and necessaries,and that, when he came once more intolight and air, he appeared so emaciated and colourless,that he might well be believed to havecome out of Hades.The close of the life of Pythagoras was, accordingto every statement, in the midst ofmisfortune and violence. Some particulars arerelated by lamblichus", which, though he is not anauthority beyond all exception, are so characteristicas seem to entitle them to the being transcribed.This author is more circumstantial than anyother in stating the elaborate steps by which thepupils of Pythagoras came to be finally admittedinto the full confidence of the master. He say,that they passed three years in the first place inastate of probation, carefully watched by theirseniors, and exposed to their occasional tauntsand ironies, by way of experiment to ascertainwhether they were of a temper sufficiently philosophicaland firm. At the expiration of that periodthey were admitted to a noviciate, in which theywere bound to uninterrupted silence, and heardthe lectures of the master, while he was himselfLaertiuB, c. 21. s lamblichus, c, 17.IIconcealed from their view by a curtain. Theywere their received U) initiation, and required todeliver over their property to the coinniou stock.TJiey were admitted to intercourse with the master.They were invited to a participation of the mostobscure theories, and the abstrusest problems. Il"however in this stage of their progress they werediscovered to be too weak of intellectual penetration,or any other fundamental objection were establishedagainst them, they were expelled thecommunity ; the double of the property they hadcontributed to the common stock was paid downto them ; a head-stone and a monument inscribedwith their names were set up in the place ofmeeting of the community , they were consideredas dead ; and, if afterwards they met by chanceany of those who were of the privileged few, they■rere treated by them as entirely strangers.Cylon, the richest, man, or, as he is in one placestyled, the prince, of Croton, had manifested thegreatest partiality to Pythagoras. He was at thesame time a man of rude, impatient and boisterouscharacter. He, together with Pericles ofThrum, submitted to all the severities of thePythagorean school. They passed the three yearsof probation, and the Hve years of silence. Theywere received into the familiarity of the master.They were then initiated, and delivered all theirwealth into the common stock. They were howeverultimately pronounced deficient in intellectteal power, or for some other reason were notjudged worthy to continue among the confidentialpupils of Pythagoras. They were expelled. Thedouble of the property they had contributed waspaid back to them. A monument was set up inmemory of what they had been ; and they werepronounced dead to the school.It will easily be conceived in what temperCylon sustained this degradation. Of Pericleswe hear nothing further. But Cylon, from feelingsof the deepest reverence and awe for Pythagoras,which he had cherished for years, was ifilled even to bursting with inextinguishable hatredand revenge. The unparalleled merits, the ve- Ienable age of the mester whom he had so longfollowed, had no power to control his violence.His paramount influence in the city insured him 1the command of a great body of followers. He jexcited them to a frame of turbulence and riot. IHe represented to them how intolerable was thedespotism of this pretended philosopher. Theysurrounded the school in which the pupils were Iaccustomed to assemble, and set it on fire. Forty jpersons perished in the flames ^ According to Isome accounts Pythagoras was absent at the time, jAccording to others he and two of his pupils Jescaped. He retired from Croton to Metapon- jturn. But the hostility which had broken out ithe former city, followed him there. He took |Pythagoras.Soitherefuge in the Temple of the Muses. But he wasField so closely besieged that no provisions couldbe conveyed to him ; and he finally perished withhunger, after, according to Laertius, forty days'abstinence'.It is difficult to imagine any thing more instructed,and more pregnant with matter for salutaryreflection, than the contrast presented to us bythe character and system of action of Pythagorason the one hand, and those of the great enquirersthe last two centuries, for example, Bacon,newton and Locke, on the other. Pythagorasprobably does not yield to any one of these in theevidences of true intellectual greatness. In hisschool, in the followers he trained resembling himself,and in the salutary effects he produced onthe institutions of the various republics of Magnanecia and Sicily, he must be allowed greatly toive excelled them. His discoveries of variouspropositions in geometry, of the earth as a planet,and of the solar system as now universally recognised,clearly stamp him a genius of the highestYet this man, thus enlightened and philanthropic,established his system of proceeding upongrow and exclusive principles, and conducted itsly methods of artifice, quackery and delusion.Nne of his leading maxims was, that the great andfundamental truths to the establishment of whichI.a.Ttms, c. 21.PYTHAGORAS,he devoted himself, were studiously to be concealedfrom the vulgar, and only to be impartedto a select few, and after years of the severest noviciateand trial. He learned his earliest lessonsof wisdom in Egypt after this method, and heconformed through life to the example which hadthus been delivered to him. The severe examinationthat he made of the candidates previouslyto their being admitted into his school, and theyears of silence that were then prescribed to them,testify this. He instructed them by symbols,obscure and enigmatical propositions, which theywere first to exercise their ingenuity to exposed.The authority and dogmatical assertions of themaster were to remain unquestioned ; and the ■pupils were to fashion themselves to obsequiousand implicit submission, and were the furthest inthe world from being encouraged to the independentexercise of their own understandings.There was nothing that Pythagoras was morefixed to discountenance, than the communicationof the truths upon which he placed the highestvalue, to the uninitiated. It is not probable there ■fore that he wrote any thing: all was communicatedorally, by such gradations, and with suchdiscretion, as he might think fit to adopt and toexercise.Delusion and falsehood were main features of Jhis instruction. With what respect therefore can iwe consider, and what manliness worthy of hisPYTHAGORAS.on n^^ theihigh character and endowments can we impute to,his discourses delivered from behind a curtain,his hiding himself during the day, and only appearingby night in a garb assumed tor the purposeof exciting awe and veneration ? What shallre say to the story of his various transmigrations?t first sight it appears in the light of the mostaudacious and unblushing imposition. And, ifwe were to yield so far as to admit that by a high-wroughtenthusiasm, by a long train of macerationand visionary reveries, he succeeded in imposingon himself, this, though in a different way, would■cely less detract from the high stage of evinceupon which the nobler parts of his characterwould induce us to place him.Such were some of the main causes that havemade his efforts perishable, and the lustre whichshould have attended his genius in a great degreetransitory and fugitive. He was probably muchunder the influence of a contemptible jealousy,and must be considered as desirous that none ofhis contemporaries or followers should eclipsetheir master. All was oracular and dogmatic inthe school of Pythagoras. He prized and justlyiced the greatness of his attainments and discoveries,and had no conception that any thinglull go beyond them. He did not encourage,ly, he resolutely opposed, all true independence■of mind, and that undaunted spirit of enterprisewhich is the atmosphere in which the sublimestEumenides.thoughts are most naturally generated. He thereforedid not throw open the gates of science andwisdom, and invite every comer ; but on the con ,tray narrowed the entrance, and carefully reducedthe number of aspirants. He thought notof the most likely methods to give strength and 'permanence and an extensive sphere to the progressof the human mind. For these reasons he ,wrote nothing ; but consigned all to the frail anduncertain custody of tradition. And distant posterityhas amply avenged itself upon the narrownessof his policy ; and the name of Pythagoras,which would otherwise have been ranked withthe first luminaries of mankind, and consigned toeverlasting gratitude, has in consequence of a fewradical and fatal mistakes, been often loaded withobloquy, and the hero who bore it been indiscriminatelyclassed among the votaries of imposture iand artifice.Eumenides.Eumenides has been mentioned among the Jdisciples of Pythagoras j but he probably lived atan earlier period. He was a native of Crete. JThe first extraordinary circumstance that iS re- Icorded of him is, that, being very young, he was jsent by his father in search of a stray sheep, when,being overcome by the heat of the weather, he re- ltired into a cave, and slept fifty-seven years, iEPI MEN IDES.Supposing that he had slept only a few hours, herepaired first to his father's country-house, whichhe found in possession of a new tenant, and tiento the city, where he encountered his youngerbrother, now grown an old man, who with difficultywas brought to acknowledge him". It wasprobably this circumstance that originally broughtEpimenides into repute as a prophet, and a favouriteof the Gods.Epimenides appears to have been one of thosepersons, who make it their whole study to deludetheir fellow-men, and to obtain for themselves thereputation of possessing supernatural gills. Suchpersons, almost universally, and particularly inages of ignorance and wonder, become themselvesthe dupes of their own pretensions. He gave outthat he was secretly subsisted by food brought toslim by the nymphs ; and he is said to have takennourishment in so small quantities, as to be exemptedfrom the ordinary necessities of nature'.He boasted that he could send his soul out of his■ body, and recal it, when he pleased; and alter-latelyappeared an inanimate corpse, and thenpin his life would return to liirn, and he appearCapable of every human function as before". He^ said to have practised the ceremony of exorcisingi and fields, and thus rendering them fruitfulUd blessed". He frequently uttered propheciess. Lib. I, .;^. 100.Pliniu,s, Lib. VII. c.12.I.e. 113.Ibi.l.'1 Ibid.c. 11EMPISIENIDF.S.of events with such forms of ceremony and suchsagacious judgment, that they seemed to come topass as he predicted.One of the most memorable acts of his life happenedin this manner. Cylon, the head of one of \the principal families in Athens, set on foot a rebellionagainst the government, and surprised the ,citadel. His power however was of short duration.Siege was laid to the place, and Cylon found hissafety in flight. His partisans forsook their arms,and took refuge at the altars. Seduced from thissecurity by fallacious promises, they were broughtto judgment and all of them put to death. TheGods were said to be offended with this violationof the sanctions of religion, and sent a plague uponthe city. All things were in confusion, and sadnesspossessed the whole community. Prodigieswere perpetually seen ; the spectres of the deadwalked the streets ; and terror universally prevailed.The sacrifices offered to the gods exhibitedthe most unfavourable symptoms". In thisemergency the Athenian senate resolved to sendfor Epimenides to come to their relief. His reputationwas great. He was held for a holy and 1devout man, and wise in celestial things by aspirationfrom above. A vessel was fitted out under ;the command of one of the first citizens of thestate to fetch Epimenides from Crete. He performedvarious rites and purifications. He took aPlutarch, Vita Colonies. Laertius. Lily. I, c. 109.Empedocles. 95am number of sheep, Mack and white, and ledthen to the Areopagus, where he caused them tobe let loose to go wherever they would. He diireeled certain persons to follow them, and markI the place where they lay down. He enquired towhat particular' deity the spot was consecrated,and sacrificed the sheep to that deity ; and in theresult of these ceremonies the plague was stayed.According to others iie put an end to the plagueby the sacrifice of two human victims. TheI Athenian senate, full of gratitude to their benesector, tendered him the gift of a talent. ButEpimenides refused all compensation, and onlyrequired, as an acknowledgment of what he haddone, that there should be perpetual peace betweenthe Athenians and the people of Glosses, ibisnative city'. He is said to have died shortly■ ■f^er his return to his country, being of the ageI of one hundred and fifty-seven years*.EMPEDOCLES.Empedocles has also been mentioned as a discipleof Pythagoras. But he probably liveth too latefor that to have been the case. His principleswere in 8 great degree similar to those of that illustriouspa-songe ; and he might have studiedunder one of the immediate successors of Pythago-I ras. He was a citizen of Argentum in Sicily ;'plutarch. Vita Colonies. Laertes, Lib. I. c. 110. f- Ibid.EMPEDOCLES.and, having inherited considerable wealth, exercisedgreat authority in his native place'. He wasa distinguished orator and poet. He was greatlyconversant in the study of nature, and was eminentfor his skill in medicine'. In addition tothese accomplishments, he appears to have been adevoted adherent to the principles of liberty. Heeffected the dissolution of the ending council ofArgentum, and substituted in their room a triennialmagistracy, by means of which the publicauthority became not solely in the hands of therich as before, but was shared by them with expertand intelligent men of an inferior class'. Heopposed all arbitrary exercises of rule. He gavedowries from his own stores to many young maidensof impoverished families, and settled them in eligiblemarriages'. He performed many cures uponhis fellow-citizens ; and is especially celebrated forhaving restored a woman to life, who had beenapparently dead, according to one account for sevendays, but according to others for thirty'.But the most memorable things known of Empedocles,are contained in the fragments of hi* Iverses that have been preserved to us. In one ofthem he says of himself, " I well remember thetime before I was Empedocles, that I once wasa boy, then a girl, a plant, a glittering fish, a bird iLaertiua, Lib. VllI, c. 51, 64. * Ibid, c. 57.'■ Ibid, c. 06. " Ibid, c. 73.• Plinius, Lib, VII, c. 52. Laprtius, c. 6LEHrPF.DOCLES. 97that cut the air," Addressing those who resortedto him for improvement and wisdom, he says,By my instructions you shall learn medicinesthat are powerful to cure disease, and re-animateold age i you shall be able to calm the savage^ winds which lay waste the labours of the husbandman,and, when you will, shall send forth theTempest again ; you shall cause the skies to be fairod serene, or once more shall draw down refreshingshowers, re-animating the fruits of the earth ;nay, you shall recal the strength of the dead man,p*hen he has already become the victim of Pluto."Further, speaking of himself, Empedocles exclaims:Friends, who inhabit the great city laved by theyellow Crags, all hail 1 I mix with you a God,no longer a mortal, and am every where honouredby you, as is just ; crowned with fillets, and fragrantgarlands, adorned with which when I visit(populous cities, I am revered by both men and'omen, who follow me by ten thousands, enquireroad to boundless wealth, seeking the giftf prophecy, and who would learn the marvellousill to cure all kinds of diseases."The best known account of the death of Empedoclesmay reasonably be considered as fabulous.IVom what has been said it sufficiently appears,that he was a man of extraordinary intellectual endowments,and the most philanthropical dispositions; at the same time that he was immoderatelyvain, aspiring by every means in his power to acquireto himself a deathless remembrance. Morningon these hints, a story has been invented that heaspired to a miraculous way of disappearing fromamong men ; and for this purpose repaired, when Isone, to the top of Mount etna, then in a stateof eruption, and threw himself down the burningcrater: but it is added, that in the result of thisperverse ambition he was baffled, the volcano havingthrown up one of his brazen sandals, by means Iof which the mode of his death became known".Herodotus tells a marvellous story of one Aris iteas, a poet of Proconsul, an island of the Pre ipontus. This man, coming by chance intofuller's workshop in his native place, suddenlyfell down dead. As the man was of considerablerank, the fuller immediately, quitting and lockingup his shop, proceeded to inform his family ofwhat had happened. The relations went accordingly,having procured what was requisite to give tthe deceased the rites of sepulture, to the shopij [but, when it was opened, they could discover op jvestige of Arises, either dead or alive, A tramweller however from the neighbouring town' of 1Cyzicus on the continent, protested that be hadjustest that place, and, as he set foot in the wherryLaertius, c. 6fl. Ilorat. Dc Arte Poetica, v. 4G3.IHEKMOTIMUS. 99which had brought him over, had met ArJsteas,and held a particular conversation with him. Sevenyears after, Arises reappeared at Proconsul,Resided there a considerable time, and during thisabode wrote his poem of the wars of the one-eyedArimaspians and the Gryphons. He tien againdisappeared in an unaccountable manner. But,what is more than all extraordinary, three Indeedand forty years after this disappearance, he shewedhimself again at Metapontura, in Magna Grecian,and commanded the citizens to erect a statue inhis honour near the temple of Apollo in the forum ;which being done, he raised himself in the air ;and flew away in the form of a crow".HliRMOTIMUS.Harmonious, or, as Plutarch names him, herodotusof Clazomene, is said to have possessed,Eke Epimenides, the marvellous power of quittings body, and returning to it again, as often, andr as long a time as he pleased. In these absencesIsis unbodied spirit would visit what places hesought proper, observe every thing that was goingon, and, when he returned to his fleshy tabernacle,make a minute relation of what he had seen."Hennotinius bad enemies, who, one time whenhis body had lain unanimated unusually long, beguiledhis wife, made her believe that he was cereLib. Ill, c. 14, !5. Plinius, Lib. VII, c. ^2.100 THE MOTHER OF DEMARATUS,vainly dead, and that it was disrespectful and indecentto keep him so long in that state. Thewoman therefore placed her husband on the funeralpyre, and consumed him to ashes ; so that, continuesthe philosopher, when the soul of Harmoniouscame back again, it no longer found itscustomary receptacle to retire into Certainlythis kind of treatment appeared to furnish an infalliblecriterion, whether the seeming absences ofthe soul of this miraculous man were pretended orreal.THE MOTHER OF DEMARATUS, KING OFSPARTA.Herodotus** tells a story of the mother of De-paratus,king of Sparta, which bears a strikingresemblance to the fairy tales of modern times.This lady, afterward queen of Sparta, was sprungfrom opulent parents, but, when she was born,was so extravagantly ugly, that her parents hidher from all human observation. According to themode of the times however, they sent the babedaily in its nurse's arms to the shrine of Helen,now metamorphosed into a Goddess, to pray thatthe child might be delivered from its presentpreternatural deformity. On these occasions the» Plutarch, De Genie Socrates. Lucian, Muscae Encomium.Plinius, Lib. VII, c. 52.»> PliniuB, Lib. Ill, c. 61, 62.ORACLES.^^^ caiNovi^^^ toocliiltl was shrouded in many coverings, that itmight escape being seen. One day as the nursecame out of the temple, a strange woman met her,And asked her what she carried so carefully concealed.The nurse said it was a female child, hutopulent parents, and she was strictly enjoined[that it should be seen by no one. The stranger^as importunate, and by dint of perseveranceovercame the nurse's reluctance. The womantook the babe in her arms, stroked down its hair,issued it, and then returning it to the nurse, saidlat it should grow up the most perfect beauty inlarva. So accordingly it proved : and the kingthe country, having seen her, became so enamouredof lier, that, though he already had awife, and she a husband, he overcame all obstacles,and made her his queen.il.'One of the most extraordinary things to be metin the history of ancient times is the oracles.'hey maintained their reputation for many decisivecenturies. The most famous perhaps werethat of Delphi in Greece, and that of Jupiter Ammonin the deserts of Lydia. But they were scatteredthrough many cities, many plains, and manyislands. They wore consulted by the abolish andthe wise ; and scarcely anything considerable wasundertaken, especially about the time of the Per-102 ORACLES,sian invasion into Greece, without the parties havingfirst had recourse to these ; and they in mostcases modified the conduct of princes and armiesaccordingly. To render the delusion more success-fill,every kind of artifice was put in practice. Theoracle could only be consulted on fixed days ; andthe persons who resorted to it, prefaced their applicationwith costly offerings to the presidingGod. Their questions passed through the handsof certain priests, residing in and about the temple.These priests received the embassy withalldue solemnity, and retired. A priestess, orPythia, who was seldom or never seen by any ofthe profane vulgar, was the immediate vehicle ofcommunication with the God. She was cut offfrom all intercourse with the world, and was carefullytrained by the attendant priests. Spending almostthe whole of her time in solitude, and taughtto consider her office as ineffably sacred, she sawvisions, and was for the most part in a state ofgreat excitement. The Pythia, at least of theDelphian God, was led on with much ceremonyto the performance of her office, and placed uponthe sacred tripod. The tripod, we are told, stoodover a chasm in the rock, from which issued fumesof an inebriating quality. The Pythia became graduallypenetrated through every limb with thesefumes, till her bosom swelled, her features enlarged,her mouth foamed, lier voice seemed supernatural,and she uttered words that could someII^^^ Bess"times scarcely be called articulate. She coiiltl withdifficulty contain herself', and seemed to be possessed,and wholly overpowered, with the God.,er a prelude of many unintelligible sounds,,red with fervour and a sort of frenzy, she becameby degrees more distinct. She uttered incoherentsentences, with breaks and pauses, thatwere filled up with preternatural efforts and distortedgestures ; while the priests stood by, carefullyrecording her words, and then reducing theminto a sort of obscure signification. They finallydigested there for the most part into a species ofhexameter verse. We may suppose the supplicantsduring this ceremony placed at a proper distance,»o as to observe these things imperfectly, whilele less they understood, they were ordinarily thelore impressed with religious awe, and preparedimplicitly to receive what was communicated tothem. Sometimes the priestess found herself inaframe, not entirely equal to her function, andrefused tor the present to proceed with the ceremony.The priests of the oracle doubtless conductedhem in a certain degree like the gipsies and forestallersof modern times, cunningly procuringThemselves intelligence in whatever way theyeoukl, and ingeniously worming out the secrets oftheir suitors, at the same time contriving that their^rifb should least of all be suspected. But thar104 ORACLES*main resource probably was in the obscurity, almostamounting to unintelligibleness, of their responses.Their prophecies in most cases requiredthe comment of the event to make them understood; and it not seldom happened, that the meaningin the sequel was found to be the diametricallyopposite of that which the pious votaries had originallyconceived.In the mean time the obscurity of the oracleswas of inexpressible service to the cause of superstition.If the event turned out to be suchas could in no way be twisted to come within thescope of the response, the pious suitor only concludedthat the failure was owing to the grossnessand carnality of his own apprehension, and not toany deficiency in the institution. Thus the oracleby no means lost credit, even when its meaningremained for ever in its original obscurity. But,when, by any fortunate chance, its predictionsseemed to be verified, then the unerringness ofthe oracle was lauded from nation to nation ; andthe omniscience of the God was admitted with astonishmentand adoration.It would be a vulgar and absurd mistake however,to suppose that all this was merely the affairof crass, the multitude only being the dupes, whilethe priests in cold blood carried on the deception,and secretly laughed at the juggle they werepalming on the world. They felt their own importance; and they clierislietl it. They felt thatthey were regarded by their countrymen assomething more than human j and the opinionentertained of them by the world around them,did not fail to excite a responsive sentiment inI their own bosoms. If their contemporaries willinglyascribed to them an exclusive sacredness,by how much stronger an impulse were they ledfully to receive so flattering a suggestion ! Theirminds were In a perpetual state of exaltation ; andthey believed themselves specially favoured by theGod whose temple constituted their residence. Asmall matter is found sufficient to place a creedwhich flatters all the passions of its votaries, onthe most indubitable basis. Modern philosopherslink that by their doctrine of gases they can explainall the appearances of the Pythia ; but theancients, to whom this doctrine was unknown, admittedthese appearances as the undoubted evidenceof an interposition from heaven.It is certainly a matter of the extremest difficulty.for us in imagination to place ourselves in2 situation of those who believed in the ancientatheistical creed. And yet these believersnearly constituted the whole oi the population ofthe kingdoms of antiquity. Even those who professedto have shaken off the prejudices of theireducation, and to rise above the absurdities ofpaganism, had still some of the old leaven adheringLily them. One of the last acts of the life of Socrates,was to order the sacrifice of a cock to bemade to aesculapius.Now the creed of paganism is said to have madeup to the number of thirty thousand deities.Every kingdom, every city, every street, nay, inamanner every house, had its protecting God.These Gods were rivals to eacli other ; and wereeach jealous of his own particular province, andwatchful against the intrusion of any neighbour 'deity upon ground where he had a superior right.The province of each of these deities was of small ,extent ; and therefore their watchfulness and jealousyof their appropriate honours do not enterinto the slightest comparison with the Providenceof the God who directs the concerns of the uni* |verse. They had ample leisure to employ in vindicatingtheir prerogatives. Prophecy was of all Imeans the plainest and most obvious for each deityto assert his existence, and to inforce the reverenceand submission uf his votaries. Prophecywas that species of interference which was leastliable to the being confuted and exposed. TheOracles, as we have said, were delivered in terms ■and phrases that were nearly unintelligible. If Itherefore they met with no intelligible fulfilment,this lost them nothing; and, if it gained them noadditional credit, neither did it expose them toany disgrace. Whereas every example, where the Iobscure prediction seemed to tally with, and be Jillustrated by any subsequent event, was hailed ]INVASION OF XERXES INTO GREECE.with wonder and applause, confirmed the faith ofthe true believers, and was held forth as a victoriousconfutation of the doubts of the infidel.INVASION OF XERXES INTO GREECE.It is particularly suitable in this place to voicethe events which took place at Delphi uponvision of the memorable invasion of Xerxesrto Greece. This was indeed a critical momentthe heathen mythology. The Persians werepointed and express in their hostility against theStars and the temples of the Greeks. It was nooner known that the straits of Thermopylae; had'been forced, than the priests consulted the God, asto whether they should bury the treasures of thetemple, so to secure them against the sacrilege ofiie invader. Theanswer of the oracle was : *letnothing be moved ; the God is sufficient for the(Protection of his rights." The inhabitants thereforeof the neighbourhood withdrew: only sixtyBen and the priest remained. The Persians iniie mean time approached. Previously to thishowever, the sacred arms which were placed inthe temple, were seen to be moved by invisiblehands, and deposited on the declivity which wasI. on the outside of the building. The invaders notone shewed themselves, than a miraculousform of thunder and lightning rebounded andwished among the multiplied hills which sur-invasionOF XERXES INTO GREECE.rounded the sacred area, and struck terror into allhearts. Two vast fragments were detached fromthe top of mount Parnassus, and crushed hundredsin their fall. A voice of warlike acclamationissued from within the walls. Dismay seizedthe Persian troops. The Delphian then, rushing-fromtheir caverns, and descending from the sum-rats,attacked them with great slaughter. Two,persons, exceeding all human stature, and that'were said to be the demigods whose penes wereerected near the temple of Apollo, joined in thpursuit, and extended the slaughter . It has beet'said that the situation of the place was particularlyadapted to this mode of defence. Surroundedand almost overhung with lofty mountain-summits,the area of the city was inclosed within'crags and precipices. No way led to it butthrough defiles, narrow and steep, shadowedwith wood, and commanded at every step byt'fastnesses from above. In such a position artificialfires and explosion might imitate a thunderstorm.Great pains had been taken, to representthe place as altogether abandoned ; and tinfore the detachment of rocks from the topmount Parnassus, though effected by humiWihands, might appear altogether supernatural,Nothing can more forcibly illustrate the strength'of the religious feeling among the Greeks, thanthe language of the Athenian government at theHerodotus, Lib. VIII, c. 36, 37, 3S, 39.Ipre-invasionOF XERXES INTO GREECE.time of the second descent of the Persian armamentupon their territory, when they were i^incompelled to abandon their houses and land toinvader. Antonius said to them ; " I amus commissioned by the king of Persia, he willrelease and give back to you your country ; heinvites you to choose a further territory, whateveryou may think desirable, which he will guaranteeto you to govern as you shall judge Ht. He willrebuild for you, without its costing you cithermoney or labour, the temples which in his formerincursion he destroyed with fire. It is in vain foryou to oppose him by force, for his armies areinnumerable." To which the Athenians replied,As long as the sun pursues his course in theheavens, so long will we resist the Persian invader."Then turning to the Spartan ambassadorswho were sent to encourage and animate them topersist, they added, " It is but natural that youremployers should apprehend that we might giveway and be discouraged. But there is no sum ofmoney so vast, and no region so inviting and fertile,that could buy us to concur in the enslavingof Greece. Many and resistless are the causeswhich induce us to this resolve. First and chief-est,the temples and images of the Gods, whi<^Xerxes has burned and laid in ruins, and wluchwe are called upon to avenge to theinstead of forming a league with him whodevastation. Secondly, the considerationIIII WIU^II ^^utmost, ^^Mlio made ^^MDemocritus.the Grecian race, the same with us in blood and Jin speech, the same in religion and manners, and jwhose cause we will never betray. Know there. Jfore now, if you knew not before, that, as long aa single Athenian survives, we will never swerve Jfrom the hostility to Persia to which we have dft*,|voted ourselves."Contemplating this magnanimous resolution, it |is in vain for us to reflect on the absurdity, incongruityand frivolousness, as we apprehend it, ctflthe pagan worship, inasmuch as we find, whatever 1we may think of its demerits, that the most Fiesole ]people that ever existed on earth, in the hour of Itheir direst calamity, regarded a zealous and feiv fvent adherence to that religion as the most sacred Jof all duties'.DEMOCRITUS.The fame of Democritus has sustained a singu.^|lar fortune. He is represented by Pliny as one of 1the most superstitious of mortals. This character Iis founded on certain books which appeared in hisname. In these books he is made to say, that, tfthe blood of certain birds be mingled together, tilecombination will produce a serpent, of which whoevereats will become endowed with the gift of |understanding the language of birds". He attri- fbutes a multitude of virtues to the limbs of a dead 1*• Herodotus, Lib. VIII, c, 140, el seqq.• Historia Naturally, Lib. X, c. 49.DEMOCRITUS.Illcricamelion : among others that, if the left foot ofthis animal be grilled, and there be added certainherbs, and a particular unctuous preparation, it willive the quality to render the person who carriesabout him invisible'. But all this is whollyirreconcilable with the known character of Democritus,who distinguished himself by the hypothesisthat tile world was framed from the fortuitous courseof atoms, and that the soul died with theicy. And accordingly Lucian', a more judiciousthor than Pliny, expressly cites Democritus asstrenuous opposer of all the pretenders to'miracles. " Such juggling tricks," he says, "callfor a Democritus, an Epicurus, a Metropolis, ortome one of that temper, who should endeavourdetect the illusion, and would hold it tor cern,even if he could not fully lay open the deceit,lat the whole was a lying pretence, and had notspark of reality in it."Democritus was in reality one of the most disinterestedcharacters on record in the pursuit ofwith. He has been styled the father of experimentalphilosophy. When his father died, andiB estate came to be divided between him andtwo brothers, he chose the part which was inmoney, though the smallest, that he might indulgetum in traveling in pursuit of knowledge. Helitod Egypt and Persia, and turned aside into:, Lib. Xxviii, c. 8.Pseutloiaantis, c. 17- See also Philopseudea,112 SOCRATES.Ethiopia and India. He is reported to have said,that he had rather be the possessor of one of thecardinal secrets of nature, than of the diadem ofPersia.SOCRATES.Socrates is the most eminent of the ancientphilosophers. He lived in the most enlightenedage of Greece, and in Athens, the most illustriousof her cities. He was born in the middle ranks oflife, the son of a sculptor. He was of a meancountenance, with a snub nose, projecting eyes,and otherwise of an appearance so unpromising,that a physiognomist, his contemporary, pronouncedhim to be given to the gi-grossest vices.But he was of a penetrating understanding, thesimplest manners, and a mind wholly bent on thestudy of moral excellence. He at once abjuredall the lofty pretensions, and the dark and reconditepursuits of the most applauded teachers of histime, and led those to whom he addressed his instructionsfrom obvious and irresistible data to themost unexpected and useful conclusions. Therewas something in his manner of teaching thatdrew to him the noblest youth of Athens. Platoand Xenophon, two of the most admirable of theGreek writers, were among his pupils. He reconciledin his own person in a surprising degreepoverty with the loftiest principles of independence.He taught an unreserved submission tothe lawson our country. He several times unequivocallydisplayed his valour in the field of battle,while at the same time he kept aloof from publicoffices and trusts. The serenity of bis mind neverforsook him. He was at all times ready to teach,and never found it difficult to detach himself fromhis own concerns, to attend to the wants andwishes of others. He was uniformly courteousand unpretending; and, if at anytime he indulgedin a vein of playful ridicule, it was only againstthe presumptuously ignorant, and those who werewithout foundation wise in their own conceit.Yet, with all these advantages and perfections,the name of Socrates would not have been bandeddown with such lustre to posterity but for themanner of bis death. He made himself manyenemies. The plainness of his manner and thesimplicity of bis instructions were inexpressiblywounding to those (and they were many), who,setting up for professors, had hitherto endeavouredto dazzle their hearers by the loftiness of theirclaims, and to command from them implicit submissionby the arrogance with which they dictated.It must be surprising to us, that a manbke Socrates should be arraigned in a countrylike Athens upon a capital accusation. He wascharged with instilling into the youth a disobedienceto their duties, and propagating impiety tothe Gods, faults of which he was notoriously iuno-But the plot against him was deeply laid,litIand is said to have been twenty years in the concoction.And he greatly assisted the machinationsof his adversaries, hy the wonderful firmnessof his conduct upon his trial, and his spirited resolutionnot to submit to any thing indirect andpusillanimous. He defended himself with a serenecountenance and the most cogent arguments, butwould not stoop to deprecation and intreaty.When sentence was pronounced against him, thisdid not induce the least alteration of his conduct.He did not think that a life which he had passedfor seventy years with a clear conscience, wasworth preserving by the sacrifice of Honour. Herefused to escape from prison, when one of hisrich friends had already purchased of the jailor themeans of his freedom. And, during the last days tof his life, and when lie was waiting the signal of Ideath, which was to be the return of a ship that fhad been sent with sacrifices to Delos, he uttered ]those admirable discourses, which have been re |corded by Xenophon and Plato to the later"!posterity.But the question which introduces his name Iinto this volume, is that of what is called the Idemon of Socrates. He said that he repeatedly Jreceived a divine premonition of dangers impend* Iing over himself and others ; and considerablepains have been taken to ascertain the cause andauthor of these premonitions. Several persons,among whom we may include Plato, have con* |lived that Socrates regarded himself as attendedsupernatural guardian who at all timesetched over his welfare and concerns.But the solution is probably of a simpler nature.crates, with all his incomparable excellenciesand perfections, was not exempt from the superstitionsof his age and country. He had been bredup among the absurdities of polytheism. In themwere included, as we have seen, a profound deferencefor the responses of oracles, and a vigilantattention to portents and omens. Socrates appearsto have been exceedingly regardful of omens.Plato tells us that this intimation, which he spokeof as his demon, never prompted Iii to any act,but occasionally interfered to prevent him or hisfriends from proceeding in any thing that wouldhave been attended with Injurious consequences".Sometimes he described it as a voice, which noone however heard but himself; and sometimes itshewed itself in the act of sneezing. If the sneezingcame, when lie was in doubt to do a tiling ornot to do it, it confirmed him ; but if, being alreadyengaged in any act, he sneezed, this he consideredas a warning to desist. If any of his friendssneezed on his right hand, he interpreted this asafavourable omen ; but, if on his left, he immediatelyrelinquished his purpose Socrates viscidhis mode of expressing himself on the sub-theater.riiilarcli. Pc Genie Sui-alU.sect, by saying that others, when they spoke ofomens, for example, by the voice of a bird,said the bird told me this, but that he, knowingthat the omen was purely instrumental to a higherpower, deemed it more religious and respectful tohave regard only to the higher power, and to saythat God had graciously warned him'. One ofthe examples of this presage was, that, going alonga narrow street with several companions in earnestdiscourse, he suddenly stopped, and turned anotherway, warning his friends to do the same. Someyielded to him, and others went on, who were encounteredby the rushing forward of a multitudeof hogs, and did not escape without considerableinconvenience and injury. In another instanceone of a company among whom was Socrates, hadconfederated to commit an act of assassination.Accordingly he rose to quit the place, saying toSocrates, " I will be back presently." Socrates,unaware of his purpose, but having received theintimation of his demon, said to him earnestly,Go not." The conspirator sat down. Againhowever lie rose, and again Socrates stopped him.At length he escaped, without the observation of'the philosopher, and committed the act, for whichhe was afterwards brought to trial. When ledto execution, he exclaimed, " This would neverhave happened to me, if I had yielded to the inti-'■" Xenophon, Memorabilia, Lib. I, c. 1.'' Plutarch, ubi supra.ISOCRATES. 117nation of Socrates" In the same manner, andby a similar suggestion, the philosopher predictedthe miscarriage of the Athenian expedition toSicily under Nicias, which terminated with suchsignal disaster'. This feature in the character ofSocrates is remarkable, and may shew the prevalenceof superstitious observances, even in personswhom we might think the most likely to be exemptfrom this weakness.« Plato, Thames. ^ Ibid.ROME.igh„.^^ TheiVIRGIL.From the Greeks let us turn to the RomansThe earliest examples to our purpose occur in the^neid. And, though Virgil is a poet, yet is heso correct a writer, that we may well take forgranted, that he either records facts which leadbeen handed down by tradition, or that, when hefeigns, he feigns things strikingly in accord withemanners and belief of the age of which hespeaks.POLYDORUS.IOne of the first passages that occur, is of theghost of the deceased Polydorus on the coast ofThrace. Polydorus, the son of Priam, was mur-sedby the king of that country, his host, forsakeof the treasures he had brought with himim Troy. He was struck through with darts,e of the wood of the myrtle. The body wastast into a pit, and earth thrown upon it. Thestems of myrtle grew and flourished, eneas,after the burning of Troy, first attempted a settlementin this place. Near the spot where helanded he found a hillock thickly set withlyrtie. He attempted to gather some, thinking120 DIDO.it might form a suitable screen to an altar whichhe had just raised. To his astonishment and horrorhe found the branches he had plucked, droppingwith blood. He tried the experiment againand again. At length a voice from the mound washeard, exclaiming, " Spare me ! I am Polygons ;"and warning him to fly the blood-stained andtreacherous shore.DIDO.We have a more detailed tale of necromancy,when Dido, deserted by aeneas, resolves on self-destruction.To delude her sister as to her secretpurpose, she sends for a priestess from the gardensof the Hesperides, pretending that her object isby magical incantations again to relumine the passionof love in the breast of eneas. This priestessis endowed with the power, by potent verseto free the oppressed soul from care, and by similarmeans to agitate the bosom with passion whichis free from its empire. She can arrest the headlongstream, and cause the stars to return back intheir orbits. She can call up the ghosts of thedead. She is able to compel the solid earth torock, and the trees of the forest to descend fromtheir mountains. To give effect to the infernalspell, Dido commands that a funeral pyre shall besetup in the interior court of her palace, and that;the arms of aeneas, what remained of his attire.and the marriage bed in which Dido had receivedhim, shall be leaped upon it. The pyre is hungI round with garlands, and adorned with branchesf cypress. The sword of eneas and his picturesadded. Altars are placed round the pyre ; andthe priestess, with dishevelled hair, calls with terrificcharms upon her three hundred Gods, uponErebus, chaos, and the three-faced Hecate. Shesprinkles around the waters of Avernus, and addscertain herbs that had been cropped by moonlightsith a sickle of brass. She brings with her theexcrescence which is found upon the forehead ofI new-cast foal, of the size of a dried fig, and whichness first eaten by the mare, the mother neveradmits her young to the nourishment of her milk.After these preparations, Dido, with garmentstucked up, and with one foot bare, approached the^^HAltars, breaking over them a consecrated cake, and^^^fembracing them successively in her arms. The^^^■pyre was then to be set on fire ; and, as the differsobjects placed upon it were gradually ,the charm became complete, and the ends^^^nroposed to the ceremony wei-e expected to follow.^^^^Dido assures her sister, that she well knew the unI lawfulness of her proceeding, and protests thatnothing but irresistible necessity should have have recourse to these unhallowedfinally stabs herself, and expires.^^ cert^^Lwith^^Kexcr^^fcne^^™«dmThe early history of Rome is, as might be expected,interspersed with prodigies. Romulus himself,the founder, after a prosperous reign of manyyears, disappeared at last by a miracle. The king ,assembled his army to a general review, when sud |deny, in the midst of the ceremony, a tempestarose, with vivid lightnings and tremendous crashesof thunder. Romulus became enveloped in a cloud,and, when, shortly after, a clear sky and serene (heavens succeeded, the king was no more seen, 'and the throne upon which he had sat appearedvacant. The people were somewhat dissatisfiedwith the event, and appear to have suspected foulplay. But the next day Julius Proclus, a senatorof the highest character, shewed himself in the generalassembly, and assured them, that, with thefirst dawn of the morning, Romulus had stood beforehim, and certified to him that the Gods hadtaken him up to their celestial abodes, authorisinghim withal to declare to his citizens, that theirarms should be for ever successful against all theirenemies".Numa was the second king of Rome : and, theobject of Romulus having been to render his peoplesoldiers and invincible in war, Numa, an old■ LiviuB, Lib. I, c. IG.I^^ tutsuaA.H^ calmay^^ pOS£man amt a philosopher, made it his purpose tocivilise them, and deeply to imbue them with sentimentsof religion. He appears to have imagined16 thing best calculated to accomplish this purse,was to lead them by prodigies and the persuasionof an intercourse with the invisible world.A shield fell from heaven in his time, which hecaused to be carefully kept and consecrated to thegods ; and he conceived no means so likely toeffectual to this end, as to make eleven otherfields exactly like the one which had descendedmiracle, so that, if an accident happened toany one, the Romans might believe that the onegiven to them by the divinity was still in theirpossessionNuma gave to his people civil statutes, and a.e of observances in matters of religion ; andthese also were inforced with a divine sanction.Numa met the goddess Egeria from time to timein a cave ; and by her was instructed in the institutionshe should give to the Romans : and thisbarbarous people, awed by the venerable appearanceof their king, by the sanctity of his manners,id still more by the divine favour which was sosally imparted to him, received his mandatesexemplary reverence, and ever after implythemselves to all that he had suited".■ LiviuB, Lib. I, c. 19, 21.124 ACCIUS NAVIUS.Tellus Hostility.Tullus Hostility, the third king of Rome, restoredagain the policy of Romulus. In his time,Alba, the parent state, was subdued and united toits more flourishing colony. In the mean timeTullus, who during the greater part of his reignhad been distinguished by martial achievements,in the latter part became the victim of superstitions.A shower of stones fell from heaven, inthe manner, as Livy tells us, of a hail-storm. Aplague speedily succeeded to this prodigy*. Tellus,awed by these events, gave his whole attentionto the rites of religion. Among other thingshe found in the sacred books of Numa an accountof a certain ceremony, by which, if rightly performed,the appearance of a God, named JupiterDelicious, would be conjured up. But Tullus, whohad spent his best days in the ensanguined field,proved inadequate to this new undertaking. Somedefects having occurred in his performance of themagical ceremony, not only no God appeared athis bidding, but, the anger of heaven being awakened,a thunderbolt fell on the palace, and theking, and the place of his abode were consumedtogether.ACCIUS NAVIUS.In the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth» Livius, Lib. I, c. 31. ^ Ibid.SEHVIUS TULLIUS.Iting of Rome, another famous prodigy is recorded.The king had resolved to increase the number ofthe Roman cavalry. Romulus had raised the firstbody with the customary ceremony of augury.Tarquinius proposed to proceed in the present case,omitting this ceremony. Accius Navies, the chiefaugur, protested against the innovation. Tarquin,in contempt of his interference, addressedAccius, saying, "Come, augur, consult your birds,and tell me, whether the thing I have now in mymind can be done, or cannot be done." Acciusproceeded according to the rules of his art, andtold the king it could be done. " What 1 wasthinking of," replied Tarquinius, "was whether youcould cut this whetstone in two with this razor."Accius immediately took the one instrument andthe other, and performed the prodigy in the facethe assembled people".Servile TULLIUS.Service Nullius, the sixth king of Rome, was themodel of a disinterested and Liberal politician, andgave to his subjects those institutions to which,more than to any other cause, they were indebtedfor their subsequent greatness. Tarquinius subjectednearly the whole people of Latium to hisrule, capturing one town of this district after another.In Curriculum, one of these places, SereLivius, Lib. I, c. 36.^SEBVIUS Tellus.vies TuIHus, being in extreme youth, was made Ia prisoner of war, and subsequently dweltslave in the king's palace. One day as he lay Iasleep in the sight of many, Iiiss head was observed Ito be on fire. The bystanders, terrified at thespectacle, hastened to bring water that they might |extinguish the flames. The queen forbade their |assiduity, regarding the event as a token from theGods. By and by the boy awoke of his own accord,and the flames at the same instant disappeared.The queen, impressed with the prodigy,became persuaded that the youth was reserved for Jhigh fortunes, and directed that he should be instructedaccordingly in all liberal knowledge. Induetime he was married to the daughter of Tarquiniua,and was destined in all men's minds to succeed iin the throne, which took place in the sequel'.In the year of Rome two hundred and ninetyone, forty-seven years after the expulsion of Tar Jquin, a dreadful plague broke out in the city, andcarried off both the consuls, the augurs, and avast multitude of the people. The following yearwas distinguished by numerous prodigies ; fireswere seen in the heavens, and the earth shook,spectres appeared, and supernatural voices were 'heard, an ox spoke, and a shower of raw flesh fell 'in the fields. Most of these prodigies were not 'preternatural ; the speaking ox was probably receivedon the report of a single hearer ; and tbs j» Livius, Lib. I, c. 39.IITHE SORCERESS OF VIRGIL. 1 @7'whole was invested with exaggerated terror bymeans of the desolation of the preceding year'.^UpoiTHE SORCERESS OF VIRGIL.Prodigies are plentifully distributed through theearlier parts of the Roman history -, but it is notourpurpose to enter into a chronological detail onthe subject. And in reality those already given,except in the instance of Talus Hostility, donot entirely fall within the scope of the present volume.The Roman poets, Virgil, Horace, Ovid andLucan, give a fuller insight than the Latin prose-writers,into the conceptions of their countrymenupon the subject of incantations and magic.The eighth eclogue of Virgil, entitled Hannahis particularly to our purpose in this point,here is an Idyll of Theocritus under the samebut it is of an obscurer character ; and theenchantress is not, like that of Virgil, triumphantin the success of her arts.The sorceress is introduced by Virgil, givingdirection to her female attendant as to the dueadministration of her charms. Her object is to:al Daphnis, whom she styles her husband, toformer love for her. At the same time, .shelys, she will endeavour by magic to turn himaway from his wholesome sense. She directs herattendant to burn vervain and frankincense ; andTHE SORCERESS OF VIRGIL.she ascribes the highest efficacy to the solemnchant, which, she says, can call down the moonfrom its sphere, can make the cold-blooded snakeburst in the field, and was the means by whichCirce turned the companions of Ulysses into beasts.She orders his image to be thrice bound roundwith fillets of three colours, and then that it beparaded about a prepared altar, while in binding-theknots the attendant shall still say, "Thus daI bind the fillets of Venus." One image of clayand one of wax are placed before the same fire jand as the image of clay hardens, so does theheart of Daphnis harden towards his new mistress; and as the image of wax softens, so is theheart of Daphnis made tender towards the sorceress.She commands a consecrated cake to bebroken over the image, and crackling laurels to beburned before it, that as Daphnis had tormentedher by his infidelity, so he in his turn may bc'agitated with a returning constancy. She praysthat as the wanton heifer pursues the steer throughwoods and glens, till at length, worn out withfatigue, she lies down on the oozy reeds by thebanks of the stream, and the night-dew is unableto induce her to withdraw, so Daphnis may be ledon after her for ever with inextinguishable love.She buries the relics of what had belonged toDaphnis beneath her threshold. She bruises poisonousherbs of resistless virtue which had beengathered in the kingdom of Pontus, herbs, whichI1^9'enabled him who gave them to turn himself into ahungry wolf prowling amidst the forests, to call upghosts from the grave, and to translate the ripenedharvest fi'om the field where it grew to the landsof another. She orders her attendant to bring outto the face of heaven the ashes of these herbs, andto cast them over her head into the runningstream, and at the same time taking care not tolook behind her. After all her efforts the sorceressbegins to despair. She says, " Daphnis heedsnot ray incantations, heeds not the Goths." Shelooks again ; she perceives the ashes on the altaremit sparkles of fire ; she hears her faithful house-dogbark before the door ; she says, " Can thesethings bes or do lovers dream what they desire?It is not so ! The real Daphnis comes ; I hearhis steps ; he has left: the deluding town ; heRubens to my longing arms!"Candia.In the works of Horace occurs a frightful andimpulsive, but a curious detail of a scene of incantation*.Four sorceresses are represented as assembled,Canidia, the principal, to perform, the otherthree to assist in, the concoction of a charm, bymeans of which a certain youth, named Varus, forwhom Canidia had conceived a passion, but whoregards the hag with the utmost contempt, may■ lipoU. V.be made obsequious to her desires. Canidia appearsfirst, the locks of her dishevelled hair twinedround with venomous and deadly serpents, orderingthe wild fig-tree and the funereal cypress to berooted up from the sepulchres on which they grew,and these, together with the egg of a toad smearedwith blood, the plumage of the screech-owl, variousherbs brought from Thessaly and Georgia,and bones torn from the jaws of a famished dog,to be burned in flames fed with perfumes fromColchis. Of the assistant witches, one traces withhurried steps the edifice, sprinkling it, as she goes,with drops from the Avernus, her hair on herhead stiff and erect, like the quills of the sea \hedge-hog, or the bristles of a hunted boar ; andanother, who is believed by all the neighbour ]hood to have the faculty of conjuring the stars 1and the moon down from heaven, contributes her ]aid.But, which is most horrible, the last of the assistantwitches is seen, armed with a spade, and, withearnest and incessant labour, throwing up earth,that she may dig a trench, in which is to be iplunged up to his chin a beardless youth, stripped 1of his purple robe, the emblem of his noble descent,and naked, that, from his marrow already dry andhis liver (when at length his eye-balls, long fixedon the still renovated food which is withheld from |his famished jaws, have no more the power to discern),may be concocted the love-potion, from ]which these hags promise themselves the mostmarvellous results.Horace presents before us the helpless victimof their malice, already inclosed in the fatal trench,first viewing their orgies with affright, asking, bythe Gods who rule the earth and all the race ofmortals, what means the tumult around him ?He then interests Canidia, by her children if evershe had offspring, by the visible evidences of hishigh rank, and by the never-failing vengeanceof Jupiter upon such misdeeds, to say why shecasts on him glances, befitting the fury of a stepmother,or suited to a beast already made desperateby the wounds of the hunter.At length, no longer exhausting himself in fruitlessintreaties, the victim has recourse in hisagonies to curses on his executioners. He says,his ghost shall haunt them for ever, for no vengeancecan expiate such cruelty. He will teartheir cheeks with his fangs, for that power is givento the shades below. He will sit, a night-mare,on their bosoms, driving away sleep from theireyes ; while the enraged populace shall pursuethem with stones, and the wolves shall gnaw andhowl over their unburied members. The unhappyyouth winds up all with the remark, that hisparents who will survive him, shall themselves witnessthis requital of the sorceresses' infernal deeds.Canidia, unmoved by these menaces and exertions,complains of the slow progress of herK '2charms. She gnaws her fingers with rage. Sheinvokes the night and the moon, beneath whoserays these preparations are carried on, now, whilethe wild beasts lie asleep in the forest), and while ithe dogs alone bay the superannuated fletcher, whorelies singly on the rich scents with which he isperfumed for success, to speed her incantations, Iand signalise their power beneath the roof of him Iwhose love she seeks. She impatiently demands |why her drugs should be of less avail than those 1of Medea, with which she poisoned a garment, |that, once put on, caused Creusa, daughter of the ]king of Corinth, to expire in intolerable torments ? IShe discovers that Varus had hitherto battled her jpower by means of some magical antidote ; and ishe resolves to prepare a mightier charm, that!nothing from earth or hell shall resist. " Soonershe says, " shall the sky be swallowed up in the 1sea, and the earth be stretched a covering ove Jboth, than thou, my enemy, shalt not be wrapped!in the flames of love, as subtle and tenacious tthose of burning pitch."It is not a little curious to remark the operation iof the antagonist principles of superstition and]scepticism among the Romans in this enlightened]period, as it comes illustrated to us in the conipo- 1nations of Horace on this subject. In the piece, 'the contents of which have just been given, thingsare painted in all the solemnity and terror which18 characteristic of the darkest ages. But, a few Jpages further on, we lind the poet in a mock Pali-JEBICHTHO.Ifiodia deprecating the vengeance of the sorceress,who, he says, lias already sufficiently punishedhim by turning through her charms his flaxen hairto hoary white, and overwhelming him by day andnight with ceaseless anxieties. He feels himselfthrough her powerful magic tortured, like Herculesin the envenomed shirt of Nessus, or ass if he werecast down into the flames of Etna ; nor does behope that she will cease compounding a thousanddeadly ingredients against him, till his very ashesshall have been scattered by the resistless winds.He offers therefore to expiate his offence at herpleasure either by a sacrifice of an hundred oxen,or by a lying ode, in which her chastity and spotlessmanners shall be applauded to the skies.What Ovid gives is only a new version of thecharms and philtres of Medea".Lucan, in his Fharsalia", takes occasion, immediatelybefore the battle which was to decide thefate of the Roman world, to introduce Sextus, theyounger son of Pompey, as impatient to enquire,even by the most sacrilegious means, into the importantevents which are immediately impending.He is encouraged in the attempt by the reflection,that the soil upon which they are now standing,Thessaly, had been notorious for ages as thetumorplioaes. Lib. VII. ■ Lib. VI,IEBICHTHO.noxious and unwholesome seat of sorcery andwitchcraft. The poet therefore embraces this occasionto expatiate bn the various modes in whichthis detested art was considered as displayingitself. And, however he may have been ambitiousto seize this opportunity to display the wealth 6fhis imagination, the whole does not fail to becurious, as an exhibition of the system of magicalpower so far as the matter in hand is concerned.The soil of Thessaly, says the poet, is in tbsutmost degree fertile in poisonous herbs, and herrocks confess the power of the sepulchral song ofthe magician. There a vegetation springs np ofvirtue to compel the Gods ; and Colchis itself ira*ports from Thessaly treasures of this sort whichshe cannot boast as her own. The chant of theThessalian witch penetrates the furthest seat of theGods, and contains words so powerful, that notthe care of the skies, or of the revolving spheres,can avail as an excuse to the deities to decline itsforce. Babylon and Memphis yield to the superiormight ; and the Gods of foreign climes fly tofulfil the dread behests of the magician.Prompted by Thessalian song, love glides into'the hardest hearts ; and even the severity of age:is taught to bum with youthful fires. The ingredientsof the poisoned cup, nor the excrescencefound on the forehead of the new-cast foal, can rivalin efficacy the witching incantation. The soul ismelted by its single force. The heart which not:IERICHTHO.ICS the attractions of the genial bed could fire, northe influence of the most beautiful form, the wheelof the sorceress shall force from its bent.But the effects are perhaps still more marvellousthat are produced on inanimate and un intellectualnature. The eternal succession of the world issuspended ; day delays to rise on the earth ; theskies no longer obey their ruler. Nature becomesstill at the incantation : and Jove, accustomed toguide the machine, is astonished to find the polesdisobedient to his impulse. Now the sorceressdeluges the plains with rain, hides the face ofheaven with murky clouds, and the thunders roll,unbidden by the thunderer. Anon she shakes herhair, and the darkness is dispersed, and the wholehorizon is cleared. At one time the sea rages,urged by no storm ; and at another is smooth asglass, in defiance of the tempestuous North. Thebreath of the enchanter carries along the bark inthe teeth of the wind ; the headlong torrent is suspended,and rivers run back to their source. TheNile overflows not in the summer ; the crookedMeander shapes to itself a direct course ; the sluggishAfar gives new swiftness to the rapid Rhone jand the mountains bow their heads to their foundations.Clouds shroud the peaks of the cloudlessOlympus ; and the Scythian snows dissolve, un-urgedby the sun. The sea, though impelled bythe tempestuous constellations, is counteracted byrhcrafl, ami no longer beats along the shore.ERICHTHO.Earthquakes shake the solid globe; and theaffrighted inhabitants behold both hemispheres atonce. The animals most dreaded for their fury,and whose rage is mortal, become tame ; the hungrytiger and the lordly lion fawn at the sorc&» 'less's feet; the snake entwine all heralds amidstthe snow ; the viper, divided by wounds, unitesagain its severed parts ; and the envenomed serpentpines and dies under the power of a breath Imore fatal than his own.What, exclaims the poet, is the nature of thecompulsion thus exercised on the Gods, thisobedience to song and to potent herbs, this fearto disobey and scorn the enchanter? Do theyyield from necessity, or is it a voluntary subjection?Is it the piety of these hags that obtainsthe reward, or by menaces do they secure theirpurpose? Are all the Gods subject to this con ,trol, or, is there one God upon whom it haspower, who, himself compelled, compels the elements? The stars fill from heaven at their command.The silver moon yields to their execrations,and burns with a smouldering flame, even aswhen the earth comes between her and the sun, |and by its shadow intercepts its rays ; thus is themoon brought lower and more low, till she coverswith her froth the herbs destined to receive hermalignant influence.But Erichtho, the witch of the poet, flouts all 'these arts, as too poor and timid for her purposes.ERICMTHO.She never allows a roof to cover her horrid head,or confesses the influence of the Houshold Gods.She inhabits the deserted tomb, and dwells in agrave from which the ghost of the dead has beenpreviously expelled. She knows the Stygian abodes,and the counsels of the infernal. Her countenanceis lean ; and her complexion overspreadwith deadly paleness. Her hair is neglected andmatted. But when clouds and tempests obscurethe stars, then she comes forth, and defies themidnight lightning. Wherever she treads, thefruits of the earth become withered, and the wholesomeair is poisoned with her breath. She offersno prayers, and pours forth no supplications j shehas recourse to no divination. She delights toprofane the sacred altar with a funereal flame, andpollutes the incense with a torch from the pyre.The Gods yield at once to her voice, nor dare toprovoke her to a second mandate. She inclosesthe living man within the confines of the grave;she subjects to sudden death those who were destinedto a protracted age ; and she brings backto life the corses of the dead. She snatches thesmoaking cinders, and the bones whitened withflame, from the midst of the pile, and wrests thetorch from the hand of the mourning parent. Sheseizes the fragments of the burning shroud, and theembers yet moistened with blood. But, wherethe sad remains arc already hearse in marble, itis there that she most delights to exercise herERICHTHO.Pious power. She tears the Urbs of thedead, and digs out their eyes. She gnaws theirfingers. She separates with her teeth the rope onthe gibbet, and tears away the murderer from thecross on which he hung suspended. She appliesto her purposes the entrails withered with thewind, and the marrow that had been dried by thesun. She bears away the nails which had piercedthe hands and feet of the criminal, the clotted bloodwhich had distilled from his wounds, and the sinewsthat had held him suspended. She pouncesupon the body of the dead in the battle-field, anticipatingthe vulture and the beast of prey j butshe does not divide the limbs with a knife, nortear them asunder with her hands: she watchesthe approach of the wolf, that she may wrenchthe morsels from his hungry jaws. Nor does thethought of murder deter her, if her rites requirethe living blood, first spurting from the laceratedthroat. She drags forth the foetus from its pregnantmother, by a passage which violence hasopened. Wherever there is occasion for a bolderand more remorseless ghost, with her own handshe dismisses him from life ; man at every periodof existence furnishes her with materials. She ,drags away the first down from the cheek of thestripling, and with her left hand cuts the favourite |lock from the head of the young man. Often she [watches with seemingly pious care the dying hoursof a relative, and seizes the occasion to bite his IERICHTHO. 139compress his windpipe, and whisper in hisexpiring organ some message to the infernal shades.Sextus, guided by the general fame of this woman,sought her in her haunts. He chose histime, in the depth of the night, when the sun isat its lowermost distance from the upper sky. Hetook his way through the desert fields. He tookfor companions the associates, the accustomedministers of his crimes. Wandering among brokengraves and crumbling sepulchres, they discoveredher, sitting sublime on a ragged rock, wheremount Hfemus stretches its roots to the Pharsaliefield. She was mumbling charms of the Magi andthe magical Gods. For she feared that the warmight yet be transferred to other than the Mathiasfields. The sorceress was busy therefore enchantingthe soil of Philippi, and scattering on itssurface the juice of potent herbs, that it might beheaped with carcasses of the dead, and saturatedwith their blood, that Macedon, and not Italy,might receive the bodies of departed kings andthe bones of the noble, and might be amply peopledwith the shades of men. Her choicest labourwas as to the earth where should be depositedle prostrate Pompey, or the limbs of the mighty^■j^e prSextus approached, and bespoke her thus : " Oh,glory of Hftmonia, that hast the power to divulgethe fates of men, or canst turn aside fate itself fromprescribed course, I pray thee to exercise thyEltieUTHO.gift in disclosing events to come. Not the meanestof the Roman race am I, the offspring of anillustrious chieftain, lord of the world in the onecase, or in the other the destined heir to myfather's calamity. I stand on a tremendous andgiddy height : snatch me from this posture ofdoubt ; let me not blindly rush on, and blindlyfall ; extort this secret from the Gods, or forcethe dead to confess what they know."To whom the Thessalian crone replied : " Ifyou asked to change the fate of an individual,though it were to restore an old man, decrepidwith age, to vigorous youth, I could comply ; butto break the eternal chain of causes and consequencesexceeds e'en our power. You seek howeveronly a foreknowledge of events to come, and youshall be gratified. Meanwhile it were best, whereslaughter has afforded so ample a field, to selectthe body of one newly deceased, and whose flexibleorgans shall be yet capable of speech, not withlineaments already hardened in the sun."Saying thus, Erichtho proceeded (having firstwith her art made the night itself more dark, andinvolved her head in a pitchy cloud), to explorethe field, and examine one by one the bodies ofthe unburied dead. As she approached, the wolvesfled before her, and the birds of prey, unwillinglysheathing their talons, abandoned their repast,while the Thessalian witch, searching into theal parts of the frames before her, at length fixIIehichtiio.Ponone whose lungs were uninjured, and whoseorgans of speech had sustained no wound. Thefate of many hung in doubt, till she had made herselection. Had the revival of whole armies beenher will, armies would have stood up obedient toher bidding. She passed a hook beneath the jawof the selected one, and, fastening it to a cord,dragged him along over rocks and stones, till shereadied a cave, overhung by a projecting ridge.A gloomy fissure in the ground was there, of adepth almost reaching to the Infernal Gods, wherethe yew-tree spread thick its horizontal branches,at all times excluding the light of the sun. Fearfuland withering shade was there, and noisomeslime cherished by the livelong night. The airwas heavy and flagging as that of the Ta-marianpromontory ; and hither the God of hell permitshis ghosts to extend their wanderings. It is doubtfulwhether the sorceress called up the dead toattend her here, or herself descended to the abodesof Pluto. She put on a fearful and variegated.joe ; she covered her face with her dishevelledand bound her brow with a wreath ofMeanwhile she observed Sextus afraid, with hiseyes fixed on the ground, and his companionstrembling; and thus she reproached them. "Layaside," she said, "your vainly-conceived terrors IYou shall behold only a living and a human figure,those accents you may listen to with perfect secuscity. If this alarms you, what would you say, if ]you should have seen the Stygian lakes, and theshores burning with sulphur unconsumed, if thefuries stood before you, and Cerberus with hismane of vipers, and the giants chained in etemrfadamant? Yet all these you might have witnessedunharmed; for all these would quail at the terror 'of my brow."She spoke, and next plied the dead body with iher arts. She supplies his wounds, and infuses .fresh blood into his veins : she frees his scars fromthe clotted gore, and penetrates them with frothfrom the moon. She mixes whatever nature hasengendered in its most fearful caprices, foam fromthe jaws of a mad dog, the entrails of the lyiix, the <backbone of the hyena, and the marrow of a stagthat had dieted on serpents, the sinews of the remora,and the eyes of a dragon, the eggs of theeagle, the flying serpent of Arabia, the viper that ,guards the pearl in the Red Sea, the slough of thehooded snake, and the ashes that remain when thephoenix has been consumed. To these she addsall venom that has a name, the forage of herbsover which she has sung her charms, and on which jshe had voided her rheum as they grew.At length she chaunts her incantation to the ,Stygian Gods, in a voice compounded of all discords,and altogether alien to human organs. Itresembles at once the barking of a dog, and the Ihowl of a wolf; it consists of the hooting of theERICHTHO.H-3screech-owl, the yelling of a ravenous will beast,and the fearful hiss of a serpent. It borrows somewhatfrom the roar of tempestuous waves, thehollow rushing of the winds among the branchesof the forest, and the tremendous crash of deafeningthunder."Ye Furies," she cries, "and dreadful Styx, yesufferings of the damned, and Chaos, for evereager to destroy the fair harmony of worlds, andthou, Pluto, condemned to an eternity of ungratefulexistence. Hell, and Elysium, of which noThessalian witch shall partake, Proserpine, forevercut off from thy health-giving mother, andhorrid Hecate, Cerebrum curst with incessant hunger,ye Destinies, and Charon endlessly murmuringat the task I impose of bringing back the deadagain to the Ind of the living, hear me ! — if I callon you with a voice sufficiently impious andabominable, if I have never sung this chaunt, unsatedwith human gore, if I have frequently laidon your altars the fruit of the pregnant mother,bathing its contents with the reeking brain, if Ihave placed on a dish before you the head andentrails of an infant on the point to be born —I ask not of you a ghost, already a tenant ofthe Tartarean abodes, and long familiarised to theshades below, but one who has recently quittedthe light of day, and who yet hovers over themouth of hell : let him hear these incantations,and immediately after descend to his destinedERICHTHO.place! Let him articulate suitable omens to theson of his general, having so late been himself asoldier of the great Pompey Do this, as you lovethe very sound and rumour of a civil war !'"Saying this, behold, the ghost of the dead man Istood erect before her, trembling at the view of Ihis own unanimated limbs, and loth to enter again |the confines of his wonted prison. He shrinks to jinvest himself with the gored bosom, and the Jfibres from which death had separated him. Un jhappy wretch, to whom death had not given the jprivilege to die 1 Erichtho, impatient at the un Ilooked for delay, lashes the unmoving corpse with ]one of her serpents. She calls anew on the powers Iof hell, and threatens to pronounce the dreadful ]name, which cannot be articulated without consequencesnever to be thought of, nor without the Idirest necessity to be ventured upon.At length the congealed blood becomes liquid 1and warm ; it oozes from the wounds, and creeps 1steadily along the veins and the members ; the Ifibres are called into action beneath the gelid 1breast, and the nerves once more become instinctwith life. Life and death are there at once. Thearteries beat j the muscles are braced ; the bodyraises itself, not by degrees, but at a single impulse,and stands erect. The eyelids unclose. The icountenance is not that of a living subject, but othe dead. The paleness of the complexion, the Irigidity of the lines, remain ; and he looks about |ERICHTHO.with an unmeaning stare, but utters no sound.He waits on the potent enchantress.Speak I" said she; " and ample shall be yourreward. You shall not again be subject to the artof the magician. I will commit your members tosuch a sepulchre ; I will bum your form withsuch wood, and will chaunt such a charm overyour funeral pyre, that all incantations shall thereafterassail you in vain. Be it enough, that youhave once been brought back to life! Tripods,and the voice of oracles deal in ambiguous responses; but the voice of the dead is perspicuousand certain to him who receives it with an un-shrinkingspirit. Spare not ! Give names tothings ; give places a clear designation ; speakwith a full and articulate voice."Saying this, she added a further spell, qualifiedto give to him who was to answer, a distinct knowledgeof that respecting which he was about to beconsulted. He accordingly delivers the responsesdemanded of him ; and, that done, earnestly requiresof the witch to be dismissed. Herbs andmagic rites are necessary, that the corpse may beagain unanimated, and the spirit never more beliable to be recalled to the realms of day. Thesorceress constructs the funeral pile ; the deadmanplaces himself thereon ; Erichtho applies thetorch ; and the charm is for ever at an end.Lucan in this passage is infinitely too precise,quid exhausts his mise in a number of particulars.146 SERTORIUS.where he had better have been more succinct andselect. He displays the prolific exuberance of ayoung poet, who had not yet taught himself themultiplied advantages of compression* He hadnot learned the principle, Relinquish ques desperatetraetata nUescere possess But, as this is the fullestenumeration of the forms of witchcraft, that occursin the writers of antiquity, it seemed proper togive it to the reader entire.SERTORIUS.The story of Sertorius and his hind, whichoccurred about thirty years before, may not beimproperly introduced here. It is told by Plutarchin the spirit of a philosopher, and as a meredeception played by that general, to render thebarbarous people of Spain more devoted to hisservice. But we must suppose that it had, atleast for the time, the full effect of something preternatural.Sertorius was one of the most highlygifted and well balanced characters that is to befound in Roman story. He considered with thesoundest discernment the nature of the personsamong whom he was to act, and conducted* himselfaccordingly. The story in Plutarch is this.** So soone as Sertorius arrived from Africa, hestraight learned men of warre, and with themsubdued the people of Spain fronting upon his^ Horae.) de Arte Poetica, v. 150.marches, of which the more part did willinglysubmit themselves, upon the bruit that ran ofhim to be merciful and courteous, and a valiantman besides in present danger. Furthermore, lielacked no fine devises and subtilties to iii theirgoodwill : as among others, the policy, and deujseof the hind. There was a poore man of thecoun-trey called Spans, who meeting by chance oneday with a hind in his way that had newly called,flying from the hunters, he let the damme go, notbeing able to take her ; and running after her cafetooke it, which was a young hind, and of a strangeHaire, for she was all milk-white. It chanced so,that Sertorius vas at that time in those parts. So,this poore man presented Sertorius with his younghind, which he gladly received, and which withtime he made so tame, that she would come tohim widen he called her, and follow him whereverhe went, being nothing the wilder for thedaily sight of such a number of armed souldierstogether as they were, nor yet afraid of the noiseand tumult of the campe. Insomuch as Sertoriusby little and little made it a miracle, making thesimple barbarous people believe that it was a giftthat Diana had sent him, by the which she malehim understand of many and sundrie things tocome : knowing well enough of himselfe, that thebarbarous people were men easily deceived, andquickly caught by any subtile superstition, besidesthat by art also he brought them to believe it as aL 2thing verie true. For when he had any s'ecrelfintelligence given him, that the enemies wouldinvade some part of the countries and provincessubject into him, or that they Iiad taken any of jhis forts from him by any intelligence or suddenattempt, he straight told them that his hind spake |to him as lie slept, and had warned him both toarme his men, and put himselfe in strength. In 'like manner if he had heard any newest hat one of Jhis lieutenants had wonne a battle, or that he had Jany advantage of his enemies, he would hide the Imessenger, and bring his hind abroad with a gar |land and coller of nosegays : and then say, it was |a token of some good news coming towards Ihim, perswading them withall to be of good chare;and so did sacrifice to the Gods, to give thenthanks for the good tidings he should heare be |fore it were long. Thus by putting this supersti- Ition into their heads, he made them the more Jtractable and obedient to his will, in so much sthey thought they were not now governed anymoreby a stranger wiser titian themselves, butwere steadfastly perswaded that they were rathaled by some certaine God."Now was Sertorius very heauie, that no man Icould tell him what was become of his white hinder Ifor thereby all his subtilty and fineness to keepethe barbarous people in obedience was taken away,and then specially when they stood in need ofmost comfort. But by good hap, certaine of hiw«Sertorius.Fiat had lost themselves in the night,met with the hind in their way, and knowing herbyher colour, tooke her and brought her backagaine. Sertorius hearing of her, promised thema good reward, so that they would tell no livingcreature that they brought her againe, and thereuponmade her to be secretly kept. Then withina few dayes after, he came abroad among them,and with a pleasant countenance told the noblemenand chiefe captains of these barbarous people,how the Gods had revealed it to him inhis dreams, that he should shortly haue a marvellousgood thing happen to him : and with theseworiis sate downe in his chaire to give audience.Whereupon they that kept the hind not farre fromthence, did secretly let her go. The hind beingloose, when she had spied Sertorius, anne straightto his chaire with great joy, and put her head betwixthis legge, and layed her mouth in his righthand, as she before was wont to do. Sertoriusalso made very much of her, and of purpose appearedmarvellous glad, shewing such tender affectionto the hind, as it seemed the water stoodin his eyes for joy. The barbarous people that>d there by and beheld the same, at the first'pre much amazed therewith, but afterwards whenthey had better bethought themselves, for hoy theyclapped their hands together, and waited uponSertorius to his lodging with great and joyfulsaying, and steadfastly believing, that he150 SIMON MAGUS.he was a heavenly creature, and beloved of theGods'CASTING OUT DEVILS.We are now brought down to the era of theChristian religion ; and there is repeated mentionof sorcery in the books of the New Testament.One of the most frequent miracles recorded ofJesus Christ is called the " casting out devils**The Pharisees in the Evangelist, for the purposeof depreciating this evidence of his divine mission,are recorded to have said, " this fellow doth notcast out devils, but by Beelzebub, the prince ofdevils*' Jesus, among other remarks in refutationof this opprobrium, rejoins upon them, " If I byBeelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your childrencast them out* ?*' Here then we have a plaininsinuation of sorcery from the lips of Christ himself,at the same time that he appears to admit thathis adversaries produced supernatural achievementssimilar to his own.SIMON MAGUS.But the most remarkable passage in the NewTestament on the subject of sorcery, is one whichdescribes the proceedings of Simon Magus, asfollows.• Plutarch, North's Translation. * Matt. c. xii, v. 24, 27.SIMON MAGUS."Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria,I and preached Christ unto them. But there was acertain man, called Simon, which before time inthe same city used sorcery, and bewitched thepeople of Samaria, giving out that himself wasI Bone great one. To whom they all gave heed,■£rom the least to the greatest, saying, This man isthe great power of God. And to him they hadregard, because that of long time he had bewitchedthem with sorceries. But, when they believedPhilip, preaching the things concerning the kingdomof God and the name of Jesus Christ, theywere baptized both men and women. Then Simonhimself believed also. And, when he was baptized,he continued with Philip, and wondered,beholding the miracles and signs which weredone.Now, when the apostles which were at Jeru-Jem heard that Samaria had received the wordof (jot, they sent unto them Peter and ,?o]m.Who, when they were come down, prayed forthem, that they might receive the Holy Ghost,for as yet he was fallen upon none of them : onlyhey were baptized in the name of the J-ord Jesus,risen laid they their hands on them, and theyReceived the Holy Ghost.And, when Simon saw that, through thetrying on of the apostles' hands, the Holy Ghost1 given, he offered them money, saying, Givealso this power, that on whomsoever I laySIMON MAGUS.hhands he may receive the Holy Ghost. ButPeter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee Ihecaiise thou hast thought that the gift of Godmight be purchased with money. Thou hastneither part nor lot in this matter : for thy heartis not right in the sight of God. Repent thereforeof this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhapsthe thought of thy heart may he forgiven thee :for 1 perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness,and in the bond of iniquity. Then answeredSimon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord tor me, thatnone of these tilings which ye have spoken comeupon me"This passage of the New Testament leaves usin considerable uncertainty us to the nature ofthe sorceries, by which *' of a long time Simonhad bewitched the people of Samaria." But thefathers of the church, Clemens romanus andAnabasis Sinai, have presented us with a detailof the wonders he actually performed. Whenand to whom he pleased he made himself invisible ;he created a man out of air ; he passed throughrocks and mountains without encountering anobstacle ; he threw himself from a precipice uninjured; he flew along in the air ; he flung himselfin the fire without being burned. Bolts andchains were impotent to detain him. He animatedstatues, so that they appeared to every beholderto be men and women ; he made all the furnitureIELYMAS, THE SORCEllEIt. 153of the house and the table to change places as required,without a visible mover; he metamorphosedhis countenance and visage into that ofAnother person ; he could make himself into aI sheep, or a goat, or a serpent ; he walked throughthe streets attended with a multitude of strangefigures, which he affirmed to be the souls of thedeparted ; he made trees and branches of treessuddenly to spring up where he pleased ; he setupand deposed kings at will ; he caused a sickleLto go into 3 field of corn, which unassisted wouldI mow twice as fast as the most industrious reaperThus endowed, it is difficult to imagine what hethought lie would have gained by purchasing fromthe apostles their gil of working miracles. SutClemens Human us informs us that he complainedliiat, in his sorceries, he was obliged to employTedious ceremonies and incantations ; whereas theapostles appeared to effect their wonders without■:ttifficulty and effort, by barely speaking a word*.ELYMAS, Thai: SORCERER.But Simon Magus is not the only magicianopen of in the New Testament. When theapostle Paul came to Paphos m the isle of Cyprus,Clemens Romanus, Recognitions, Lib. H, cap. 9. (Snails. Questioned ; Quieslio 20.Clement Romanus, Const it stones Apostolic, Lib. VI,ELYMAS, THE SORCERER.Nhe found the Roman governor divided in his pre-fterence between Paul and Elias, the sorcerer*who before the governor withstood Paul to hisface. Then Paul, prompted by his indignation,said, " Oh, full of all subtlety and mischief, childof the devil, enemy of all righteousness, wilt thounot cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord ?And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is uponthee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sunfor 3 season." What wonders Elias effected todeceive the Roman governor we are not told : but i*' immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness;and he went about, seeking some to leadhim by the hand."In another instance we find certain vagabond IJews, exorcists, who pretended to cast out devils \from the possessed. But they came to the apostle,and " confessed, and shewed their deeds. Many of ]them also which used curious arts, brought their 'books together, and buried them before all. And Jthey counted the price of them, and found it fifty Ithousand pieces of silver."It is easy to see however on which side the Ivictory lay The apostles by their devotion and Ithe integrity of theu- proceedings triumphed ; while Ithose whose only motive was selfishness, the ap Jpause of the vulgar, or the admiration of the super ,filial, gained the honours of a day, and were then |swept away into the gulf of general oblivion.Acts, c. xiii. ' Ibid, c. xix.VESPASIAN.The arts of the magician are said to Iiavc beencalled into action by Nero upon occasion of theassassination of his mother, Agrippina. He wasvisited with occasional (its of the deepest remorse inthe recollection of his enormity. Notwithstandingall the ostentatious applause and congratulationswhich he obtained from the senate, the army andthe people, he complained that he was perpetuallyhaunted with the ghost of his mother, and pursuedby the furies with flaming torches and whips. Hetherefore caused himself to be attended by magicians,who employed their arts to conjure up theshade of Agi-ippina, and to endeavour to obtainIJier forgiveness for the crime perpetrated by herson'. We are not informed of the success of theirvocations.VESPASIAN.In the reign of Vespasian we meet with a remarkablerecord of supernatural power, though itdoes not strictly fail under the head of magic. Itis related by both Tacitus and Suetonius. having taken up his abode for some monthsitt Alexandria, a blind man, of the common people,le to him, earnestly intreating the emperor tohist in curing his infirmity, alleging that he wasomitted to apply by the admonition of the Godt suetonius, Lib, VI, cii. 11.LOG VESPASIAN.Serapis, and importuning the prince to anoint hischeeks and the balls of his eyes with the royalspittle. Vespasian at first treated the supplicationwith disdain ; but at length, moved by the fervourof the petitioner, inforced as it was by the flatteryof his courtiers, the emperor began to think thatevery thing would give way to his prosperous fortune,and yielded to the poor man's desire. With3 confident carriage therefore, the multitude ofthose who stood by being full of expectation, hedid as he was requested, and the desired successimmediately followed. Another supplicant appearedat the same time, who had lost the use ofhis hands, and intreated Vespasian to touch thediseased members with his foot; and lie also wascuredhas remarked that many circumstancescontribute to give authenticity to this miracle,if," as he says, " any evidence could avail toestablish so palpable a falsehood. The gravity,solidity, age and probity of so great an emperor,who, through the whole course of his life, conversedin a familiar manner with his friends andcourtiers, and never affected any airs of divinity :the historian, a contemporary writer, noted forcandour and veracity, and perhaps the greatestand most penetrating genius of all antiquity : andlastly, the persons from whose authority he relatedthe miracle, who we may presume to have been of• Tacitus, HJElotiie, Lib. IV, cap. 81. Suetonius, Lib. VIII,IAP0LLON105 OF TYANA. 157established character for judgment and honour ;eye-witnesses of the fact, and confirming their^^^ testimony, as Tacitus goes on to say, after the^^^b flavian family ceased to be in power, and could^^^Lno longer give any reward as the price of a lie^^H nei| ilU.iTiij-.H ,,1 ,, ^POLLONIUS OF TYANA.Apollonius of Tyana in Asia Minor was bornnearly at the same time as Jesus Christ, and acquiredgreat reputation while he lived, and for aconsiderable time after. He was hon of wealthyparents, and seems early to have betrayed a passionfor philosophy. His father, perceiving this,placed him at fourteen years of age under Euthy-deus, a rhetorician of Tarsus ; but the youthspeedily became dissatisfied with the indolenceand luxury of the citizens, and removed himseM" toJKgas, a neighbouring town, where was a templeof aesculapius, and where the God Wits supposedsometimes to appear in person. Here he becameprofessedly a disciple of the sect of Pythagoras.He drained from animal food, and subsisted entirelyon fruits and herbs. He went barefoot, andwore no article of clothing made from the skins ofanimals'. He further imposed on himself a noviciateof five years silence. At the death of hisfather, he divided his patrimony equally with his'' Hume, EstayB, Fait 111, Section X.• Philostratai, Vita Apollonii, Lib. I, cap, 5, (i.1.58 Al'OLLONIUS OF TYANA.brother ; and, that brother having wasted his estateby prodigality, he again made an equal divisionwith him of what remained'. He travelled toBabylon and Susa in pursuit of knowledge, andeven among the Brahmans of India, and appearsparticularly to have addicted himself to the studyof magic". He was of a beautiful countenanceand a commanding figure, and, by means of thesethings, combined with great knowledge, a composedand striking carriage, and much natural eliquench, appears to have won universal favourwherever he went. He is said to have professedthe understanding of all languages without learningthem, to read the thoughts of men, and to beable to interpret the language of animals. Apower of working miracles attended him in allplaces'.On one occasion he announced to the people ofEphesus the approach of a tenable pestilence ; butthe citizens paid no attention to bis prophecyThe calamity however having overtaken therethey sent to Apologies who was then at Smyrna,to implore his assistance. He obeyed the sura-mens.Having assembled the inhabitants, therewas seen among them a poor, old and decrepidbeggar, clothed in rags, hideous of visage, andwith a peculiarly fearful and ti'eniendous expressionin his eyes. Apologies called out to thePhi] stratus, Vita Apollonii, Lib. I, c. 10.■- Ibid, c. 13. ■" Ibi, c. 13, U.Al'tn I.OVH's OF TYANAEphesians, " This is an enemy to the Gods ; turnall your animosity against him, and stone him todcatli I" The old man in the most piteous tonesbesought their mercy. The citizens were shocked'with the inhumanity of the prophet. Some howeverof the more thoughtless flung a few stones,Without any determined purpose. The old man,who had stood hitherto crouching, and with hiseyes half-closed, now erected his Figure, and caston the crowd glances, fearful, and indeed diabolical.The Ephesians understood at once that thiswas the genius of the plague. They showeredupon him stones without mercy, so as not only tocover him, but to produce a considerable moundwhere he had stood. After a time Apollonius commandedthem to take away the stones, that theymight discover what sort of an enemy they haddestroyed. Instead of a man they now saw an enor-liffous black dog, of the size of a lion, and whosemouth and jaws were covered with a thick en.venomed froth'.Another miracle was performed by Apolloniusfavour of a young man, named Menippus ofifiorintli, five and twenty years of age, for whom|tte prophet entertained a singular favour. Thisconceived himself to be beloved by a rich andbeautiful woman, who made advances to him, andto whom he was on the point of being contractedmarriage. Apollonius warned his young friendPhiloatratuB. Lib. IV, c. 10.VigoAPOLLONIUS OF TYANA.►nagainst the match in an enigmatical way, tellinghim that he nursed a serpent in his bosom. Thishowever did not deter Menippus. All thingswere prepared ; and the wedding table was spread.Apollonius meanwhile came among them, and preventedthe calamity. He told the young man thatthe dishes before him, the wine he was drinking,the vessels of gold and silver that appeared aroundhim, and the very guests themselves were unrealand illusory ; and to prove his words, hecaused them immediately to vanish. The bridealone was refractory. She prayed the philosophernot to torment her, and not to compel her to confesswhat she was. He was however inexorable.She at length owned that she was an empuse (asort of vampire), and that she had determined tocherish and pamper Menippus, that she might inthe conclusion eat his flesh, and lap up his blood'.One of the miracles of Apollonius consisted inraising the dead. A young woman of beautifulperson was laid out upon a bier, and was in theact of being conveyed to the tomb. She was followedby a multitude of friends, weeping andlamenting, and among others by a yoimg man, towhom she had been on the point to be married.Apollonius met the procession, and commandedthose who bore it, to set down the bier. He exhortedthe proposed bridegroom to dry up histears. He enquired the name of the deceased,Philoslralus, Lib. IV, c. 23.APOLI-ONIL's OF TVANA.Filand, saluting her accord ini^Jy, took hold of herhand, and murmured over her certain mysticalwords. At this act the maiden raised herself onAber seat, and presently returned home, whole andBound, to the house of her father".Towards the end of his life Apollonius was accusedbefore Domitian of having conspired withNerva to put an end to the reign of the tyrant.He appears to Have proved that he was at anotherplace, and therefore could not have engaged in theconspiracy that was charged upon him. Domitianpublicly cleared him from the accusation, but atP the same time required him not to withdraw fromRome, till the emperor had first had a private conferencewith him. To this requisition Apolloniusreplied in the most spirited terms. " I thank yourm^esty," said he, " for the justice you have renderedme. But I cannot submit to what you re-fire. How can I be secure from the false accusationsof the unprincipled informers who infestyour court? It is by their means that wholetowns of your empire are unpeopled, that provincesare involved in mourning and tears, your armiesare in mutiny, your senate full of suspicion andalarms, and the islaruis are crowded with exiles.It is not for myself that I speak, my soul is invulnerableto your enmity ; aud it is not given to youby the Clods to become master of my body." And,having thus given utterance to the virtuous an.■ PhilosIl IV.IsisAPOLLONIUS OF TYANA.guLsli of Ins spirit, he suddenly became invisiblethe midst of a full assembly, and was immediately Iafter seen at Puteoli in the neighbourhood <rf" |Mount Vesuvius'.Domitian pursued the prophet no further ; andhe ]passed shortly after to Greece, to Ionia, andfinally to Ephesus. He every where deliveredlectures as fie went, and was attended with crowdsof the most distinguished auditors, and with theutmost popularity. At length at Ephesus, when 'he was in the midst of an eloquent harangue, hesuddenly became silent. He seemed as if he sawa spectacle which engrossed all hia attention. Hiscountenance expressed fervour and the most de ]termined purpose. He exclaimed, " Strike thetant ; strike him 1" and immediately after, raisinghimself, and addressing the assembly, he said*Domitian is no more ; the world is delivered ofits bitterest oppressor." — The next post broughtthe news that the emperor was killed at Rome,exactly on the day and at the hour when Apolloniushad thus made known the event at Ephesus'.Nerva succeeded Domitian, between whom andApollonius there subsisted the sincerest friendship.The prophet however did not long survive thisevent. He was already nearly one hundred yearsold. But what is most extraordinary, no one couldtell precisely when or where he died. No tomb |bore the record of bis memory; and his biogra*'' PhilostratUB, I.ib, Vii, c. :,. ■ Ibid, c. 2fl.Arol.I.ONIUS OF TYANA. \GS'TfhcT inclines to the opinion that lie was taken upinto heaven'.Divine honours were paid to this philosopher,both during his life, .into after his death. The inhabitantsof Tyana built a temple to him, and hisimage was to be found in many other temples'.The emperor Adrian collected his letters, andtreated them as an invaluable rec. AlexanderSeverus placed his statue in his oratory, togetherwith those of Jesus Christ, Abraham and Orpheus,<io whom he was accustomed daily to perform theceremonies of religion". Viscus, in his Life of[Aurelian", relates that this emperor had determinedto rase the city of Tyana, but that ,whom he knew from his statues, appeared tohim, and said, " Aurelian, if you would conquer,do not think of the destruction of my citizens:if you would reign, abstain from theof the innocent: Aurelian, if you wouldconquer, distinguish yourself by acts of clemency."It was at the desire of Julia, the mother of Severus,that Pisistratus composed the life of Apollonius,to which he is now principally Indebted for his&me°.The publicity of Apologies and his miraclesbecome considerably greater, from the circum-iceof the early enemies of the Christian relicLib. YIU, c. 29,30. ' Ibid, c. 29.■ Larapridiua, in Vile Alex. Severe, c. 29. • C. 21.Philostratus, Lib. I, c. 3.il 2wim^^^-nil^^^ ao not t^^^k&urelian,hood ofvSi APULEIUS.f^ion having instituted a comparison between themiracles of Christ and of this celebrated philosopher,for the obvious purpose of undermining oneof the most considerable evidences of the truth ofdivine revelation. It was probably with an indirectview of this sort that Philostratus was incitedby the empress Julia to compose his life ofthis philosopher; and Hercules, a writer of thetime of Diocletian, appears to have penned anexpress treatise in the way of a parallel betweenthe two, attempting to shew a decisive superiorityin the miracles of Apollonius.Apuleius of Madura in Africa, who lived iiithe time of the Antoninus, appears to have beenmore remarkable as an author, than for any thingthat occurs in the history of his life. St. Augustineand Acanthus however have coupled himwith Apollonius of Tyana, as one of those who fortheir pretended miracles were brought into competitionwith the author of the Christian religion.But this seems to have arisen from their misapprehensionrespecting his principal work, the GoldenAss, which is a romance detailing certain won ,tearful transformations, and which they appear to ,have thought was intended as an actual history ofthe life of the author.The work however deserves to be cited in THE PAPHLACONIAN.16.5Iii)lace, as giving a curious representation of theideas which were then prevalent on the subjects ofmagic and witchcraft. The author in .the courseof his narrative says : " When the day began todawn, I chanced to awake, and became desirous toknow and see some marvellous and strange things,remembering that I was now in the midst of Thes-flatly,where, by the common report of the world,Forgeries and enchantments are most frequent. Iviewed the situation of the place in which I was ;nor was there any thing I saw, that I believed tobe the same thing which it appeared. Insomuchthat the very stones in the street I thought weremen bewitched and turned into that figure, andthe birds I heard chirping, the trees without thewalls, and the running waters, were changed fromhuman creatures into the appearances they wore.,1 persuaded myself that the statues and buildingscould move, that the oxen and other brute beastscould speak and tell strange tidings, and that Ishould see and hear oracles from heaven, conveyedon the beams of the sun."ALEXANDER THE PAPHLACONIAN.At the same time with Apuleius lived Alexanderthe Papblagonian, of whom so extraordinaryan account is transmitted to us by Lucian. Hewas the native of an obscure town, called Abono-ica, but was endowed with all that ingenuity andlOf) ALEXANDER THE PAPHLAGONIAN.cunning which enables men most effectually toimpose upon their fellow-creatures. He was tallof stature, of an impressive aspect, a fair complexion,eyes that sparkled with an awe-commandingtire as if informed by some divinity, and avoice to the last degree powerful and melodious.To these he added the graces of carriage andattire. Being born to none of the goods of fortune,he considered with himself how to turn theseadvantages to the greatest account ; and the planhe fixed upon was that of instituting an oracle entirelyunder his own direction. He began atChalcedony on the Thracian Bosphorus ; but, con •tinting but a short time there, he used it principallyas an opportunity for publishing that Aesculapius,with Apollo, his father, would in no longtimefix his residence at Abonotica. This rumourreached the fellow-citizens of the prophet, whoimmediately began to lay the foundations of itemple for the reception of the God. In due timeAlexander made his appearance ; and he so wellmanaged his scheme, that, by means of spies andemissaries whom he scattered in all directions, henot only collected applications to Iiiss propheticskill from the different towns of Ionia, Cilicia and igalatia, but presently extended his fame to Italyand Rome. For twenty years scarcely any oracle |of the known world could vie with that of Abono- Irica; and the emperor Aurelius himself is said to Ihave relied for the success of a military expedition IIALEXANDER THE PArHl.AGONr.iN. iG?Upon the predictions of Alexander the PaphianLucian gives, or pretends to give, an accountof the manner in which Alexander gained so extraordinary3 success. He says, that this youngman in his preliminary travels, coming to Pella inMacedon, found that the environs of this city weredistinguished from perhaps ?" other parts of theworld, hy a breed of serpents of extraordinary sizeand beauty. Our author adds that these serpentswere so tame, that they inhabited the houses of theprovince, and slept in bed with the children. Ifyou trod upon them, they did not turn again, orshew tokens of anger, and they sucked the breastof the women to whom it might he of service todraw off their milk. Lucian says, it was probablyone of these serpents, that was found in the bedof Olympia, and gave occasion to the tale thatAlexander the Great was begotten by Jupiter underthe form of a serpent. The prophet boughtthe largest and finest serpent Ik* could find, andconveyed it secretly with him into Asia. Whenhe came to Abonotica, he found the temple thatwas built surrounded with a moat ; and he tookan opportunity privately of sinking a goose-c^,which he had first emptied of its contents, insertinginstead a young serpent just hatched, andclosing it again with great care. He then told hisfellow-citizcii.s that the God was arrived, andhastening to the meal, scooped up the egg in an^^^ fellow-city^^^L Hastening16SALEXANDER THE PAl'HLAtJONIAN.egg-cup in presence of the whole assembly. Henext broke the shell, and shewed the young serpentthat twisted about his fingers in presence ofthe admiring multitude. After this he sufferedseveral days to elapse, and then, collecting crowdsfrom every part of I'aphlagonia, he exhibited himselfas he had previously announced he should do,with the fine serpent he had brought from Macesdon twisted in coils about the prophet's neck, andits head hid under his arm-pit, while a head artfullyformed with linen, and bearing some resemblanceto a human face, protruded itself, and passed forthe head of the reptile. The spectators were beyondmeasure astonished to see a little embryoserpent, grown in a few days to so magnificent asize, and exhibiting the features of a human countenance.Having thus fair succeeded, Alexander did notstop here. He contrived a pipe which passedseemingly into the mouth of the animal, while theother end terminated in an adjoining room, wherea man was placed unseen, and delivered the replieswhich appeared to come from the mouth ofthe serpent. This immediate communication withthe God was reserved for a few favoured suitors,who bought at a high price the envied distinction, iThe method with ordinary enquirers was torthem to communicate thcb requests in writing,which they were enjoined to roll up and carefullyseal ; and these scrolls were returned lo them in aALEXANDER THE PAPHLAGONIAN. l69few days, with the seals apparently unbroken, butwith an answer written within, strikingly appropriateto the demand that was preferred. — It isfurther to be observed, that the mouth of the serpentwas occasionally opened by means of a horsehairskilfully adjusted for the purpose, at the sametime that by similar means the animal darted outits forked tongue to the terror of the amazed bystanders.Revolution PRODUCED IN THE HISTORY OFNECROMANCY AND WITCHCRAFT UPON THEESTAJtLlSHMENT OF CHRISTIANITY.^It is necessary here to take notice of the great revolutionthat took place under Constantine, nearlythree hundred years after the death of Christ,when Christianity became the established religionof the Roman empire. This was a period whichproduce a new era in the history of necromancyand witchcraft. Under the reign of polytheism,devotion was wholly unrestrained in every directionit might chance to assize. Gods known andunknown, the spirits of departed heroes, the Godsof heaven and hell, abstractions of virtue or vice,might unblamed he made the objects of religiousworship. Witchcraft therefore, and the invocationof the spirits of the dead, might be practisedwith toleration ; or at all events were not regardedotherwise than as venial deviations from the religionof the state.It is true, there must always have been a horrorof secret arts, especially of such as were of amaleficent nature. At all times men dreaded themysterious power of spells and incantations, ofpotent herbs and nameless rites, which were ableto control the eternal order of the planets, and theIREVOLUTION IN NECROMANCY.voluntary operations of mind, which could extinguishor recal life, inflame the passions of thesoul, blast the works of creation, and extort frominvisible beings and the dead the secrets of futurity.But under the creed ofthe unity of the divinenature the case was exceedingly different. Idolatry,and the worship of other Gods than one,were held to be crimes worthy of the utmost abhorrenceand the severest punishment. There wasno medium between the worship of heaven andheir. All adoration was to be directed to Godthe Creator through the mediation of his only begottenSon ; or, if prayers were addressed to inferiorbeings, and the glorified spirits of his saints,at least they terminated in the Most High, were adeprecation of his wrath, a soliciting his favour,and a homage to his omnipotence. On the otherhand sorcery and witchcraft were sins of theblackest dye. In opposition to the one only God,the creator of heaven and earth, was the "princeof darkness," the " prince of the power of theair," who contended perpetually against the Almighty,and sought to seduce his creatures andhis subjects from their due allegiance. Sorcerersand witches were supposed to do homage and sellthemselves to the devil, than which it was not inthe mind of man to conceive a greater enormity,or a crime more worthy to cause its perpetratorsto be exterminate from the face of the earth.The thought of it was of power to cause the fleshIIIMagical. CONSULTATIONS. 17^Fofman to creep and tingle with horror: and suchi were prone to indulge their imaginations to theI Utmost extent of the terrible, found a perverse delightin conceiving this depravity, and were butToo much disposed to fasten it upon their fcltow-I creatures.MAGICAL CONSULTATIONS RESPECTING THELIFE OF THE EMPEROR.bIt was not within the range of possibility, thatwhich a change should take place in the establishedreligion of the empire as that from Paganism tochristianity, without convulsions and vehementstruggle. The prejudices of mankind on a subject:SO nearly concerned with their dearest interestsand affections must inevitably be powerful and obstinate;and the lucre of the priesthood, togetherwith the strong hold they must necessarily havehad on the weakness and superstition of theirflocks, would tend to give force and perpetuityto the contention. Julian, a man of great abilityand unquestionable patriotism, succeeded to theempire only twenty-four years after the death ofConstantine ; and he employed the most vigorousmeasures for the restoration of the ancient religion.But the reign of Julian was scarcely more thaneighteen months in duration : and that of Jovian,his successor, who again unfurled the standard of[Christianity, lasted hardly more than half a year.171 MAGICAL CONSULTATIONS.The state of things bore a striking similarity tothat of England at the time of the Protestant Reformation,where the opposite faiths of Edwardthe Sixth and Ms sister Mary, and the shortnessof their reigns, gave preternatural keenness tothe feelings of the parties, and instigated them tohang with the most restless anticipation upon thechances of the demise of the sovereign, and the consequences,favourable or unfavourable, that mightarise from a new accession.The joint reign of Valentinian and Valens,Christian emperors, had now lasted several years,when information was conveyed to these princes,and particularly to the latter, who had the rule ofAsia, that numerous private consultations wereheld, as to the duration of their authority, andthe person of the individual who should come afterthem. The succession of the Roman empire waelective ; and consequently there was almost anunlimited scope tor conjecture in this question.Among the various modes of enquiry that wereemployed we are told, that the twenty-tour lettersof the alphabet were artificially disposed in a ■circle, and that a magic ring, being suspendedover the centre, was conceived to point to the initialletters of the name of him who should bethefuture emperor. Theodore, a man of mosteminent qualifications, and high popularity, wasput to death by the jealousy of Valens, on thevague evidence that this kind ot trial had in-Magical CONSULTATIONS. 175dictated the early letters of his name". It mayeasily be imagined, that, where so restless andsecret an investigation was employed as to thesuccessor that fate might provide, conspiracy woultlnot always be absent. Charges of this sort wereperpetually multiplied ; informers were eager toobtain favour or rewards by the disclosures theypretended to communicate ; and the Christians,who swayed the sceptre of the state, did not failto aggravate the guilt of those who had recourseto these means for satisfying their curiosity, byalleging that demons were called up from hell toaid in the magic solution. The historians of thesetimes no doubt greatly exaggerate the terror andthe danger, when they say, that the persons apprehendedon such charges in the great cities outnumberedthe peaceable citizens who were left unsuspected,and that the military who had chargeof the prisoners, complained that they were whollywithout the power to restrain the flight of the captives,or to control the multitude of partisans whoinsisted on their immediate release'. The punishmentswere barbarous and indiscriminate; to beaccused was almost the same thing as to be convicted; and those were obliged to hold themselvesfortunate, who escaped with a fine that in a manyser swallowed up their estates.ZoainiDS, Lib. IV, cap. 13. Oibbou observes, that thename of Theodosius, who actually succeeded, begins with tirsame letters which were indicated in this magic trial.'' Zusimus, Lib. IV, cap. 14.h .> *i- It• .».» ; It f 4*»t</ «-^S - 'I• )<:. ^ iris sines^' " -r r*?.'^ it.iu/ik ':HISTORY OF NECROMANCY IN THE EAST.From the countries best known in what is usuallystyled ancient history, in other worthy fromGreece and Rome, and the regions into which thespirit of conquest led the people of Rome andGreece, it is time we should turn to the East, andthose remoter divisions of the world, which tothem were comparatively unknown.With what has been called the religion of theMagi, of Egypt, Persia and Chaldea, they wereindeed superficially acquainted ; but tor a morefamiliar and accurate knowledge of the East wearechiefly indebted to certain events of modernhistory ; to the conquests of the Saracens, whenthey possessed themselves of the North of Africa,made themselves masters of Spain, and threatenedin their victorious career to subject France to theirstandard i to the crusades ; to the spirit of nauticaldiscovery which broke out in the close of thefifteenth century; and more recently to the extensiveconquests and mighty augmentation of territorywhich have been realised by the English EastIndia Company.The religion of Persia was that of Zoroaster1 the Magi. When Hardship, or Artaxerxes, theunder of the race of the Sassanidcs, restored thelyS NECROMANCY IN THE EAST. 1throne of Persia in the year of Christ '^26, hecalled together an assembly of the Magi from aU )parts of his dominions, and they are said to hav |met to the number of eighty thousand". Thesepriests, from a remote antiquity, had to a greatdegree preserved their popularity, and had r&-markabl y adhered to their ancient institutions.They seem at all times to have laid claim to thfl Ipower of suspending the course of nature, ant Iproducing miraculous phenomena. But in so nu iserous a body there must have been some whosepretensions were of a more moderate nature, anotherswho displayed a loftier aspiration. Th jmore ambitious we find designated in their nativelanguage by the name of Jo^eex'', of the samesigj Iedification as the Latin /««c^/. .;i,;i # ITheir notions of the Supreme Being are said, to 1have been of the highest and abstrusest character, 1as comprehending every possible perfection of Jpower, wisdom and goodness, as purely spiritus ]in his essence, and incapable of the smallest variationand change, the same yesterday, to-day, and ]for ever. Such as they apprehended him to b^ jsuch the most perfect oi' their priests aspired tomake themselves. They were to put oft" all humanweakness and frailty ; and, in proportion as theyassimilated, or rather became tie with the Deity,they supposed themselves to partake of his attributes,to become infinitely wise and powerful and■ Ribbon, Chap. VIII, *> This word it of Sanscrit original. ,Necromancy IN THE EAST. 179good. ITence their claim to suspend the courseof nature, and to produce miraculous phenomena.For this purpose it was necessary that they shouldabstract themselves from every thing mortal, haveno human passions or partialities, and divest themselvesas much as possible of all the wants and demandsof our material frame. Zoroaster appearsindeed to have preferred morality to devotion, tohave condemned celibacy and fasting, and to havepronounced, that " he who sows the ground withdiligence and care, acquires a greater stock of religiousmerit than he who should repeat ten thousandprayers," But his followers at least did notabide by this decision. They found it more practicableto secure to themselves an elevated reputationby severe observances, rigid self-denial, auntiepractice of the most inconceivable mortifications.This excited wonder and reverence and nsort of worship from the bystander, which industryand benevolence do not so assuredly securenice therefore in frequent instances laceratedtheir flesh, and submitted to incredible hardshipsThey scourged themselves without mercy, woundedtheir bodies with lancets and nails", and condenned themselves to remain for days and yearsunmoved in the most painful attitudes. It was noUnprecedented thing for them to take their stationiijibh the top of a high pillar J and some are said"They cut themselves with knives luict lancets, till the>d'^*)if3 out upon therti." I King*, xviii. 28.IqU Necromancy IN THE EAST.tb"li^^6 edhtinued in this position, without ever *coming down from it, for thirty years. The morethey trampled under foot the universal instinctsof our nature, and shewed themselves superior |to its infirmities, the nearer they approached to Ithe divine essence, and to the becoming one with jthe Omnipresent. They were of consequence the ]more sinless and perfect ; their will became the ]will of the Deity, and they were in a sense in- ]vested with, and became the mediums of the acts ]of, his power. The result of all this is, that their Iwho exercised the art of magic in its genuine and ]unadulterated form, at all times applied it to put Jposes of goodness and benevolence, and that their Iinterference was uniformly the signal of some un Iequivocal benefit, either to mankind in general, or Ito those individuals of mankind who were best Jentitled to their aid. It was theirs to succourvirtue in distress, and to interpose the divine as* jdistance in cases that most loudly and unquestionedably called for it.Such, we are told, was the character of the pure Iand primitive magic, as it was handed down from Ithe founder of their religion. It was called into 1action by the Jogees, men who, by an extraordinarymerit of whatever sort, had in a certain senserendered themselves one with the Deity. But theexercise of magical power was too tempting an endowment,not in some cases to be liable to abuse.Even as we read of the angels in heaven, that notIin**■■ Tl^^-withNECROMANCY IN THE EAST. lolall of thei Stood, and persevered in their originaljHnlessucss and integrity, so of the Jogees some,partaking of the divine power, were also under thedirection of a will celestial and divine, while others,having derived, we must suppose, a mighty andmiraculous power from the gift of God, afterwardsabused it by applying it to capricious, or, as-dt should seem, to malignant purposes. This appearsto have been every where essential to theHistory of magic. Jt' those who were supposed toless it in its widest extent and most astonishingdegree, Iiail uniformly employed it only in behalfof justice and virtue, they would indeed havebeen regarded as benefactors, and been entitled tothe reverence and love of mankind. But thehuman mind is always prone to delight in theterrible. No sooner did men entertain the ideawhat was supernatural and uncontrolable, thanley b^;an to fear it and to deprecate its hostility.They apprehended they knew not what, of thedead returning to life, of invisible beings armedwith the power and intention of executing niia-if, and of human creatures endowed with theNegative of bringing down pestilence andslaughter, of dispensing wealth and poverty, prosperityand calamity at their pleasure, of causinghealth and life to waste away by insensible, butsure degrees, of producing lingering torments, anddeath in its most fearful form. Accordingly itappears that, as there were certain magicians whoNECROMANCY IN THE EAST.were as Gods dispensing benefits to those whobeat deserved it, so there were others, whoseonly principle of action was caprice, and against,whose malice no innocence and no degree (^virtue would prove a defence. As the former sortof magicians were styled Jogeefi, and were held tftbe the deputies and instruments of infinite good ,near, so the other sort were named Ku-Jogees, that 'is, persons who possessing the same species of ascendancyover the powers of nature, employed itonly in deeds of malice and wickedness.In the mean time these magicians appear to haveproduced the wonderful effects which drew toithem the reverence of the vulgar, very frequently Iby the intervention of certain beings of a naturesuperior to the human, who should seem, thoughordinarily invisible, to have had the faculty ofrendering themselves visible when they thoughtproper, and assuming what shape they pleaseth.These are principally known by the names ofPeris, Dives*, and Gins, or Genii. Richardson,in the preface to his Persian Dictionary, fromwhich our account will principally be taken, refer ius to what he calls a romance, but from which hn Jappears to derive the outline of his Persian mythology.In this romance Kahraman, a mortal pisintroduced in conversation with Simurgh, a creaturepartaking of the nature of a bird and a gridiron,who reveals to him the secrets of the past historyOtherwise, Dt^cves.NECROMANCY IS THE EAST. 183I <tf the earth. She tells him that she has lived to[see the world seven times peopled with inhabitIts of so many different natures, and seven timesI depopulated, the former inhabitants having beenlab often removed, and giving place to their auc-sors. The beings who occupied the earth previouslyto man, were distinguished into the PeraKitad the Dives ; and, when they no longer possessedthe earth in chieii tiicy were, as it should seem,IaUI permitted, in an airy and unsubstantial form,nd tor the most part invisibly, to interfere in theaffairs of the human race. These beings ruled theearth during seventy-two generations. The Lastmonarch, named Jan bin Jan, conducted himselfso ill, that God sent the angel Hai'is to chastisehim. Paris however became intoxicated withpower, and employed his prerogative in the mostreprehensible manner. God therefore at lengthcreated Adam, the first of men, crowning himwith glory and honour, and giving him dominionover all other earthly beings. He commanded theangels to obey him ; but Paris refused, and theDives followed Iiiss example. The rebels were forthe most part sent to hell for their contumacy;but a part of the Dives, whose disobedience hadbeen less Vagrant, were reserved, and allowed foraCertain term to walk the earth, and by theirtemptations to put the virtue and constancy ofman to trial. Henceforth the human race wassecretly surrounded by invisible beings of twoIB* NECROMANCY IN THE EAST.Species, the Peris, who were friendly to man, andthe Dives, who exercised their ingenuity m revoltingthem in error and guilt. The Peris werebeautiful and benevolent, but imperfect and offendingbeings ; they are supposed to have borne3 considerable resemblance to the Fairies of thewestern world. The Dives were hideous in forelandof a malignant disposition. The Peris subsistwholly on perfumes, which the Dives, being of ttgrosser nature, hold in abhorrence. This mythologyis said to have been unknown in Arabia tillLong after Mahomet: the only invisible beings weread of in their early traditions are the Gins,which term, though now used for the most partas synonymous with Dives, originally signifiednothing more than certain infernal fiends of stupendouspower, whose agency was hostile to man.There was perpetual war between the Peris andthe Dives, whose proper habitation was Kaf, orCaucasus, a line of mountains which was supposedto reach round the globe. In these wars the Peria'jgenerally came oflT with the worst ; and in thatcase they are represented in the traditional tales ofthe East, as applying to some gallant aud heroicmortal to reinforce their exertions. The warriorswho figure in these narratives appear all to havebeen ancient Persian kings. Tahmuras, one of themost celebrated of them, is spoken of as mountingupon Simurgh, surrounded with talismans and enchantedarmour, and furnished with a sword theISILENCE RESPECTING EASTERN NECROMANCERS. 18.5dint of "which nothing could resist. He proceedsto Kaf, or Ginnistan, and defeats Arzshank, thechief of the Dives, but is defeated in turn by amore formidable competitor. The war appears tobe carried on for successive ages with alternateadvantage and disadvantage, till after the lapse ofcenturies Rustan kills Arzshank, and dually reducesthe Dives to a subject and tributary condition.In all this there is a great resemblance tothe hobbles of Scandinavia ; and the Northern andthe Eastern world seem enviously to have contributedtheir quota of chivalry and romance, ofjKroic achievements and miraculous events, ofmonsters and dragons, of amulets and enchantmentand all those incidents which most rouse theimagination, and are calculated to instil into geniusand enterprising youth a courage the mostintend and invincible.;neal silence of the east respectingINDIVIDUAL necromancers.Asia has been more notorious than perhaps anyother division of the globe for the vast multiplicityand variety of its narratives of sorcery and magic,have however been much disappointed in theling I looked tor in the first place, and that is, inthe individual adventures of such persons as mightbe supposed to have gained a high degree of creditand reputation for their skill in exploits of magic.where the professors are many (and they have18G SILENCE RESPECTING EASTERN NECROMANCERS.been perhaps no where so numerous as those ofmagic m the East), it is unavoidable but that someshould have been more dextrous than others, moreeminently gifted by nature, more enthusiastic andpersevering in the prosecution of their purpose*and more fortunate in awakening popularity andadmiration among their contemporaries. In theinstances of Apollonius TyaniKus and othersamong the ancients, and of Cornelius Agrippa,Roger Bacon and Faust among the moderns, weareacquainted with many biographical particularsof their lives, and can trace with some degree ofaccuracy their peculiarities of disposition, and observehow they were led gradually from one studyand one mode of action to another. But the magiciansof the East, so to speak, are mere abstractions,not characterised by any of those habits whichdistinguish one individual of the human race fromanother, and having those marking traits and pettylineaments which make the person, as it were, startup into life while he passes before our eyes. Theyare merely reported to ns as men prone to theproducing great signs and wonders, and nothingmore.Two of the most remarkable exceptions that 1have found to this rule, occur in the examplesJ)fi'IV,ocailV''and of Hakim, otherwise called Mo*■ unit VllOItt'■■*lu 'Uirii if.-*ftkamf tMiMiMKiMHfn-w-u>ayT*i>a.iirt WiiROCAIL.■1 Ml HyiTtlT. iThe first of these however is scarcely tft Iw[- called an exception, as lying beyond the limits ofI all credible history. Rocail is said to have beenI the younger brother of Seth, the son of Adam.I A Dive, or giant of mount Caucasus, being hardI pressed by his enemies, sought as usual among theI ions of men for aid that might extricate him outof his difficulties. He at length made an alliancewith Rocail, by whose assistance he arrived at thetranquillity he desired, and who in consequencebecame his grand vizier, or prime minister. Hegoverned the dominions of his principal for manyyears with great honour and success ; hut, ultimatelyperceiving the approaches of old age and\ death, he conceived a desire to leave behind himft monument worthy of his achievements in policy\ and war. He according erected, we are not toldby what means, a magnificent palace, and a sepulchreequally worthy of admiration. Jut whatwas most entitled to notice, he peopled tlii« palace1 with statues of eo extraordinary a quality, thatthey moved and performed all the functions andoffices of having men, so that every one who beheldthem would have believed that they were actuallyinformed with souls, whereas in reality all they didwas by the power of magic, in consequence ofwhich, though they were in fact no more than in-i animate matter, they were enabled to obey theIIAKEM, Otherwise Joanna.behests, and perform the will, of the peisoD|t;bjtwhom they were visited'. i i. !'IL! i[i; ll'l'^iiiid I"«''"■' riitEM, OTHERWISE MOCAnJJJC"'"" ""»■Mil M "■-.■ ' ,'i-hi ,"Hf|MblHarem was a leader iu one of the different divisionsof the followers of Mahomet. To inspire thegreater awe into the minds of his supporters, hepretended that he was the Most High God, thecreator of heaven and earth, under one of thedifferent forms by wliicli lie has in successive agesbecome incarnate, and made himself manifest tohis creatures. He distinguished himself by thepeculiarity of always wearing a thick and imperviousveil, by which, according to his followers,he covered the dazzling splendour of his countenance,which was so great that no mortalcouldbehold it and live, but that, according to his enemies,only served to conceal the hideousness ibisfeatures, too monstrously deformed to be contemplatedwithout horror. One of his miracles, whichseems the most to have been insisted on, was thatthe .nightly, for a considerable space of time, causedan orb, something like the moon, to rise iron asacred well, which gave a light scarcely less splendidthan the day, tJiat diffused its beams for manymiles around. His followers were enthusiasticallydevoted to his service, and he supported his authorityunquestioned for a number of years. AtD'Herbtlot, Bibliotheca Omiilnle.ARABIAN nights' F-N'TRltTAINMENTS.ihgth a more formidable opponent appeared, andafter several battles he became obliged to shutI himself up in a strong fortress. Here however hel-was so straitly besieged as to be driven to the last1-despair, and, having administered poison to hisI whole garrison, he prepared a bath of the mostl|K)werful ingredients, which, when he threw himselfinto it, dissolved his frame, even to the verybones, so that nothing remained of him but a lodirfhis hair. He acted thus, with the hope that itI-would be believed that he was miraculously takenLVp into heaven ; nor did this fail to be the effect1 the great body of his adherents r'**ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS.»'"11lfe most copious record of stories of AsiaticEnchantment that we possess, is contained in theArabian Nights' Entertainments ; to which we mayadd the Persian Tales, and a few other repositoriesI of Oriental adventures. It is true that these arc deliveredto us in a garbof fiction ; but they are knownto present so exact a picture of Eastern manservantcustoms, and so just a delineation of the follies, the■weidtnesses and credulity of the races of men thatI ^gnre in them, that, in the absence of materials of astrictly historical sort of which we have to complain,they may not inadequately supply the place, andmay furnish us with a pretty full representation ofD'Herbelot. Bibliothi-quc Orlentule.190 ARABIAN NIGHTS* Entertainments.the ideas of sorcery and magic which for cenfeOfies'were entertained in this part of the world. Theyhave indeed one obvious defect, which it is properthe reader should keep constantly in mind. Themythology and groundwork of the whole is Persian: but the narrator is for the most part a Mahometan.Of consequence the ancient Fire-worshippers,though they contribute the entire materials,and are therefore solely entitled to ourgratitude and deference for the abundant supplythey have famished to our curiosity, are uniformlytreated in these books with disdain andcontumely as unworthy of toleration, while the'comparative upstart race of the believers in theKoran are held out to us ass the only enlightenedand upright among the sons of men.Many of the matters most currently relate 'among these supernatural phenomena, are tales o?transformation. A lady has two sisters of the mostprofligate and unprincipled character. They havfiioriginally the same share of the paternal inheritanceas herself. But they waste it in profusion andfolly, white she improves her portion by good judgmentand frugality. Driven to the extremity of distress,they humble themselves, and apply to her forassistance. She generously imparts to them thesame amount of wealth that they originally posh'sessed, and they arc once more reduced to poverty.This happens again and again. At length, findingthem incapable of discretion, she prevails on th^iii'ARABIAN nights' ENTERTAINMENTS. 191I if come and live with her. By wearisome andI ceaseless importunity they induce her to embarkI ifi a mercantile enterprise. Here she meets withI prince, who Iiad the misfortune to be born in aI region of fire-worshippers, but was providentiallyI educated by a Mahometan nurse. Hence, whenI his countrymen were by divine vengeance allI turned into stones, he alone was saved alive. TheI lady finds him in this situation, endowed withjiR^se and motion amidst a petrified city, and theyimmediately fall in love with each other. SheI brings him away from this melancholy scene, andtogether they go on board the vessel which hadI been freighted by herself and her sisters. list theI ^ters become envious of her good fortune, andL conspire, while she and the prince are asleep, torlj^ow them overboard. The prince is drowned;I'^Iit the lady with great difficulty escapes. SheI finds herself in a desert island, not tar from thelace where she had originally embarked on herI a^v'^"*"'"'' ; '^^^* having slept off the fatigues sheL^^ encountered, beholds on her awaking a blackleman with an agreeable countenance, a fairy,fcwho leads in her hand two black bitches compileditpgetlier with a cord. These black bitches are theLily's sisters, thus metamorphosed, as a punishmentI for their ingratitude and cruelty. The fairy conkeys her through the air to her own house in Balldad) which she finds well stored with all sorts ofL commodities, and delivers to her the two animals,192 ARABIAN nights' ENTERTAINMENTS.with an injunction that she is to whip them every Iday at a certain hour as a further retribution fortheir crimes. This was accordingly punctuallyperformed ; and, at the end of each day's penance,the lady, having before paid no regard to the animals'gestures and pitiable cries, wept over them,took them in her arms, kissed them, and carefullywiped the moisture from their eyes. Having perseveredfor a length of time in this discipline, the |offenders are finally, by a counter incantation, re- 'stored to their original finns, being by the severitiesthey had suffered entirely cured of the viceswhich had occasioned their calamitous condition.Another story is of a calender, a sort of Mahometanmonk, with one eye, who had originallybeen a prince. He had contracted a taste for 'navigation and naval discoveries ; and, in one 'of his voyages, having been driven by stress of ]weather into unknown seas, he suddenly findshimself attracted towards a vast mountain of loadstone,which first, by virtue of the iron and nailsin the ship, draws the vessel towards itself, andthen, by its own intrinsic force, extracts the nails,so that the ship tumbles to pieces, and everyoneon board is drowned. The mountain, onthe side towards the sea, is all covered withnails, which had been drawn from vessels thatpreviously suffered the same calamity ; and thesenails at once preserve and augment the fatal powerof the mountain. The prince only escapes ; andARABIAN Nights' ENTERTAINMENTS. I'J-'Jhe finds himself hi a desolate island, with a domeor brass, supported by brazen pillars, and on thetop of it a horse of brass, and a rider of the samemetal. This rider the prince is fated to throwdown, by means of an enchanted arrow, and thusto dissolve the charm which had been fatal tothousands. From the desolate island he embarkedon board a boat, with a single rower, a man ofmetal, and would have been safely conveyed tohis native country, had he not inadvertentlypronounced the name of God, that he had beenwarned not to do, and which injunction he hadobserved many days. On this the boat immediatelysunk -, but the prince was preserved, whocomes into a desolate island, where he finds butone inhabitant, a youth of fifteen. This youth ishid in a cavern, it having been predicted of himthat he should be killed after fifty days, by theman that threw down the horse of brass and hisrider. A great friendship is struck up betweenthe unsuspecting youth and the prince, who never -tireless fulfils the prediction, having by a pureaccident killed the youth on the fiftieth day. Henext arrives at a province of the main land, wherehe visits a castle, inhabited by ten very agreeableyoung men, each Wind of the right eye. Hedwells with them for a month, and finds, after aday of pleasant entertainment, that each eveningdo penance in squalidness and ashes. Hiscuriosity is greatly excited to obtain an explana-Arabian Nl^iHTs' ENTERTAINMENTS.tion of what he saw, but this they refuse, tellingbim at the same time, that he may, if he pleases,pass through the same adventure as they havedone, and if he does, wishing it may be attendedwith a more favourable issue. He determines tomake the experiment ; and by their directionafter certain preparations, is flown away withthrough the air by a roc, a stupendous bird, thatis capable in the same manner of carrying off anelephant. By this means he is brought to a castleof the most extraordinary magnificence, inhabitedby fort)' ladies of exquisite beauty. With theseladies he lives for eleven months in a perpetualsuccession of delights. But in the twelfth monththey tell him, that they are obliged to leave him tilthe commencement of the new year. In the meantimethey give him for his amusement the keys ofone hundred apartments, all but one of wluch heis permitted to open. He is delighted with thewonders of these apartments till the last day. Onthat day he opens the forbidden room, where tlj8rarity that most strikes him is a black horse of admirableshape and appearance, with a saddle andbridle of gold. He leads this horse into the openair, and is tempted to mount him. The home firststands still ; but at length, being touched with aswitch, spreads a pair of wings which the princehad not before perceived, and mounts to an amazingheight in the air. The horse finally descends on theterrace of a castle, where he throws his rider, and,,IIIIPERSIAN TALES. 195aves him, having first daslieil out his right eyeIwitli a sudden swing of his tail. The prince goesI down into the castle, and to his surprise finds himselfin company with the ten young men, blind of[fie eye, who had passed through the same adventureas he had done, and all been betrayedthy melons of the same infirmity.PERSIAN TALES.These two stories are from the Arabian Nights :;the two following are from the Persian Tales. —^adlallah, king of Mouse, contracted an intimacyithayoungdervise, a species of Turkish tear, whosnakes a vow of perpetual poverty. The devise,to ingratiate himself the more with the prince, informedIiira of a secret he possessed, by means of acertain incantation, of projecting his soul into thebody of any dead animal he thought proper.t-'/ To convince the king that this power was no.Empty boast, he offered to quit his own body, andMinute that of a doe, which Fadlallah had justkilled in hunting. He accordingly executed whathe proposed, took possession of the body of theJoe, displayed the most surprising agility, approachedthe king, fawning on him with everyexpression of endearment, and then, after variousbounds, deserting the limbs of the animal, and repossessinghis own frame, which during the experimenthad lain breathless on the ground. Fad-persianTA-LES.allah became earnest to possess the secret of the Idervise j and, after some demurs, it was communicatedto him. The king took possession of thebody of the doe ; but his treacherous confident no Isooner saw the limbs of Fadlallah stretched senseless Ion the ground, than he conveyed his own spirit into ithem, and, bending his bow, sought to destroy the [Hfe of his defenceless victim. The king by his agility Iescaped ; and the dervise, resorting to the palace, ]took possession of the throne, and of the bed of 1the queen, Zemroude, with whom Fadlallah was [desperately enamoured. The first precaution of ■the usurper was to issue a decree that all the deerwithin his dominions should be killed, hoping bythis means to destroy the rightful sovereign. Butthe king, aware of his danger, had deserted the bodyof the doe, and entered that of a dead nightingalethat lay in his path. In this disguise he hastened Jto the palace, and placed himself in a wide-spreads 1ing tree, which grew immediately before the apartmentof Zemroude. Here he poured out his complaintsand the grief that penetrated his soul insuch melodious notes, as did not fail to attract the |attention of the queen. She sent out her bird-ncatchers to make captive the Utile warbler ; and Fad-allah,who desired no better, easily suffered himselfto be made their prisoner. In this new positionhe demonstrated by every gesture of fondness hispartiality to the queen ; but if any of her womenapproached him, he pecked at them in anger, and^jPERSIAN TALES. 197when the impostor made Iiiss appearance, couldnot contain the vehemence of his rage. It happenedone night that the queen's lap-dog died ;and the thought struck Fadlallah that he wouldanimate the corpse of this animal. The nextroaming Zemroude found her favourite bird deadin his cage, and immediately became inconsolable.Never, she said, was so amiable a bird ; he distinguishedher from all others ; he seemed even toentertain a passion for her ; and she felt as if shecould not survive his loss. The dervise in vaintried every expedient to console her. At lengthhe said, that, if she pleased, be would cause hernightingale to revive every morning, and entertainher with his tunes as long as she thought proper.The dervise accordingly laid himself on a sopha,and by means of certain cabalistic words, transportedhis soul into the body of the nightingale,and began to sing. Fadlallah watched his time ;he lay in a corner of the room unobserved ; butno sooner had the dervise deserted his body, thanthe king proceeded to take possession of it. Thefirst thing he did was to hasten to the cage, toopen the door with uncontrolable impatience, and,seizing the bird, to twist otFits head. Zemroude,amazed, asked him what he meant by so inhumanan action, Fadlallah in reply related to her all thecircumstances that had befallen him ; and thej^ueen became so struck with agony and remorselat she had suffered her person, however iinio-198 Persian TALES.gently, to be polluted by so vile an impostor, that 1she could not get over the recollection, but pined |away and died from a sense of the degradation she Ihad endured.But a much more perplexing and astounding ]instance of transformation ocairs in the history of 1the Young King of Tibet and the Princess of theNaiads, The sorcerers in this case are repress iseated as, without any intermediate circumstance ito facilitate their witchcraft, having the ability toassume the form of any one they pleases and inconsequenceto take the shape of one actually present,producing a duplication the most confoundingthat can be imagined. — Mocbel, the son of an .artificer of Damascus, but whose father had bequeathedhim considerable wealth, contrived towaste his patrimony and his youth together inprofligate living with Dilnouaze, a woman of dissolutemanners. Finding themselves at once poorand despised, they Iiad recourse to the sage Bedra, 'the most accomplished magician of the desert, and Ifound means to obtain her favour. In consequenceshe presented them with two rings, which ihad the power of enabling them to assume the Jlikeness of any man or woman they please. Thus jequipped, Mocbel heard of the death of Mouaffackiprince of the Naiads, who was supposed to have ]been slain in a battle, and whose body had never |been found. The niece of Mouaffack now filled ]the throne ; and under these circumstances Mocbel \PERSIAN TALES.Iconceived the design of personating the absentMouaSUck, exciting a rebellion among Ins countrymen,and taking possession of the throne. Inthis project he succeeded ; and the princess driveninto exile, took refuge in the capital of Tibet.Here the king saw her, fell in love with her, andespoused her. Being made acquainted with herhistory, he resolved to re-conquer her dominions,and sent a defiance to the usurper. Mocbel, terrifiedat the thought of so formidable an invader,first pretended to die, and then, with Dilnouaze,who during his brief reign had under the form ofa beautiful woman personated his queen, proceededin his original form to the capital of ThisHere hies purpose was to interrupt the happinessof those who had disturbed him in his deceitfulcareer. Accordingly one night, when thequeen, previously to proceeding to her repose, hadshut herself up in her closet to read certain passagesof the Alcoran, Dilnouaze, assuming herform with the minutest exactness, hastened toplace herself in the royal bed by the side of theking. After a time, the queen shut her book, andWent along the gallery to the king's bedchamber.,,Mocbel watched his time, and placed himself, underthe form of a frightful apparition, directly inthe quecu'.'i path. She started at the sight, anduttered a piercing shriek. The king recognisedher voice, and hastened to see what had happenedto her. She explained ; but the kingPERSIAN TALES.spoke of something much more extraordinary,and asked her iiow it could possibly happenthat she should be in the gallery, at the same momentthat he had left her, undressed and in bed.They proceeded to the chamber to unravel themystery. Here a contention occurred betweenthe real and the seeming queen, each chargingthe other with imposture. The king turnedfrom one to the other, and was unable to decidebetween their pretensions. The courtiers andthe ladies of the bedchamber were called, andall were perplexed with uncertainty and doubt.At length they determine in favour of the falsequeen. It was then proposed that the other shouldbe burned for a sorceress. The king howeverforbade this. He was not yet altogether decided;and could not resolve to consign his truequeen, as it might possibly be, to a cruel death.He was therefore content to strip her of her royalrobes, to clothe her in rags, and thrust her igno- |ominously from his palace.Treachery however was not destined to be ulti- Jlately triumphant. Tiie king one day rode out a ^hunting; and Mocbel, that he might the betterdeceive the guards of the palace, seizing the opportunity,assumed Ins figure, and went to bed toDilnouaze. The king meanwhile recollected somethingof importance, that he had forgotten before ;he went out to hunt, and returning upon his steps, iproceeded to the royal chamber. Here to his iSTORY OF A GOULE.I Utter confusion he found a man in bed with hisqueen, and that man to Iiiss greater astonishmentthe exact counterpart of himself. Furious at theI eight, he immediately drew his scimitar. Theman contrived to escape down the backstairs. TheI woman however remained in bed ; and, stretchingI out her hands to intreat for mercy, the king struckofl'the hand which had the ring on it, and she immediatelyappeared, as she really was, a frightfulhag. She begged for life ; and, that she mightmollify his rage, explained the mystery, told himthat it was by means of a ring that she effected thedelusion, and that by a similar enchantment herI paramour had assumed the likeness of the king.I The king meanwhile was inexorable, and struck offI her head. He next turned in pursuit of the adulterer.Mocbel however had had time to mount|iDn horseback. But the king mounted also; and,[being the better horseman, in a short time overtook his foe. The impostor did not dare to copeI with him, but asked his life ; and the king, consideringhim as the least offender of the two, pardonedhim upon condition of his surrendering thetiring, in consequence of which he passed the re-leander of his life in poverty and decrepitude.STORY OF A GOULE.A Story in the Arabian Nights, which merits noticefor its singularity, and as exhibiting a particularJSTOltV OF A COULE.example of the credulity of the people of the East,is that of a man who married a sorceress, withoutbeing in any way conscious of her character in thatrespect. She was sufficiently agreeable in her person,and he found for the most part no reason tobe dissatisfied with her. But he became uneasyat the strangeness of her behaviour, whenever tJieysat together at meals. The husband provided asufficient variety of dishes, and was anxious thathis wife should eat and be refreshed. But shetook scarcely any nourishment. He set before heraplate of rice. From this plate she took somewhat,grain by grain ; but she would taste of noother dish. The husband remonstrated with herupon hier way of eating, but to no purpose ; shestill went on the same. He knew it was impossiblefor any one to subsist upon so little as she ate;and his curiosity was roused. One night, as heJay quietly awake, he perceived his wife rise verysoftly, and put on her clothes. He watched, butJiiade as if he saw nothing. Presently she openedthe door, and went out. He followed her unperceived,by moonlight, and tracked her into a place |-of graves. Here to his astonishment he saw herjoined by a Goule, a sort of wandering demon,which is known to infest ruinous buildings, andfrom time to time suddenly rushes out, seizes jchildren and other defenceless people, strangles,and devours them. Occasionally, tor want ofother food, this detested race will resort to church. Arabian NIGHTS. 203'^ai^s," and," digging up the bodie-s of the newly-buried,gorge their appetites upon the ftesli ofthese. The husband followed his wife and hersupernatural companion, and watched their proceedings.He saw them digging in a new-madegrave. They extracted the body of the deceased;and, the Gouge cutting it up joint by joint, theyfeasted voraciously, and, having satisfied their appetites,cast the remainder into the grave again,and covered it up as before. The husband nowwithdrew unobserved to his bed, and the wife followedpresently after. He however conceived ahorrible loathing of such a wife ; and she discoversthat he is acquainted with her dreadful secret.They can no longer live together ; and a metamorphosisfollowed. She turned him into a dog, whichby ill usage she drove from her door; and he, aidedby a benevolent sorceress, first recovers his naturalshape, and then, having changed her into a mare,by perpetual hard usage and ill treatment ventshis detestation of the character he had discovered■hi her.ARABIAN NIGHTS.A compilation of more vigorous imagination andmore exhaustless variety than the Arabian Nights,perhaps never existed. Almost every thing thatcan be conceived of marvellous and terrific isthere to be found. When we should apprehend20t RESEMBLANCE OF THE TALES OFthe author or authors to have come to an end ofthe rich vein in which they expatiate, still newwonders are presented to us in endless succession.Their power of comic exhibition is not less extraordinarythan their power of surprising and terrifying.The splendour of their painting is endless ;and the mind of the reader js roused and refreshedby shapes and colours for ever new.RESEMBLANCE OF THE TALES OF THE EAST ANDOF EUROPE.It is characteristic of this work to exhibit afaithful and particular picture of Eastern manners,customs, and modes of thinking and acting. Andyet, now and then, it is curious to observe the coincidenceof Oriental imagination with that of antiquityand of the North of Europe, so that it isdifficult to conceive the one not to be copied fromthe other. Perhaps it was so ; and perhaps not.Man is every where man, possessed of the samefaculties, stimulated by the same passions, derivingpain and pleasure from the same sources,with similar hopes and fears, aspirations and alarms.In the Third Voyage of Sinbad he arrives at anisland were he finds one man, a negro, as tall as apalm-tree, and with a single eye in the middle ofhis forehead. He takes up the crew, one by one,and selects the fattest as first to be devoured.This is done a second time. At length nine of theTHE EAST AND OF EUROPE.»boldest seize on a spit, while he lay on his backasleep, and, having heated it red-hot, thrust it intohis eye This is precisely the story of Ulysses andthe Cyclops.The story of the Little Hunchback, who ischoaked with a fish-bone, and, after having broughtsuccessive individuals into trouble on the suspicion■of murdering him, is restored to life again, isnearly the best known of the Arabian Tales. Themerry jest of Dan Hew, Monk of Leicester, who*• once was hanged, and four times slain," bears-a very striking resemblance to this*.A similar resemblance is to be found, onlychanging the sex of the aggressor, between thewell known tale of Patient Grizzled, and that ofCheheristany in the Persian Tales. This ladywas a queen of the Gins, who fell in love with theemperor of China, and agrees to many him uponcondition that lie shall do what she pleases, andhe shall never doubt that what she does is right.She bears him a son, beautiful Lis the day, andthrows him into the fire. She bears him a daughter,and gives her to a white bitch, who runs awaywith her, and disappears. The emperor goes towar with the Moguls ; and the queen utterly destroysthe provisions of his army. But the firewas a salamander, and the bitch a fairy, who rearthe children in the most admirable manner ; and9 in Selden's Collection of Ballads in the Bodleian ISee Letters from the Bodleian, Vol. I, p. 120 to 126.Jn900 CAUSES OF HUMAN Credulity,the provisions of the army were poisoned by atraitor, and are in a miraculous manner replacesby such as were wholesome and of the most invigoratingqualities.CAUSES OF HUMAN CREDULITY.Meanwhile, though the stories above relatedare extracted from books purely and properly offiction, they exhibit so just a delineation ofEastern manners and habits of mind, that, in thedefect of materials strictly historical, they may toa certain degree supply the place. The principalfeature they set before us is credulity and a loveof the marvellous. This is ever found characteristicof certain ages of the world ; but in Asia itprevails in uninterrupted continuity. Whereverlearning and the exercise of the intellectual facultiesfirst shew themselves, there mystery and aknowledge not to be communicated but to theselect few must be expected to appear. Wisdomin its natural and genuine form seeks to diffuseitself; but in the East on the contrary it is onlyvalued in proportion to its rarity. Those who devotedthemselves to intellectual improvement,looked for it rather in solitary abstraction, than infree communication with the minds of others ; and,when they condescended to the use of the organof speech, they spoke in enigmas and ambiguities,and in phrases better adapted to produce wonderCAUSES OF HUMAN CREDULITY. 907and perplexity, than to enlighten and instruct.When the more consummate instructed the novice,i it was by slow degrees only, and through the mediumof a long probation. In consequence of this\ state of things the privileged few conceived oftheir own attainments with an over-weeping pride,I and were puffed up with a sense of superiority ;while the mass of their fellow-creatures looked tothem with astonishment; and, agreeably to theOriental creed of two independent and contendingprinciples of good and of evil, regarded these se.I let and supernaturally endowed beings anon a^ asource of the most enviable blessings, and aJion asobjects of unmingled apprehension and terror,before whom their understandings became pi[03-I tate, and every thing that was most appalling andI dreadful was most easily believed. In this state1 superstition unavoidably grew infectious; and theI more the seniors inculcated and believed, the moreI the imagination of the juniors became a pliant andunresisting slave.The Mantra, or charm, consisting of a few unintelligiblewords repeated again and again, alwaysaccompanied, or rather preceded, the supposedmiraculous phenomenon that was imposed on theignorant. Water was flung over, or in the face of,the thing or person upon whom the miraculouseffect was to be produced. Incense was burned ;and such chemical substances ware set on tire, theCAUSES OF HUMAN Credulity.Idazzling appearance of which might confound thesenses of the spectators. The whole consisted inthe art of the juggler. The first business was toact on the passions, to excite awe and fear andcuriosity in the parties ; and next by a sort of 'slight of hand, and by changes too rapid to be followedby an unpractised eye, to produce phenomena,wholly unanticipated, and that could not beaccounted for. Superstition was further an essentialingredient j and this is never perfect, butwhere the superior and more active party regardshimself as something more than human, and theparty acted upon beholds in the other an object ofreligious reverence, or tingles with apprehensionof he knows not what of fearful and calamitous.The state of the party acted on, and indeed ofeither, is never complete, till the senses are confounded,what is imagined is so powerful as in amanner to exclude what is real, in a word, till, asthe poet expresses it, " function is smothered insurmise, and nothing is, but what is not."It is in such a state of the faculties that it is entirelynatural and simple, that one should mistakea mere dumb animal for one's relative or near connectionin disguise. And, the delusion havingonce begun, the deluded individual gives to everygesture and motion of limb and eye an explanationthat forwards the deception. It is in the sameway that in ignorant ages the notion of changeling' .CAUSES OF HUMAN CREDULITY. S09has been produced. The weak and fascinatedmother sees every feature with a turn of expressionunknown before, all the habits of the childappear different and strange, till the parent herselfdenies her offspring, and sees in the object solately cherished and doated on, a monster uncouthand horrible of aspect.DARK AGES OF EUROPE.In Europe we are slenderly supplied with historians,ami with narratives exhibiting the mannersand peculiarities of successive races of men, fromthe time of Theodosius in the close of the fourthcentury of the Christian era to the end of thetenth. Mankind during that period were in anuncommon degree wrapped up in ignorance and .barbarism. We may be morally sure that this wasan interval beyond all others, in which superstitionand an implicit faith in supernatural phenomenapredominated over this portion of the globe. Thelaws of nature, and the everlasting chain of antecedentsand consequents, were little recognised. Inproportion as illumination and science have risenon the world, men have become aware that theI succession of events is universally operating, andthat the frame of men and animals is every wherethe same, modified only by causes not less unichangeable in their influence than the internalconstitution of the frame itself. We have learnedto explain much ; we are able to predict and investigatethe course of things ; and the contemnnative and the wise are not less intimately andL profoundly persuaded that the process of naturalI events is sure and simple and void of all just occasionDARK AGES OF EUROPE.for surprise and the lifting up of hands in astonishment,where we are not yet familiarly acquaintedwith the development of the elementsof things, as where we are. What we have notyet mastered, we feel confidently persuaded thatthe investigators that come after us will reduce torules not less obvious, familiar and comprehensible,than is to us the rising of the sun, or theprogress of animal and vegetable life from the firstbud and seed of existence to the last stage of decrepitudeand decay.But in these ages of ignorance, when but few,,and those only the most obvious, laws of naturewere acknowledged, every event that was not of Ialmost daily occurrence, was contemplated with. ]more or less of awe and alarm. These men " saw fGod in" clouds, and heard him in the wind." In- .jstead of having regard only to that universal Pro Ievidence, which acts not by partial impulses, but jby general laws, they beheld, as they conceived, jthe immediate hand of the Creator, or rather, upon ]most occasions, of some invisible intelligence, sometimesbeneficent, but perhaps oftener malignantand capricious, interfering, to baffle the foresight ofthe sage, to humble the pride of the intelligent,and to place the discernment of the most gifted Jupon a level with the drivelling of the idiot, and Jthe ravings of the insane.And, as in events men saw perpetually the su-Jsupernatural and miraculous, so in their fellow 1IIIDAHK AGES OF EUROPE. XlScreatures they continually sought, and thereforefrequently imagined that they found, a gifted race,that had command over the elements, held commercewith the invisible world, and could producethe most stupendous and terrific effects. In man,as we now behold him, we can ascertain his nature,the strength and pliability of his Hmhs, theaccuracy of his eye, the extent of his intellectualacquisitions, and the subtlety of his powers ofthought, and can therefore in a great measure anticipatewhat we have to hope or to fear from him.Every tiling is regulated by what we call naturalmeans. But, in the times I speak of, all was mysterious:the powers of men were subject to norecognised his : and therefore nothing that imaginationcould suggest, exceeded the bounds ofcredibility. Some men were supposed to be sorarely endowed that " a thousand liveried angels"waited on them invisibly, to execute their behestsfor the benefit of those they favoured ; while, muchoftener, the perverse and crookedly disposed, whodelighted in mischief, would bring on those towhom, for whatever capricious reason, they werehostile, calamities, which no sagacity could predict,sand no merely human power could baffle and resistAfter the tenth century enough of credulity remained,to display in glaring colours the aberrationsof the human mind, and to furnish forth taleswhich will supply abundant matter for the remainderof this volume. But previously to thisDAHK AGES OF EUROPE.kperiod, we may be morally sure, reigned most eminentlythe sabbath of magic and sorcery, whennothing was too wild, and remote from the realityof things, not to meet with an eager welcome,when terror and astonishment united themselveswith a nameless delight, and the auditor wasalarmed even to a sort of madness, at the same timethat he greedily demanded an ever-fresh supply ofcongenial aliment. The more the known laws ofthe universe and the natural possibility of thingswere violated, with the stronger marks of approbationwas the tale received : while the dextrous ■impostor, aware of the temper of his age, andknowing how most completely to blindfold and leadastray his prepared dupes, made a rich harvest ofthe folly of his contemporaries. But I am wrongto call him an impostor. He imposed upon himself,no less than on the gaping crowd. His dis .courses, even in the act of being pronounced, won 1upon his own ear ; and the dexterity with which hebaffled the observation of others, bewildered hisready sense, and filled him with astonishment at themagnitude of his achievements. The accomplishedadventurer was always ready to regard himselfrather as a sublime being endowed with great and .stupendous attributes, than as a pitiful trickster. |He became the God of his own idolatry, and stoodastonished, as the witch of Endor in the EnglishBible is represented to have done, at the successof his incantations.DAHK AGES OF EUROPE.nsBut all these things are passed away, and areburied in the gulf" of oblivion. A thousand tales,each more wonderful than the other, marked theyear as it glided away. Every valley had itsburies ; and every hill its giants. No solitarydwelling, unpeopled with human inhabitants, waswithout its ghosts i and no church-yard in the absenceof day-light could be crossed with impunity.The gifted enchanter " bedimraedIThe noon-tide sun, called forth the mutinous wind.And 'twiict the green sea and the azure vaultSet roaring war; to the dread, rattling thunderHe gave forth fire, and rifted Jove's stout oakWith his own bolt, the strong-based promontoryHe made to shake, and by the spurs plucked upThe pine and cedar."It is but a small remnant of these marvellousadventures that has been preserved. The greaterpart of them are swallowed up in that gulf of oblivion,to which are successively consigned after abrief interval all events as they occur, except sofaras their memory is preserved through the mediumof writing and records. From the eleventh'century commences a stream of historical relation,which since that time never entirely eludes thesearch of the diligent enquirer. Before this periodthere occasionally appears an historian or miscellaneouswriter : but he seems to start up bychance j the eddy presently closes over lUm, andall is again impenetrable darkness.3l6 MERLIN.When this succession of writers began, theywere unavoidably induced to look back upon theages that had preceded them, and to collect hereand there from tradition any thing that appearedespecially worthy of notice. Of course any informationthey could glean was wild and uncertain,deeply stamped with the credulity and wonder of Ian ignorant period, and still increasing in marvellousnessand absurdity from every hand it passedthrough, and from every tongue which repeated it.One of the most extraordinary personages whose jstory is thus delivered to us, is Merlin. He appearsto have been contemporary with the periodof the Saxon invasion of Britain in the latterpart of the fitly century ; but probably the earliest imention of his name by any writer that has come Jdown to us is not previous to the eleventh. We Imay the less wonder therefore at the incredible 1things that are reported of him. He is first Imentioned in connection with the fortune oflVortigern, who is represented by Geoffrey oflMonmouth as at that time king of England. The fRomans having withdrawn their legions from this {island, the warlike Britons found themselves incompetentto repel the invasions of the uncivilisedScots and Picts, and Vortigern perceived no remedybut in inviting the Saxons from the northern |Merle. 217'continent to his aid. The Saxons successfullyrepelled the invader ; but, having done this, theyrefused to return home. They determined tosettle here, and, having taken various towns, arerepresented as at length inviting Vortigern and hisprincipal nobility to a feast near Salisbury underpretence of a peace, where they treacherously slewthree hundred of the chief men of the island,and threw Vortigern into chains. Here, by wayof purchasing the restoration of his Puberty, theyinduced him to order the surrender of London,York, Winchester, and other principal towns.Having lost all his strong holds, he consulted hismagicians as to how he was to secure himself fromthis terrible foe. They advised him to build animpregnable tower, and pointed out the situationwhere it was to be erected. But so unfortunatelydid their advice succeed, that all the work that ibisengineers did in the building one day, the earthswallowed, so that no vestige was to be found onthe next. The magicians were consulted again onthis fresh calamity ; and they told the king thatthat there was no remedying this disaster, otherthan by cementing the walls of his edifice with theblood of a Human being, who was born of no humanfather.Vortigern sent out his emissaries in every directionin search of this victim ; and at length bystrange good fortune they lighted on Merlin near^218 MERLIN.the town of Caermarthen, who told them that hismother was the daughter of a king, but that shehad been got with child of him by a being of anangelic nature, and not a man. No sooner hadthey received this information, than they seizedhim, and hurried him away to Vortigern as thevictim required. But in presence of the king hebaffled the magicians ; he told the king that theground they had chosen for his tower, had underneathit a lake, which being drained, they would,find at the bottom two dragons of inextinguishablehostility, that under that form enured the Britonsand Saxons, all of which upon the experimentproved to be true.Vortigern died shortly after, and was succeededfirst by Ambrosius, and then by Uther Pendragon.Merlin was the confident of all these kings. ToUther he exhibited a very criminal sort of compliance.Uther became desperately enamoured ofIgerna, wife of the duke of Cornwal, and triedevery means to seduce her in vain. Having con-suitedMerlin, the magician contrived by an extraordinaryunguent to metamorphose Uglier intothe form of the duke. The duke had shut up hiswife for safety in a very strong tower ; but Utherin his new form gained unsuspected entrance; and-the virtuous Igerna received him to her embraces,by means of which he begot Arthur, afterwardsthe most renowned sovereign of this island. UtherMERLIN. 219now contrived that the duke, her husband, shouldbe slain in battle, and immediately married thefair Igerna, and mate her his queen.The next exploit of Merlin was with the intentto erect a monument that slioukl last for ever, tothe memory of the three hundred British nobles thatwere massacred by the Saxons. This design producedthe extraordinary edifice called Stonehenge.These mighty stones, which by no human powercould be placed in the position in which we beholdthem, had originally been set up in Africa, andafterwards by means unknown were transportedto Ireland. Merlin commanded that they shouldbe carried over the sea, and placed where theynow are, on Salisbury Plain. The workmen, havingreceived his directions, exerted all their powerand skill, but could not move one of them. Merlin,having for some time watched their exertions,at length applied his magic ; and to the amazementof every one, the stones spontaneously quittedthe situation in which they had been placed, roseto a great height in the air, and then pursuedthe course which Merlin had prescribed, finallysettling themselves in Wiltshire, precisely in theposition in which we now hind them, and whichthey will for ever retain.The last adventure recorded of Merlin proceededfrom a project he conceived for surroundinghis native town of Caermarthen with a brazcawall. He committed the execution of this projectIto a multitude of fiends, who laboured upon theplan underground in a neighbouring cavern". Inthe mean while Merlin had become enamoured of asupernatural being, called the Lady of the Lake.The lady had long resisted his importunities, andin fact had no inclination to yield to his suit.One day however she sent for him in great haste ;and Merlin was of course eager to comply withher invitation. Nevertheless, before he set out,he gave it strictly in charge to the fiends, thatthey should by no means suspend their labours tillthey saw him return. The design of the lady wasto make sport with him, and elude his addresses.Merlin on the contrary, with the hope to melt herseverity, undertook to shew her the wonders of hisart. Among the rest he exhibited to her observationa tomb, formed to contain two bodies j at thesame time teaching her a charm, by means ofwhich the sepulchre would close, and never againbe opened. The lady pretended not to believe thatthe tomb was wide enough for its purpose, and inveigledthe credulous Merlin to enter it, and placehimself as one dead. No sooner had she so farsucceeded, than she closed the lid of the sepulchre,and pronouncing the charm, rendered it impossiblethat it should ever be opened again till the day ofjudgment. Thus, according to the story. Merlinwas shut in, a corrupted and putrefying body witha Hvingsoul, to which still inhered the faculty of> Spenser, Fairy Queen, Book 111, Canto 111, sUnzaS, £f j^^returning in audible sounds a prophetic answer tosuch as resorted to it as an oracle. Meanwhilethe fiends, at work in the cavern near Caermarthen,mindful of the injunction of their taskmaster, notto suspend their labours till his return, proceed foreverin their office ; and the traveller who passesthat way, if he lays his ear close to the mouth ofthe cavern, may hear a ghastly noise of iron chainsand brazen caldrons, the loud strokes of the hammer,and the ringing sound of the anvil, intermixedwith the pants and groans of the workmen,enough to unsettle the brain and confound thefaculties of him that for any time shall listen tothe din.As six hundred years elapsed between the timeof Merlin and the earliest known records of hisachievements, it is impossible to pronounce whathe really pretended to perform, and how greatwere the additions which successive reporters haveannexed to the wonders of his art, more than theprophet himself perhaps ever dreamed of. Inlater times, when the historians were the contemporariesof the persons by whom the supposedwonders were achieved, or the persons who havefor these causes been celebrated have bequeathedcertain literary productions to posterity, we maybeable to form some conjecture as to the degreein which the heroes of the tale were deluding ordeluded, and may exercise our sagacity in thequestion by what strange peculiarity of mind ads.DUNSTAN.ventures which we now hold to be impossible obtainedso general belief. But in a case like thisof Merlin, who lived in a time so remote fromthat in which his history is first known to havebeen recorded, it is impracticable to determine atwhat time the fiction which was afterwards generallyreceived began to be reported, or whetherthe person to whom the miracles were imputedever heard or dreamed of the extraordinary thingshe is represented as having achieved.ST. DUNSTAN.An individual scarcely less famous in the darkages, and who, like Merlin, lived in confidencewith successive kings, was St. Dunstan. He wasborn and died in the tenth century. It is not alittle instructive to employ our attention upon therecorded adventures, and incidents occurring inthe lives, of such men, since, though plentifullyinterspersed with impossible tales, they serve todiscover to us the tastes and prepossessions of thetimes in which these men lived, and the sort ofaccomplishments which were necessary to theirsuccess.St. Dunstan is said to have been a man of distinguishedbirth, and to have spent the earlyyears of his life in much licentiousness. He washowever doubtless a person of the most extraordinaryendowments of nature Ambition earlyIST. DUNSTAN.IIIlighted its fire in his bosom ; and he displayed thegreatest facility in acquiring any talent or art onwhich lie fixed his attention. His career of profligacywas speedily arrested by a dangerous illness,in which he was given over by his physicians.While he lay apparently at the point of death, anangel was suddenly seen, bringing a medicine totrim which effected his instant cure. The saintimmediately rose from his bed, and hastened todie nearest church to give God thanks for hisrecovery. As he passed along, the devil, surroundedwith a pack of black dogs, interposedhimself to obstruct his way. Dunstan howeverintrepidly brandished a rod that he held in hishand, and his opposers took to flight. When hecame to the church, he found the doors closed.But the same angel, who effected his cure, was athand, and, taking him up softly by the hair of hishead, placed him before the high altar, where hePerformed his devotions with suitable fervour.That he might expiate the irregularities of hispast life, St. Dunstan now secluded himself entirelyfrom the world, and constructed for hishabitation a cell in the abbey of Glastonbury, sonarrow that he could neither stand upright in it,nor stretch out his limbs in repose. He tookscarcely so much sustenance as would support life,and mortified his flesh with frequent castigations.He did not however pass his time during thisseclusion in vacuity and indolence. He pursuedST. DUNSTAN.his studies with the utmost ardour, and ftiade Agreat proficiency in philosophy, divinity, painting,sculpture and music. Above all, he was an admirablechemist, excelled in manufactures of goldand other metals, and was distinguished by a wonderfulskill in the art of magic.During all these mortifications and the severenessof his industry, he appears to have become aprey to extraordinary visions and imaginations.Among the rest, the devil visited him in his cell,and, thrusting his head in at the window, disturbedthe saint with obscene and blasphemousspeeches, and the most frightful contortions of thefeatures of his countenance. Dunstan at length,wearied out with his perseverance, seized the red-hottongs with which lie was engaged in somechemical experiment, and, catching the devil bythe nose, held him with the utmost firmness, whileSatan filled the whole neighbourhood for manymiles round with his bellowing. Extraordinaryas this may appear, it constitutes one of the mostprominent incidents in the life of the saint ; andthe representations of it were for ever repeatedin ancient carvings, and in the illuminations ofchurch-windows.This was the precise period at which the popeand his adherents were gaining the greatest ascendancyin the Christian world. The doctrine oftransubstantiation was now in the highest vogue;and along with it a precept still more essential toIST. DUNSTAN.iFT,ari^^ agithe empire of the Catholic church, the celibacy ofthe clergy. This was not at first established withoutvehement struggles. The secular clergy, whowere required at once to cast off* their wives asconcubines, and their children as bastards, foundevery impulse of nature rising in arms against theinnate. The regular clergy, or monks, were inobvious rivalship with the secular, and engrossedto themselves, as much as possible, all promotionsand dignities, as well ecclesiastical as civil. St.Augustine, who first planted Christianity in this(land, was a Benedictine monk ; and the Benedictineswere for a long time in the highest reputationin the Catholic church. St. Dunstan wasftlso a Benedictine. In his time the question ofthe celibacy of the clergy was most vehementlystated; and Dunstan was the foremost of thelampions of the new institution in England.'he contest was carried on with great vehemence.Many of the most powerful nobility, impelledeither by pity for the sufferers, or induced byfamily affinities, supported the cause of the secular.Three successive synods were held on thesubject; and the cause of nature it is said wouldhave prevailed, had not Dunstan and his confederatescalled in the influence of miracles to theiraid. In one instance, a crucifix, fixed in a conspicuouspart of the place of assembly, uttered a voiceat the critical moment, saying, " Be steady I you,ve once decreed right ; alter not your ordi-ST. DUNSTAN.Idances." At another time the floor of the placeof meeting partially gave way, precipitating theungodly opposers of celibacy into the place beneath,while Dunstan and his party, who were inanother part of the assembly, were miraculouslypreserved unhurt.In these instances Dunstan seemed to be. engagedin the cause of religion, and might be consideredas a zealous, though mistaken, advocateof Christian simplicity and purity. But he wasnot contented with figuring merely as a saint. Heinsinuated himself into the favour of Edred, thegrandson of Alfred, and who, after two or threeshort reigns, succeeded to the throne. Edredwas an inactive prince, but greatly under thedominion of religious prejudices ; and Dunstan,being introduced to him, foimd him an apt subject .for his machinations. Edred first made him abbot |of Glastonbury, one of the most powerful ecclesiasticaldignities in England, and then treasurer of Ithe kingdom. During the reign of this prince, IDunstan disposed of all ecclesiastical affairs, and Jeven of the treasures of the kingdom, at his \pleasure.But Edred filled the throne only nine years, ani 1was succeeded by Edwy at the eai"ly age of sevens Iteen, who is said to have been endowed with ]every grace of form, and the utmost firmness and Jintrepidity of spirit. Dunstan immediately conceiveda jealousy of these qualities, and took an jIST. DUNSTAN. 297early opportunity to endeavour to disarm them.Edwy entertained a passion for a princess of theroyal house, and even proceeded to marry her,though within the dejj^ees forbidden by the canonkw. The rest of the story exhibits a lively pictureof the manners of these barbarous times.Odo, archbishop of Canterbury, the obedient toolof Dunstan, on the day of the coronation obtrudedhimself with his abettor into the private apartment,to which the king had retired with his queen, onlyaccompanied by her mother ; and here the ambitiousabbot, after loading Edwy with the bitterestreproaches for his shameless sensuality, thrust himback by main force into the hall, where the noblesof the kingdom were still engaged at their banquet.The spirited young prince conceived a deepresentment of this unworthy treatment, and, seizingan opportunity, called Dunstan to account formalversation in the treasury during the late king'slife-time. The priest refused to answer; and theissue was that he was banished the realm.But he left behind him a fiiithfiil and implicitcoadjutor in archbishop Odo. This prelate is saidactually to have forced his way with a party ofSoldiers into the palace, and, having seized thequeen, barbarously to have seared her cheeks with8 red-hot iron, and sent her oft' a prisoner to Ireland.He then proceeded to institute all the formsof a divorce, to which the unhappy king wasobliged to submit. Meanwhile the queen, havingST. DUNSTAN.recovered her beauty, found means to escape, and,crossing the Channel, listened to join her husband.But here again the priests manifested thesame activity as before. They intercepted thequeen in her journey, and by the most cruel meansundertook to make her a cripple for life. Theprincess however sunk under the experiment, andended her existence and her woes together.A rebellion was now excited against the sacrilegiousEdwy ; and the whole north of England,having rebelled, was placed under the dominion of |his brother, a boy of thirteen years of age. In themidst of these adventures Dunstan returned fromthe continent, and fearlessly shewed himself in hisnative country. His party was every where triumphant;Odo being dead, he was installed archbishopof Canterbury, and Edwy, oppressed withcalamity on every side, sunk to an untimely grave.The rest of the life of Dunstan was passed in ,comparatively tranquillity. He made and unmadekings as he pleased. Edgar, the successor ofEdwy, discovered the happy medium of energyand authority as a sovereign, combined with a dispositionto indulge the ambitious policy of the.priesthood. He was licentious in his amours,without losing a particle of his ascendancy as asovereign. He however reigned only a few years jbut Dunstan at his death found means to place hiseldest son on the throne under his special protection,in defiance of the intrigues of the ambitiousST. DUNSTAN.Elfride, the king's second wife, who moved heavenand earth to cause the crown to descend upon herown son, as yet comparatively an infant.In this narrative we are presented with a livelypicture of the means by which ambition climbedto its purposes in the darkness of the tenth century.Dunstan was enriched with all those endowmentswhich might seem in any age to lead tothe highest distinction. Yet it would appear tohave been in vain that he was thus qualified, if hehad not stooped to arts that fell in with the grossprejudices of his contemporaries. He had continualrecourse to the aid of miracles. He gave intopractices of the most rigorous mortification. Hestudied, and excelled in, all the learning and artsthat were then known. But his main dependencewas on the art of magic. The story of his takingthe devil by the nose with a pair of red-hot tongs,seems to have been of greater service to him thanany other single adventure of his life. In othertimes he might have succeeded in the schemes ofhis political ambition by seemly and speciousmeans. But it was necessary for him in the timesin which he lived, to proceed with eclat, and in away that should confound all opposers. The utmostresolution was required to overwhelm thosewho might otherwise have been prompted to contendagainst him. Hence it appears that he tooka right measure of the understanding of his contemporaries,when he dragged the young king230 ST, DUNSTAN.from the scene of his retirement, and brought himback by force into the assembly of the nobles.And the inconceivable barbarity practised to thequeen, which would have rendered his namehorrible in a more civilised age, was exactly calculatedto overwhelm the feelings and subject theunderstandings of the men among whom he lived.The great quality by which he was distinguishedwas confidence, a frame of behaviour which shewedthat he acted from the fullest conviction, and neverdoubted that his proceedings had the immediateapprobation of heaven.COMMUNICATION OF EUROPE AND THE SARACENS.It appears to have been about the close of thetenth century that the more curious and inquisitivespirits of Europe first had recourse to the Eastas a source of such information and art, as theyfound most glaringly deficient among their countrymen.We have seen that in Persia there wasan uninterrupted succession of professors in theart of magic : and, when the followers of Mahometby their prowess had gained the superiority overthe greater part of Asia, over all that was knownof Africa, and a considerable tract of Europe, theygradually became awake to the desire of cultivatingthe sciences, and in particular of making themselvesmasters of whatever was most liberal andeminent among the disciples of Zoroaster. Tothis they added a curiosity respecting Greek learning,especially as it related to medicine and theinvestigation of the powers of physical nature.Bagdad became an eminent seat of learning; andperhaps, next to Bagdad, Spain under the Saracens,or Moors, was a principal abode for the professorsof ingenuity and literature.Herbert, POPE SILVESTER II.As a consequence of this state of things themore curious men of Europe by degrees adoptedHerbert, POPE SILVESTER II.the practice of resorting to Spain for the purposeof enlarging their sphere of observation and knowledge.Among others Gerbert is reported to havebeen the first of the Christian clergy, who strungthemselves up to the resolution of mixing with thefollowers of Mahomet, that they might learn fromthence things, the knowledge of which it was impossiblefor them to obtain at home. This generousadventurer, prompted by an insatiable thirstfor information, is said to have secretly withdrawnhimself from his monastery of Fleury in Burgundy,and to have spent several years among theSaracens of Cordova. Here he acquired a knowledgeof the language and learning of the Arabians,particularly of their astronomy, geometryand arithmetic ; and he is understood to Have beenthe first that imparted to the north and west ofEurope a knowledge of the Arabic numerals, ascience, which at first sight might be despised forits simplicity, but which in its consequences isno inconsiderable instrument in fertilising thethe powers of human intellect. He likewise introducedthe use of clocks. He is also representedto have made an extraordinary proficiency inthe art of magic ; and among other things is saidto have constructed a brazen head, which would ;answer when it was spoken to, and oracularly re- Isolve many difficult questions". The same historianassures us that Gerbert by the art of ncCTO- IWilliam of Mulmcsbury, Lib. II, c. 10. IGEUBEltT, POPE SILVESTER 1Inancy made various discoveries of hidden treasures,and relates in all its circumstances the spectacleof a magic palace he visited underground,with the multiplied splendours of an Arabian tale,but distinguished by this feature, that, though itsmagnificence was dazzling to the sight, it wouldnot abide the test of feeling, but vanished intoair, the moment 'it was attempted to be touched.It happened with Gerbert, as with St. Dunstan,that be united an aspiring mind and a boundlessspirit of ambition, with the intellectual curiositywhich has already been described. The first stepthat he made into public life and the career forwhich he panted, consisted in his being namedpreceptor, first to llobcrt, king of France, theson of Hugh Capet, and next to Otho the Third,emperor of Germany. Hugh Capet appointedhim archbishop of Rheims ; but, that dignity beingdisputed with him, he retired into Germany, and,becoming eminently a favourite with Otho theThird, he was by the influence of that princeraised, first to be archbishop of Ravenna, andafterwards to the papacy by the name of Silvesterthe SecondCardinal Benno, who was an adherent of theanti-popes, and for that reason is supposed tohave calumniated Gerbert and several of his successors,affirms that he was habitually waited onby demons, that by their aid he obtained the papalWilliam of Salisbury, Lib. 11. c- 10.«34 Benedict THE NINTH.crown, and that the devil to whom he had soldhimself, t'aitlifuUy promised him that he shouldlive, till he had celebrated high mass at Jerusalem.This however was merely a juggle of the evilspirit ; and Gerbert actually died, shortly afterhaving officially dispensed the sacrament at thechurch of the Holy Cross in Jerusalem, which isone of the seven districts of the city of Rome.This event occurred in the year 1003^BENEDICT THE NINTH.According to the same authority sorcery was at ithis time extensively practised by some of thehighest dignitaries of the church, and five or sixpopes in succession were notorious for these sacrilegiouspractices. About the same period thepapal chair was at its lowest state of degradation {this dignity was repeatedly exposed for sale \ iand the reign of Gerbert, a man of consummate iabilities and attainments, is almost the only re- ideeming feature in the century in which he bed.At length the tiara became the purchase of an ambitiousfamily, which had already furnished two 'popes, in behalf of a boy of twelve years of age,who reigned by the name of Benedict the Ninth.This youth, as he grew up, contaminated his rule Jwith every kind of profligacy and debauchery.Naude, Apologie des Grands Hommes HaueSalisbury, ubitupra.s de Logie, 1IIIGREGORY THE SEVENTH. '235But even he, according to Benno, was a pupil inthe school of Silvester, and became no mean proficientin the arts of sorcery. Among other thingslie caused the matrons of Rome hy his incantationsto tallow him in troops among woods andmountains, being bewitched and their souls subduedby the irresistible charms of his magic'.GREGORY THE SEVENTH.Benno presents us with a regular catalogue ofthe ecclesiastical sorcerers of this period : Benedictthe Ninth, and Laurence, archbishop ofMelfi, each of whom, he says, learned the art ofSilvester), Julni XX and Gregory VI. But hismust vehement accusations are directed againstGregory Vll, who, he affirms, was in the earlypart of his career, the constant companion ndassistant of these dignitaries in unlawful practicesof tins sort.Gregory VII, whose original name was Hildebrand,is one oi' the great champions of theRomish church, and did more than any other manlo estahhsh the law of the celibacy of the clergy,and to take the patronage of ecclesiastical dignitiesout of the hands of the laity. He was eminentlyqualified for this undertaking by the severity of hismanners, and the inflexibility of his resolution toaccomplish whatever he undertook.I • Native, Apologia ties Grands Hommti Accuses dp Mngit,'chap. 19.Gregory THE SEVENTH.His great adversary was Henry the Fourth, emperorof Germany, a young prince of high spirit,and at that time (1075) twenty-four years of age.Gregory sent to summon him to Rome, to answeran accusation, that he, as all his predecessors haddone, being a layman, had conferred ecclesiasticaldignities. Henry refused submission, and was immediatelydeclared excommunicated. In retaliationfor this offence, the emperor, it is said, gave hisorders to a chief of brigands, who, watching hisopportunity, seized the pope in the act of sayingmass in one of the churches of Rome, and carriedhim prisoner to a tower in the city which was inthe possession of this adventurer. But no soonerwas this known, than the citizens of Rome, rose enmasse, and rescued their spiritual father. Mean whileHenry, to follow up his blow, assembled a synodat Worms, who pronounced on the pope, that formanifold crimes he was fallen from bis supremedignity, and accordingly fulminated a decree ofdeposition against him. But Henry had no forcesto carry this decree into execution; and Gregory onhis side emitted a sentence of degradation againstthe emperor, commanding the Germans to elect a .new emperor in his place. It then became evidentthat, in this age of ignorance and religious subjugation,the spiritual arm, at least in Germany, wasmore powerful than the temporal ; and Henry,having maturely considered the perds that surroundedhim, took the resolution to pass the AlpsGREGORY THE SEVENTH.with a few domestics only, and, repairing to thepresence of the pope, submit himself to such penanceas the pontiff should impose. Gregory was■ At this time at Canova, a fortress beyond Naples,1 which was surrounded with three walls. Henry,I without any attendant, was admitted within theI first wall. Here he was required to cast off all thesymbols of royalty, to put on a hair-shirt, and towait barefoot his holiness's pleasure. He stoodaccordingly, fasting from morn to eve, withoutI receiving the smallest notice from the pontiff. ItI was in the month of January. He passed throughI the same trial the second day, and the third. OnI the fourth day in the morning he was admittedI to the presence of the holy father. They partedI however more irreconcilable in heart than ever,I though each preserved the appearance of goodrill. The pope insisted that Henry should abideI the issue of the congress in Germany, of whichhe constituted himself president; and the emperor,exasperated at the treatment he had received, resolvedto keep no terms with Gregory. HenryI proceeded to the election of an anti-pope, ClementI the Third, and Gregory patronised a new emperor,1 Rodolph, duke of Swabia. Henry had howeverI generally been successful in his military enterprises ; and he defeated Rodolph in two battles,I. in the last of which his opponent was slain. InJ. the synod of Brien, in which Clement the Thirdt was elected, Gregory was sentenced as a magicianGREGORY THE SEVENTH.and a necromancer. The emperor, puffed up withhis victories, marched against Rome, and took it,with the exception of the castle of St. Angelo, inwhich the pope shut himself up ; and in the meantimeHenry caused the anti-pope, his creature, tobe solemnly inaugurated in the church of the Lateran.Gregory however, never dismayed, andnever at an end of his expedients, called in theNormans, who had recently distinguished themselvesby their victories in Naples and Sicily. RobertGuiscard, a Norman chieftain, drove the Germansout of Rome ; but, some altercations ensuingbetween the pontiff and his deliverer, the city wasgiven up to pillage, and Gregory was glad to takerefuge in Salerno, the capital of his Norman ally,where he shortly after expired, an exile and afugitive.Gregory was no doubt a man o£ extraordinaryresources and invincible courage. He did not liveto witness the triumph of his policy ; but his projectsfor the exaltation of the church finally metwith every success his most sanguine wishes couldhave aspired to. In addition to all the rest ithappened, that the countess Matilda, a princesswho in her own right possessed extensive sovereigntiesin Italy, nearly commensurate with whathas since been styled the ecclesiastical state, transferredto the pope in her life-time, and confirmedby her testament, all these territories, thus mainlycontributing to render him and his successors soIIGREGORY THE SEVENTH.Iste^B4evKconsiderable as temporal princes, as since that timetfiey have appeared.It is, however, as a sorcerer, that Gregory VII(Hildebrand) finds a place in this volume. Bennorelates that, coming one day from his Allan villa,he found, just as he was entering the church of thelAteran, that he had left behind him his magicalbook, which he was accustomed to carry aboutM» person. He immediately sent two trustyservants to fetch it, at the same time threateningthem most fearfully if they should attempt to lookinto the volume. Curiosity however got thebetter of their fear. They opened the book, andbegan to read ; when presently a number of devilsappeared, saying, "We are come to obey your com-lands, but, if we find ourselves trifled with, we■rfiall certainly tall upon and destroy you." Theservants, exceedingly terrified, replied, "Our willisthat you should immediately throw down so muchof tile wall of the city as is now before us." Thedevils obeyed ; and the servants escaped the danger,t hung over them." It is further said, that Greedywas so expert in the arts of magic, that helull throw out lightning by shaking his arm, anddart thunder from his sleeve''But the most conspicuous circumstance in thelife of Gregory that has been made the foundationof a charge of necromancy against him, is that,mutatis, p. 258. Coeffetean, Re->' Ibid.GREGORY THE SEVENTH.when Rodolph marched against Henry IV, thepope was so confident of his success, as to venturepublicly to prophesy, both in speech and in writing,that his adversary should be conquered and perishin this campaign. *' Nay," he added, " this prophecyshall be accomplished before St, Peter's day ;nor do I desire any longer to be acknowledged forpope, than on the condition that this comes topass." It is added, that Rodolph, relying on theprediction, six times renewed the battle, in whichfinally he perished instead of his competitor. Butthis does not gu far enough to substantiate a chargeof necromancy. It is further remarked, that Gregorywas deep in the pretended science of judicialastrology ; and this, without its being necessary tohave recourse to the solution of diabolical aid, maysufficiently account for the undoubting certaintywith which he counted on the event.In the mean time this statement is of great importance,as illustrative of the spirit of the timesin general, and the character of Gregory in particular.Rodolph, the competitor for the empire,has his mind wrought up to such a pitch by thisprophetic assurance, that, five times repulsed, heyet led on his forces a sixth time, and perished thevictim of his faith. Nor were his followers lessanimated than he, and from the same cause. Wesee also from the same story, that Gregory was notan artful and crafty impostor, but a man spurred onby a genuine enthusiasm. And this indeed is ,IDUFF, KING OF SCOTLAND. 241I necessary to account for the whole of his conduct.The audacity with which he opposed the claims ofT Henry, and the unheard-of severity with which heI treated him at the fortress of Canova, are to be re-l ferret to the same feature of character. InvincibleI perseverance, when united with great resources ofV intellect and a lofty spirit, will enable a man thoroughlyto effect, what a person of inferior endowsments would not have dared so much as to dreamI of. And Gregory, like St Dunstan, achievedincredible things, by skilfully adapting himself toI circumstances, and taking advantage of the temperI end weakness of his contemporaries.DUFF. KING OF SCOTLAND.It is not to be wondered at, when such thingsoccurred in Italy, the principal seat of all thelearning and refinement then existing in Europe,that the extreme northerly and western districtsshould have been given up to the blindest superstition.Among other instances we have the followingaccount in relation to Mufti king of Scotland,who came to the crown about the year 968,He found his kingdom in the greatest disorderfrom numerous bands of robbers, many of whomwere persons of high descent, but of no competentmeans of subsistence. Duff resolved to put anend to their depredations, and to secure those whosought a quiet support from cultivating the fruitsDUFF, KING OF SCOTLAND.of tile earth from forcible invasion. He executedthe law against these disturbers without respect ofpersons, and hence made himself many and powerfulenemies. In the midst of his activity howeverhe suddenly fell sick, and became confined to hisbed. His physicians could no way account for hisdistemper. They found no excess of any humourin his body to which they could attribute his illness; his colour was fresh, and his eyes lively jand he had a moderate and healthful appetite. Butwith all this he was a total stranger to sleep ; heburst out into immoderate perspirations ; and therewas scarcely any thing that remained of him,but skin and bone. In the meantime secret informationwas brought that all this evil was the resultof witchcraft. And, the house being pointedout in which the sorcerers held their sabbath, aband of soldiers was sent to surprise them. Thsdoors "being burst open, they found one woman'roasting upon a spit by the fire a waxen image olthe king, so like in every feature, that no doubtwas entertained that it was modelled by the artof the devil, while another sat by, busily engagedin reciting certain verses of enchantment, bywhich means, as the wax melted, the king was consumedwith perspiration, and, as soon as it was:utterly dissolved, his death should immediately follow.The witches were seized, and from their ownconfession burned alive. The image was brokenpieces, and every fragment of it destroyed. AndIIawI^^^ mailOner was this effected, tliuii Duffliad all that nightthe most refreshing and healthful sleep, and thenext day rose without any remains of his infirmity'.This reprieve however availed him but for ashort time. He was no sooner recovered, thanhe occupied himself as before with pursuing theoutlaws, whom he brought indiscriminately tocondign punishment. Among these there chancedto be two young men, near relations of the governorof the castle of Fores, who had hitherto beenthe king's most faithful adherents. These youngmen had been deluded by ill company : and theGovernor most earnestly sued to Duff for their pardon.But the king was inexorable. Meanwhile,As he had always placed the most entire trust intheir father, he continued to do so without thesmallest suspicion. The night after the execution,:the king slept in the castle of Fores, as he had!n done before ; but the governor, conceivingthe utmost rancour at the repulse he had sustained,and moreover instigated by his wife, in themiddle of the night murdered Duff in his bed, asslept. His reign lasted only four yearsMACBETH.The seventh king of Scotland after Duff, with aninterval of sixty-eight years, was Macbeth. TheHolinshed, History of Scotland, p. 200. 207.Ibid, p. 207, 208.K 2historian begins his tale of witchcraft, towards theend of the reign of Duncan, his predecessor, withobserving, " Shortly after happened a strange anduncouth wonder, which afterward was the cause of Jmuch trouble in the realm of Scotland. It fortuned, ]as Macbeth and Banquo journeyed towards Foreswhere the king as then lay, they went sporting by |the way together, without other company save Jonly themselves, passing through the woods and 1fields, when suddenly, in the midst of a land, jthere met them three women in strange and ferry fapparel, resembling creatures of an elder world, Iwhom when they attentively beheld, wondering ]much at the sight, the first of them spake and said, [All hail, Macbeth, thane of Glacis (for he had Ilately entered into that dignity and office by the jdeath of his father Syne). The second of themsaid, Hail,Macbeth,thaneof Candor. But the third Jsaid, All hail, Macbeth, that Iiereailer shall be king Iof Scotland. Then Bauquo, What sort of women,said he, are you, that seem so little favourableunto me, whereas to my fellow here, besides highoffices, ye assign also the kingdom, appointing ]forth nothing for me at all ? Yes, saith the first Iof them, we promise greater benefits unto theethan unto him, for he shall reign indeed, but with ian unlucky end, neither shall he leave auy issue Ibehind him to succeed in his place ; where contra Irely thou indeed shalt not reign at all, but of thee ithose shall be born, which shall govern the Scottish 1edom by long order of continual descent. herewiththe foresaid women vanished immediately outpos their sight.This was reputed at the first but some vainfantastical illusion by Macbeth and Banquo, insomuchthat Banquo would call Macbeth in jest kinglos Scotland, and Macbeth again would call him in"Oil likewise the father of many kings. But afterwardsthe common opinion was, that these womenWere either the weu-d sisters, that is (as you would»y) the goddesses of destiny, or else some nymphsfairies, endued with knowledge of prophecytheir necromantic science, because everyKlbiog came to pass as they had spoken.For shortly after, the thane of Candor, beingcondemned at Fores of treason against the kingadmitted, his lands, livings and offices were givenf the king's liberality unto Macbeth."Malcolm, the preceding king of Scotland, hadtwo daughters, one of them the mother of Duncan,and the other of Macbeth ; and in virtue of thisdescent Duncan succeeded to the crown. Theaccession of Macbeth therefore was not very remote,if he survived the present king. Of consequenceMacbeth, though he thought much of theprediction of the weird sisters, yet resolved to wait1 time, thinking that, as had happened in hisirnier preferment, this might come to pass withouthis aid. But Duncan had two sons, Malcolm• Holinshed, History of Scotland, p. 243, 244.Sycamoreand Donald Bane. The law of successsion ill Scotland was, that, if at the death of thereigning sovereign he that should succeed were .not of sufficient age to take on him the goveru-1ment, he that was next of blood to Iiiin shoulderbe admitted. Duncan however at this juncturecredited his eldest son Malcolm prince of Cumberland,a title which w;ih considered as designatinghim heir to the throne. Macbeth was greatlytroubled at this, as cutting off the expectation hethought he had a right to entertain : and, thg^flwords of the weird sisters still ringing in his ears* 1and his wife with ambitious speeches urging Ihim to the deed, he, in conjunction with sora? Itrusty friends, among whom was Banquo, came to Ia resolution to kill the king at Inverness. Theadeed being perpetrated, Malcolm, the eldest soil Mof Duncan, fled for safety into Cumberland, an IDonald, the second, into Ireland IMacbeth, who became king of Scotland in tb ■year 1040, reigned for ten years with great pope !laity and applause, but at the end of that ting Ichanged his manner of government, and became it 1tyrant. His first action in this character wa? Iagainst Banquo. He remembered that the weinj^flsisters had promised to Banquo that he should bfufather to a hne of kings. Haunted with tins ref ■collection, Macbeth invited Banquo and his soq;.!France to a supper, and appointed assassins tqJ*• Holinshed, Hialorv ol' Scotland, p. 214, 245. IGr;I murder them both on their return. Banquo wasplain accordingly ; but france, under favour ofthe darkness of the night, escaped'.This murder brought Macbeth into great odium,[since every man began to doubt of the securityI of his life, and Macbeth at the same time to fearthe UI will of his subjects. He therefore, proneeded to destroy all against whom he entertainedI *ny suspicion, and every day more and more to\ steep his hands in blood. Further to secure himself, he built a castle on the top of a high hdl,I called Dunsinnan, which was placed on such anelevation, that it seemed impossible to approach itin a hostile manner. This work he carried on bymeans of requiring the thanes of the kingdom, eachI one in turn, to come with a set of workmen to helpforward the edifice. When it came to the turn ofMacduff, thane of Fife, he sent workmen, but didnot come himself, as the others had done. Macbethfrom that time regarded Macduff with an eyeof perpetual suspicion'.Meanwhile Macbeth, remembering that the orisof his present greatness consisted in the prophecyof the weird sisters, addicted himself continuallyto the consulting of wizards. Those heconsulted gave him a pointed warning to takeheed of Macduff, who in time to come would seekfacto destroy him. This warning woidd unqucstiou-Holinshed, Histof^- of Scotland, p. 2 10.Ibid, p. 24S, 249.etably have proved fatal to Macdutt'j had not on theother hand Macbeth been buoyed up in security,by the prediction of a certain witch in whom hehad great trust, that he should never be vanquishedtill the wood of Bernard came to the castle ofDunsinnan, and that he should not be slain byany man that was born of a woman ; both whichhe judged to be impossibilitiesThis vain confidence however urged him to domany outrageous things ; at the same time thatsuch was his perpetual uneasiness of mind, that inevery nobleman's house lie had one servant oranother in fee, that he might be acquainted withevery thing that was said or meditated against him.About this time Macduft' fled to Malcolm, whohad now taken refuge in the court of Edward theConfessor ; and Macbeth came with a strong partyinto Fire with the purpose of surprising him. Themaster being safe, those within MacdufTs castlethrew open the gates, thinking that no mischiefwould result from receiving the king. But Macbeth,irritated that he missed of his prey, causedMacduff's wife and children, and all persons whowere found within the castle, to be slain.'Shortly after, Malcolm and Macduff, reinforced,by ten thousand English under the command ofSeward, earl of Northumberland, marched intoScotland. The subjects of Macbeth stole awaydaily from him to join the invaders; but he hadHolinshed, History of Scotland, p. 249. ' Ibid.IVIRGIL. 249such conscience in the predictions that had beendelivered to liii, that he still believed he sliotildnever be vanquished. Malcolm meanwhile, as heapproached to the castle of Dunsinnan, commandedbis men to cut down, each of them, a bough fromthe wood of Bernard, as large as he could bear,that they might take the tyrant the more by surprise.Macbeth saw, and thought the wood approachedhim ; but he remembered the prophecy,and led forth and marshalled his men. When howeverthe enemy threw down their boughs, and theirformidable numbers stood revealed, Macbeth andhis forces immediately betook themselves to flight.Macduff pursued him, and was haul at his heels,when the tyrant turned his horse, and exclaimed,"Why dost thou follow me? Know, that it is ordainedthat no creature born of a woman can everovercome me." Macduff instantly retorted, " I amthe man appointed to slay thee. I was not bornof a woman, but was untimely ripped from mymother's womb." And, saying this, he killed himon the spot. Macbeth reigned in the whole seventeenyears'.One of the most curious particulars, and whichcannot be omitted in a history of sorcery, is thevarious achievements in the art of magic which havebeen related of the [poet Virgil I bring them in< Hollinshed, History of Scotland, p. Spheresbecause they cannot be traced further backthan the eleventh or twelfth century. The burial-placeof this illustrious man was at Pausilippo, nearNaples ; the Neapolitans had for many centuriescherished a peculiar reverence for his memory ;and it has been supposed that the old ballads, andsongs of the minstrels of the north of Italy, firstoriginated this idea respecting him". The vulgarof this city, full of imagination and poetry, conceivedthe idea of treating him as the guardiangenius of the place ; and, in boding forth this iconception, they represented him in his life-time agifted with supernatural powers, which he em Iplayed in various ways for the advantage of a citythat he so dearly loved. Be this as it will, it appearsthat Germans of Tilbury, chancellor to Otho 1the Fourth, emperor of Germany, Helinandus,Cistercian monk, and Alexander Neckar, all of Iwhom lived about this time, first recorded these ]particulars in their works.They tell us, that Virgil placed a fly of brass over Ione of the gates of the city, which, as long as it Icontinued there, that is, for a space of eight years, |had the virtue of keeping Naples clear from mos-kitesand all noxious insects: that he built a setof shambles, the meat in which was at all times free jfrom putrefaction : that he placed two images overthe gates of the city, one of which was named Joyful,and the other Sad, one of resplendent beauty,Nauat.the other hideous ami deformed, and that whoeverentered the town under the former image wouldsucceed in all his undertakings, and under the latterwould as certainly miscarry : that he caused abrazen statue to be erected on a mountain nearNaples, with a trumpet in his mouth, which whenthe north wind blew, sounded so shrill as to driveto the sea the tire and smoke which issued fromthe neighbouring forges of Vidcan : that he builtdifferent baths at Naples, specifically prepared forthe cure of every disease, which were afterwardsdemolished by the malice of the physicians : andthat he lighted a perpetual fire for the refreshmentof all travellers, close to which he placed an archerof brass, with his bow bent, and this inscription,Whoever strikes me, I will let fly my arrow :"that a fool-hardy fellow notwithstanding struck thestatue, when the arrow was immediately shot intothe fire, and the fire was extinguished. It is added,that, Naples being invested with a vast multitudeof contagious leeches, Virgil made a leech of gold,which he threw into a pit, and so delivered thecity from the infection ; that he surrounded hisgarden with a wall of air, within which the rainnever fell ; that he built a bridge of brass thatwould transport him wherever he pleased : that hemade a set of statues, which were named the salvationof Rome, which had the property that, if anyoneof the subject nations prepared to revolt, thestatue, which bore the name of, and was adored byd52 ROBERT OF LINCOLN.that nation, rung a bell, and pointed with its fingerin the direction of the danger : that he made ahead, which had the virtue of predicting thingsfuture : and lastly, amidst a world of other wonders,that he cut a subterranean passage through mountPausilippo, that travellers might pass with perfectSafety, the mountain having before been so infestedwith serpents and dragons, that no one could ventureto cross it.ROBERT OF LINCOLN.The most eminent person next, after popes SilvesterII and Gregory VII, who labours underthe imputation of magic, is Robert Grosset^te, orRobert of Lincoln, appointed bishop of that seein the year 1235. He was, like those that havepreviously been mentioned, a man of the mosttranscendant powers of mind, and extraordinaryacquirements. His parents are said to have beenso poor, that he was compelled, when a boy, toengage in the meanest offices for bread, and evento beg on the highway. At length the mayor ofLincoln, struck with his appearance, and the quicknessof his answers to such questions as were proposedto him, took him into his family, and puthim to school. Here his ardent love of learning,and admirable capacity for acquiring it, soon procuredhim many patrons, by whose assistance hewas enabled to prosecute his studies, first at Cam-robertOF LINCOLN.Englbridge, afterwards at Oxford, and finally at Paris.He was master of the Greek and Hebrew languages,then very rare accomplishments; and is pronouncedby Roger Bacon, avery competent judge, of whomwe shall presently have occasion to speak, to havespent much of his time, for nearly forty years, inthe study of geometry, astronomy, optics, and otherbranches of mathematical learning, in all of whichhe much excelled. .So that, as we are informedfrom the same authority, this same Robert of Lincoln,and his friend, Friar Adam de Marco, werethe two most learned men in the world, and excelledthe rest of mankind in both human anddivine knowledge.This great man especially distinguished himselfby his firm and undaunted opposition to the corruptionsof the court of Rome. Pope Innocent IV,who filled the papal chair upwards of eleven years,'from 1243 to 1254, appears to have exceeded allhia predecessors in the shamelessness of his abuses.We are told, that the hierarchy of the church ofEngland was overwhelmed like a flood with an in-station of foreign dignitaries, of whom not a few'ere mere boys, for the most part without learning,ignorant of the language of the island, andipable of benefiting the people nominally undertheir care, the more especially as they continuedto dwell in their own countries, and scarcely oncees visited the sees to which they had254 MICHAEL SCOT.been appointed*. Grosset^te lifted up his voiceagainst these scandals. He said that it was impossiblethe genuine apostolic see, which received itsauthority from the Lord Jesus for edification, andnot for destruction, could be guilty of such a crime,for that would forfeit all its glory, and plunge itinto the pains of hell. He did not scruple thereforeamong his most intimate friends to pronouncethe reigning pope to be the true Antichrist ; andhe addressed the pontiff himself in scarcely moremeasured terms.Among the other accomplishments of bishopGrosset^te he is said to have been . profoundlyskilled in the art of magic : and the old poet Gowerrelates of him that he made a head of brass, expresslyconstructed in such a manner as to be ableto answer such questions as were propounded toit,and to foretel future events.MICHAEL SCOT.Michael Scot of Balwirie in the county of Fife,was nearly contemporary wi th bishop Grosset.He was eminent for his knowledge of the Greekand Arabic languages. He was patronised by theemperor Frederic II, who encouraged him to undertakea translation of the works of Aristotle into)Latin. He addicted himself to astrology, che-godwin,Praesulibus, art. Gronthead.THF. DEAN OF BADAJOZ.misery, and the still more frivolous sciences ofchiromancy and physiognomy. It does not appearthat he made any pretences to magic ; butthe vulgar, we are told, generally regarded him asasorcerer, and are said to have carried their superstitionso far as to have conceived a terror of somuch as touching his works.Ifs*'THE DEAN OF BADAJOZ.■rm ^"^■Kdign^Kltm.^^* .,1There is a story related by this accomplished!hoar, in a collection of aphorisms and anecdotesentitled Meiua Philosophical, which deserves to becited aa illustrating the ideas then current on thesubject of sorcery. " A certain great necromancer,or necromancer, had once a pupil of considerablerank, who professed himself extremely desirous foronce to have the gratification of believing himselfan emperor. The necromancer, tired with his importunities,at length assented to his prayer. Hetook measures accordingly, and by his potent artcaused his scholar to believe that one province and.dignity fell to him after another, till at length hislost desires became satisfied. The magicianhowever appeared to be still at his elbow ; and:e day, when the scholar was in the highest exultationat his good fortune, the master humblyrequested him to bestow upon him some landedpossession, as a reward for the extraordinary benefithe had conferred. The imaginary emperw25GTHE DEAN OF BADAJOZ.cast upon the necromancer a glance of the utmost Idisdain and contempt. " Who are you ?" said he, 1I really have not the smallest acquaintance with Jyou." "I am he," replied the magician, witblwithering severity of countenance and tone, " that 'gave you ail these things, and will take themaway." And, saying this, the illusion with whichthe poor scholar had been inebriated, immediately ,vanished ; and he became what he had before been,and no more.The story thus briefly told by Michael Scotsafterwards passed through many hands, and was Igreatly dilated. In its last form by the abbe IBlanchet, it constituted the well known and agree Jable tale of the dean of Badajoz. This reverend fdivine comes to a sorcerer, and interests a specimen (of his art. The magician replies that he had mefc jwith so many specimens of ingratitude, that he |was resolved to be deluded no more. The dean Jpersists, and at length overcomes the reluctance ofthe master. He invites his guest into the parlour,and orders his cook to put two partridges to thefire, for that the dean of Badajoz will sup with Ihim. Presently he begins his incantations; andthe dean becomes in imagination by turns a bishop,a cardinal, and a pope. The magician then claimshis reward. Meanwhile the dean, inflated with hissupposed elevation, turns to his benefactor, and Isays, " I have learned with grief that, under pre Ihence of secret science, you correspond with the IMIRACLE OF THE TUB OF WATEii.■Hmiprince of darkness. 1 command you to repent andabjure ; and in the mean time I order you to quitthe territory ot" the church in three days, underpain of being delivered to the secular arm, and therigour of the flames." The sorcerer, having beenthus treated, presently dissolves the incantation,and calls aloud to his cook, " Put down but onepartridge, the dean of Badajoz does not sup withle to-night."MIRACLE OF THE TUB OF WATER.This story affords an additional example of theaffinity between the ancient Asiatic and Europeanlegends, so as to convince us that it is nearly impossiblethat the one should not be in some wayborrowed from the other. There is, in a compilationcalled the Turkish Tales, a story of an infidelsultan of Egypt, who took the liberty before alearned Mahometan doctor, of ridiculing some ofthe miracles ascribed to the prophet, as for examplehis transportation into the seventh heaven,and having ninety thousand conferences with God,while in the mean time a pitcher of water, whichhad been thrown down in the first step of his ascent,was found with the water not all spilled athis return.The doctor, who had the gift of workingmiracle-s, told the sultan that, with his consent, hewould give him a practical proof of the possibility258 MIRACLE OF THE TUB OF WATER.of the circumstance related of Mahomet. Thesultan agreed. The doctor therefore directed thata huge tub of water should be brought in, and,while the prince stood before it with his courtiersaround, the holy man bade him plunge his headinto the water, and draw it out again. The sultanimmersed his head, and had no sooner done so,than he found himself alone at the foot of a mountainon a desert shore. The prince first began torave against the doctor for this piece of treacheryand witchcraft. Perceiving however that all hisrage was vain, and submitting himself to theimperiousness of his situation, he began to seekfor some habitable tract. By and by he discoveredpeople cutting down wood in a forest,and, having no remedy, he was glad to haverecourse to the same employment. In processof time he was brought to a town ; and therebygreat good fortune, after other adventures, hemarried a woman of beauty and wealth, and livedlong enough with her, for her to bear him sevensons and seven daughters. He was afterwards reducedto want, so as to be obliged to ply in thestreets as a porter for his livelihood. One day, ashewalked alone on the sea-shore, ruminating onhis hard fate, he was seized with a fit of devotion,and threw off his clothes, that he might wash himself, agreeably to the Mahometan custom, previouslyto saying his prayers. He had no soonerhowever plunged into the sea, and raised his headINSTITUTION OF FBIAIIS.again above water, than he found himself standingby the side of the tub that had been brought in,with all the great persons of his court round him,and the holy man close at his side. He foundthat the long series of imaginary adventures he hadpassed through, had in reality occupied but oneminute of time.INSTITUTION OF FRIARS.About this time a great revolution took place inthe state of literature in Europe. The monks,who at one period considerably contributed to preservethe monuments of ancient learning, memorablyfell coffin reputation and industry. Theircommunities by the donations of the pious grewwealthy ; and the monks themselves inhabitedsplendid palaces, and became luxurious, dissipatedand idle. Upon the ruins of their good fame rosea very extraordinary race of men, called Friars.The monks professed celibacy, and to have no individualproperty j but the friars abjured all property,both private and in common. They hadno place where to lay their heads, and subsistedas mendicants upon the alms of their contemporaries.They did not hide themselves in refectoriesand dormitories, but lived perpetually before thepublic. In the sequel indeed they built Friariesfor their residence ; but these were no less distinguishedfor the simplicity and humbleness of theirS60 ALBERTUS MAGNUS.appearance, that the monasteries were for theirgrandeur and almost regal magnificence. TheFriars were incessant in preaching and praying,voluntarily exposed themselves to the severest'hardships, and were distinguished by a fervorof devotion and charitable activity that knew nobounds. We might figure them to ourselves asswallowed up in these duties. But they added totheir merits an incessant earnestness in learningand science. A new era in intellect and subtletyof mind began with them ; and a set of the moat,wonderful men in depth of application, logicacuteness. and discoveries in science distinguishedthis period. They were few indeed, in comparisonof the world of ignorance that every where surroundedthem ; but they were for that reason onl;the more conspicuous. They divided themselves'principally into two orders, the Dominicans andFranciscans. And all that was most illustrious inintellect at this period belonged either to the one.or the other.ALBERTUS MAGNUS.Albertus Magnus, a Dominican, was one of tho.most famous of these. He was born according tp-someaccounts in the year 1193, and according toothers in 1205. It is reported of him, that he wasnaturally very dull, and so incapable of instruction,that he was on the point of quitting theAlbertus MAGNUS.^^^ narrowdespair of learning what his vocation required,when the blessed virgin appeared to him in avision, and enquired of him in which he desired toexcel, philosophy or divinity. He chose philosophy; and the virgin assured him that he shouldbecome incomparable in that, but, as a punishmentfor not having chosen divinity, he shouldsink, before he died, into his former stupidity. Itis added that, after this apparition, he had an infinitedeal of wit, and advanced in science with sorapid a progress as utterly to astonish the masters.He afterwards became bishop of Ratisbon.It is related of Albertus, that he made an entireman of brass, putting together its limbs undervarious constellations, and occupying no less thanthirty years in its formation. This man would answerall sorts of questions, and was even employed'by its maker as a domestic. But what is more extraordinary,this machine is said to have become atlength so garrulous, that Thomas Aquinas, beinga pupil of Albertus, and finding himself perpetuallydisturbed in his abstrusest speculations by itsuncontrollable loquacity, in a rage caught up ahammer, and beat it to pieces. According to othercounts the man of Albertus Magnus was com-used, not of metal, but of flesh and bones likeother men ; but this being afterwards judged to beimpossible, and the virtue of images, rings, andplanetary ails being in great vogue, it was conceivedthat this figure was formed of brass, and in-«Albertus MAGNUS.Ndebated for its virtue to certain conjunctions and]aspects of the planets'.A further extraordinary story is told of AlbertusMagnus, well calculated to exemplify the ideas ofmagic with which these ages abounded. William,earl of Holland, and king of the Romans, was ex Jpetted at a certain time to pass through Cologne. IAlbertus had set his heart upon obtaining fromthis prince the cession of a certain tract of landupon which to erect a convent. The better tosucceed in his application he conceived the followingscheme. He invited the prince on his journeyto partake of a magnificent entertainment. |To the surprise of every body, when the prince |arrived, he found the preparations for the banquetspread in the open air. It was in the depth ofwinter, when the earth was bound up in frost, andthe whole face of things was covered with snow.The attendants of the court were mortified, and Ibegan to express their discontent in loud murmurs.No sooner however was the king with Albertusand his courtiers seated at table, than the snow instantlydisappeared, the temperature of summer |shewed itself, and the sun burst forth withdazzling splendour. The ground became covered flwith the richest verdure; the trees were clothedat once with foliage, flowers and fruits : and a vin-Jtake of the richest grapes, accompanied withravishing odour, invited the spectators to partake- Nniide, c. IR.IrImROGER BACON.IA thousand birds sang on every branch. A trainof pages shewed themselves, fresh and graceful inperson and attire, and were ready diligently tosupply the wants of all, while every one was struckwith astonishment as to who they were and fromwhence they came. The guests were obliged tothrow off their upper garments the better to coolthemselves. The whole assembly was delightedwith their entertainment, and Albertus easily gainedhis suit of the king. Presently after, the banquetdisappeared ; all was wintry and solitary asbefore ; the snow lay thick upon the ground ; andthe guests in all haste snatched up the garmentsthey had laid aside, and hurried into the apartments,that by numerous fires on the blazing hearththey might counteract the dangerous dull whichthreatened to seize on their limbs'.ROGER BACON.^Roger Bacon, of whom extraordinary stories ofmagic have been told, and who was about twentyyears younger than Albertus, was one of the rarestgeniuses that have existed on earth. He was aFranciscan friar. He wrote grammars of the Latin,Greek and Hebrew languages. He was profoundin the science of optics. He explained the natureof burning-glasses, and of glasses which magnifyand diminish, the microscope and the telescope.haiinpH <lc Becky, n/itti/ Trithemii Chronii-a, Hin. I2.'H.264 ROGER BACON.He discovered the composition of gunpowder. Heascertained the true length of the solar year ; andhis theory was afterwards brought into general use,but upon a narrow scale, by Pope Gregory XIII,.nearly three hundred years after his death'.But for all these discoveries he underwent aseries of the most bitter persecutions. It was imputedto him by the superiors of his order thatthe improvements he suggested in natural philosophywere the effects of magic, and were suggestedto him through an intercourse with infernal spirits.They forbade him to communicate any of his speculations.They wasted his frame with rigorousfasting, often restricting him to a diet of bread andwater, and prohibited all strangers to have accessto him. Yet he went on indefatigably in pursuitof the secrets of nature At length Clement IV,to whom he appealed, procured him a considerabledegree of liberty. But, after the death of thatpontiff, he was again put under confinement, andcontinued in that state for a further period of tenyears. He was liberated but a short time beforehis death.Feint says that, among other ingenious contrivances,he put statues in motion, and drew articulatesounds from a brazen head, not however bymagic, but by an artificial application of the principlesof natural philosophy. This probably fiir-» Feint, History of Physick, Vol. IT, p. 234 to 239.^ Bacon, Exist. ad Clement. IV. ^ Ubi supra.ItOCER BACON.Iwished a foundation for the tale of Friar Bacon andFriar Bung, which was one of the earliest productionsto which the art of printing was appliedin England. These two persons are said to haveentertained the project of inclosing England witha wall, so as to render it inaccessible to any invader.They accordingly raised the devil, as theperson best able to inform them how this was to bedone. The devil advised them to make a brazenhead, with all the internal structure and organs ofa human head. The construction would cost themmuch time ; and they must then wait with patiencetill the faculty of speech descended upon it. Itwould finally however become an oracle, and, ifthe question were propounded to It, would teachthem the solution of their problem. The friarsspent seven years in bringing the structure to perfection,and then waited day after day, in expectationthat it would utter articulate sounds. Atlength nature became exhausted in them, and theylay down to sleep, having first given it strictly incharge to a servant of theirs, clownish in nature,but of strict fidelity, that he should awaken themthe moment the image began to speak. That periodarrived. The head uttered sounds, but suchas the clown judged unworthy of notice. " Timeis!" it said. No notice was taken; and a longpause ensued. "Time was!" A similar pause,and no notice. " Time is passed !" And the momentthese words were uttered, a tremendous266 THOMAS AQUINAS.Storm ensued, with thunder and lightning, and thehead was shivered into a thousand pieces. Thusthe experiment of friar Bacon and friar Bungcame to. nothing.THOMAS AaUINAS.Thomas Aquinas, who has likewise been broughtunder the imputation of magic, was one of the profoundestscholars and subtlest logicians of his day.He also furnishes a remarkable instance of the ascendantwhich the friars at that time obtained overthe minds of ingenuous young men smitten withthe thirst of knowledge. He was a youth of illustriousbirth, and received the rudiments of hiseducation under the monks of Monte Cassino, andin the university of Naples. But, not contentedwith these advantages, he secretly entered himselfinto the society of Preaching Friars, or Dominicans,at seventeen years of age. His mother, being indignantthat he should thus take the vow of poverty,and sequester himself from the world forlife, employed every means in her power to inducehim to alter his purpose, but in vain. The friars,to deliver him from her importunities, removedhim from Naples to Terracina, from Terracina toAnaemia, and from Anaemia to Rome. His motherfollowed him in all these changes of residence,but was not permitted so much as to see him. Atlength she spirited up his two elder brothers to»THOMAS AQUINAS. Sfj?seize him by force. They waylaid him in his roadto Paris, whither he was sent to complete his courseof instruction, and carried him oft' to the castle ofAquino where he had been born. Here he wasconfined for two years ; but he found a way tocorrespond with the superiors of his order, andfinally escaped from a window in the castle. St.Thomas Aquinas (for he was canonised after hisdeath) exceeded perhaps all men that ever existedin the severity and strictness of his metaphysicaldisquisitions, and thus acquired the name of theSeraphic Doctor.It was to be expected that a man, who thus immersedhimself in the depths of thought, should beaninexorable enemy to noise and interruption.We have seen that he dashed to pieces the artificialman of brass, that Albertus Magnus, whowas his tutor, had spent thirty years in bringing toperfection, being impelled to this violence by itsperpetual and unceasing garrulity". It is furthersaid, that his study being placed in a great thoroughfare,where the grooms were all day long exercisingtheir horses, he found it necessary to applya remedy to this nuisance. He made by the lawsof magic a small horse of brass, which he buriedtwo or three feet under ground in the midst of thishighway ; and, having done so, no horse wouldany longer pass along the road. It was in vainthat the grooms with whip and spur sought to con-seepage 261.268 PETER OF APONO.quer their repugnance. They were filially compelledto give up the attempt, and to choose anotherplace for their daily exercise'.It has further been sought to fix the imputationof magic upon Thomas Aquinas by imputing tohim certain books written on that science; butthese are now acknowledged to be spurious "*.PETER OF APONO.Peter of Apono, so called from a village of thatname in the vicinity of Padua, where he was bornin the year 1250, was an eminent philosopher, mathematicianand astrologer, but especially excelledin physic. Finding that science at a low ebb inhis native country, he resorted to Paris, where itespecially flourished ; and after a time returninghome, exercised his art with extraordinary success,and by this means accumulated great wealth.But all his fame and attainments were poisonedto him by the accusation of magic. Among otherthings he was said to possess seven spirits, each ofthem inclosed in a crystal vessel, from whom hereceived every information he desired in the sevenliberal arts. He was further reported to have hadthe extraordinary faculty of causing the money heexpended in his disbursements, immediately tocome back into his own purse. He was besides ofa hasty and revengeful temper. In consequence of^ Naude, Cap. 17. ^ Ibid.ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TllEASON.this it happened to Iii, that, Having a neighbour,who had an admirable spring of water in bis garden,and who was accustomed to suffer the physician tosend for a daily supply, but who for some displeasureor inconvenience withdrew his permission,Peter d'Apono, by the aid of the devil, removedthe spring from the garden in which it had flowed,and turned it to waste in the public street. Forsome of these accusations he was called to accountby the tribunal of the inquisition. While he wasupon his trial however, the unfortunate man died.But so unfavourable was the judgment of the inquisitorsrespecting him, that they decreed that hisbones should be dug up, and publicly burned.Some of luH friends got intimation of this, and savedhim from the impending disgrace by removing hisremains. Disappointed in this, the inquisitors proceededto burn him in effigy.ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TREASON.It may seem strange that in a treatise concerningnecromancy we should have occasion to speak ofthe English law of high treason. But on reflectionperhaps it may appear not altogether alien to thesubject. This crime is ordinarily considered byour lawyers as limited and defined by the statute of35 Edward III. As Blackstone has observed, " Bythe ancient common law there was a great latitudeleft in the breast of the judges, to determine what970 ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TREASON.was treason, or not so : whereby the creatures oftyrannical power had opportunity to create abundanceof constructive treasons ; that is, to raise,by forced and arbitrary constructions, offencesinto the crime and punishment of treason, whichwere never suspected to be' such. To preventthese inconveniences, the statute of 26 Edward IIIwas made''.*' This statute divides treason intoseven distinct branches ; and the first and chief ofthese is, ^^ when a man doth compass or imaginethe death of our lord the king**Now the first circumstance that strikes us in thisaffair is, why the crime was not expressed in moreperspicuous and appropriate language ? Why, forexample, was it not said, that the first and chiefbranch of treason was to ** kill the king ?'* Or, ifthat limitation was not held to be sufficiently ample,could it not have been added, it is treason to " attempt,intend, or contrive to kill the king ?** Weareapt to make much too large an allowance forwhat is considered as the vague and obsolete languageof our ancestors. Logic was the element inwhich the scholars of what are called the dark ageswere especially at home. It was at that periodthat the description of human geniuses, called theSchoolmen, principally flourished. The writerswho preceded the Christian era, possessed in anextraordinary degree the gift of imagination andinvention. But they had little to boast on theCommentaries, Book IV. chap. vi.ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TREASON.^^ suprscore of arrangement, and discovered little skill inthe strictness of an accurate deduction. Meanwhilethe Schoolmen had a surprising subtlety inweavingthe web of an argument, and arriving bya close deduction, through a multitude of steps, toa sound and irresistible conclusion. Our lawyersto a certain degree formed themselves on the disciplineof the Schoolmen. Nothing can be moreforcibly contrasted, than the mode of pleadingamong the ancients, and that which has characterisedthe processes of the moderns. The pleadingsof the ancients were praises of the art .oforatorical persuasion ; the pleadings of the modernssometimes, though rarely, deviate into oratory, butprincipally consist in dextrous subtleties upon'words, or a nice series of deductions, the wholetexture of which is endeavoured to be woveninto one indissoluble substance. Several strikingexamples have been preserved of the mode ofpleading in the reign of Edward II, in which theexceptions taken for the defendant, and the repliessupporting the mode of proceeding on behalf ofle plaintiff, in no respect fall short of the mosthired shifts, quirks and subtleties of the greatlawyers of later times'.It would be certainly wrong therefore to considerthe legal phrase, to " compass or imagine thedeath of the king," as meaning the same tiling asto '* kill, or intend to kill" him. At all events wemay take it for granted, that to " compass" does notLife of Chaucer, c. xviii.S7«ENGLISH LAW OF HIGH TKF.ASON.hmean to accomplish ; but rather to " take in han 1to go about to effect." There is therefore no form Iof words here forbidding to " kill the king.phrase, to " imagine," does not appear less starts Iling. What is, to a proverb, more lawless tliQ% Iimagination ?Evil into the mind of Nod or manMny come and go, so unapproved, and leaveNo Spot or blame behind.What can be more tyrannical, than an inquisitioninto the sports and freaks of fancy ? Wijat more |unsusceptible of detection or evidence? How |many imperceptible shades of distinction between Ithe guilt and innocence that characterise them! — -JMeanwhile the force and propriety of these terms Iwill strikingly appear, if we refer them to the!popular ideas of witchcraft. Witches were under 1stood to have the power of destroying life, without Jthe necessity of approaching the person whose libelwas to be destroyed, or producing any conscious 1ness in him of the crime about to be perpetrated. IOne method was by exposing an image of wax to Ithe action of fire ; while, in proportion as the Iimage wasted away, the life of the individual who 1was the object contrived against, was underminedand destroyed. Another was by incantationsand spells. Either of these might fitly be called ,the " compassing or imagining the death."nation is, beside this, the peculiar province oftwitchcraft. And in these pretended hagsfaculty is no longer desultory and erratic. Con-JIZIITO. 87sschola of their power, they are supposed to havesubjected it to system and discipline. They applyits secret and trackless energy with an intentnessand a vigour, which ordinary mortals may in vainattempt to emulate in an application of the forceof inert matter, or of the different physical powersby means of which such stupendous effects haveoften been produced, — How universal and familiarthen must we consider the ideas of witchcraft tohave been before language which properly describesthe secret practices of such persons, and isnot appropriate to any other, coidd have beenfound to insinuate itself into the structure of themost solemn act of our legislature, that act whichbeyond all others was intended to narrow or shutout the subtle and dangerous inroads of arbitrarypower I^Very extraordinary tilings are related of Ziito,•a sorcerer, in the court of Wenceslaus, king ofBohemia and afterwards emperor of Germany, inthe latter part of the fourteenth century. This isperhaps, all things considered, the most wonderfulspecimen of magical power any where to be foundis gravely recorded by Dubravius, bishop ofOlmutz, in his History of Bohemia. It was publiclyexhibited on occasion of the marriage ofWenceslaus with Sophia, daughter of the electorT^Af ziiTO.Palatine of Bavaria, before a vast assembled multi Jtide.The father-in-law of the king, well aware of thtelbridegroom's known predilection for theatrical exhibitionsand magical illusions, brought with hinpflto Prague, the capita! of Wenceslaus, a wholeswaggon-load of niorrice-dancers and jugglers, wIh^Imade their appearance among the royal retinue IMeanwhile Ziito, the favourite magician of alii 1king, took his place obscurely among the ordinary: Ispectators. He however immediately arrested the Iattention of the strangers, being remarked for lix Iextraordinary deformity, and a mouth that stretched 'completely from ear to ear. Ziito was for soirtdtime engaged in quietly observing the tricks andsleight that were exhibited. At length, while Jthe chief magician of the elector Palatine wars Istill busily employed in shewing some of the mostadmired specimens of his art, the Bohemian, indignantat what appeared to him the bunglingexhibitions of his brother-artist, came forward, andreproached iii with the unskilfulness of his performances. The two professors presently fell into Jwarm debate. Ziito, provoked at the insolence of liv Irival, made no more ado but swallowed him wholebefore the multitude, attired as he was, all but hisshoes, which he objected to because they weredirty. He then retired for a short while to dJcloset, and presently returned, leading the magicianalong with him. J ■ n,IHaving thus disposed of his rival, Ziito proceededto exhibit the wonders of his art. Heshewed himself first in his proper shape, and thenin those of different persons successively, withcountenances and a stature totally dissimilar to hisown ; at one time splendidly attired in robes ofpurple and silk, and then in the twinkling of aneye in coarse linen and a clownish coat of frieze.He would proceed along the field with a smoothand undulating motion without changing the postureof a limb, for all the world as if he were carriedalong in a ship. He would keep pace with theking's chariot, in a car drawn by barn-door fowls.He also amused the king's guests as they sat attable, by causing, widen they stretched out theirbands to the different dishes, sometimes theirhands to turn into the cloven feet of an ox, and atother times into the hoofs of a horse. He wouldclap on them the antlers of a deer, so that, whensey put their heads out at window to see sometight that was going by, they could by no meansdraw them back again ; while he in the meanthine feasted on the savoury cates that had beenspread before them, at his leisure.At one time he pretended to be in want ofpiouey, and to task his wits to devise the means toprocure it. On such an occasion lie took up ahandful of grains of corn, and presently gave themthe form and appearance of thirty hogs well fattedfor the market. He drove these hogs to the re-T 2hS76 ZllTO.silence of one Michael, a rich dealer, but who wairemarked for being penurious and thrifty in hbtmbargains. He offered them to Michael for whateverprice he should judge reasonable. The bargain*!was presently struck, Ziito at the same time warti'^ling the purchaser, that he should on no account Idrive them to the river to drink. Michael how Iever paid no attention to this advice ; and thehogs no sooner arrived at the river, than theyturned into grains of corn as before. The dealer,greatly enraged at this trick, sought high andlow for the seller that he might be revenged onhim. At length he found him in a vintner's shopseemingly in a gloomy and absent frame of mini,reposing himself, with his legs stretched out on aform. The dealer called out to him, but heseemed not to hear. Finally he seized Ziito by onefoot, plucking at it with all his might. The ftcame away with the leg and thigh ; and Iiiscreamed out, apparently in great agony. Hftiseized Michael by the nape of the neck, and-draggedhim before judge. Here the two set uptheir separate complaints, Michael for the fraudthat had been committed on him, and Ziito for theirreparable injury he had suffered in his person.From this adventure came the proverb, frequent inthe days of the historian, speaking of a personwho had made an improvident bargain, " He hasmade just such a purchase as Michael did with hia,hogs."ITRANSMUTATION OF METALS.TRANSMUTATION OF METALS.Among the different pursuits, which engagedthe curiosity of active minds in these unenlightenedages, was that of the transmutation of the moreordinary metals into gold and silver. This art,though not properly of necromantic nature, washowever elevated by its professors, by means of animaginary connection between it and astrology, andeven between it and an intercourse with invisiblespirits. They believed, that their investigationscould not be successfully prosecuted but under favourableaspects of the planets, and that it was evenindispensable to them to obtain supernatural aid.In proportion as the pursuit of transmutation,and the search after the elixir of immortality grewinto vogue, the adepts became desirous of investingthem with the venerable garb of antiquity.They endeavoured to carry up the study to thetime of Solomon ; and there were not wanting somewho imputed it to the first father of mankind.They were desirous to track its footsteps in AncientEgypt ; and they found a mythological representationof it in the expedition of Jason afterthe golden fleece, and in the cauldron by whichMedea restored the father of Jason to his originalyouth. But, as has already been said, the firstunquestionable mention of the subject is to be referredto the time of Diocletian'. From that wotton,Rcftectioiis oii Learning, Chap). X.^ See above, p. 29.RAYMOND I.ULL1.iron traces of the studies of the alchemists iron]time to time regularly discover themselves.The study of chemistry and its supposed invalidable results was assiduously cultivated by Gebiand the Arabians.ARTEPHIUS.Artephius is one of the earliest names thatoccur among the students who sought the philosopher'sstone. Of him extraordinary things arfeitold. He lived about the year 1130, and wrote'i-book of the Art of Prolonging Human Life,which he professes to have already attained the age;of one thousand and twenty-five years". He muStby this account have been born about one hundredyears after our Saviour. He professed to have visitedthe infernal regions, and there to have seen Tantalusseated on a throne of gold. He is also saidby some to be the same person, whose life has beenwritten by Philostratus under the name of Pollanius of Tyana**. He wrote a book on the philsophie's stone, which was published in Latin aiFrench at Paris in the year 1612.IRAYMOND LULLI.Among the European students of these intereaing secrets a foremost place is to be assigned iRaymond Lull and Arnold of Villeneuve.fiiugraphie Universelle. ^ Nondc.Raymond LULU. 279■ Lull was undoubtedly a man endowed in a veryeminent degree with the powers of intellect. Hewas a native of the island of Majorca, and wasborn in the year 1234. He is said to have passedhis early years in profligacy and dissipation, but tohave been reclaimed by the accident of falling inlove with a young woman afflicted with a cancer.This circumstance induced him to apply himselfintently to the study of chemistry and medicine,with a view to discover a cure for her complaint,in which he succeeded. He afterwards enteredinto the community of Franciscan friars.Edward the First was one of the most extraordinaryprinces that ever sat on a throne. He revivedthe study of the Roman civil law with suchsuccess as to have merited the title of the EnglishJustinian. He was no less distinguished asthe patron of arts and letters. He invited toEngland Guido della Colonia, the author of theTroy Book, and Raymond Lull. This latter wasbelieved in his time to have prosecuted his .studieswith such success as to have discovered the elixirvitof, by means of which he could keep off theassaults of old age, at least for centuries, andthe philosopher's stone. He is affirmed by thesemeans to have supplied to Edward the First sixmillions of money, to enable him to carry on waragainst the Turks.But he was not only indefatigable in the pursuitof natural science. He was also seized with an in-280 RAYMOND LULLI.vincible desire to convert the Mahometan to theChristian faith. For this purpose he entered earnestlyupon the study of the Oriental languages.He endeavoured to prevail on different prince ofEurope to concur in his plan, and to erect collegesfor the purpose, but without success. He at lengthset out alone upon his enterprise, but met withsmall encouragement. He penetrated into Aricaand Asia. He made few converts, and was withdifficulty suffered to depart, under a solemn injunctionthat he should not return. But Lui those toobey God rather than man, and ventured' a secondtime. The Mahometan became exasperated withhis obstinacy, and are said to have stoned himto death at the age of eighty years. His bodywas however transported to his native place ; andmiracles are reported to have been worked at histQmb%Raymond Lull is beside famous for what he waspleased to style his Great Art. The ordinary accountshowever that are given of this art assumea style of burlesque, rather than of philosophy.He is said to have boasted that by means of it hecould enable any one to argue logically on anysubject for a whole day together, independentlyof any previous study of the subject in debate. Tothe details of the process Swift seems to have beenindebted for one of the humorous projects describedby him in his voyage to Laputa. Lull recoilMoreri.ARNOLD OF Villeneuve. 281mended that certain general terms of logic, metaphysics,ethics or theology should first be collected.These were to be inscribed separately upon squarepieces of parchment. They were then to be placedon a frame so constructed that by turning a handlethey might revolve freely, and form endless combinations.One term would stand for a subject,and another for a predicate. Tiie student was thendiligently to inspect the different combinationsthat fortuitously arose, and exercising the subtletyof bis faculties to select such as he should find bestcalculated for his purposes. He would thus carryon the process of his debate ; and an extraordinaryfelicity would occasionally arise, suggestingthe most ingenious hints, and leading on to themost important discoveries — If a man with theeminent faculties which Lull otherwise appearedto have possessed really laid down the rules ofSuch an art, all he intended by it must have beento satirize the gravity with which the learned doctorsof his time carried on their grave disputationsin mood and figure, having regard only toI the severity of the rule by which they debated,I and holding themselves totally indifferent whetherthey made any real advances in the discovery oftruth.ARNOLD OF Villeneuve.Arnold of Villeneuve, who lived about the sametime was a man of eminent attainments. HeField, History of Philosophy, Book Vlll, dini)tcr i.LAWS RESPECTING TRANSMUTATION.made a great proficiency in Greek, Hebrew,Arabic. He devoted himself in a high degree t^<astrology, and was so confident in his art, as toventure to predict that the end of the world wouldoccur in a few years ; but he lived to witness thafallaciousness of his prophecy. He had much orpotation as a physician. He appears to have beena bold thinker. He maintained that deeds 0$charity were of more avail than the sacrifice of thl»mass, and that no one would be damned hereafter,but such as were proved to afford an example ofimmoral conduct. Like all the men of these timeswho were distinguished by the profoundness oftheir studies, he was accused magic. For this,or upon a charge of heresy, he was brought murderthe prosecution of the inquisition. But bewas alarmed by the fate of Peter of Apono, andby recantation or some other mode of prudent coiftrance was fortunate enough to escape. He ifone of the persons to whom the writing of thebook, De Tribes Impostoribiis, Of the Three Impostors(Moses, Jesus Christ and Mahomet) wasimputed I'ENGLISH LAWS RESPECTING TRANSMUTATION ;So great an alarm was conceived about this timerespecting the art of transmutation, that an act ofparliament was passed in the fifth year of HenryIV, 140*, which lord Coke states as the shortestMuferi.IIILAWS RESPECTING TRANSMUTATION.of our statutes, determining that the making ofgold or silver shall be deemed felony. This lawis said to have resulted from the fear at that timeentertained by the houses of lords and commons,lest the executive power, finding itself by thesemeans enabled to increase the revenue of the crownto any degree it pleased, should disdain to ask aidfrom the legislature ; and in consequence shoulddegenerate into tyranny and arbitrary power".George Ripley, of Ripley in the county ofYork, 13 mentioned, towards the latter part of thefifteenth century, as having discovered the philosopher'sstone, and by its means contributed onehundred thousand pounds to the knights of Rhodes,the better to enable them to carry on their waragainst the Turks'.About this time however the tide appears tohave turned, and the alarm respecting the multiplicationof the precious metals so greatly to haveabated, that patents were issued in the thirty-fillliyear of Henry VI, for the encouragement of suchas were disposed to seek the universal medicine,and to endeavour the transmutation of inferiormetals into gold'.• Watson, Chemical Ewayi, Vol, I.Fuller, Worthies of England.Walton, ubi supra.REVIVAL OF LETTERS.While these things were going on in Europe;the period was gradually approaching, when theenergies of the human mind were to loosen itsshackles, and its independence was ultimately toextinguish those delusions and that superstitionwhich had so long enslaved it. Petrarch, born inthe year 1304, was deeply impregnated with a passionfor classical lore, was smitten with the love ofrepublican institutions, and especially distinguishedhimself for an adoration of Homer, Dante, a moresublime and original genius than Petrarch, was hiscontemporary. About the same time Boccaccio inhis Delamere gave at once to Italian prose thatpurity and grace, which none of his successors inthe career of literature have ever been able toexcel. And in our own island Chaucer with adaring hand redeemed his native tongue from thedisuse and ignominy into which it had fallen, andpoured out the immortal strains that the genuinelovers of the English tongue have ever since perusedwith delight, while those who are discouragedby its apparent crabbedness, have yet grownfamiliar with his thoughts in the smoother and moremodern versification of Dryden and Pope. Fromthat time the principles of true taste have been2Sb JOAN OK ARC.more or less cultivated, while with equal careerindependence of thought and an ardent spirit ofdiscovery have continually proceeded, and maderapid advance towards the perfect day. oBut the dawn of literature and intellectual freedom were still a long time ere they producedtheir full effect. The remnant of the old womartclung to the heart with a tenacious embrace. Threeor four centuries elapsed, while yet the belief insorcery and witchcraft was alive in certain classesof society. And then, as is apt to occur in suchcases, the expiring folly occasionally gave tokensof its existence with a convulsive vehemence, andbecame only the more picturesque and impressivethrough the strong contrast of lights aod shadowsthat attended its manifestations.JOAN OF ARC.One of the most memorable stories on orelthat of Joan of Arc, commonly called the Maid ofOrleans. Henry the Fifth of England won thedecisive battle ©f Agincourt in the year l-iiS, andsome time after concluded a treaty with the reigningking of France, by which he was recognised,'in case of that king's death, as heir to the throne'Henry V died in the year 14.22, and Charles VIof France in less than two months after. HenryVI was only nine months old at the time of hisfather's death ; but such was the deplorable stateIJOAN OF ARC. iSffof France, that lie was in the same year proclaimedking in Paris, and for some years seemed to haveevery prospect of a fortunate reign. John dukeof Bedford, the king's uncle, was declared regentof France : the son of Charles VI was reduced tothe last extremity ; Orleans was the last strongtown in the heart of the kingdom which held outin his favour ; and that place seemed on the pointto surrender to the conqueror.In this fearful crisis appeared Joan of Arc, andin the most incredible manner turned the wholetide of affairs. She was a servant in a poor inn atDomremi, and was accustomed to perform thecoarsest offices, and in particular to ride the horsesto a neighbouring stream to water. Of course thesituation of France and her hereditary king formedthe universal subject of conversation ; and Joanbecame deeply impressed with the lamentable stateof her country and the misfortunes of her king.By dint of perpetual meditation, and feeling in herI breast the promptings of energy and enterprise,Bhe conceived the idea that she was destined byheaven to he the deliverer of France. Agreeablyto the state of intellectual knowledge at that period,L ■ahe persuaded herself that she saw visions, andI 'held communication with the saints. She had conversationswith St. Margaret, and St. Catherine ofFierbois. They told her that she was commissionedby God to raise the siege of Orleans, and to coniduct Charles VII to his coronation at Rheims.288 JOAN OF ARC.St Catherine commanded her to demand a swordwhich was in her church at Fierboia, which theMaid described by particular tokens, though shehad never seen it. She then presented herself toBaudricourt, governor of the neighbouring townof Vaucouleurs, telling him her commission, andrequiring him to send her to the king at Chiron.Baudricourt at first made light of her application ;but her importunity and the ardour she expressedat length excited him. He put on her a man'sattire, gave her arms, and sent her under an escortof two gentlemen and their attendants to Chiron.Here she immediately addressed the king in person,who had purposely hid himself behind hiscourtiers that she might not know him. She thendelivered her message, and offered in the name ofthe Most High to raise the siege of Orleans, andconduct king Charles to Rheims to be anointed.As a further confirmation she is said to have revealedto the king before a few select friends, asecret, which nothing but divine inspiration couldhave discovered to her.Desperate as was then the state of affairs, Charlesand his ministers immediately resolved to seize theoccasion that offered, and put forward Joan as aninstrument to revive the prostrate courage of hissubjects. He had no sooner determined on this,than he pretended to submit the truth of hermission to the most rigorous trial. He called togetheran assembly of theologians and doctors.JOAN OF ARC. yoj)wbo rigorously examined Joan, and pronouncedjn her favour. He referred the question to theparliament of Poitiers ; and they, who met persuadedthat she was an impostor, became convincedof her inspiration. She was mounted on ahigh-bred steed, furnished with a consecrated banner,and marched, escorted by a body of five thousandmen, to the relief of Orleans. The French,strongly convinced by so plain an interposition otheaven, resumed the courage to which they hadlong been strangers. Such a phenomenon wasexactly suited to the superstition and credulity ofthe age. The English were staggered with theRumours that every where went before her, andstruck with a degree of apprehension and terror1 sat they could not shake off. The garrison, informedof her approach, made a sally on the otherI side of the town; and Joan and her convoy enteredwithout opposition. She displayed her standard.in the market-place, and was received as a celestialdeliverer.She appears to have been endowed with a pru-I hence, not inferior to her courage and spirit ofI enterprise. With great docility she caught thehints of the commanders by whom she was surroundedi and, convinced of her own want of experienceand skill, delivered them to the forces asthe dictates of heaven. Thus the knowledge anddiscernment of the generals were brought intoI play, at the same time that their suggestions JOAN OF ARC.quire new weight, when filling from the lips ofthe heaven-instructed heroine. A second convoyarrived ; the waggons and troops passed betweenthe redoubts of the English ; while a dead silenceand astonishment reigned among the forces, solately enterprising and resistless. Joan now calledon the garrison no longer to stand upon the defensive,but boldly to attack the army of the besiegers.She took one redoubt and then another. TheEnglish, overwhelmed with amazement, scarcelydared to lift a hand against her. Their veterangenerals became spell-bound and powerless j andtheir soldiers were driven before the prophetesslike a flock of sheep. The siege was raised.Joan followed the English garrison to a fortifiedtown which they fixed on as their place of retreat.The siege lasted ten days ; the place was taken ;and all the English within it made prisoners. Thelate victorious forces now concentred themselvesat Patty in the Orleans ; Joan advanced to meetthem. The battle lasted not a moment ; it wasrather a flight than a combat ; Fastolfe, one of thebravest of our commanders, threw down his arms,and ran for his life ; Talbot and Scales, the othergenerals, were made prisoners. The siege of Orleanswas raised on the eighth of May, 1429 ;the battle of Patty was fought on the tenth of thefollowing month. Joan was at this time twenty-twoyears of age.This extraordinary turn having been given toJOAN OF ARC.the affairs of the kingdom, Joan next insistedthat the king should march to Rheims, in order toIsis being crowned. Rheims lay in a direction expresslythrough the midst of the enemies' garrisons.But every thing yielded to the marvellousfortune that attended upon the heroine. Troyesopened its gates ; Chains followed the example ;Rheims sent a deputation with the keys of thecity, which met Charles on his march. The proposedsolemnity took place amidst the extacies andenthusiastic shouts of his people. It was no soonerover, than Joan stept forward. She said, she hadnow performed the whole of what God had commissionedhier to do ; she was satisfied ; she intreatedthe kinjf to dismiss her to the obscurityfrom which she had sprung.The ministers and generals of France howeverfound Joan too useful an instrument, to be willingto part with her thus early ; and she yielded totheir earnest expostulations. Under her guidancethey assailed Lion, Soissons, Chateau Tliierry,Provins, and many other places, and took themone after another. She threw herself into Com-piegne, which was besieged by the Duke of Burgundyin conjunction with certain English commanders.The day after her arrival she headed asally against the enemy ; twice she repelled them;but, finding their numbers increase every momentwith fresh reinforcements, she directed a retreat.Twice she returned upon her pursuers, and madeu aJOAN OF Anthemrecoil, the third time she was less fortunate.She found herself alone, surrounded with the enemy;and after having enacted prodigies of valour,she was compelled to surrender a prisoner. This |happened on the twenty-fifth of May, 1430.It remained to be determined what should be 1the fate of this admirable woman. Both friends,and enemies agreed that her career had been attendedwith a supernatural power. The French,who were so infinitely indebted to her achieve \ments, and who owed the sudden and glorious re- .verse of their affairs to her alone, were convinced,that she was immediately commissioned by God,and vied with each other in reciting the miraculousphenomena which marked every step in her Jprogress. The English, who saw all the victorious;]acquisitions of Henry V crumbling from their igrasp, were equally impressed with the manifest,!miracle, but imputed all her good-fortune to ;league with the prince of darkness. Tliey saidethat her boasted visions were so many delusions othedevil. They determined to bring her to trialfor the tremendous crimes of sorcery and witch-Jcraft. They believed that, if she were once convictedand led out to execution, the prowess andvalour which had hitherto marked their progresswould return to them, and that they should obtain 'the same superiority over their disheartened foes.The devil, who had hitherto been her constantally, terrified at the spectacle of the flames tJOAN OF ARC.consumed her, would instantly return to the infernalregions, and leave the field open to Englishenterprise and energy, and to the interposition ofGod and his saints.An accusation was prepared against her, and allthe solemnities of a public trial were observed.But the proofs were so weak and unsatisfactory,and Joan, though oppressed and treated with theutmost severity, displayed so much acuteness andpresence of mind, that the court, not venturing toproceed to the last extremity, contented themselveswith sentencing her to perpetual imprisonment,and to be allowed no other nourishment thanbread and water for life. Before they yielded tothis mitigation of punishment, they caused her tosign with her mark a recantation of her offences.She acknowledged that the enthusiasm that hadI guided her was an illusion, and promised nevermoreto listen to its suggestions.The hatred of her enemies however was not yetappeased. They determined in some way to trap her. They had clothed her in a female garb ;I they insidiously laid in her way the habiliments ofFa man. The fire smothered in the bosom of themaid, revived at the sight ; she was alone ; shecaught up the garments, and one by one adjustedthem to her person. Spies were set upon her towatch for this event ; they burst into the apartment.What she had done was construed into noi offence than that of a relapsed heretic ; thereS94 ELEANOR COBHAM.was no more pardon for such confirmed delinquency; she was brought out to be burned alivein the market-place of Rouen, and she died, embracinga crucifix, and in her last moments callingupon the name of Jesus. A few days more thantwelve months, had elapsed between the period ofher first captivity and her execution.ELEANOR COBHAM, DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER.This was a period in which the ideas of witchcrafthad caught first hold of the minds of mankind;and those accusations, which by the enlightenedpart of the species would now be regardedas worthy only of contempt, were then consideredas charges of the most litigious nature. WhileJohn, duke of Bedford, the eldest uncle of kingHenry VI, was regent of France, Humphrey ofGloucester, next brother to Bedford, was lord protectorof the realm of England. Though Henrywas now nineteen years of age, yet, as he was aprince of slender capacity, Humphrey still continuedto discharge the functions of sovereignty.He was eminently endowed with popular qualities,and was a favourite with the majority of thenation. He had however many enemies, one of thechief of whom was Henry Beaufort, great-undeto the king, and cardinal of Winchester. One ofthe means employed by this prelate to underminethe power of Humphrey, consisted in a chargeELEANOR COBHAM.oC witchcraft brought against Eleanor Cobham, hiswife.This woman had probably yielded to the delusions,which artilil persons, who saw into the weaknessof her character, sought to practise upon her.She was the second wife of Humphrey, and he wassuspected to have indulged in imbue familiaritywith her, before he was a widower. His presentduchess was reported to have had recourse towitchcraft in the first instance, by way of securinghis wayward inclinations. The duke of Bedfordhad died in 1435 ; and Humphrey now, in additionto the actual exercise of the powers of sovereign,was next heir to the crown in case of theking's decease. This weak and licentious woman,being now duchess of Gloucester, and wife to thelord protector, directed her ambition to the highertitle and prerogatives of a queen, and by way offeeding her evil passions, called to her counsels MargeryJordan, commonly called the witch of Eye,Roger Bolingbroke, an astrologer and supposedmagician, Thomas Southwel, canon of St. Stephen's,and one John Hume, or Hun, a priest.These persons frequently met the duchess in secretcabal. They were accused of calling up spiritsfrom the infernal world ; and they made an imageI of wax, which they slowly consumed before a fire,expecting that, as the image gradually wasted away,I so the constitution and life of the poor king woulddecay and fin;dl\ perish.Eleanor COBHAM.Hume, or Hun, is supposed to have turned informer,and upon his information several of thesepersons were taken into custody. After previousexamination, on the twenty-fifth of July, 144-1,Bolingbroke was placed upon a scaffold before thecross of St. Paul's, with a chair curiously painted,which was supposed to be one of his implementsof necromancy, and dressed in mystical attire, andthere, before the archbishop of Canterbury, thecardinal of Winchester, and several other bishops,made abjuration of all his unlawful arts.A short time after, the duchess of Gloucester,having fled to the sanctuary at Westminster, her casewas referred to the same high persons, and Boling-brokewas brought forth to give evidence againsther. She was of consequence committed to custodyin the castle of Leeds near Maidstone, to take hertrial in the month of October. A commission was.directed to the lord treasurer, several noblemen,and certain judges of both benches, to enquire into'all manner of treasons, sorceries, and other thingsthat might be hurtful to the king's person, andBolingbroke and Southwel as principals, and theduchess of Gloucester as accessory, were brought'before them. Margery Jordan was arraigned atthe same time ; and she, as a witch and relapsedheretic, was condemned to be burned in Smithfield.The duchess of Gloucester was sentenced to dopenance on three several days, walking through,the streets of London, with a lighted taper in herIIRICHARD HI. 297hand, attended by the lord mayor, the sheriffs, anda select body of the livery, and then to be banishedfor life to the isle of Man. Thomas Southwel diedin prison ; and Bolingbroke was hanged at Tyburnon the eighteenth of November.RICHARD III.An event occurred not very long after this,which deserves to be mentioned, as being well calculatedto shew how deep an impression ideas ofwitchcraft had made on the public mind even inthe gravest affairs and the counsels of a nation.Richard duke of Gloucester, afterwards RichardIII, shortly before his usurpation of the crown In1483, had recourse to this expedient for disarmingthe power of his enemies, which he feared as anI obstacle to bis project. Being lord protector, hecame abruptly into the assembly of the councilthat iie had left but just before, and suddenlyasked, what punishment they deserved who shouldbe found to have plotted against his life, being theperson, as nearest akin to the young king, intrustedin chief with the affairs of the nation ?And, a suitable answer being returned, he said thepersons he accused were the queen-dowager, andShore, the favourite concubine of the latewitchcraft and forbidden arts hadI fciiig.I by• sought to destroy him. And, while he spoke, helaid bare his left arm ui) to the elbow, which RICHARD III.feared shrivelled and wasted in a pitiable manner.To this condition* said he, " have these abandonedwomen reduced me." — The historian adds,that it was well known that his arm had been thuswasted from his but.In January 1484 the parliament met which recognisedthe title of Richard, and pronounced themarriage of Edward IV null, and its issue illegitimate.The same parliament passed an act of attainderagainst Henry earl of Richmond, afterwardsHenry VII, the countess of Richmond, his mother,and a great number of other persons, many of themthe most considerable adherents of the house ofLancaster. Among these persons are enumeratedThomas Nandick and William Knives, necromancers.In the first parliament of Henry VIIthis attainder was reversed, and Thomas Nandickof Cambridge, conjurer, is specially nominated asan object of free pardon.Sir Thomas More, History of Edward the Fifth.^ Buck, Life and Reign of Richard III.SANGUINARY PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Witchcraft.II AM now led to the most painful part of mysubject, but which does not the less constitute oneof its integral members, and which, though painful,is deeply instructive, and constitutes a mostessential branch in the science of human nature.Wherever I could, I have endeavoured to renderthe topics which offered themselves to my examination,entertaining. When men pretended toinvert the known laws of nature, " murdering impossibility; to make what cannot be, slight work ;"I have been willing to consider the whole as aningenious fiction, and merely serving as an examplehow far credulity could go in setting asidethe deductions of our reason, and the evidence ofsense. The artists in these cases did not fail toexcite admiration, and gain some sort of applausefrom their con temporaries, though still with atingling feeing that all was not exactly as itBhouid be, and with a confession that the professorswere exercising unhallowed arts. It was likewhat has been known of the art of acting ; thosewho employed it were caressed and made everywherewelcome, but were not allowed the distinctionof Christian burial.But, particularly in the fifteenth century, things30{) SANGUINARY PROCEEDINGStook a new turn. In the dawn of the day of goodsense, and when historical evidence at lengthbegan to be weighed in the scales of judgment,men became less careless of truth, and regardedprodigies and miracles with a different temper.And, as it often happens, the crisis, the precisepassage from ill to better, shewed itself more calamitous,and more full of enormities and atrocity,than the period when the understanding was completelyhood-winked, and men digested absurditiesand impossibility with as much ease as. their everydayfood. They would not now forgive the tamperingwith the axioms of eternal truth ; they regardedcheat and imposture with a very differenteye ; and they had recourse to the stake and thefaggot, for the purpose of proving that they wouldno longer be trifled with. They treated the offendersas the most atrocious of criminals, andthus, though by a very indirect and circuitousmethod, led the way to the total dispersion ofthose clouds, which hung, with most uneasy operation,on the human understanding.The university of Paris in the year 1398 promulgatedan edict, in which they complained thatthe practice of witchcraft was become more frequentand general than at any former period*.A stratagem was at this time framed by theecclesiastical persecutors, of confounding togetherthe crimes of heresy and witchcraft. The first ofHutchinson on Witchcraft.AGAINST WITCHCRAFT.these might seem to be enough in the days ofbigotry and implicit faith, to excite the horror ofthe vulgar ; but the advocates of religious uniformityheld that they should be still more secure oftheir object, if they could combine the sin ofholding cheap the authority of the recognisedheads of Christian faith, with that of men's enlistingunder the banners of Satan, and becomingthe avowed and sworn vassals of his infernal empire.They accordingly seem to have inventedthe ideas of a sabbath of witches, a numerous assemblyof persons who had cast oft' all sense ofshame, and all regard for those things which therest of the human species held most sacred, wherethe devil appeared among them in his most forbiddingform, and, by rites equally ridiculous andobscene, the persons present acknowledged themselveshis subjects. And, having invented thisscene, these cunning and mischievous persecutorsfound means, as we shall presently see, of compellingtheir unfortunate victims to confess that they hadpersonally assisted at the ceremony, and performedall the degrading offices which should consign themin the world to come to everlasting fire.While I express myself thus, I by no means intendto encourage the idea that the ecclesiasticalauthorities of these times were generally hypocrites.They fully partook of the narrowness ofthought of the period in which they lived. They[believed that the sin of heretical gravity was " as902 SANGUINARY PROCEEDINGSthe sin of witchcraft**;*' they regarded them alikewith horror, and were persuaded that there was anatural consent and alliance between them. Fullyimpressed with this conception, they employedmeans from which our genuine and debauchednature revolts, to extort from their deluded victimsa confession of what their examiners apprehendedto be true ; they asked them leading questions ;they suggested the answers they desired to receive; and led the ignorant and friendless to imaginethat, if these answers were adopted, theymight expect immediately to be relieved from insupportabletortures. The delusion went round.These unhappy wretches, finding themselves theobjects of universal abhorrence, and the hatred ofmankind, at length many of them believed thatthey had entered into a league with the devil, thatthey had been transported by him through the airto an assembly of souls consigned 'to everlastingreprobation, that they had bound themselves inacts of fealty to their infernal taskmasters, and hadreceived from him in return the gift of performingsuperhuman and supernatural feats. This is atremendous state of degradation of what Miltoncalled the " the faultless proprieties of natures,"which cooler thinking and more enlightened timeswould lead us to regard as impossible, but to whichthe uncontradicted and authentic voice of historycompels us to subscribe.** 1 Samuel, xv, 23. * Doctrine of Divorce, Preface.AGAINST WITCHCRAFT..303The Albigenses and Waldenses were a set ofmen, who, in the flourishing provinces of Languedoc,in the darkest ages, and when the understandingsof human creatures by a force not less memorablethan that of Procrustes were reduced toan uniform stature, shook oft' by some strange andunaccountable freak, the chains that were universallyimposed, and arrived at a boldness of thinkingsimilar to that which Luther and Calvinafter a lapse of centuries advocated with happierauspices. With these manly and generous sentimentshowever they combined a considerableportion of wild enthusiasm. They preached thenecessity of a community of goods, taught that itwas necessary to wear sandals, because sandalsonly had been worn by the apostles, and devotedthemselves to lives of rigorous abstinence and themost severe seU-denial.The Catholic church knew no other way inthose days of converting heretics, but by fire andsword ; and accordingly pope Innocent the Thirdpublished a crusade against them. The inquisitionwas expressly appointed in its origin to bring backthese stray sheep into the flock of Christ ; and, tosupport this institution in ita operations, SimonMontfort marched a numerous army for the exterminationof the offenders. One hundred thousandare said to have perished. Tliey disappeared fromthe country which had witnessed their commencement,and dispersed themselves in the vallies of304.Sanguinary ProceedingsPiedmont, in Artois, and in various other plainThis crusade occurred in the commencement ofthe thirteenth century ; and they do not againattract the notice of history till the middle of thififteenth.Minstrels, in his Chronicle, gives one of tlearliest accounts of the proceedings at this tiinstituted against these unfortunate people, undthe date of the year 1459. " In this year," say'he, " in the town of Arras, there occurredmiserable and inhuman scene, to which, I knownot why, was given the name of f'atcdome. Therewere taken up and imprisoned a number of considerablepersons inhabitants of this town, and otherof a very inferior class. These latter werecruelly put to the torture, that they confessed,that they had been transported by supernaturalmeans to a solitary place among woods, where thidevil appeared before them in the form of a rajthough they saw not his face. He instructed themin the way in which they should do his bidding, andexacted from them acts of homage and obedience.He feasted them, and after, having put out thelights, they proceeded to acts of the grossest licentiousness."These accounts, according to Mon-street,were dictated to the victims by their timentors J and they then added, under the saisuggestion, the names of divers lords, prelates, amgovernors of towns and bailliages, whom theaffirmed they had seen at these meetings, and witd,-althe^HAGAINST Witchcraft.1^'joined in the same unholy ceremonies. The historianadds, that it cannot be concealed that theseaccusations were brought by certain malicious persons,either to gratify an ancient hatred, or toextort from the rich sums of money, by means ofwhich they might purchase their escape fromfurther prosecution. The persons apprehendedwere many of them put to the torture so severely,and for so long a time, and were tortured againand again, that they were obliged to confess whatwas laid to their charge. Some however shewedso great constancy, that they could by no meansbe induced to depart from the protestation oftheir innocence. In fine, many of the poorervictims were inhumanly burned ; while the richer.with great sums of money procured their discharge,but at the same time were compared tobanish themselves to distant places, remote fromthe scene of this cruel outrage. — Balduinus ofArtois gives a similar account, and adds that thesentence of the judges was brought by appealunder the revision of the parliament of Paris, andreversed by that judicature in the year I491''-I have not succeeded in tracing to my satisfactionfrom the original authorities the dates of thefollowing examples, and therefore shall refer themto the periods assigned them in Hutchinson onWitchcraft. The facts themselves rest for themost part on the most unquestionable authority.rt Delrio, DisguiseSANGUINARY PROCEEDINGSInnocent VIII published about the year 1484a bully in which he affirms : ** It has come to ourears, that numbers of both sexes do not avoid tohave intercourse with the infernal fiends, and thatby their sorceries they afflict both man and beast ;they blight the marriage-bed, destroy the births ofwomen, and the increase of cattle ; they blast thecom on the ground, the grapes of the vineyard,the fruits of the trees, and the grass and herbs ofthe field." For these reasons he arms the inquisitorswith apostolic power to " imprison, convictand punish'' all such as may be charged with theseoffences. — The consequences of this edict weredreadful all over the continent, particularly inItaly, Germany and France.Alcaeus, an eminent lawyer of this period, relates,that a certain inquisitor came about this timeinto the vallies of the Alps, being commissioned toenquire out and proceed against heretical womenwith whom those parts were infested. He accordinglyconsigned more than one hundred to theflames, every day, like a new holocaust, sacrificingsuch persons to Vulcan, as, in the judgment of thehistorian, were subjects demanding rather helleborethan fire ; till at length the peasantry of thevicinity rose in arms, and drove the mercilessjudge out of the country. The culprits were accusedof having dishonoured the crucifix, and denyingChrist for their God. They were assertedto have solemnised after a detestable way theAGAINST WITCHCRAFT, 307devils sabbath, in which the fiend appeared personallyamong them, and instructed them in theceremonies of his worship. Meanwhile a questionwas raised whether they personally assisted on theoccasion, or only saw the solemnities in a vision,credible witnesses having sworn that they were athome in their beds, at the very time that they wereaccused of having taken part in these blasphemies'.In 1.515, more than five hundred persons aresaid to have suffered capitally for the crime ofwitchcraft in the city of Geneva in the course ofthree months'.In 15'.i-i, one thousand persons were burned onthis accusation in the territory of Como, and onehundred per annum for several year afterDanes commences his Dialogue of Witcheswith this observation. " Within three months ofthe present time (l.'i75) an almost infinite numberof witches have been taken, on whom the parliamentof Paris has passed judgment : and thesame tribunal fails not to sit daily, as malefactorsaccused of this crime are continually brought them out of all the provinces."In the year 1595 Nicholas Remi, otherwise Leimigius, printed a very curious work, entitled Deimonolatreia, in which he elaborately expounds theprinciples of the compact into which the devil en-alcaeus,Parerg« Juris, L. VIII, cap. 22.llaneeus, apud Delrin, Proloquium.R Bartholomew de Spina, De Strigibus. c. 13-308 SANGUINARY PROCEEDINGStears with his mortal allies, and the modes of conductspecially observed by both parties. He boaststhat his exposition is founded on an exact observationof the judicial proceedings which had takenplace under his eye in the duchy of Lorraine,where for the preceding fifteen years nine hundredpersons, more or less, had suffered the extremepenalty of the law for the crime of sorcery. Mostof the persons tried seem to have been sufficientlycommunicative as to the different kinds of menaceand compulsion by which the devil had broughtthem into his terms, and the various appearanceshe had exhibited, and feats he had performed :but others, says the author, had, " by preservingan obstinate silence, shewn themselves invincibleto every species of torture that could be inflictedon them."But the most memorable record that remains touson the subject of witchcraft, is contained in anample quarto volume, entitled A Representation(Tableau) of the 111 Faith of Evil Spirits and Demons,by Pierre De Lancre, Royal Counsellorin the Parliament of Bordeaux. This man wasappointed with one coadjutor, to enquire into certainacts of sorcery, reported to have been committedin the district of Labour, near the foot ofthe Pyrenees ; and his commission bears date inMay, 1609, and by consequence twelve monthsbefore the death of Henry the Fourth.The book is dedicated to M. de Silver, changWITCHCRAFT.Icellar of France ; and in the dedication the aiitliorobserves, that formerly those who practised sorcerywere well known for persons of obscure stationand narrow intellect ; but that now the sorcererswho confess their misdemeanours, depose,that there are seen in the customary meetings heldby such persons a great number of individuals ofquality, whom Satan keeps veiled from ordinarygaze, and who are allowed to approach near tohim, while those of a poorer and more vulgar classare thrust back to the furthest part of the assembly.The whole narrative assumes the form of aregular warfare between Satan on the one side,and the royal commissioners on the other.At first the devil endeavoured to supply theaccused with strength to support the tortures bywhich it was sought to extort confession fromthem, insomuch that, in an intermission of thetorture, the wretches declared that, presently fallingasleep, they seemed to be in paradise, and toenjoy the most beautiful visions. The commissionershowever, observing this, took care to grantthem scarcely any remission, till they had drawn■ from them, if possible, an ample confession. Thedevil next proceeded to stop the mouths of theaccused that they might not confess. He leapedon their throats, and evidently caused an obstructionof the organs of speech, so that in vain theyendeavoured to relieve themselves by disclosing all.that was demanded of them.310 PROCEEDINGS AGAINST WITCHCRAFT.The historian proceeds to say that, at thesesacrilegious assembling, they now began to murmuragainst the devil, as wanting power to relievethem in their extremity. The children, thedaughters, and other relatives of the victims reproachedhim, not scrupling to say, '* Out uponyou 1 you promised that our mothers who wereprisoners should not die ; and look how you havekept your word with us 1 They have been burned,and are a heap of ashes." In answer to this chargethe devil stoutly affirmed, that their parents, whoseemed to have suffered, were not dead, but weresafe in a foreign country, assuring the malcontentsthat, if they called on them, they would receivean answer. The children called accordingly, andby an infernal illusion an answer came, exactly inthe several voices of the deceased, declaring thatthey were in a state of happiness and security.Further to satisfy the complainers, the devilproduced illusory fires, and encouraged the dissatisfiedto walk through them, assuring them thatthe fires lighted by a judicial decree were as harmlessand inoffensive as these. The demon furtherthreatened that he would cause the prosecutors tobe burned in their own fire, and even proceededto make them in semblance hover and alighton the branches of the neighbouring trees. Hefurther caused a swarm of toads to appear likea garland to crown the heads of the sufferers, atwhich when in one instance the bystanders threwSavonarola.stones to drive them away, one monstrous blacktoad remained to the last uninjured, and finallymounted aloft, and vanished from sight. DeLancre goes on to describe the ceremonies of thesabbath of the devil ; and a plate is inserted, presentingthe assembly in the midst of their solemnities.He describes in several chapters the sort ofcontract entered into between the devil and the sorcerers,the marks by which they may be known,the feast with which the demon regaled them, theirdistorted and monstrous dance, the copulation betweenthe fiend and the witch, and its issue Itis easy to imagine with what sort of fairness thetrials were conducted, when such is the descriptionthe judge affords us of what passed at theseassemblies. Six hundred were burned under thisprosecution.■ The last chapter is devoted to an accurate accountof what took place at an auto da fe. in themonth of November 1610 at Logrogno on theBro in Spain, the victims being for the greaterpart the unhappy wretches, who had escapedthrough the Pyrenees from the merciless prosecutionthat had been exercised against them bythe historian of the whole.SAVONAROLA.Jerome Savonarola was one of the most remarkablemen of his time, and his fortunes are wellSAVONAROLA.adapted to illus-ate the peculiarities of that periodsHe was born in the year 1452 at Ferrara in Italy,He became a Dominican Friar at Bologna withoutthe knowledge of his parents in the twenty-secondyear of his age. He was first employed by hi»isuperiors in elucidating the principles of physicsand metaphysics. But, after having occupied someyears in this way, he professed to take a lastingleave of these subtleties, and to devote himself e:exclusively to the study of the Scriptures. In mlong time he became an eminent preacher, by thielegance and purity of his style acquiring the applauseof hearers of taste, and by the unequalledfervour of his eloquence seeming the hearts of themany. It was soon obvious, that, by his powergained in this mode, he could do any thing hepleased with the people of Florence among whomlie resided. Possessed of such an ascendancy,, hiwas not contented to be the spiritual guide of th(souls of men, but further denoted himself to the temporalprosperity and grandeur of his country. Thehouse of Medici was at this time masters of thestate, and the celebrated Lorenzo de Medici possessedthe administration of affairs. But the poU"tical maxims of Lorenzo were in discord with thoseof our preacher. Lorenzo sought to concentre allauthority in the opulent few ; but Savonarola, proceedingon the model of the best times of ancientHome, endeavoured to vest the sovereign powerthe hands of the people.SAV0NA1101.AHe had settled at Florence in the thirty-fourthyear of his age, being invited to become prior ofthe convent of St. Maria in that city : and suchwas his popularity, that, four years ater, Lorenzoon his death-bed sent for Savonarola to administerto him spiritual consolation. Meanwhile, so stemdid this republican shew himself, that he insisted onLorenzo's renunciation of his absolute power, beforehe would administer to him the sacrament and absolution: and Lorenzo complied with these terms.The prince being dead, Savonarola stepped immediatelyinto the highest authority. He reconstitutedthe state upon pure republican principles,and enjoined four things especially in all his publicpreaching, the fear of God, the love of the republic,oblivion of all past injuries, and equal rightsto all for the future.I But Savonarola was not contented with the deilivery of Florence, where he is said to have produceda total revolution of manners, from Libertinismto the most exemplary purity and integrity ;he likewise aspired to produce an equal effect onthe entire of Italy. Alexander VI, the most profligateof popes, then filled the chair at Rome ; andSavonarola thundered against him in the cathedra!I at Florence the most fearful denunciations. Thepope did not hesitate a moment to proceed to extremitiesagainst the friar. He cited him to Rome,I under pain, if disobeyed, of excommunication toI the priest, and an interdict to the republic that SAVONAROLA.poured him. The Florentines several times succeededin causing the citation to be revoked, and,making terms with the sovereign pontiff, Jeromeagain and again suspending his preaching, whichwere however continued by other friars, his colleaguesand confederates. Savonarola meanwhilecould not long be silent ; he resumed his philippicsas fiercely as ever.At this time faction raged strongly at Florence.Jerome had many partisans ; all the Dominicans,and the greater part of the populace. But he hadvarious enemies leagued against him ; the adherentsof the house of Medici, those of the pope, thelibertines, and all orders of monks and friars exceptthe Dominicans. The violence proceeded sofar,that the preacher was not unfrequently insultedin his pulpit, and the cathedral echoed with thedissentions of the parties. At length a conspiracywas organized against Savonarola ; and, his adherentshaving got the better, the friar did notdare to trust the punishment of his enemies to thegeneral assembly, where the question would haveled to a scene of warfare, but referred it to a morelimited tribunal, and finally proceeded to the inflictionof death on its sole authority.This extremity rendered his enemies more furiousagainst him. The pope directed absolution,the communion, and the rites of sepulture, to berefused to his followers. He was now expelledfrom the cathedral at Florence, and removed hisaiipreaching to the chapel of his convent, whichwas enlarged in its accommodations to adapt itselfto his numerous auditors. In this interim a mostextraordinary scene took place. One Francis dePouille offered himself to the trial of fire, in favourof the validity of the excommunication of the popeagainst the pretended inspiration and miracles otthe prophet. He said he did not doubt to perishin the experiment, but that he should have thesatisfaction of seeing Savonarola perish along withhim. Dominic de Percha however and anotherDominican presented themselves to the flames insteadof Jerome, alledging that he was reserved forhigher things. De Pouille at first declined thesubstitution, but was afterwards prevailed on tosubmit. A vast fire was lighted in the marketplacefor the trial ; and a low and narrow galleryof iron passed over the middle, on which the challengerand the challenged were to attempt to effecttheir passage. But a furious deluge of rain wassaid to have occurred at the instant every thingwas ready ; the fire was extinguished ; and the trialfor the present was thus rendered impossible.Savonarola in the earnestness of his preachingpretended to turn prophet, and confidently to predictfuture events. He spoke of Charles VIII ofFrance as the Cyrus who should deliver Italy, andsubdue the nations before him ; and even namedtile spring of the year 1498 as the period thatshould see all these tilings performed.316 SAVONAROLA.But it was not in prophecy alone that Savonarolalaid claim to supernatural aid. He describedvarious contests that he had maintained against amultitude of devils at once in his convent. Thitormented in different ways the friars of St. Mark*'but ever shrank with awe from his personal interposition.They attempted to call upon him byname; but the spirit of God overruled them, sothat they could never pronounce his name aright,but still misplaced syllables and letters in a ludicrousfashion. They uttered terrific threatening*,against him, but immediately after shrank away witb<fear, awed by the holy words and warnings whichhe denounced against them. Savonarola besidesundertook to expel them by night, by sprinklingholy water, and the singing of hymns in a solemnchorus. While however he was engaged in these'sacred offices, and pacing the cloister of hisvent, the devils would arrest his steps, and suddenlyrender the air before him so thick, that ilwas impossible for him to advance further,another occasion one of his colleagues assureFrancis Picus of Miranda, the writer of his Life,that he had himself seen the Holy Ghost in theform of a dove more than once, sitting on Savona^^roll's shoulder, fluttering his feathers, which weresprinkled with silver and gold, and, putting hisbeak to his ear, whispering to iii his divine s'questions. The prior besides relates in a bookhis own composition at great length a dialogue thatt a ^^ISAVONAROLA. 317lie held with the devil, appearing like, and havingbeen mistaken by the writer for, a hermit.The life of Savonarola however came to a speedyand tragical close. The multitude, who are alwaysfickle in their impulses, conceiving an unfavourableimpression in consequence of his personallydeclining the trial by fire, turned against him.The same evening they besieged the conventwhere he resided, and in which he had taken refuge.The signory, seeing the urgency of thecase, sent to the brotherhood, commanding themto surrender the prior, and the two Dominicanswho had presented themselves in his stead to thetrial by fire. The pope sent two judges to trythem on the spot. They were presently put tothe torture. Savonarola, who we are told was ofa delicate habit of body, speedily confessed and expressedcontrition for what he had done. But nosooner was he delivered from the strappado, thanhe retracted all that he had before confessed. Theexperiment was repeated several times, and alwayswith the same success.At length he and the other two were adjudgedto perish in the flames. This sentence was nosooner pronounced than Savonarola resumed allthe constancy of a martyr. He advanced to theplace of execution with a steady pace and a serenecountenance, and in the midst of the flames resignedlycommended his soul into the hands of hismaker. His adherents regarded him as a witness318 TllITHEMIUS.to the truth, and piously collected his relics ; buthis judges, to counteract this defiance of authority,commanded his remains and his ashes to be castinto the river*.TRITHEMIUS.A name that has in some way become famousin the annals of magic, is that of John Trithemius,abbot of Spanheim, or Sponheim, m the circle ofthe Upper Rhine, He was born in the year 1462.He early distinguished himself by his devotion toliterature ; insomuch that, according to the commonchronology, he was chosen in the year 1482,being about twenty years of age, abbot of theBenedictine monastery of St. Martin at Spanheim.He has written a great number of works, and hasleft some memorials of his Hfe. Learning was ata low ebb when he was chosen to this dignity.The library of the convent consisted of little morethan forty volumes. But, shortly after, under hissuperintendence it amounted to many hundreds.He insisted upon his monks diligently employingthemselves in the multiplication of manuscripts.The monks, who had hitherto spent their days inluxurious idleness, were greatly dissatisfied withthis revolution, and led the* abbot a very uneasylife. He was in consequence removed to presideover the abbey of St, Jacques in Wuitzburg in• Biographie Universelle.TRITHEWIUS.•sio»1506, where lie died in tranquillity and peace in151ti.Trithetnius has been accused of necromancyand a commerce with demons. The principalground of this accusation lies in a story that hasbeen told of his intercourse with the emperorMaximilian. Maximilian's first wife was Mary ofBurgundy, whom he lost in the prime of her life.The emperor was inconsolable upon the occasion ;and Trithemius, who was called in as singularlyqualified to comfort him, having tried all otherexpedients in vain, at length told Maximilian thathe would undertake to place his late consort beforehim precisely in the state in which she had lived.After suitable preparations, Mary of Burgundyaccordingly appeared. The emperor was struckwith astonishment. He found the figure beforehim in all respects like the consort he had lost.At length he exclaimed, " There is one mark bywhich I shall infallibly know whether this is thesame person. Mary, my wife, had a wart in the napeof her neck, to the existence of which no one wasprivy but myself." He examined, and found thewart there, in all respects as it had been duringher life. The story goes on to say, that Maximilianwas so disgusted and shocked with what he saw,that he banished Trithemius his presence for ever.This tale has been discredited, partly on theScore of the period of the death of Mary of Burgundy,which happened in 14>81, when Trithemius320 LUTHER.was only nineteen years of age. He himself expresslydisclaims all imputation of sorcery. Oneground of the charge has been placed upon theexistence of a work of his, entitled Steganogrs^hia,or the art, by means of a secret writing, of communicatingour thoughts to a person absent. Hesays however, that in this work he had merelyused the language of magic, without in any degreehaving had recourse to their modes of proceeding.Trithemius appears to have been the first writerwho has made mention of the extraordinary featsof John Faust of Wittenberg, and that in a waythat shews he considered these enchantments asthe work of a supernatural power*.LUTHER.It is particularly proper to introduce some mentionof Luther in this place ; not that he is in anywayimplicated in the question of necromancy,but that there are passages in his writings in whichhe talks of the devil in what we should now thinka very extraordinary way. And it is curious, andnot a little instructive, to see how a person of somasculine an intellect, and who in many respectsso far outran the illumination of his age, was accustomedto judge respecting the intercourse ofmortals with the inhabitants of the infernal world.Luther was born in the year 1483.*» Biographic Universelle.II appears from his Treatise on the Abuses attendanton Private Masses, that he had a conferencewith the devil on the subject. He says, thatthis supernatural personage caused him by hisvisits "many bitter nights and much restless andwearisome repose." Once in particular lie cameto Luther, " in the dead of the night, when hewas just awaked out of sleep. The devil," he goeson to say, " knows well how to construct his arguments,and to urge them with the skill of amaster. He delivers himself with a grave, and yeta shrill voice. Nor does he use circumlocutions,and beat about the bush, but excels in forciblestatements and quick rejoinders. I no longerwonder," he adds, " that the persons whom heassails in this way, are occasionally found dead intheir beds. He is able to compress and throttle,and more than once he has so assaulted me anddriven my soul into a comer, that I felt as if thenext moment it must leave my body. I am ofopinion that Gesner and Oecolampadius and othersin that manner came by their deaths. The devil'smanner of opening a debate is pleasant enough;but he urges things so peremptorily, that the respondentin a short time knows not how to acquithimself." He elsewhere says, "The reasons whythe sacramentarians understood so little of theScriptures, is that they do not encounter the truehonest, that is, the devil, who presently drives^ Hospinian, Historia Sacrament aria. Part II. fol, 131.328 Cornelia Agrippa.one up in a corner, and thus makes one perceivethe just interpretation. For my part I am thoroughlyacquainted with him, and have eaten abushel of salt with him. He sleeps with me morefrequently, and lies nearer to me in bed, than myown wife does*".*-CORNELIUS AGRIPPA.Henry Cornelius Agrippa was bora in the yearI486. He was one of the most celebrated men ofhis time. His talents were remarkably great ; andhe had a surprising facility in the acquisition oflanguages. He is spoken of with the highestcommendations by Trithemius, Erasmus, Melanchthon,and others, the greatest men of his times.But he was a man of the most violent passions,and of great instability of temper. He was ofconsequence exposed to memorable vicissitudes.He had great reputation as an astrologer, andwas assiduous in the cultivation of chemistry. Hehad the reputation of possessing the philosopher'sstone, and was incessantly experiencing the privationsof poverty. He was subject to great per-actions, and was repeatedly imprisoned. Hereceived invitations at the same time from HenryVIII, from the chancellor of the emperor, from adistinguished Italian marquis, and from Margaretof Austria, governess of the Low Countries. He^ Bale.L'OllNELlllS AQHll'PA.wr ->made his election in favour ot" the last, ami couldHnd no way so obvious ot" showing his gratitudefor her patronage, as composing an elaborate treatiseon the Superiority' of the Female Sex, whichhe dedicated to her. .Shortly after, he produced awork not less remarkable, to demonstrate the Vanityand Emptiness of Scientific Acquirements. Margaretof Austria being dead, he was subsequentlyappointed physician to Louisa of Savoy, motherto Francis I. This lady however having assignedhim a task disagreeable to his inclination, a calculationaccording to the rules of astrology, he madeno scruple of turning against her, and affirmingthat he should iieiicefoith hold her for a cruel adperfidious Jezebel, After a life of storms and perpetualvicissitude, he died in 1.^3*, aged 48 years.He enters however into the work I am writing,principally on account of the extraordinary stories*that have been told of him on the subject of magic.He says of himself, in his Treatise on the Vanityof Sciences, " Being then a very young man, Iwrote in three books of a considerable size Discussionsconcerning Magic."The first of the stories I am about to relate ischiefly interesting, inasmuch as it is connected withthe history of one of the most illustrious ornamentsof our early English poetry, Henry Howard earlof Surrey, who suffered death at the close of thereign of King Henry VIII. The earl of Surrey,lid, became acquainted with CorneliusCorneliusAgrippa at the court of John George elector ofSaxony. On this occasion were present, beside theEnglish nobleman, Erasmus, and many other personseminent in the republic of letters. These personsshewed themselves enamoured of the reports thathad been spread of Agrippa, and desired him beforethe elector to exhibit something memorableOne intreated him to call up Plautus, and shehim as he appeared in garb and countenance, whileground corn in the mill. Another beforethings desired to see Ovid. But Erasmus earnest!;requested to behold Tully in the act of deliveringhis oration for Roscius. This proposal carried themost votes. And, after marshalling the concourseof spectators, Tully appeared, at the command ofAgrippa, and from the rostrum pronounced thioration, precisely in the words in which it has]been handed down to us, " with such astonishinganimation, so fervent an exaltation of spirit, anisuch soul-stirring gestures, that all the person*present were ready, like the Romans of old, topronounce his client innocent of every charge thathad been brought against him." The story cadithat, when sir Thomas More was at the saiplace, Agrippa shewed him the whole destructionTroy in a dream. To Thomas Lord Cromwihe exhibited in a perspective glass King HenVIII and all his lords hunting in his forestWindsor. To Charles V he shewed David, Solmon, Gideon, and the rest, with the Nine \Vor».]ICORNELIUS AGillPPA. OXOthes, in their habits and similitude as they hadlived.Lord Suited, in the mean time having gotteninto familiarity with Agrippa, requested him bythe way side as they travelled, to set before himhis mistress, the fair Geraldine, shewing at thesame time what she did, and with whom shetalked. Agrippa accordingly exhibited his magicglass, in which the noble poet saw this beautifuldame, sick, weeping upon her bed, and inconsolablefor the absence of her admirer, — It is nowknown, that the sole authority for this tale isThomas Nash, the dramatist, in Ins Adventures ofJack Wilton, printed in the year 1593.Paulus Jovius relates that Agrippa always kepta devil attendant upon him, who accompanied himin all his travels in the shape of a black dog. Whenhe lay on his death-bed, lie was earnestly exhortedto repent of his sins. Being in consequence struckwith a deep contrition, he took hold of the dog,I and removed from him a collar studded with nails,*which formed a necromantic inscription, at the1 same time saying to him, " Begone, wretched animal, which hast been the cause of my entire destruction"— It is added, that the dog immediatelylean away, and plunged itself in the river Soanc,P after which it was seen no more". It is furtherrelated of Agrippa, as of many other magicians,-that he was in the habit, when he regaled himself• Paulus Joviiis, Elogia Docturum Vironiin, i-. 101.Corneliusat an inn, of paying his bill in counterfeit money,which at the time of payment appeared of sterlingvalue, but in a few days after became pieces ofhorn and worthless .shellsBut the most extraordinary story of Agrippatold by Delrio, and is as follows. Agrippa hioccasion one time to be absent for a few days fromhis residence at Louvain. During his absence he intrustedhis wife with the key of his Museum, butwitlian earnest injunction that no one on any accountshould be allowed to enter. Agrippa happenedthat time to have a boarder in his house, a youfellow of insatiable curiosity, who would never groverimportuning his hostess, till at length hetaint from her the forbidden key. The first tliinjin the Museum that attracted his attention, wasbook of spells and incantations. He spread thibook upon a desk, and, thinking no harm, besto read aloud. He had not long continued thoccupation, when a knock was heard at the doorof the chamber. The youth took no notice, butcontinued reading. Presently followed a secondknock, which somewhat alarmed the reader. Tjspace of a minute having elapsed, and no anew(made, the door was opened, and a demontered. "For what purpose am I called?"the stranger sternly. " What is it you demand to'have done?" The youth was seized with thegreatest alarm, and struck speechless. The dtr'' Dclrio, Disquisitions M;tgica', Lib. II, Qiiieslio xi. j 18.iiCornelius Agrippa. 327moil advanced towards him, seized him by thethroat, and strangled iii, indignant that his presenceshould thus be invoked from pure thoughtlessnessand presumption.At the expected time Agrippa came homeward tohis great surprise found a number of devils caperingand playing strange antics about, and on the roofof his house. By his art he caused them to desistfrom their sport, and with authority demandedwhat was the cause of this novel appearance. Thechief of them answered. He told how they hadbeen invoked, and insulted, and what revenge theyhad taken. Agrippa became exceedingly alarmedfor the consequences to himself of this unfortunateadventure. He ordered the demon without lostof time to reanimate the body of his victim, thento go forth, and to walk the boarder three or fourtimes up and down the market-place in the sightoi' the people. The infernal spirit did as he wasordered, shewed the student publicly alive, andhaving done this, suffered the body to fall down,the marks of conscious existence being plainly nomore. For a time it was thought that the studenthad been killed by a sudden attack of disease.But, presently after, the marks of strangulationwere plainly discerned, and the truth came out.Agrippa was then obliged suddenly to withdrawhimself, and to take up his residence in a distantprovince'.• Delriu, Il), II, Quanto xxix, § 7.3^ COllNKLIUS AGRIPPA.Wierus in his well known book, De F^ieHigusDemonunii informs us that he had lived for yearsin daily attendance on Cornelius Agrippa, andthat the black dog respecting which such strangesurmises had been circulated, was a perfectly innocentanimal that he had often led in a string.He adds, that the sole foundation for the story layin the fact, that Agrippa had been much attachedto the dog, which he was accustomed to permitto eat off the table with its master, and even to lieof nights in his bed. He further remarks, thatAgrippa was accustomed often not to go out ofhis room for a week together, and that people accordinglywondered that he could have such accurateinformation of what was going on in all partsof the world, and would have it that his intelligencewas communicated to him by his dog. Hesubjoins however, that Agrippa had in fact correspondentsin every quarter of the globe, and receivedletters from them daily, and that this wasthe real source of his extraordinary intelligence **.Naude, in his Apology for Great Men accusedof Magic, mentions, that Agrippa composed abook of the Rules and Precepts of the Art ofMagic, and that, if such a work could entitle aman to the character of a magician, Agrippa indeedwell deserved it. But he gives it as his opinionthat this was the only ground for fasteningthe imputation on this illustrious character.^ Wierus, Lib. II, c. v, § 11, 12.CORNELIUS AfiHIPPA. 329Without believing however any of the tales ofthe magic practices of Cornelius Agrippa, and evenperhaps without supposing that he seriously pretendedto such arts, we are here presented with astriking picture of the temper and credulity of thetimes in which he lived. We plainly see from thecontemporary evidence of Wierus, that such thingswere believed of him by his neighbours ; and atthat period it was sufficiently common for anyman of deep study, of recluse habits, and a certainsententious and magisterial air to undergo theseimputations. It is more than probable that Agrippawas willing by a general silence and mystery togive encouragement to the wonder of the vulgarmind. He was flattered by the terror and awewhich his appearance inspired. He did not wishto come down to the ordinary level. And if tothis we add his pursuits of alchemy and astrology,with the formidable and various apparatus supposedto be required in these pursuits, we shall nolonger wonder at the results which followed. Heloved to wander on the brink of danger, and wascontented to take his chance of being molested,rather than not possess that ascendancy over theordinary race of mankind which was evidentlygratifying to his vanity.330 FAUSTUS.FAUSTUS.Next in respect of time to Corners Agrippacomes the celebrated Dr. Faustus. Little in pointof fact is known respecting this eminent personagein the annals of necromancy. His pretended historydoes not seem to have been written tillabout the year 1587, perhaps half a century afterhis death. This work is apparently in its principalfeatures altogether fictitious. We have noreason however to deny the early statements as tohis life. He is asserted by Camerarius and Wierusto have been born at Curdling near Cracow in thekingdom of Poland, and is understood to havepassed the principal part of his life at the universityof Wittenberg. He was probably well knownto Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus. Melanchthonmentions him in his Letters ; and Conrad Lesserrefers to him as a contemporary. The author ofhis Life cites the opinions entertained respectinghim by Luther. Philip Camerarius speaks of himin his Horae Subserve as a celebrated nameamong magicians, apparently without reference tothe Life that has come down to us * ; and Wierusdoes the same thing". He was probably nothingmore than an accomplished juggler, who appearsto have practised his art with great success inseveral towns of Germany. He was also no doubta pretender to necromancy.^ Cent. I, cap. 70.*• De Prspstigiis Damnum, Lib. II, cap. iv, sect. 8.On this isis the well known History of hisLife has heeii built. The author lias with greatart expanded very slender materials, and renderedhis work in a striking degree a code and receptacleof all the most approved ideas respecting necromancyand a profane and sacrilegious dealing withthe devil. He has woven into it with much skill thepretended arts of the sorcerers, and has transcribedor closely imitated the stories that have beenhanded down to us of many of the extraordinaryfeats they were said to Have performed. Jt istherefore suitable to our purpose to dwell at somelength upon the successive features of this history.The life has been said to have been originallywritten in Spain by Franciscans Scotus of Toledo,in the Latin language But this biographicalwork is assigned to the date of 1594-, previouslyto which the Life is known to have existed in German.It is improbable that a Spanish writer shouldhave chosen a German for the hero of his romancewhereas nothing can be more natural than for at German to have conceived the idea of giving tameand notoriety to his countryman. The mistakeseems to be the same, though tor an opposite reason,as that which appears to have been made inrepresenting the Gil Bias of Le Sage as a translation.The biographical account professes to have beenbegun by Faustus himself, though written in theOurriuB, apud Scht;lhorii,33«third person, and to have been continued by Wagner,his confidential servant, to whom the doctoria affirmed to have bequeathed his memoirs, lettersand manuscripts, together with his house and itsfurniture. 'Faustus then) according to his history, was theson of a peasant, residing on the banks of the Rotain the duchy of Weimar, and was early adopted byan uncle, dwelling in the city of Wittenberg, who Ihad no children. Here he was sent to college, -and was soon distinguished by the greatness of his Italents, and the rapid progress he made in every Ispecies of learning that was put before him. He |was destined by his relative to the profession c^Jtheology. But singularly enough, considering that jhe is represented as furnishing materials for his 1own Memoirs, he is said ungraciously to have set Jat nought his uncle's pious intentions by deriding JGod's 'word, and thus to have resembled Cain,*Reuben and Absalom, who, having sprung frontgodly parents, afflicted their fathers' hearts by theirapostasy. He went through his examinations with ,applause, and carried off' all the first prizes amongsixteen competitors. He therefore obtained 1degree of doctor in divinity ; but his success onljFlmade him the more proud and headstrong. Heldisdained his theological eminence, and sighed for Idistinction as a man of the world. He took his idegree as a doctor of medicine, and aspired to Icelebrity as a practitioner of physic. About the' |same time lie fell in with certain contemporaries,of tastes similar to his own, and associated withthem in the study of Chaldean, Greek and Arabicscience, of strange incantations and supernaturalinfluences, in short, of all the arts of a sorcerer.Having made such progress as he could by dintof study and intense application, lie at length resolvedto prosecute his purposes still further byactually raising the devil. He happened oneevening to walk in a thick, dark wood, withina short distance from Wittenberg, when it occurredto him that that was a fit place tor executinghis design. He stopped at a solitary spotwhere four roads met, and made use of his wandto mark out a large circle, and then two small oneswithin the larger. In one of these he fixedhimself, appropriating the other for the use ofhis expected visitor. He went over the preciserange of charms and incantations, omitting nothing.It was now dark night between the ninth andtenth hour. The devil manifested himself by theusual signs of his appearance. " Wherefore am Icalled'' said he, "and what is it that you demand?""I require," rejoined Faustus, "thatyou should sedulously attend upon me, answer myenquiries, and fulfil my behests."Immediately upon Faustus pronouncing thesewords, there followed a tumult over head, as ifheaven and earth were coming together. Thetrees in their topmost branches bended to theirvery roots. It seemed as if the whole forest were *peopled with devils, making; a crash Eke a thousandwaggons, hurrying to the right and the left, beforeand behind, in every possible direction, with thunderand lightning, and the continual discharge ofgreat cannon. Hell appeared to have emptied itself,to have furnished the din. There succeededthe most charming music from all sorts of instructments, and sounds of hilarity and dancing. N«came a report as of a tournament, and the clashingof innumerable lances. This lasted so long, thaiFaustus was many times about to rush out of thicircle in which he had inclosed himself, and t^abandon his preparations. His courage and restlutioii however got the better; and lie leinainej Iimmoveable. He pursued his incantations withoutintermission. Then came to the very edge of thecircle a griffin first, and next a dragon, which ia.Jthe midst of his enchantments grinned at him hornribly with his teeth, but finally fell down at liifeet, and extended his length to many a rootFaustus persisted. Then succeeded a sort of finworks, a pillar of fire, and a man on lire at tiltop, who leaped down ; and there immediatelyappeared a number of globes here and there rehot, while the man on fire went and came to evenpart of the circle for a quarter of an hour. Atlength the devil came forward in the shape <a grey monk, and asked Faustus what he wantsed. Faustus adjourned their further conference3S5conAnd appointed the devil to come to him at hislodgings.He in the mean time busied himself in the necessarypreparations, lie entered his study at theappointed time, and found the devil waiting forhim. Faustus told him tithe had prepared certainarticles, to which it was necessary that thedemon should fully accord, — that he should attendhim at all times, when required, for all the days ofhis life, that he should bring him every thing hewanted, that he should coin to him in any shapethat Faustus required, or be invisible, and Faustusshould be invisible too, whenever he desired it,that he should deny him nothing, and answer himwith perfect veracity to every thing he demanded.To some of these requisitions the spirit could notconsent, without authority fi'om his master, thelief of devils. At length all these concessionsre adjusted. The deva on his part also prescribedhis conditions. That Faustus should abjurethe Christian religion and all reverence for the supremeGod ; that lie should enjoy the entire commandof his attendant demon for a certain term ofyears, and that at the end of that period the devilshould dispose of him body and soul at his pleasure[the term was fixed for twenty-four year's ;that he should at all times stedfastly refuse to to any one who should desire to convert him,ir convince him of the error of his ways, and lead'him to repentance ; that Faustus should draw upa writing containing these particulars, and sign itwith his blood, that he should deliver this writingto the devil, and keep a duplicate of it for himself,that so there might be no misunderstandingsIt was further appointed by Faustus that the devilshould usually attend him in the habit of cordelier,with a pleasing countenance and an insinuatingdemeanour. Faustus also asked the devil his name,who answered that he was usually called Mephistopheles(perhaps more accurately Mephistopheles,a lover of clouds).Previously to this deplorable transaction, inJwhich Faustus sold himself, soul and body, to the?devil, he had consumed his inheritance, and waireduced to great poverty. But he was now nollonger subjected to any straits. The establishedments of the prince of Chute, the duke of Bavariaand the archbishop of Salzburg were daily puunder contribution for his more convenient supply.By the diligence of Mephostophiles provisionsof all kinds continually flew in at his windows;and the choicest wines were perpetually foundat his board to the annoyance and discredit ofthe cellars and butlers of these eminent personages,who were extremely blamed for defalcationsin which they had no share. He also broughthim a monthly supply of money, sufficient for thesupport of his establishment. Besides, he suppliedhim with a succession of mistresses, suchhis heart desired, which were in truth nothing but dFAUSTUS. 337devils disguised under the semblance of beautifulwomen. He further gave to Faustus a book, inwhich were amply detailed the processes of sorceryand witchcraft, by means of which the doctorcould obtain whatever he desired.One of the earliest indulgences which Faustusproposed to himself from the command he possessedover his servant-demon, was the gratificationof his curiosity in surveying the variousnations of the world. Accordingly Mephistophelesconverted himself into a horse, with twohunches on his back like a dromedary, betweenwhich he conveyed Faustus through the air whereeverhe desired. They consumed fifteen monthsin their travels. Among the countries they visitedthe history mentions Pannonia, Austria, Germany,Bohemia, Silesia, Saxony, Misnia, Thuringia,Franconia, Swabia, Bavaria, Lithuania, Livonia,Prussia, Muscovy, Friesland, Holland, Westphalia,Zealand, Brabant, Flanders, France, Spain, Italy,Poland, and Hungary ; and afterwards Turkey,Egypt, England, Sweden, Denmark, India, AfricaI and Persia. In most of these countries Mephistophelespoints out to his fellow-traveller their principalcuriosities and antiquities. In Rome theysojourned three days and three nights, and, beingthemselves invisible, visited the residence of thepope and the other principal palaces.At Constantinople Faustus visited the emperorof the Turks, assuming to himself the figure of338 FAUSTUS,the prophet Mahomet. His approach was precededby a splendid illumination, not less thanthat of the sun in all his glory. He said to theemperor, "Happy art thou, oh sultan, who artfound worthy to be visited by the great prophet**And the emperor in return fell prostrate beforehim, thanking Mahomet for his condescension inthis visit. The doctor also entered the seraglio,where he remained six days under the same figure,the building and its gardens being all the timeenvironed with a thick darkness, so that no one,not the emperor himself, dared to enter. At theend of this time the doctor, still under the figureof Mahomet, was publicly seen, ascending, as itseemed, to heaven. The sultan afterwards enquiredof the women of his seraglio what had occurredto them during the period of the darkness ;and they answered, that the God Mahomet hadbeen with them, that he had enjoyed them corporeally,and had told them that from his seedshould arise a great people, capable of irresistibleexploits.Faustus had conceived a plan of making hisway into the terrestrial paradise, without awakeningsuspicion in his demon-conductor. For thispurpose he ordered him to ascend the highestmountains of Asia. At length they came so near,that they saw the angel with the flaming sword forbiddingapproach to the garden. Faustus, perceivingthis, asked Mephostophiles what it meantHis conductor told Iiitn, but added that it was invain for them, or any one but the angels of theLord, to think of entering within.Having gratified his curiosity in other ways,Faustus was seized with a vehement desire to visitthe infernal regions. He proposed the questionto Mephostophiles, who told him that this was amatter out of his department, and that on thatjourney he could have no other conductor thanBeelzebub. Accordingly, every thing being previouslyarranged, one day at midnight Beelzebubappeared, being already equipped with a saddlemade of dead men's bones. Faustus speedilymounted. They in a short time came to an abyss,and oncountcicd a multitude of enoniious serpents;but a bear with wings came to their aid,and drove the serpents away. A flying bull nextcame with a hideous roar, so fierce that Beelzebubappeared to give way, and Faustus tumbled atonce heels-overhead into the pit. After havingfallen to a considerable depth, two dragons with achariot came to his aid, and an ape helped him toget into the vehicle. Presently however came ona storm with thunder and lightning, so dreadfulthat the doctor was thrown out, and sunk in atempestuous sea to a vast depth. He contrivedhowever to lay hold of a rock, and here to securehimself a footing. He looked down, and perceiveda great gulph, in which lay floating many of thevulgar, and not a few emperors, kings, princes, andz 9.340 FAUSTUS.such as lead been mighty lords. Faustus with asudden impulse cast himself into the midst of theflames with which they were surrounded, with thedesire to snatch one of the damned souls from thqjpit. But, just as he thought he had caught hiaby the hand, the miserable wretch sliced from Itween his fingers, and sank again.At length the doctor became wholly exhaustedwith the fatigue he had undergone, with the sraokiand the fog, with the stifling, sulphureous air, withthe tempestuous blasts, with the alternate extreme!of heat and cold, and with the clamours, the !»sensations, the agonies, and the hastings of thedamned everywhere around him, — when, just inthe nick of time, Beelzebub appeared to him again,and invited him once more to ascend the saddle,which he had occupied during his infernal journey.Here he fell asleep, and, when he awoke, sowhimself in his own bed in his house. He then shimself seriously to reflect on what had passed.*At one time he believed that he had been reallyin hell, and had witnessed all its secrets. Atanother he became persuaded that he had bea(subject to an illusion only, and that the devil '.led him through an imaginary scene, whichtruly the case ; for the devil had taken care ito shew him the real hell, fearing that it mighthave caused too great a terror, and have inducedhim to repent him of his misdeeds perhaps beforeit was too late.ney.buDd^Hused.reallyIt so happened that, once upon a time, the emperorCharles V was at Instruct, at a time whenFaustus also resided there. His courtiers informedthe emperor that Faustus was in the town, andCharles expressed a desire to see him. He wasintroduced. Charles asked him whether he couldreally perform such wondrous feats as were reportedof him. Faustus modestly replied, invitingthe emperor to make trial of his skill. " Then,"said Charles, " of all the eminent personages Ihave ever read of, Alexander the Great is the manwho most excites my curiosity, and whom it wouldmost gratify my wishes to see in the very form inwhich he lived." Faustus rejoined, that it was outof his power truly to raise the dead, but that hehad spirits at his command who had oflcn seenthat great conqueror, and that Faustus would willinglyplace him before the emperor as he required.He conditioned that Charles should not speak tohim, nor attempt to touch him. The emperorpromised compliance. Aller a few ceremoniestherefore, Faustus opened a door, and brought inAlexander exactly in the form in which he hadlived, with the same garments, and every circumstancecorresponding. Alexander made his obeisanceto the emperor, and walked several timesround him. The queen of Alexander was thenintroduced in the same manner. Charles just thenrecollected, he had read that Alexander had a warthe nape of his neck ; and with proper precautionsFaustus allowed the emperor to examiithe apparition by this test. Alexander thenwished.As doctor Faustus waited in court, he perceive*a certain knight, who had fallen asleep in awindow, with his head out at window. The whimtook the doctor, to taste on his brow the antlersof a stag. Presently the knight was roused fromhis nap, when with all his efforts he could not drawin his head on account of the antlers which grewupon it. The courtiers laughed exceedingly atthe distress of the knight, and, when they hadsufficiently diverted themselves, Faustus took offhis conjuration, and set the knight at liberty.Soon after Faustus retired from Instruct. Mealwhile the knight, having conceived a high resetment against the conjuror, waylaid him with semihorsemen on the road by which he had to p;Faustus However perceived them, and immediatelymade himself invisible. Meanwhile the knightspied on every side to discover the conjuror ; but,as he was thus employed, he heard a sudden noiseof drums and trumpets and cymbals, and saw aregiment of horse advancing against him. He immediatelyturned off" in another direction ; butencountered by a second regiment of horse. Tloccurred no less than six times ; and the knightand his companions were compelled to surrenderat discretion. These regiments were so manydevils ; and Faustus now appeared in a new foihadient^Hr^3+3as the general of this army. He obliged the knightand his party to dismount, and give up their swords.Then with a seeming generosity he gave themnew horses and new swords. But this was all enchantment.The swords presently turned intoswitches; and the horses, plunging into a river ontheir road, vanished from beneath their riders,who were thoroughly drenched in the stream, andscarcely escaped with their lives.Many of Faustus's delusions are rather remarkableas tricks of merry vexation, than as partakingof those serious injuries which we might look torin an implement of hell. In one instance he inquiredof a countryman who was driving a load ofhay, what compensation he would judge reasonablefor the doctor's 'eating as much of his lay asheshould be inclined to. The waggoner replied,that for half a stiver (one farthing) he should bewelcome to eat as much as he pleased. The doctorpresently fell to, and ate at such a rate, that thepeasant was frightened lest his whole load shouldbe consumed. He therefore offered Faustus agold coin, value twenty-seven shillings, to be offhis bargain. The doctor took it j and, when thecountryman came to his journey's end, he foundhis cargo undiminished even by a single blade.Another time, as Faustus was walking along theroad near Brunswick, the whim took him of askinga waggoner who was driving by, to treat him witha ride in his vehicle. " No, I wJI not'" lepUedthe boor ; " my horses will have enoughdrag their proper load." " You churl," said thedoctor, "since you will not let your wheels carryme, you shall carry them yourself as far as fromthe gates of the city"' The wheels then detachthemselves, and flew through the air, to the gatesof the town from which they came. At the sametime the horses fell to the ground, and were utterlyunable to raise themselves up. The countryfrightened, fell on his knees to the doctor, and pimixed, if he would forgive him, never to offend inlike manner again. Faustus now, relenting a little,bade the waggoner take a handful of sand from theroad, and scatter on his horses, and they would bewell. At the same time he directed the man to gotothe four gates of Brunswick, and he would finihis wheels, one at each gate.In another instance, Faustus went into a fairsmounted on a noble beast, richly caparisoned,sight of which presently brought all the honfanciers about him. After considerable hagglinghe at last disposed of his horse to a dealer forhandsome price, only cautioning him at pihow he rode the horse to water. The dealtdespising the caution that had been given him,^turned his horse the first thing towards the river.He had however no sooner plunged in, than thehorse vanished, and the rider found himself seatedon a saddle of straw, in the middle of the stream.With difficulty he waded to the shore, atesTielaoj^^Hlately, enquiring out the doctor's inn, went to himto complain of the cheat. He was directed toFaustus's room, and entering found the conjuroron his bed, apparently asleep. He called to himlustily, but the doctor took no notice. Worked upbeyond his patience, he next laid hold of Faustus'sfoot, that he might rouse him the more effectually.What was his surprise, to find the doctor's leg andfoot come off in his hand 1 Faustus screamed, apparentlyin agony of pain, and the dealer ran outof the room as fast as he could, thinking that hehad the devil behind him.In one instance three young noblemen appliedto Faustus, having been very desirous to be presentat the marriage of the iron of the duke of Bavariaat Mente, but having overlaid the time, in whichit would have been possible by human means toaccomplish the journey. Faustus, to oblige them,led them into his garden, and, spreading a largemantle upon a grass-plot, desired them to step onit, and placed himself in the midst. He then reciteda certain form of conjuration. At the sameI time he conditioned with them, that they shouldr On no account speak to any one at the marriage,and, if spoken to, should not answer again. Theywere carried invisibly through the air, and arrivedin excellent time. At a certain moment they becamevisible, but were still bound to silence. Onepf them however broke the injunction, and amusedI himself with the courtiers. The consequence was346 FAUSTUS.that, when the other two were summoned by thedoctor to return, he was left behind. There wassomething so extraordinary in their sudden appearance,and the subsequent disappearance ofthe others, that he who remained was put inprison, and threatened with the torture the nextday, if he would not make a full disclosure.Faustus however returned before break of day,opened the gates of the prison, laid all the guardsasleep, and carried off the delinquent in triumph.On one occasion Faustus, having resolved topass a jovial evening, took some of his old collie-companions,and invited them to make free withthe archbishop of Salzburg's cellar. They tooka ladder, and scaled the wall. They seated themselvesround, and placed a three-legged stool, withbottles and glasses in the middle. They were inthe heart of their mirth, when the butler made hisappearance, and began to cry thieves with all hismight. The doctor at once conjured him, so thathe could neither speak nor move. There he wasobliged to sit, while Faustus and his companionstapped every vat in the cellar. They then carriedhim along with them in triumph. At length theycame to a lofty tree, where Faustus ordered themto stop ; and the butler was in the greatest fright,apprehending that £hey would do no less thanhang him. The doctor however was contented,by his art to place him on the topmost branch.IFaustus. 347where he was obliged to remain trembling andalmost dead with the cold, till certain peasantscame out to their work, whom he hailed, and finallywith great difficulty they rescued him from hispainful eminence, and placed him safely on theground.On another occasion Faustus entertained severalof the junior members of the university of Wittenbergat his chambers. One of them, referringto the exhibition the doctor had made of Alexanderthe Great to the emperor Charles V, said it wouldgratify him above all things, if he could once beholdthe famous Helen of Greece, whose beautywas so great as to Have roused all the princes ofher country to arms, and to have occasioned a tenyears' war. Faustus consented to indulge his curiosity,provided all the company would engage tobe merely mute spectators of the scene. Thisbeing promised, he let the room, and presentlybrought in Helen. She was precisely as Homerlas described her, when she stood by the side ofPriam on the walls of Troy, looking on the Grecianchiefs. Her features were irresistibly attractive ;and her full, moist lips were redder than the summercherries. Faustus shortly after obliged hisguests with her bust in marble, from which severalcopies were taken, no one knowing the name ofthe original artist.No long time elapsed after this, when the doctorwas engaged in delivering a course of lectures onHomer at Erfurt, one of the principal citiesGermany. It having been suggested to him thatit would very much enhance the interest of hislectures, if he would exhibit to the company tlheroes of Greece exactly as they appeared to tlicontemporaries, Faustus obligingly yielded to tlproposal. The heroes of the Trojan war walkin procession betbre the astonished auditors,less lively in the representation than Helen h;been shewn before, and each of them with soicharacteristic attitude and striking expressioncountenance.When the doctor happened to be at Frankfort,there came there four conjurors, who obtainedvast applause by the trick of cutting off one another'sheads, and fastening them on again. Faiteswas exasperated at this proceeding, andgarden them as laying claim to a skill superiorhis own. He went, and was invisibly presenttheir exhibition. They placed beside them a vesselwith liquor which they pretended was the elixir ofife, into which at each time they threw a plantresembling the lily, which no sooner touched tlliquor than its buds began to unfold, and shortlyit appeared in full blossom. The chief conjuiwatched his opportunity ; and, when the bariwas complete, made no more ado but struck off'the head of his fellow that was next to him, anddipping it in the liquor, adjusted it to theders, where it became as securely fixed assel.ofi3Mthe operation. This was repeated a second and athird time. At length it came to the turn of thechief conjuror to have his head smitten off. Faustusstood by invisibly, and at the proper time brokeoff the flower of the Hly without any one beingaware of it. The head therefore of the principalconjuror was struck off; but in vain was it steepedin the liquor. The other conjurors were at a lossto account for the disappearance of the lily, andfumbled for a long time with the old sorcerer'shead, which would not stick on in any position inwhich it could be placed.Faustus was in great favour with the Prince ofAnhalt. On one occasion, alter residing somedays in his court, he said to the prince, " Willyour highness do me the favour to partake of asmall collation at a castle which belongs to me out*t your city-gates ?" The prince graciously counted.The prince and princess accompanied thedoctor, and found a castle which Faustus haderected by magic during the preceding night.The castle, with five hotly towers, and two greatites, inclosing a spacious court, stood in themidst of a beautiful lake, stocked with all kinds offish,and every variety of water-fowl. The courtexhibited all sorts of animals, beside birds ofevery colour and song, which flitted from tree totree. The doctor then ushered his guests into thehall, with an ample suite of apartments, branchingoff on each side. In one of the largest they found350 FAUSTUS.a banquet prepared, with the pope's plate of gold,which Mephostophiles had borrowed for the day.The viands were of the most delicious nature, withthe choicest wines in the world. The banquetbeing over, Faustus conducted the prince andprincess back to the palace. But, before they hadgone far, happening to turn their heads, they sawthe whole castle blown up, and all that had beenprepared for the occasion vanish at once in a vastvolume of fire.One Christmas-time Faustus gave a grand entertainmentto certain distinguished persons ofboth sexes at Wittenberg. To render the scenemore splendid, he contrived to exhibit a memorableinversion of the seasons. As the companyapproached the doctor's house, they were surprisedto find, though there was a heavy snow throughthe neighbouring fields, that Faustus's court andgarden bore not the least marks of the season, buton the contrary were green and blooming as in theheight of summer. There was an appearance ofthe freshest vegetation, together with a beautifulvineyard, abounding with grapes, figs, raspberries,and an exuberance of the finest fruits. The large,red Provence roses, were as sweet to the scent asthe eye, and looked perfectly fresh and sparklingwith dew.As Faustus was now approaching the last yearof his term, he seemed to resolve to pamper hisappetite with every species of luxury. He carefullyaccumulated all the materials of voluptuousnessand magnificence. He was particularlyanxious in the selection of women who should servefor his pleasures. He had one Englishwoman, oneHungarian, one French, two of Germany, and twofrom different parts of Italy, all of them eminentfor the perfections which characterised their differentcountries.As Faustus's demeanour was particularly engaging,there were many respectable persons inthe city in which he lived, that became interestedin his welfare. These applied to a certain monkof exemplary purity of life and devotion, and urgedhim to do every thing he could to rescue the doctorfrom impending destruction. Tiie monk beganwith him with tender and pathetic remonstrances.He then drew a fearful picture of the wrath of God,and the eternal damnation which would certainlyensue. He reminded the doctor of his extraordinarygifts and graces, and told him how differentan issue might reasonably have been expected fromhim. Faustus listened attentively to all the goodmonk said, but replied mournfully that it was toolate, that he had despised and insulted the Lord,that he had deliberately sealed a solemn compactto the devil, and that there was no possibility ofgoing back. The monk answered, " You are mistaken.Cry to the Lord for grace ; and it shallstill be given. Shew true remorse ; confess yoursins ; abstain for the future from all acts of sorcery352 Faustusand diabolical interference ; and you may rely onfinal salvation* The doctor however felt that allendeavours would be hopeless. He found in himselfan incapacity for true repentance. And finallythe devil came to him, reproached him for breachof contract in listening to the pious expostulationsof a saint, threatened that in case of infidelity hewould take him away to hell even before his time,and frightened the doctor into the act of signing afresh contract in ratification of that which he hadsigned before.At length Faustus ultimately arrived at theend of the term for which he had contractedwith the devil. For two or three years before itexpired, his character gradually altered. He becamesubject to fits of despondency, was no longersusceptible of mirth and amusement, and reflectedwith bitter agony on the close in which the wholemust terminate. During the last month of hisperiod, he no longer sought the services of hisinfernal ally, but with the utmost unwillingnesssaw his arrival. But Mephostophiles now attendedhim unbidden, and treated him with biting scoffsand reproaches. " You have well studied the Scriptures,"he said, " and ought to have known thatyour safety lay in worshipping God alone. Yousinned with your eyes open, and can by no meansplead ignorance. You thought that twenty-fouryears was a term that would have no end ; andyou now see how rapidly it is flitting away. Theterm for which you sold yourself to the devil is avery different thing ; and, after the lapse of thousandsof ages, the prospect before you will be stillas unbounded as ever. You were warned ; youwere earnestly pressed to repent ; but now it istoo late."After the demon, Mephostophiles, had long tormentedFaustus in this manner, he suddenly disappeared,consigning him over to wretchedness,vexation and despair.The whole twenty-four years were now expired.The day before, Mephostophiles again made hisappearance, holding in his hand the bond whichthe doctor had signed with his blood, giving himnotice that the next day, the devil, his master,would come for him, and advising him to holdhimself in readiness. Faustus, it seems, had earnedhimself much good will among the younger membersof the university by his agreeable manners, byhis willingness to oblige them, and by the extraordinaryspectacles with which he occasionally divertedthem. This day he resolved to pass in afriendly farewel. He invited a number of themto meet him at a house of public reception, in ahamlet adjoining to the city. He bespoke a largeroom in the house for a banqueting room, anotherapartment overhead for Iiiss guests to sleep in, anda smaller chamber at a little distance for himself.He furnished his table with abundance of delicaciesand wines. He endeavoured to appear among2 a354 FAUSTUS.them in high spirits ; but his heart was inwardlysad.When the entertainment was over, Faustus adsdressed them, telling them that this was the lastday of his life, reminding them of the wonderswith which he had frequently astonished them, andinforming them of the condition upon which . hehad held this power. They, one and all, expressedthe deepest sorrow at the intelligence. They hadhad the idea of something unlawful in his proceedings; but their notions had been very far fromcoming up to the truth. They regretted exceedinglythat he had not been unreserved in his communicationsat an earlier period. They would havehad recourse in his behalf to the means of religion,and have applied to pious men, desiring them toemploy their power to intercede with heaven in hisfavour. Prayer and penitence might have donemuch for him ; and the mercy of heaven was unbounded.They advised him still to call uponGod, and endeavour to secure an interest in themerits of the Saviour.Faustus assured them that it was all in vain,and that his tragical fate was inevitable. He ledthem to their sleeping apartment, and recommendedto them to pass the night as they could,but by no means, whatever they might happen tohear, to come out of it ; as their interference couldin no way be beneficial to him, and might be attendedwith the most serious injury to themselves.They lay still therefore, as he had enjoined them ;but not one of them could close his eyes.Between twelve and one in the night they heardfirst a furious storm of wind round all sides of thehouse, as if it would have torn away the walls fromtheir foundations. This no sooner somewhatabated, than a noise was heard of discordant andviolent hissing, as if the house was full of all sortsof venomous reptiles, but which plainly proceededfrom Faustus's chamber. Next they heard thedoctor's room-door vehemently hurst open, andcries for help uttered with dreadful agony, but ahalf-suppressed voice, which presently grew fainterand fainter. Then every thing became still, as ifthe everlasting motion of the world was suspended.When at length it became broad day, the studentswent in a body into the doctors apartment.But he was no where to be seen. Only the wallswere found smeared with his blood, and marks asif his brains had been dashed out. His body wasfinally discovered at some distance from the house,his limbs dismembered, and marks of great violenceabout the features of his face. The studentsgathered up the mutilated parts of his body, andafforded them private burial at the temple of MarsB-in the village whiche he died.A ludicrous confusion of ideas lias been producedby some persons fi-om the similarity ofnames of Faustus, the supposed magician of Wit-berg,and Faust or Must of Mente, the inventor.356 FAUSTUS.or first establisher of the art of printing. It hasbeen alleged that the exact resemblance of thecopies of books published by the latter, when noother mode of multiplying copies was known butby the act of transcribing, was found to be such,as could no way be accounted for by natural means,and that therefore it was imputed to the personwho presented these copies, that he must necessarilybe assisted by the devil. It has further beenstated, that Faust, the printer, swore the craftsmenhe employed at his press to inviolable secrecy, thathe might the more securely keep up the price ofhis books. But this notion of the identity of thetwo persons is entirely groundless. Faustus, themagician, is described in the romance as havingbeen born in 1491, twenty-five years after theperiod at which the printer is understood to havedied, and there is no one coincidence between thehistories of the two persons, beyond the similarityof names, and a certain mystery (or magical appearance)that inevitably adheres to the practice of anart hitherto unknown. If any secret referencehad bear intended in the romance to the real characterof the illustrious introducer of an art whichhas been productive of such incalculable benefitsto mankind, it would be impossible to account forsuch a marvellous inconsistence in the chronology.Others have carried their scepticism so far, as tohave started a doubt whether there was ever reallysuch a person as Faustus of Wittenberg, the al-faustus.357legend magician, But the testimony of Wierus,Philip Camerarius, Melanchthon and others, hiscontemporaries, sufficiently refutes this supposition.The fact is, that there was undoubtedly such aman, who, by sleight of dexterity, made himselfa reputation as if there was something supernaturalin his performances, and that he was probablyalso regarded with a degree of terror and abhorrenceby the superstitious. On this theme wasconstructed a romance, which once possessed thehighest popularity, and furnished a subject to thedramatical genius of Marlow, Lessing, Goethe, andothers, — It is sufficiently remarkable, that thenotoriety of this romance seems to have suggestedto Shakespear the idea of sending the grand conceptionof his brain, Hamlet, prince of Denmark,to finish his education at the university of Wittenberg.And here it may not be uninstructive to remarkthe different tone of the record of the acts of Ziito,the Bohemian, and Faustus of Wittenberg, thoughlittle more than half a century elapsed betweenthe periods at which they were written. Dubra-vies, bishop of Olmutz in Moravia, to whose penwe are indebted for what we know of Ziito, died inthe year 1553. He baa deemed it not unbecomingto record in his national history of Bohemia,the achievements of this magician, who, he says,limited them before Wenceslaus, king of theI country, at the celebration of his marriage. A^58 SABELLICUS.waggon-load of sorcerers arrived at Prague on thatoccasion for the entertainment of the company.But, at the close of that century, the exploits ofFaustus were no longer deemed entitled to a placein national history, but were more appropriatelytaken for the theme of a romance. Faustus andhis performances were certainly contemplated withat least as much horror as the deeds of Ziito. Butpopular credulity was no longer wound to so higha pitch : the marvels effected by Faustus are notrepresented as challenging the observation of thousandsat a public court, and on the occasion of aroyal festival. They " hid their diminished heads,"and were performed comparatively in a comer.SABELLICUS.A pretended magician is recorded by Naude, asliving about this time, named George's Rebellious,who, he says, if loftiness and arrogance of assumptionwere enough to establish a claim to the possessionof supernatural gifts, would beyond all controversybe recognised for a chief and consummatesorcerer. It was his ambition by the most soundingappellations of this nature to advance his claimto immortal reputation. He called himself, " Themost accomplished George's Rebellious, a secondFaustus, the spring and centre of necromantic art,an astrologer, a magician, consummate in chircx-nancy, and in agromancy, pyromancy and hydro-paracelsus.nancy inferior to none that ever lived'" I mentionthis the rather, as affording an additionalproof how highly Faustus was rated at the time inwhich he is said to have flourished.It is specially worthy of notice, that Naude,whose book is a sort of register of all the most distinguishednames in the annals of necromancy,drawn up for the purpose of vindicating theirhonour, now here mentions Faustus, except oncein this slight and cursory way.PARACELSUS.Paracelsus, or, as he styled himself, PhilippeAurelius Theophrastus Bombast Paracelsus deHohcnheim, was a man of great notoriety and eminence,about the same time as Dr. Faustus. Hewas born in the year 14-93, and died in 1541. Hisfather is said to have lived in some repute ; butthe son early became a wanderer in the world,passing his youth in the occupation of foretellingfuture events by the stars and by chiromancy, in-yoking the dead, and performing various operationsof alchemy and magic. He states Trithemiua tohave been his instructor in the science of metals.He was superficial in literature, and says of himselfthat at one time he did not open a book forten years together. He visited the mines of Bohemia,Sweden and the East to perfect himself inmetallic knowledge. He travelled through Prussia,360 PARACELSUS.Lithuania, Poland, Transylvania and Illyria, conversingindifferently with physicians and old women,that he might extract from them the practicalsecrets of their art. He visited ' Egypt, Tartaryand Constantinople, at which last place, as he says,he learned the transmutation of metals and thephilosopher's stone. He boasts also of the elixirof life, by means of which he could prolong thelife of man to the age of the antediluvians. Hecertainly possessed considerable sagacity and ahappy spirit of daring, which induced him to haverecourse to the application of mercury and opiumin the cure of diseases, when the regular physiciansdid not venture on the use of them. Hetherefore was successfully employed by certaineminent persons in desperate cases, and wasconsulted by Erasmus. He gradually increasedin fame, and in the year 1526 was chosen professorof natural philosophy and surgery in the universityof Bale. Here he delivered lectures in avery bold and presumptuous style. He proclaimedhimself the monarch of medicine, and publiclyburned the writings of Galen and Avicenna aspretenders and impostors.This however was the acme of his prosperity.His system was extremely popular for one year ;but then he lost himself by brutality and intemperance.He had drunk water only for the firstfive-and-twenty years of his life ; but now indulgedhimself in beastly crapulence with the dregs ofParacelsus.36)society, and scarcely ever took off his clothes byday or night. After one year therefore spent atBale, he resumed his former vagabond life, and,having passed through many vicissitudes, some ofthem of the most abject poverty, he died at theage of forty-eight.Paracelsus in fact exhibited in his person theunion of a quack, a boastful and impudent pretender,with a considerable degree of natural sagacityand shrewdness. Such an union is not uncommonin the present day ; but it was moreproperly in its place, when the cultivation of thefaculties of the mind was more restricted thannow, and the law of criticism of facts and evidencewas nearly unknown. He took advantageof the credulity and love of wonder incident to thegenerality of our species ; and, by dint of imposingon others, succeeded in no small degree in imposingon himself. His intemperance and arroganceof demeanour gave the suitable finish to hischaracter. lie therefore carefully cherished inthose about him the idea lliat there was in him akind of supernatural virtue, and that he had theagents of an invisible world at his command. Inparticular he gave out that he held conferenceswith a familiar or demon, whom for the convenienceof consulting he was in the habit of carryingabout with lira in the hilt of his sword.S62 CARDAN.CARDAN.Jerome Cardan who was only a few yearsyoung than Paracelsus, was a man of a very differentcharacter. . He had considerable refinementand discrimination, and ranked among the firstscholars of his day. He is however most of alldistinguished for the Memoirs he has left us of hislife, which are characterised by a frankness andunreserve which are almost without a parallel.He had undoubtedly a considerable spice of madnessin lais composition. He says of himself, thathe was liable to extraordinary fits of abstractionand elevation of mind, which by their intensenessbecame so intolerable, that he gladly had recourseto very severe bodily pain by way of getting rid ofthem. That in such cases he would bite his lipstill they bled, twist his fingers almost to dislocation,and whip his legs with rods, which he founda great relief to him. That he would talk purposelyof subjects which he knew were particularlyoffensive to the company he was in ; thathe argued on any side of a subject, withoutcaring whether he was right or wrong ; and that hewould spend whole nights in gaming, often venturingas the stake he played for, the furniture ofhis house, and his wife's jewels.Cardan describes three things of himself, whichhe habitually experienced, but respecting whichhe had never unbosomed himself to any of hisfriends. The first was, a capacity which he felt inhimself of abandoning his body in a sort of extacywhenever he pleased. He felt in these cases asort of spitting of the heart, as if his soul wasabout to withdraw, the sensation spreading overIiiss whole frame, like the opening of a door for thedismissal of its guest. His apprehension was, thathe was out of his body, and that by an energeticexertion he still retained a small hold of his corporealfigure. The second of his peculiarities was,that he saw, when he pleased, whatever he desiredto see, not through the force of imagination, butwith his material organs : he saw gives, animals,orbs, as he willed. When he was a child, he saw,these things, as they occurred, without any previousvolition or anticipation that such a thingwas about to happen. But, after he had arrivedat years of maturity, he saw them only when hedesired, and such things as he desired. Theseimages were in perpetual succession, one after another.The thing incidental to him which he mentionsin the third place was, that he could notrecollect any thing that ever happened to him,whether good, ill, or indifferent, of which he hadlot been admonished, and that a very short timefore, in a dream. These things serve to shewof what importance he was in his own eyes, andalso, which is the matter lie principally brings itsubtlety and delicacy of his animalI prove,364 QUACKS WHO SOUGHT TO CHEAT MANKIND.Cardan speaks uncertainly and contradictorily asto his having a genius or demon perpetually attendinghim, advising him of what was to happen,and forewarning him of sinister events. He concludeshowever that he had no such attendant,but that it was the excellence of his nature, approachingto immortality. He was much addictedto the study of astrology, and laid claim to greatskill as a physician. He visited the court of London,and calculated the nativity of king EdwardVI. He was sent for as a physician by cardinalSeaton, archbishop of St Andrews, whom, accordingto Delvile', he recovered to speech and health,and the historian appears to attribute the cure tomagic. He calculated the nativity of Jesus Christ,which was imputed to him as an impious undertaking,inasmuch as it supposed the creator of theworld to be subject to the influence of the stars.He also predicted his own death, and is supposedby some to have forwarded that event, by abstinencefrom food at the age of seventy-five, that hemight not bely his prediction.QUACKS, WHO IN COOL BLOOD UNDERTOOK TOOVERREACH MANKIND.Hitherto we have principally passed such personsin review, as seem to have been in part atleast the victims of their own delusions. But be• Memoirs, p. 14.BENVENUTO Cellini.side these there has always been a numerous classof men, who, with minds perfectly disengaged andfree, have applied themselves to concert the meansof overreaching the simplicity, or baffling the penetration,of those who were merely spectators, anduninitiated in the mystery of the arts that werepractised upon them. Such was no doubt the casewith the speaking heads and statues, which weresometimes exhibited in the ancient oracles. Suchwas the case with certain optical delusions, whichwere practised on the unsuspecting, and were contrivedto produce on them the effect of supernaturalrevelations. Such is the story of Bel andthe Dragon in the book of Apocrypha, where thepriests daily placed before the idol twelve measuresof flour, and forty sheep, and six vessels of wine,pretending that the idol consumed all these provisions,when in fact they entered the temple bynight, by a door under the altar, and removedthem.Benevento CELLINI.We have a story minutely related by BeneventoCellini in his Life, which it is now known wasproduced by optical delusion, but which was imposedupon the artist and his companions as altogethersupernatural. It occurred a very shorttime before the death of pope Clement the Seventhin 1534, and is thus detailed. It took place in theColiseum at Rome.366 BENVENUTO CELLINI.^* It came to pass through a variety of odd accidents,that I made acquaintance with a Sicilianpriest, who was a man of genius, and well versedin the Greek and Latin languages. Happeningone day to have some conversation with him,-where the subject turned upon the art of necromancy,I, who had a great desire to know somethingof the matter, told him, that I had all mylife had a curiosity to be acquainted with the mysteriesof this art. The priest made answer, thatthe man must be of a resolute and steady temper,who entered on that study. I replied, that I badfortitude and resolution enough to desire to beinitiated in it. The priest subjoined, * If you thinkyou have the heart to venture, I will give you allthe satisfaction you can desire.* Thus we agreedto enter upon a scheme of necromancy.The priest one evening prepared to satisfy me,and desired me to look for a companion or two.I invited one Vincenzio Romola, who was my intimateacquaintance, and he brought with him anative of Pistoia who cultivated the art of necromancyhimself. We repaired to the Coliseum;and the priest, according to the custom of conjurors,began to draw circles on the ground, withthe most impressive ceremonies imaginable. Helikewise brought with him all sorts of precious perfumesand fire, with some compositions which diffusednoisome and bad odours. As soon as he wasin readiness, he made an opening to the circle, andBENVENUTO CELLINI.took us by the hand, and ordered the other necromancer,his partner, to throw perfumes into thefire at a proper time, intrusting the care of the tireand the perfumes to the rest ; and then he beganhis incantations.This ceremony lasted above an hour and ahalf, when there appeared several legions of devils,so that the amphitheatre was quite filled with them.I was busy about the perfumes, when the priest,who knew that there wa-s a sufficient number ofinfernal spirits, turned about to me, aid said, 'Benevento,ask them something.' I answered, 'Letthem bring me into company with my Sicilianmistress, Angelica.* That night we obtained noanswer of any sort ; but I received great satisfactionin having my curiosity so far indulged.The necromancer told me that it was requisitewe should go a second time, assuring me that Ishould be satisfied in whatever I asked ; but thatI must bring with me a boy that had never knownwoman, I took with me my apprentice, who waaabout twelve years of age ; with the same Romola, who had been my companion thefirst time, and one Agnolino Gaddi, an intimateacquaintance, whom I likewise prevailed on toassist at the ceremony. When we came to theplace appointed, the priest, having made his preparationsas before with the same and even morestriking ceremonies, placed us within the circle,which he had drawn with a more wonderful artBENVENUTO CELLINI.and in a more solemn manner, than at our formermeeting. Thus having committed the care of theperfumes and the ere to my friend Vincenzio, whowas assisted by Gaddi, he put into my hands apinta colo, or magical chart, and bid me turn ittowards the places to which he should direct me jjand under the pinta colo I held my apprenticeThe necromancer, having begun to make his mo!tremendous invocations, called by their names :multitude of demons who were the leaders of theseveral legions, and questioned them, by the virumand power of the eternal, uncreated God, who livefor ever, in the Hebrew language, as also in Latin andGreek ; insomuch that the amphitheatre was filled,almost in an instant, with demons a hundred times ,more numerous than at the former conjurationsVincenzio meanwhile was busied in making a iwith the assistance of Gaddi, and burning a ogre:quantity of precious perfumes. I, by the directionof the necromancer, again desired to be in companywith my Angelica. He then turning uponme said, ' Know, they have declared that in the,space of a month you shall be in her company.*He then requested me to stand by him reilately, because the legions were now abovethousand more in number than he bad designed ;and besides these were the most dangerous j ithat, after they had answered my question, it Iloved him to be civil to them, and dismiss theiquietly. At the same time the boy under■n Itttce^Hnosteris athertuA^IiveJ^Handled.ames ^tionJ^HM:tioa^H::om-upon1 theseresoil^^lBENVENUTO Ceiling.pinta colo was in a terrible right, saying, thatthere were in the place a million of fierce menwho threatened to destroy us ; and that, besides,there were foiir armed giants of enormous stature,who endeavoured to break into our circle. Duringthis time, while the necromancer, trembling withfear, endeavoured by mild means to dismiss themin the best way he could, Vincenzio, who quiveredlike an aspen leaf, took care of the perfumes.Though I was as much afraid as any of them, Idid my utmost to conceal it ; so that I greatlycontributed to inspire the rest with resolution ;but the truth is, I gave myself over for a dead man,seeing the horrid fright the necromancer was in.*' The boy had placed his head between hisknees ; and said, ' In this attitude will I die ; forwe shall all surety perish.' I told him that thosedemons were under us, and what he saw wassmoke and shadow ; so bid him hold up his headand take courage. No sooner did he look up,than he cried out, 'The whole amphitheatre is burning,and the fire is just falling on us.' .So, coveringhis eyes with his hands, he again exclaimed, thatdestruction was inevitable, and he desired to seeno more. The necromancer intreated me to havea good Heart, and to take care to burn proper perfumes; upon which I turned to Vincen/io, andbade him burn all the most precious perfumes hehath. At the same time I cast my eyes upon Gaddi,who was terrified to such a degree, that he could2»370 BENVENUTO CELLINI.scarcely distinguish objects, and seemed to be hidead. Seeing him in this condition, I said to him,Gaddi, upon these occasions a man should notyield to fear, but stir about to give some assistance; so come directly, and put on more of theseperfumes.' Gaddi accordingly attempted to move;but the effect was annoying both to our sense ofhearing and smell, and overcame the perfumes.The boy perceiving this, once more venturedto raise his head, and, seeing me laugh, began totake courage, and said, ' The devils are flyingaway with a vengeance.' In this condition westaid, till the bell rang for morning prayers. Theboy again told us, that there remained but fewdevils, and those were at a great distance. Whenthe magician had performed the rest of his ceremonies,he stripped off his gown, and took up awallet full of books, which he had brought withhim. We all went out of the circle together,keeping as close to each other as we possibly could,especially the boy, who placed himself in themiddle, holding the necromancer by the coat, andme by the cloak.As we were going to our houses in the quarterof Banchi, the boy told us, that two of themons whom we had seen at the aniphithealwent on before us leaping and skipping, sometimesrunning upon the roofs of the houses, andsometimes on the ground. The priest declarethat, as often as he had entered magic circleracerBENVENUTO CEI.LTNI. 371nothing so extraordinary had ever happened tohim. As we went along, he would fain have persuadedme to assist at the consecrating a book,from which he said we should derive immenseriches. We should then ask the demons to discoverto us the various treasures with which theearth abounds, which would raise us to opulenceand power: but that those love-affairs were merefollies from which no good could be expected. Imade answer, that I would readily have acceptedhis proposal if I had understood I^tin. He assuredme that the knowledge of Latin was nowisematerial ; but that lie could never meet with apartner of resolution and intrepidity equal to mine,and that that would be to him an invaluable acquisition."Immediately subsequent to this scene,Cellini got into one of those scrapes, in whichhe was so frequently involved by his own violenceand ferocity ; and the connection was never againrenewed.The first remark that arises out of this narrativeis, that nothing is actually done by the supernaturalpersonages which are exhibited. The magicianreports certain answers as given by thedemons j but these answers do not appear to havebeen heard from any lips but those of him who wasthe creator or cause of the scene. The whole ofthe demons therefore were merely figures, producedby the magic lantern (which is said to have beeninvented by Roger Bacon), or by something of3b!287^ NOSTRADAMUS.that nature. The burning of the perfumes servedto produce a dense atmosphere .that was calculatedto exaggerate, and render more formidableand temfic, the figures which were exhibited.The magic lantern, which is now the amusementonly of servant-maids, and boys at school in theirholidays, served at this remote period, and whenthe power of optical delusions was unknown, toterrify men of wisdom and penetration, and makethem believe that legions of devils from the infernalregions were come among them, to produce themost horrible ejQTects, and suspend and invest thelaws of nature. It is probable, that the magician,who carried home with him a "wallet fill ofbooks," also carried at the same time the magiclantern or mirror, with its lights, which had servedhim for his exhibition, and that this was the causeof the phenomenon, that they observed two of thedemons which they had seen at the amphitheatre,going before them on their return, " leaping andskipping, sometimes running on the roofs of thehouses, and sometimes on the ground J*NOSTRADAMUS.Michael Nostradamus, a celebrated astrologer,was born at St. Remi in Provence in the year1503. He published a Century of Prophecies inobscure and oracular terms and barbarous verse,Brewster, Letters on Natural Magic, Letter IV.DOCTOR DEE. 373and other works. In the period in which helived the pretended art of astrological predictionwas in the highest repute ; and its professors weresought for by emperors and kings, and entertainedwith the greatest distinction and honour. Henrythe Second of Trance, moved with his great renown,sent for Nostradamus to court, received much gratificationfrom his visit, and atler\vard ordered himto Blois, that he might see the princes, his sons,calculate their horoscopes, and predict their futurefortunes. He was no less in favour afterwards withCharles the Ninth. He died in the year 1566.DOCTOR DEE.Dr. John Dee was a man who made a conspicuousfigure in the sixteenth century. He was bornat London in the year 1527. He was an eminentmathematician, and an indefatigable scholar. Hesays of himself, that, having been sent to Cambridgewhen he Wits fifteen, he persisted for severalyears in allowing himself only four hours for sleepin the twenty-four, and two for food and refreshment,and that he constantly occupied the remainingeighteen (the time for divine service only excepted)in study. At Cambridge he superintendedthe exhibition of a Greek play of Aristophanes,among the machinery of which he introduced anartificial scarabaeus, or beetle, which Hew up tothe palace of Jupiter, with a man on his back, and374 DOCTOR DEE.a basket of provisions. Tie ignorant and astonishedspectators ascribed this feat to the arts ofthe magician ; and Dee, annoyed by these suspicions,found it expedient to withdraw to thecontinent. Here he resided first at the universityof Louvain, at which place, his acquaintance wascourted by the dukes of Mantua and Medina, andfrom thence proceeded to Paris, where he gavelectures on EucHd with singular applause. mIn 1551 he returned to England, and was receivedwith distinction by sir John Cheek, andintroduced to secretary Cecil, and even to kingEdward, from whom he received a pension of onehundred crowns per afinuin, which he speedilyafter exchanged for a small living in the church.In the reign of queen Mary he was for sometimekindly treated ; but afterwards came intogreat trouble, and even into danger of his life. Heentered into correspondence with several of theservants of queen Elizabeth at Woodstock, andwas charged with practising against Mary's life byenchantments. Upon this accusation, he was seizedand confined ; and, being after several exam:tons discharged of the indictment, was tumover to bishop Bonner to see if any heresy coibe found in him. After a tedious persecutionwas set at liberty in 1555, and was so little subduedby what he had suffered, that in the followingyear he presented a petition to the queen, requestingher co-operation in a plan tor preservezed ^ne<^HDOCTOR DEE. 375and recovering certain monuments of classical antiquity.Tiie principal study of Dee however at thistime lay in astrology ; and accordingly, upon theaccession of Elizabeth, Robert Dudley, her chieffavourite, was sent to consult the doctor as to theaspect of the stars, that they might fix on an auspiciousday for celebrating her coronation. Someyears after we find him again on the continent ; andin 1571, being taken ill at Louvain, we are toldthe queen sent over two physicians to accomplishhis cure. Elizabeth afterwards visited him at hishouse at Mortlake, that she might view his magazineof mathematical instruments and curiosities ;and about this time employed him to defend hertitle to countries discovered in different parts ofthe globe. He says of himself, that he receivedthe most advantageous offers from Charles V, Ferdinand,Maximilian II, and Rodolph II, emperorsof Germany, and from the czar of Muscovy an offerof £200() sterling per annum, upon conditionthat he would reside in his dominions. All thesecircumstances were solemnly attested by Dee in aCompendious Rehearsal of his Life and Studies forhalf-century, composed at a later period, andread by him at his house at Mortlake to two commissionersappointed by Elizabeth to enquire intohis circumstances, accompanied with evidencesand documents to establish the particulars .Appendix to Johannes Glastoniensiit. edited by lleurnc.37BIJOCTOll DEE.Had Dee iI further than this, he wouldundoubtedly have ranked among the profoundestscholars and most eminent geniuses that adornedthe reign of the maiden queen. But he wasfortunately cursed with an ambition that nothicould satisfy ; and, having accustomed his milto the wildest reveries, and wrought himself upaa extravagant pitch of enthusiasm, he pursued acourse that involved him in much calamity, andclouded all his latter days with misery and ruin.He dreamed perpetually of the philosopher's tomand was haunted with the belief of intercourse ofsuperabundant character. It is almost impossibleto decide among these things, low much was illsion, and how much was forgery. Both were inextricablymixed in his proceedings; and this extractdiary victim probably could not in his most diipassionate moments precisely distinguish whatlonged to the one, and what to the other.As Dee was an enthusiast, so he perpetually iq.exposed in his meditations prayers of the greatestemphasis and fervour. As he was one dayin November 1582, engaged in these devoutexcises, he says that there appeared to himangel Uriel at the west window of his Museumwho gave him a translucent stone, or chrystal,a convex form, that had the quality, when intentlysurveyed, of presenting apparitions, andeven emitting sounds, in consequence of whichthe observer could hold conversations, ask queltiediDOCTOR DEE.tons and receive answers from the figures he sawin the mirror. It was often necessary that thestone should be turned one way and another in differentpositions, before the person who consultedit gained the right focus ; and then the objects tobe observed would sometimes shew themselves onthe surface of the stone, and sometime in differentparts of the room by virtue of the action of thestone. It had also this peculiarity, that only oneperson, having been named as seer, could see thefigures exhibited, and hear the voices that spoke,though there might be various persons in the room.It appears that the person who discerned thesevisions must have his eyes and his ears uninterruptedlyengaged in the affair, so that, as Dee experienced,to render the communication effectual, theremust be two human beings concerned in the scene,one of them to describe what he saw, and to recitethe dialogue that took place, and the other immediatelyto commit to paper all that his partnerdictated. Dee for some reason chose for himselfthe part of the amanuensis, and had to seek for acompanion, who was to watch the stone, and repeatto him whatever he saw and heard.It happened opportunely that, a short time beforeDee received this gift from on high, he contracteda familiar intercourse with one EdwardKelly of Worcestershire, whom he found speciallyqualified to perform the part which it was necessaryto Dee to have adequately filled. Kelly was378 Doctor DEE.an extraordinary character, and in some respect*exactly such a person as Dee wanted. He wasjust twenty-eight years younger than the memorablepersonage, who now received him as an imate, and was engaged in his service at a stipulatedsalary of fifty pounds a year.Kelly entered upon life with a somewhat unfittunate adventure. He was accused, when a youman, of forgery, brought to trial, convicted,lost his ears in the pillory. This misfortune howlever by no means daunted him. He was assiduouslyengaged in the search for the philosopher'sstone. He had an active mind, great enterprise,and a very domineering temper. Another adventurein which he had been engaged previously tohis knowledge of Dee, was in digging up the bodyof a man, who had been buried only the day before,that he might compel him by incantationto answer questions, and discover future evenThere was this difference therefore between the'two persons previously to their league. Dee wasa man of regular manners and unspotted life, honouredby the great, and favourably noticedcrowned heads in different parts of the woriiwhile Kelly was a notorious profligate) accustom)to the most licentious actions, and under nostrain from morals or principle.One circumstance that occurred early inacquaintance of Kelly and Dee it is necessarymention. It serves strikingly to illustrate theDOCTOR DEE.tendency of the junior and impetuous party overhis more gifted senior. Kelly led Dee, we are nottold under what pretence, to visit the celebratedruins of Glastonbury Abbey in iSomersetshire.Here, as these curious travellers searched into everycorner of the scene, they met by some rare accidentwith a vase containing a certain portion ofthe actual elixir vtfes, that rare and precious liquid,so much sought after, which has the virtue of convertingthe baser metals into gold and silver. Ithad remained here perhaps ever since the lime ofthe highly-gifted St. Dunstan in the tenth century.This they carried oft' in triumph : but we are nottold of any special use to which they applied it,till a few years after, when they were both on thecontinent.The first record of their consultations with thesuperabundant spirits, was of the date of December2, 1581, at Lexdcn Heath in the county of Essex; and fi"om this time they went on in a regularseries of consultations with and enquiries fromthese miraculous visitors, a great part of whichwill appear to the uninitiated extremely puerileand ludicrous, but which were committed to writingwith the most scrupulous exactness by Dee,the first part still existing in manuscript, but thegreater portion from aS May 1583 to 1G08, withsome interruptions, having been committed to thepress by Dr. Merit Casaubon in a well-sized folioin 1659, under the title of "A True and l-'aillifiilDOCTOR DEE.Relation of what passed between Dr. John Deeand some Spirits, tending, had it succeeded, to agenera! alteration of most states and kingdoms ofthe world."Kelly and Dee had not long been engagedthese supernatural colloquies, before an event occurredwhich gave an entirely new turn to theirproceedings. Albert Alaski, a Polish nobleman,lord palatine of the principality of Stadia, cameover at this time into England, urged, as hesaid, by a desire personally to acquaint himselfwith the glories of the reign of Elizabeth, and theevidences of her unrivalled talents. The queenand her favourite, the earl of Leicester, receivedhim with every mark of courtesy and attention,and, having shewn him all the wonders of hercourt at Westminster and Greenwich, sent him toOxford, with a command to the dignitariesheads of colleges, to pay him every attention, aito lay open to his view all their rarest curiosties. Among other things worthy of notice, Aliki enquired for the celebrated Dr. Dee, andpressed the greatest impatience to be acquaintwith him.Just at this juncture the earl of Leicester happenedto spy Dr. Dee among the crowd who attendedat a royal levee. The earl immediatelyadvanced towards him ; and, in his frank manner,having introduced him to Alaski, expressed hisintention of bringing the Pole to dine with tloiDOCTOR Dee.doctor 'at Iiiss house at Mortlakc. Embarrassedwith this unexpected honour. Dee no sooner gothome, than he dispatched an express to the earl,honestly confessing that he should be unable toentertain such guests in a suitable manner, withoutbeing reduced to the expedient of selling orpawning his plate, to procure him the means ofdoing so. Leicester communicated the doctor'sperplexity to Elizabeth ; and the queen immediatelydispatched a messenger with a present of fortyangels, or twenty pounds, to enable him to receivehis guests as became him.A great intimacy immediately commenced betweenDee and the stranger. Alaski, though possessingan extensive territory, was reduced by theprodigality of himself or his ancestors to muchembarrassment j and on the other hand this noblemanappeared to Dee an instrument well qualifiedto accomplish his ambitious purposes. Alaski wasextremely desirous to look into the womb of time ;and Dee, it is Hkely, suggested repeated hints ofhis extraordinary power from his possession of thephilosopher's stone. After two or three interviews,and much seeming importunity on the part of thePole, Dee and Kelly graciously condescended toadmit Alaski as a third party to their secret meetingswith their supernatural visitors, from whichthe rest of the world were carefully excluded. Herethe two Englishmen made use of the vulgar artifice,of promising extraordinary good fortune toDOCTOR DEE.the person of whom they purposed to make u§^By the intervention of the miraculous stone theytold the wondering traveller, that he should shortlybecome king of Poland, with the accession of severalother kingdoms, that he should overcomemany armies of Saracens and Paynim, and provea mighty conqueror. Dee at the same time complainedof the disagreeable condition in which hewas at home, and that Burleigh and Walsinghamwere his malicious enemies. At length they concertedamong themselves, that they, Alaski, andDee and Kelly with their wives and families,should clandestinely withdraw out of England, andproceed with all practicable rapidity to A!aski*sterritory in the kingdom of Poland. Tliey embarkedon this voyage 21 September, and arrivedat Stadia the third of February following.At this place however the strangers remainedlittle more than a month. Alaski found his financesin such disorder, that it was scarcely possible forhim to feed the numerous guests he had broughtalong with him. The promises of splendid conquestswhich Dee and Kelly profusely heaped uponhim, were of no avail to supply the deficiency ofhis present income. And the elixir they broughtfrom Glastonbury was, as they said, so incrediblyrich in virtue, that they were compelled to losemuch time in making projection by way of trial,before they coidd hope to arrive at the proper temperamentfor producing the effect they desired.DOCTOR DEr. seinthe following month Alaska with Iiiss visitorsparsed to Cracow, the residence of the kings of Poland.Here they remained five montis, Dee andKelly perpetually amusing the Pole with the extraordinaryvirtue of the stone, which had beenbrought from heaven by an angel, and busied in athousand experiments with the elixir, and manytedious preparations which they pronounced tobe necessary, before the compound could havethe proper effect. The prophecies were utteredwith extreme confidence ; but no external indicationswere afllbrded, to shew that in any waythey were likely to be realised. The experimentsand exertions of the laboratory were incessant ;but no transmutation was produced. At lengthAlaski found himself unable to sustain the train offollowers he had brought out of England. Withmountains of wealth, the treasures of the worldpromised, they were reduced to the most grievousstraits for the means of daily subsistence. Finallythe zeal of Alaski diminished ; he had no longerthe same faith in the projectors that had deludedhim; and he devised a way of sending them forwardwith letters of recommendation to Rodolph II,emperor of Germany, at his imperial seat of Prague,where they arrived on the ninth of August.Rodolph was a man, whose character and habitsof life they judged excellently adapted to their purpose.Dee had a long conference with the emperor,in which he explained to him what wonderful384 DOCTOR DEE.^H th.^H obLthings the spirits promised to this prince,be proved exemplary of life, and obedient to thisuggestions, that he should be the greatestqueror in the world, and should take captive theTurk in his city of Constantinople. Rodolph wasextremely courteous in his reception, and sent awayDee with the highest hopes that he had at lengthfound a personage with whom he should infalliblysucceed to the extent of his wishes. He soughthowever a second interview, and was baffled. Atonetime the emperor was going to his countrypalace near Prague, and at another was engaged inthe pleasures of the chace.He also complained that he was not sufficientlyfamiliar with the Latin tongue, to manage the conferenceswith Dee in a satisfactory manner inperson. He therefore deputed Curtsies, a manhigh in his confidence, to enter into the necessarydetails with his learned visitor. Dee also contrivedto have Spinosa, the ambassador from Madrid tothe court of the emperor, to urge his suit. Thefinal result was that Rodolph declined any furtherintercourse with Dee. He turned a deaf ear tohis prophecies, and professed to be altogether voidof faith as to his promises respecting the philosopher'sstone. Dee however was led on perpetuallywith hopes of better things from the emperor, tillthe spring of the year 1585. At length he wasobliged to fly from Prague, the bishop of Placentia,the pope's nuncio, having it in command fi'om hisc(^BDOCTOR Dee.Scholiness to represent to llodolph how discreditableit was for him to harbour English magicians, heretics,at his court.From Prague Dee and his followers proceeded toCracow. Here he found means of introduction toStephen, king of Poland, to whin immediately heinsinuated as intelligence from heaven, that Rodolph,the emperor, would speedily be assassinated,and that Stephen would succeed him in the throneof Germany. Stephen appears to have receivedDee with more condescension than Rudolph haddone, and was once present at his incantationand interview with the invisible spirits. Deealso lured him on with promises respecting thephilosopher's stone. Meanwhile the magician washimself reduced to the strangest expedients forsubsistence. He appears to have daily expectedgreat riches from the transmutation of metals, andwas unwilling to confess that he and his family werein the mean time almost starving.When king Stephen at length became weariedwith fruitless expectation. Dee was fortunate enoughto meet with another and more patient dupe inOrenburg, a nobleman of considerable wealth atCremona in the kingdom of Bohemia. Here Deeappears to have remained til) 1<589, widen he wassent for home by Elizabeth. In what manner heproceeded during this interval, and from whencehe drew his supplies, we aire only left to conjecture.He lured on his victim with the usual temptation,386 DOCTOR DEE.promising him that he should be king of Poland.In the mean time it is recorded by him, that, onthe ninth of December, 1586, he arrived at thepoint of projection, having cut a piece of metal outof a brass warming-pan ; and merely heating it bythe fire, and pouring on it a portion of the elixir,it was presently converted into pure silver. Wearetold that he sent the warming-pan and the pieceof silver to queen Elizabeth, that she might beconvinced by her own eyes bow exactly they tallied,and that the one had unquestionably been a portionof the other. About the same time it is said,that Dee and his associate became more freein their expenditure; and in one instance it isstated as an example, that Kelly gave away to thevalue of four thousand pounds sterling in gold ringson occasion of the celebration of the marriage ofone of his maid-servants. On the twenty-seventhand thirtieth of July, 1587f Dee has recorded inhis journal his gratitude to God for his unspeakablemercies on those days imparted, which has beeninterpreted to mean further acquisitions of wealthby means of the elixir.Meanwhile perpetual occasions of dissentionoccurred between the two great confederates,Kelly and Dee. They were in many respectsunfitted for each other's society. Dee was a man,who from his youth upward had been indefatigablein study and research, had the consciousnessof great talents and intellect, and had beenDoctor DEE. 387universally recognised aa such, and had possesseda high character for fervent piety and blamelessmorals. Kelly was an impudent adventurer, aman of no principles and of blasted reputation ;yet fertile in resources, full of self-confidence, andof no small degree of ingenuity. In their mutualintercourse the audacious adventurer often hadthe upper hand of the man who had lately possesseda well-earned reputation. Kelly frequentlyprofessed himself tired of enacting the character ofinterpreter of the Gods under Dee. He found Deeill all cases running away with the superior consideration; while he in his own opinion best deservedto possess it. The straitness of their circumstances,and the misery they were occasionallycalled on to endure, we may be sure did not improvetheir good understanding. Kelly once andagain threatened to abandon his leader. Deecontinually soothed him, and prevailed on him tostay.Kelly at length started a very extraordinaryproposition. Kelly, as interpreter to the spirits,and being the only person who heard and saw anything,we may presume made them say whateverhe pleased. Kelly and Dee had both of themwives. Kelly did not always live harmoniouslywith the partner of his bed. He sometimes wentso far as to say that he hated her. Dee wasmore fortunate. His wife was a person of goodfamily, and had hitherto been irreproachable inDOCTOR DEE.her demeanour. The spirits one day revealed to 'Kelly, that they must henceforth have their wivesin common. The wite of Kelly was barren, andthis curse could no otherwise be removed. Havingstarted the proposition, Kelly played the reluctantparty. Dee, who was pious and enthusiastic, inclinedto submit. He first indeed started thenotion, that it could only be meant that theyshould live in mutual harmony and good understanding.The spirits protested against this, andinsisted upon the literal interpretation. Deeyielded, and compared his case to that of Abraham,who at the divine command consented tosacrifice his son Isaac. Kelly alleged that thesespirits, which Dee had hitherto regarded as messengersfrom God, could be no other than servantsof Satan. He persisted in his disobedience; andthe spirits declared that he was no longer worthyto be their interpreter, and that another mediatormust be found.They named Arthur Dee, the son of the possessorof the stone, a promising and well-disposedboy of only eight years of age. Dee consecratedthe youth accordingly to his high function byprayers and religious rites for several days together.Kelly took horse and rode away, protesting thatthey should meet no more. Arthur entered uponhis office, April 15, 1587. The experiment provedabortive. He saw something ; but not to the pureheard no voices. At length Kelly,pose.DOCTOR DEE. 389the third day, entered the room unexpectedly,by miraculous fortune," as Dee says, " or adivine fate," sate down between them, and immediatelysaw figures, and heard voices, which thelittle Arthur was not enabled to perceive. In particularhe saw four heads inclosed in an obelisk,which he perceived to represent the two magiciansand their wives, and interpreted to signify thatunlimited communion in which they were destinedto engage. The matter however being still anoccasion of scruple, a spirit appeared, who by thelanguage he used was plainly no other than theSaviour of the world, and took away from themthe larger stone ; for now it appears there weretwo stones. This miracle at length induced altparties to submit ; and the divine command wasno sooner obeyed, than the stone which had beenabstracted, was found again under the pillow ofthe wife of Dee.It is not easy to imagine a state of greater degradationthan that into which this person lead nowfallen. During all the prime and vigour of his intellect,he had sustained an eminent part amongthe learned and the great, distinguished and honouredby Elizabeth and her favourite. But hisunbounded arrogance and self-opinion could neverbe satisfied. And seduced, partly by his ownweakness, and partly by the insinuations of acrafty adventurer, he became a mystic of the mostdishonourable sort. He was induced to believe in390 DOCTOR DEE.a series of miraculous communications withoutCommon sense, engaged in the pursuit of the philosopher'sstone, and no doubt imagined that he waspossessed of the great secret. Stirred up by theseconceptions, he left his native country, and becamea wanderer, preying upon the credulity of oneprince and eminent man after another, and nosooner was he discarded by one idctim of credulity,than he sought another, a vagabond on the earth,reduced from time to time to the greatest distress,persecuted, dishonoured and despised by everyparty in their turn. At length by incessant degreeshe became dead to all moral distinctions,and all sense of honour and self-respect. " Professinghimself to be wise he became a fool, walked inthe vanity of his imagination," and had his understandingunder total eclipse. The immoral systemof conduct in which he engaged, and the strangeand shocking blasphemy that he mixed with it,render him at this time a sort of character that itis painful to contemplate.Led on as Dee at this time was by the ascendancyand consummate art of Kelly, there was farfrom existing any genuine harmony between them ;and, after many squabbles and heart-burnings, theyappear finally to have parted in January 1589> Deehaving, according to his own account, at that timedelivered up to Kelly, the elixir and the differentimplements by which the transmutation of metalswas to be effected.- JL .DOCTOR DEE.Various overtures appear to have passed nowfor some years between Dee and queen Elizabeth,intended to lead to his restoration to his nativecountry. Dee lead upon different occasions expresseda wish to that effect ; and Elizabeth in thespring of 1589 scut him a message, that removedfrom him all further thought of hesitation and delay.He set out from Treboiia with three coaches,and a baggage train correspondent, and had anaudience of the queen at Richmond towards theclose of that year. Upon the whole it is impossibleperhaps not to believe, that Elizabeth was influencedin this proceeding by the various reportsthat had reached her of his extraordinary successwith the philosophe's stone, and the boundlesswealth he had it in his power to bestow. Manyprinces at this time contended with each other, asto who should be happy enough by fair means orby force to have under his control the fortunatepossessor of the great secret, and thus to have inhis possession the means of inexhaustible wealth.Shortly after this time the emperor Rudolph seizedand committed to prison Kelly, the partner of Deein this inestimable faculty, and, having once enlargedhim, placed him in custody a second time.Meanwhile Elizabeth is said to have made himpressing overtures of so flattering a nature thathe determined to escape and return to his nativecountry. For this purpose he is said to have tornleets of his bed, and twisted them into a rope.DOCTOR DEE.^that by that means he might descend from thetower in which he was continued. But, being acorpulent man of considerable weight, the ropebroke with him before he was half way down, and,having fractured one or both his legs, and beingotherwise considerably bruised, he died shortlyafterwards. This happened in the year loss.Dee (according to his own account, deliveredcommissioners appointed by queen Elizabethenquire into his circumstances) came from Tibona to England in a state little inferior to that ofan ambassador. He had three coaches, with fourhorses harnessed to eacli coach, two or three loadedwaggons, and a guard, sometimes of six, and sometimesof twenty-four soldiers, to defend him fromenemies, who were supposed to lie in wait toexcept his passage. Immediately on his arrivalhad an audience of the queen at Richmond, bywhom he was most graciously received. She gavespecial orders, that he should do what he would inchemistry and philosophy, and that do one shouldon any account molest him.But here end the prosperity and greatness ofthis extraordinary man. If he possessed the powerof turning all baser metals into gold, he certainlyacted unadvisedly in surrendering this power tohis confederate, immediately before his return tohis native country. He parted at the same timewith his gift of prophecy, since, though he broughtaway with him his miraculous stone, and atingIom ^DOCTOR DEE.pastimeappointed one Burttioloinew, and another oneHickman, his interpreters to look into the stone,to see the marvellous sights it was expected to disclose,and to hear the voices anti report the wordsthat issued from it, the experiments proved in bothinstances abortive. They wanted the finer sense,or the unparalleled effrontery and inexhaustible invention,which Kelly alone possessed.The remainder of the voyage of the life of Deewas "bound in shallows and in miseries." QueenElizabeth we may suppose soon found that herdreams of immense wealth to be obtained throughhis intervention were nugatory. Yet would shenot desert the favourite of her former years. Hepresently began to complain of poverty and difficulties.He represented that the revenue of twolivings he held in the church had been withheldfrom him from the time of his going abroad. Hestated that, shortly after that period, his house hadbeen broken into and spoiled by a lawless mob, instigatedby his ill fame as a dealer in prohibitedand unlawful arts. They destroyed or dispersedhis library, consisting of four thousand volumes,seven hundred of which were manuscripts, and ofinestimable rarity. They ravaged his collection ofcurious implements and machines. He enumeratedthe expences of his journey home by Elizabeth'scommand, tor which he seemed to considerthe queen as his debtor. Elizabeth in consequenceordered him at several times two or three small•394 DOCTOR DEE.sums. But this being insufficient, she was prevailedupon in 1592 to appoint two membersof her privy council to repair to his house atMortlake to enquire into particulars, to whom hemade a Compendious Rehearsal of half a hundredyears of his life, accompanied with documents andvouchers.It is remarkable that in this Rehearsal no mentionoccurs of the miraculous stone brought downto him by an angel, or of his pretensions respectingthe transmutation of metals. He merely restshis claims to public support upon his literary labours,and the acknowledged eminence of his intellectualfaculties. He passes over the years hehad lately spent in foreign countries, in entiresilence, unless we except his account of the particularsof his journey home. His representationto Elizabeth not being immediately productive ofall the effects he expected, he wrote a letter tearchbishop Whitgift two years after, lamentingthe delay of the expected relief, and complainingof the " untrue reports, opinions and fables, whichhad for so many years been spread of his studies**He represents these studies purely as literary,frank, and wholly divested of mystery. If theTrue Relation of what passed for many yearsbetween Dr. Dee and certain Spirits** had not beenpreserved, and afterwards printed, we might havebeen disposed to consider all that was said on thissubject as a calumny.DOCTOR DEE.39.5The promotion which Dee had set his heart on,was to the office of master of St. Cross's Hospitalnear Winchester, which the queen had promisedhim when the present holier should be made abishop. But this never happened. He obtainedhowever in lieu of it the chancellorship of St.Paul's cathedral, H December 1594, which in thefollowing year he exchanged for the wardenshipof the college at Manchester. In this last officehe continued till the year 1602 (according toother accounts I6OI), during which time he complainedof great dissentions and retVactoriness onthe part of the fellows ; though it may perhaps bedoubted whether equal blame may not fairly beimputed to the arrogance and restlessness of thewarden. At length he receded altogether frompublic life, and retired to his ancient domicile atMortlake. He made one attempt to propitiatethe favour of king James ; but it was inettectua!.Elizabeth had known him in the flower and vigourof his days; he had boasted the uniform patronageof her chief favourite ; he had been recognised bythe philosophical and the learned as inferior to noneof their body; and he had finally excited the regardof his ancient mistress by his pretence to revelations,and the promises he held out of the philosopher'sstone. She could not shake otf her ingrafted prejudicein his favour ; she could not find in her heartto cast him aside in his old :and deiI cay.Buthen came a king, to whom in his prosperityandsun-S90 DOCTOR DEE.shine he had been a stranger. He wasted hislatter days in dotage, obscurity and universalneglect. No one has told us how be contrived tosubsist. We may be sure that his constant companionswere mortification and the most humiliatingprivations. He lingered on till the year1608 ; and the ancient people in the time of AntonyWood, nearly a century afterwards, pointedto his grave in the chancel of the church at Mort-lake,and professed to know the very spot wherehis remains were deposited.The history of Dee is exceedingly interesting!not only on its own account ; not only foreminence of his talents and attainments, andincredible sottishness and blindness of understandingwhich marked his maturer years ; but as strikinglyillustrative of the credulity and superstitiousfaith of the time in which he lived. At a laterperiod his miraculous stone which displayed suchwonders, and was attended with so long a seriesof supernatural vocal communications would havedeceived nobody : it was scarcely more ingeniousthan the idle tricks of the most ordinary conjurer.But at this period the crust of long ages of darknesshad not yet been fully worn away. Men didnot trust to the powers of human understanding,and were not familiarised with the main canons ofevidence and belief Dee passed six years on thecontinent, proceeding from the court of one princeor potent nobleman to another, listened to forhere ^iDOCTOR Der.time by each, each regarding his oracular communicationswith astonishment and alarm, and atlength irresolutely casting him off, when he foundlittle or no difficulty in running a like career withanother.It is not the least curious circumstance respectingthe life of Dee, that in 1659. half a centuryafter his death, there remained still such an interestrespecting practices of this sort, as to authorisethe printing a folio volume, in a complex andelaborate form, of his communications with spirits,The book was brought out by Dr. Merit Casaubon,no contemptible name in the republic of letters.The editor observes respecting the hero and hisachievements in the Preface, that, "though hiscarriage in certain respects seemed to lay in worksof darkness, yet all was tendered by him to kingsand princes, and by all (England alone excepted)was listened to for a good while with good respect,and by some for a long time embraced and entertained."He goes on to say, that " the fame of itmade the pope bestir himself, and filled all, bothlearned and unlearned, with great wonder andastonishment." He adds, that, *' as a whole it isundoubtedly not to be paralleled in its kind in anyage or country." In a word the editor, thoughdisavowing an entire belief in Dee's pretensions,yet plainly considers them with some degree ofdeference, and insinuates to how much more regardsuch undue and exaggerated pretensions are398 EARL OF DERBY.entitled, than the impious incredulity of certainmodern Sadducees, who say that " there is no resurrection; neither angel, nor spirit." The beliefin witchcraft and sorcery has undoubtedly metwith some degree of favour from this considertion, inasmuch as, by recognising the correspondenceof human beings with the invisible world ,ithas one principle in common with the believers inrevelation, of which the more daring infidel isdestitute.EARL OF DERBY.The circumstances of the death of Ferdinand,fifth earl of Derby, in 1 594, have particularly engagedthe attention of the contemporary historians.Hesket, an emissary of the Jesuits and EnglishCatholics abroad, was importunate with this noblemanto press his title to the crown, as the legsrepresentative of his great-grandmother Mary,youngest daughter to king Henry the Seventh.But the earl, fearing, as it is said, that this wasonly a trap to ensnare him, gave information againstHesket to the government, in consequence of whichhe was apprehended, tried and executed. Heskethad threatened the earl that, if he did not complywith his suggestion, he should live only a shorttime. Accordingly, four months afterwards, theearl was seized with a very uncommon disease.A waxen image was at the same time found in hisKINO James's voyage to Norway. 399chamber with hairs in its belly exactly of the samecolour as those of the earl,. The image was, bysome zealous friend of lord Derby, burned ; butthe earl grew worse. He was himself thoroughlypersuaded that he was bewitched. Stow has insertedin his Annals a minute account of his diseasefrom day to day, with a description of all thesymptoms.KING JAMES'S VOYAGE TO NORWAY.While Elizabeth amused herself with the supernaturalgifts to which Dee advanced his claim,and consoled the adversity and destitution to whichthe old man, once so extensively honoured, wasnow reduced, a scene of a very different complexionwas played in the northern part of theisland. Trials for sorcery were numerous in thereign of Mary queen of Scots ; the comparativedarkness and ignorance of the sister kingdom renderedit a soil still more favourable than Englandto the growth of these gloomy superstitions. Butthe mind of James, at once inquisitive, pedanticand self-sufficient, peculiarly fitted him for thepursuit of these narrow-minded and obscure speculations.One combination of circumstanceswrought up this propensity within him to thegreatest height.James was born in the year 15G(>. He was the• Camden, anno 1693. 1694.400 KING James VOYAGE TO NORWAY.only direct heir to the crown of Scotland ; andhe was in near prospect of succession to that ofEngland. Tiie zeal of the Protestant Reformationhad wrought up the anxiety of men's minds to afever of anticipation and forecast. Consequently,towards the end of the reign of Ehzabetit, a pointwhich greatly arrested the general attention wasthe expected marriage of the king of Scotland.Elizabeth, with that petty jealousy which obscuredthe otherwise noble qualities of her spirit, soughtto countermine this marriage, that her rival ;expected successor might not be additionally gracewith the honours of offspring. James fixed his 'mind upon a daughter of the king of Denmark.By the successful cabals of Elizabeth he was baffledin this suit; and the lady was finally married 1the duke of Bavaria. The king of Denmark 1another daughter; and James made proposals 1this princess. Still he was counteracted ; till ilength he sent a splendid embassy, with ample ''powers and instructions, and the treaty was concluded.The princess embarked ; but, waxen shehad now for some time been expected in Scotland,news was brought instead, that she had been drivenback by tempests on the coast of Norway. Theyoung king felt keenly his disappointment, andgallantly resolved to sail in person for the port,where his intended consort was detained by theshattered condition of her fleet. James arrivedon the twenty-second of October 1581), and havingmightand^lice^Hhirark.fled:d topIs t^BmmKING James's voyage to norway.consummated his marriage, was induced by theinvitation of his father-in-law to pass the winter atCopenhagen, from whence he did not sail till thespring, and, after having encountered a variety ofcontrary winds and some danger, reached Edinburghon the first of May in the following year.It was to be expected that variable weather andstorms should characterise the winter-season inthese sea-s. But the storms were of longer continuanceand of more frequent succession, than wasusually known. And at this period, when theproposed consort of James first, then the kinghimself, and finally both of them, and the hope ofProtestant succession, were committed to themercy of the waves, it is not wonderful that theprocess of the seasons should be accurately marked,and that those varieties, which are commonly ascribedto second causes, should have been imputedto extraordinary and supernatural interference. Itwas affirmed that, in the king's return from Denmark,his ship was impelled by a different windfrom that which acted on the rest of his fleet.It happened that, soon after James's return toScotland, one Ellis Duncan, a servant-maid, forthe extraordinary circumstances that attended certaincures which she performed, became suspectedof witchcraft. Her master questioned her on thesubject ; but she would own nothing. Perceivingher obstinacy, the master took upon himself of hisown authority, to extort confession from her bySo♦02 KING James's voyage to Norway.torture. In this he succeeded ; and, having relateddivers particulars of witchcraft of herself, sheproceeded to accuse others. The persons she accusedwere cast into the public prison.One of these, Agnes Sampson by name, at firststoutly resisted the torture. But, it being more strenuouslyapplied, she by and by became extremelycommunicative. It was at this period that Jamespersonally engaged in the examinations. We arctold that he " took great delight in being present,"and putting the proper questions. The unhappyvictim was introduced into a room plentifully furnishedwith implements of torture, while the kingwaited in an apartment at a convenient distance,till the patient was found to be in a suitable frameof mind to make the desired communications. Nosooner did he or she signify that they were ready,and should no longer refuse to answer, than theywere introduced, fainting, sinking under recentsufferings which they had no longer strength toresist, into the royal presence. And here satJames, in envied ease and conscious " delight,"wrapped up in the thought of Diis own sagacity',framing the enquiries that might best extort thedesired evidence, and calculating with a judgmentby no means to be despised, from the bearing,the turn of features, and the complexion ofthe victim, the probability whether he was makinga franc and artless confession, or had stillsecret desire to impose on the royal examiner,KING James S VOYAGE TO NORWAYfrom a different motive was disposed to make useof the treacherous authority which the situationafforded, to gratify his revenge upon some persontowards whom he might be inspired with latenthatred and malice.Agnes Sampson related with what solicitudeshe lead sought to possess some fragment of thelinen belonging to the king. If he had worn it,and it had contracted any soil from his royal person,this would be enough ; she would infallibly,by applying her incantations to this fragment,have been able to undermine the the of the sovereign.She told how she with two hundred otherwitches had sailed in sieves from Leith to NorthBerwick church, how they had there encounteredthe devil in person, how they had feasted with him,and what obscenities had been practised. She relatedthat in this voyage they had drowned a cat,having first baptised him, and that immediatelya dreadful storm had arisen, and in this verystorm the king's ship lead been separated fi^om therest of his fleet. She took James aside, and, thebetter to convince him, undertook to repeat tohim the conversation, the dialogue which Jiadpassed from the one to the other, between theking and queen in their bedchamber on the .Agnes Sampson was condemned tothe flames.404 JOHN Finn.JOHN Finn.Another of the miserable victims on this occasionwas John Fian, a schoolmaster at Talentnear Edinburgh, a young man, whom the ignorantpopulace had decorated with the style of doctor.He was tortured by means of a rope stronglytwisted about his head, and by the boots. Hewas at length brought to confession. He told ofa young girl, the sister of one of his scholars, withwhom he had been deeply enamoured. He hadproposed to the boy to bring him three hairs fromthe most secret part of his sister's body, possessingwhich he should be enabled by certain incantationsto procure himself the love of the girl. The boyat his mother's instigation brought to Fian threehairs from a virgin heifer instead ; and, applyinghis conjuration to them, the consequence had beenthat the heifer forced her way into his school,leaped upon him in amorous fashion, and wouldnot be restrained from following him about theneighbourhood.This same Fian acted an important part in thescene at North Berwick church. As being bestfitted for the office, he was appointed recorder orclerk to the devil, to write down the names, andadminister the oaths to the witches. He was activelyconcerned in the enchantment, by means ofwhich the king's ship had nearly been lost on hisreturn from Denmark. This part of his proceed-kingJAMES S DEMONOLOGY.ing however does not appear in his own confession,but in that of the witches who were his fellow-conspirators.He further said, that, the night after he madehis confession, the devil appeared to him, andwas in a furious rage against him for his disloyaltyto his service, telling him that he should severelyrepent his infidelity. According to his own account,he stood firm, and defied the devil to dohis worst. Meanwhile the next night he escapedout of prison, and was with some difficulty retaken.He however finally denied all his former confessions,said that they were falshoods forced fromhim by mere dint of torture, and, though he was nowonce more subjected to the same treatment to suchan excess as must necessarily have crippled him ofhis limbs for ever, he proved inflexible to the last.At length by the king's order he was strangled,and his body cast into the flames. Multitudes ofunhappy men and women perished in this cruelpersecution'.KING JAMES'S DEMONOLOGY.It was by a train of observations and experiencelike this, that James was prompted seven yearsafter to compose and publish his Dialogues onDemonology in Three Books. In the Preface tothis book he says, " The fearful! abounding at this• Pitcairn, Trials in Scotland in Five Volume, to.406 KING James's demonology.time in this countrey, of these detestable slaves ofthe Duel, the Witches or enchanters, hath movedme (beloved Reader) to dispatch in post this followingTreatise of mine, not in any wise (as I protest)to serve for a shew of my learning and in-give, but onely (moved of conscience) to pleasethereby, so farre as I can, to resolve the doubtinghearts of many, both that such assaults of Satanare most certainly practised, and that the instrumentsthereof merits most severely to be punished."In the course of the treatise he affirms, " thatbanes, or wines, or never so differed personsmay serve for sufficient witnesses and proofs insuch trials ; for who but Witches can be proves,and so witnesses of the doings of Witches* ?'* But,lest innocent persons should be accused, and sufferfalsely, he tells us, " There are two other goodhelps that may be used for their trial : the one is,the finding of their marke [a mark that the devilwas supposed to impress upon some part of theirpersons], and the trying the insensibleness thereof:the other is their fleeting on the water : for, as inasecret murther, if the dead carcase be at anytimethereafter handled by the murtherer, it willgush out of blood, as if the blood were crying tothe heaven for revenge of the murtherer, Godhaving appointed that secret supernatural signe,for trial of that secret unnatural crime, so it appearsthat God hath appointed (for a supernatural• King James's Works, p. 135.STATUTE, 1 JAMES I.signe of the monstrous impietie of Witches) thatthe water shall refuse to receive them in her bosome,that haue shaken off' them the sacred waterof Baptisme, and wilfully refused the benefitthereof: No, not so much as their eyes are able toshed tears (threaten and torture them as ye please)while first they repent (God not permitting themto dissemble their obstinate in so horrible acrimes)"STATUTE, I JAMES 1.In consequence of the strong conviction Jamesentertained on the subject, the English parliamentwas induced, in the first year of his reign, to supersedethe milder proceedings of Elizabeth, andto enact that " if any person shall use, practice, orexercise any invocation or conjuration of any eviland wicked spirit, or shall consult, covenant with,entertain, employ, feed or reward any evil andwicked spirit, to or for any intent and purpose;or take up any dead man, woman, or child out oftheir grave, or the skin, bone, or any part of anydead person, to be used in any manner of witchcraft,sorcery or enchantment, or shall use anywitchcraft, sorcery or enchantment, whereby anyperson shall be killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed,pined or lamed in its or her body, or anypart thereof; that then evciy such offender, their'■ KiiifT James's Works, p. 135. 186.408 FORMAN AND OTHERS.aiders, abettors and counsellors shall suffer thepains of death' And upon this statute great numberswere condemned and executed.FORMAN AND OTHERS.There is a story of necromancy which unfortunatelymakes too prominent a figure in the historyof the court and character of king James the FirstRobert earl of Essex, son of queen Elizabeth'sfavourite, and who afterwards became commanderin chief of the parliamentary forces in the civilwars, married lady Frances Howard, a youngerdaughter of the earl of Suffolk, the bride and bridegroombeing the one thirteen, the other fourteenyears old at the time of the marriage. The relativesof the countess however, who had broughtabout the match, thought it most decorous to separatethem for some time, and, while she remainedat home with her friends, the bridegroom travelledfor three or four years on the continent. The ladyproved the greatest beauty of her time, but alongwith this had the most libertine and unprincipleddispositions.The very circumstance that she had vowed herfaith at the altar when she was not properly capableof choice, inspired into the wayward mind ofthe countess a repugnance to her husband. Hecame from the continent, replete with accomplishments; and we may conclude, from the figure heFORMAN AND OTUEHS.afterwards made in the most perilous times, notwithout a competent share of intellectual abilities.But the countess shrank from all advances ou hispart. He loved retirement, and word the lady toscenes most favourable to the development of theaffections : she had been bred in court, and was melancholyand repined in any other scene. So capriciouswas her temper, that she is said at the sametime to have repelled the overtures of the accomplishedand popular prince Henry, the heir to thethrone.It happened about this period that a beautifulyoung man, twenty years of age, and full of allmartial graces, appeared on the stage. King Jameswas singularly partial to young men who were distinguishedfor personal attractions. By an extraordinaryaccident this person, Robert Carr byname,in the midst of a court-spectacle, just whenit was his cue to present a buckler with a deviceto the king, was thrown from his horse, and brokehis leg. This was enough : James naturally becameinterested in the misfortune, attached himselfto Carr, and even favoured bim again andagain with a royal visit during his cure. Presentlythe young man became an exclusive favourite ; andno honours and graces could be obtained of thesovereign but by his interference.This circumstance fixed the wavering mind ofthe countess of Essex. Voluptuous and self-willedin her disposition, she would bear of no one butI'OltMAN AND OTHERS.Can". But her opportunities of seeing him wert'*both short and rare. In this emergency she appliedto Mrs. Turner, a woman whose professionit was to study and to accommodate the fancies of"socii persons as the countess. Mrs. Turner introducedher to Dr. Foreign, a noted astrologer andmagician, and lie, by images made of wax, andvarious uncouth figures and devices, undertook toprocure the love of Carr to the lady. At the sametime he practised against the earl, that he mightbecome impotent, at least towards his wife. Thishowever did not satisfy the lady ; and having gonethe utmost lengths towards her innamorato, sheinsisted on a divorce in all the forms, and a legalmarriage with the youth she loved. Carr appearsoriginally to have had good dispositions ; and,while that was the case, Iiad assiduously cultivatedthe friendship of .Sir Thomas Overture, oneof the most promising young courtiers of the time.Sir Thomas earnestly sought to break oft' the intimacyof Carr with lady Essex, and told him howutterly ruinous to his reputation and prospects itwould prove, if he married her. But Carr, instepof feeling how much obliged he was to Overrunfor this example of disinterested friendship, waimmediately and told the countess what the youman said.From this time the destruction of Overture \resolved on between them. He was first conjmitted to the Tower by an arbitrary mandate (FORM AN AND OTHERS.James tor refusing an embassage to Russia, nextsequestered from all visitors, and finally attackedwith poison, which, ater several abortive attempts,was at length brought to effect. Meanwhile adivorce was sued for by the countess upon an allegationof impotence; and another female was saidto have been substituted in her room, to be subjectedto the inspection of a jury of matrons inproof of her virginity. After a lapse of two yearsthe murder was brought to light, the inferiorcriminals, Mrs. Turner and the rest, convictedand executed, and Carr, now earl of Somerset, andhis countess, found guilty, but received the royalpardon. — It is proper to add, in order to give ajust idea of the state of human credulity at thisperiod, that, Norman having died at the time thathis services were deemed most necessary, oneGresham first, and then a third astrologer and enchanterwere brought forward, to consummate theatrocious projects of the infamous countess. It issaid that she and her second husband were ultimatelyso thoroughly alienated from each other,that they resided for years under the same roof,with the most careful precautions that they mightnot by any chance come into each other's presence'.• Tmtli brought to Light by Time. Wilson, History of Jar412 LANCASHIRE W1TCU£S.LATEST IDEAS OF JAMES ON THE SUBJECT.It is worthy of remark however that king Jameslived to alter his mind extremely on the questionof witchcraft. He was active in his observationson the subject ; and we are told that " the frequencyof forged possessions which were detectedby him wrought such an alteration in his judgment,that he, receding from what. he had written in hisearly life, grew first diffident of, and then flatly todeny, the working of witches and devils, as butfalshoods and delusions."LANCASHIRE WITCHES.A more melancholy tale does not occur in theannals of necromancy than that of the Lancashirewitches in I6l2. The scene of this story is inPendlebury Forest, four or five miles from MansFuller, Church History of Britain, Book X, p. 74. See alsoOsborn's Works, Essay I : where the author says, he " gavecharge to his judges, to be circumspect in condemning those,committed by ignorant justices for diabolical compacts. Norhad he concluded his advices a narrower circle, as I have heard,than the denial of any such operations, but out of reason ofstate, and to gratify the church, which hath in no age thought fitto explode out of the common people's minds an apprehensionof witchcraft." The author adds, that he " must confess Jamesto have been the promptest man living in his dexterity to discoveran imposture," and subjoins a* remarkable story in confirmationof this assertion.LANCASHIRE WITCHES,Chester, remarkable for its picturesque and gloomysituation. Such places were not sought then asnow, that they might afford food for the imagination,and gratify the refined taste of the traveller.Tliey were rather shunned as infamous for scenesof depredation and murder, or as the consecratedhaunts of diabolical intercourse. Pendlebury !hadbeen long of ill repute on this latter account, w hena country magistrate, Roger Nowel by name, conceivedabout this time that he should do a publicservice, by rooting out a nest of witches, who renderedthe place a terror to all the neighbouringvulgar. The first persons he seized on were elizabethDemdike and Ann Chattox, the former ofwhom was eighty years of age, and had for someyears been blind, who subsisted principally bybegging, though she had a miserable hovel on thespot, which she called her own. Ann Chattoxwas of the same age, and bad for some time beenthreatened with the calamity of blindness. Demdikewas held to be so hardened a witch, that shehad trained all her family to the mystery ; namely,Elizabeth Device, her daughter, and James andAlison Device, her grandchildren. In the accusationof Chattox was also involved Ann Referee,her daughter. These, together with John Bullock,and Jane his mother, Alice Nutter, CatherineHcwit, and Isabel Robe, were successively apprehendedby the diligence of Nowel and one or twoduring magistrates, and were ail of them by414 LANCASHIRE WITCHES.some means induced, some to make a more liberal,and others a more restricted confession of theirmisdeeds in witchcraft, and were afterwards hurriedaway to Lancaster Castle, fifty miles off, toprison. Their crimes were said to have universallyproceeded from malignity and resentment ; and itwas reported to have repeatedly happened for poorold Demdike to be led by night from her habitationinto the open air by some member of herfamily, when she was left alone for an hour tocurse her victim, and pursue her unholy incantations,and was then sought, and brought again toher hovel. Her curses never failed to produce thedesired effect.These poor wretches had been but a short timein prison, when information was given, that ameeting of witches was held on Good Friday, atMalkin Tower, the habitation of Elizabeth Device,to the number of twenty persons, to consulthow by infernal machinations to kill one Cover,an officer, to blow up Lancaster Castle, and deliverthe prisoners, and to kill another man of the nameof Lister. The last was effected. The other plansby some means, we are not told how, were prevented.The prisoners were kept in jail till the summerassizes ; and in the mean time it fortunately happenedthat the poor blind Demdike died in confinement,and was never brought up to trial.The other prisoners were severally indicted forLancashire Witcheskilling by witchcraft certain persons who werenamed, and were all found guilty. The principalwitnesses against Elizabeth Device were JamesDevice and Jennet Device, lier grandchildren, thelatter only nine years of age. When this girl wasput into the witness-box, the grandmother, onseeing lier, set up so dreadful a yell, intermixedwith bitter curses, that the child declared that shecould not go on with her evidence, unless the prisonerwas removed. This was agreed to ; andboth brother and sister swore, that they had beenpresent, when the devil came to their grandmotherin the shape of a black dog, and asked her whatshe desired. She said, the death of John Robinson ;when the dog told lier to make an image of Robinsonin clay, and after crumble it into dust, and asfast as the image perished, the life of the victimshould waste away, and in conclusion the manshould die. This evidence was received; andupon such testimony, and testimony like this, tenpersons were led to the gallows, on the twentiethof August, Ann Chattox of eighty years of ageamong the rest, the day after the trials, whichlasted two days, were finished. The judges whopresided on these trials were sir James Waltham andsir Edward Bromley, barons of the exchequer'.From the whole of this story it is fair to infer,that these old women had played at the game of■ Discovery of the Witches, 161*i, printed by order of thisIILANCASHIRE WITCHES.commerce with the devil. It had flattered theirvanity, to make their simpler neighbours afraid ofthem. To observe the symptoms of their rusticterror, even of their hatred and detestation, hadbeen gratifying to them. They played the gameso long, that in an imperfect degree they deceivedthemselves, Human passions are always to a certaindegree infectious. Perceiving the hatred oftheir neighbours, they began to think that they wereworthy objects of detestation and terror, that theirimprecations had a real effect, and their cursekilled. The brown horrors of the forest weifavourable to visions ; and they sometimes almostbelieved, that they met the foe of mankind in thenight. — But, when Elizabeth Device actually sawher grandchild of nine years old placed in the ,with the intention of consigning her toa public and an ignominious end, then the reveriesof the imagination vanished, and she deeply feltthe reality, that, where she had been somewhatimposing on the child in devilish sport, she hadbeen whetting the dagger that was to take her ownlife, and digging her own grave. It was then nowonder that she uttered a preternatural yell, andpoured curses from the bottom of her heart. Itmust have been almost beyond human endurance]to hear the cry of her despair, and to witnesscurses and the agony in which it vented itself.Twenty-two years elapsed after this scene, whena wretched man, of the name of Edmund Robinson,heirLancashire; Witches. 417conceived on the same spot the scheme of makinghimself' a profitable speculation from a similarsource. He trained his son, eleven years of age,and furnished him with the necessary instructions.He taught him to say that one day in the fields hehad met with two dogs, which he urged on tohunt a hare. They would not budge ; and heinrevenge tied them to a bush and whippedthem; when suddenly one of them was transformedinto an old woman and the other into a child, awitch and her imp. This story succeeded so well,that the father soon aimer gave out that his son hadan eye that could distinguish a witch by sight, andtook him round to the neighbouring churches,where he placed him standing on a bench afterservice, and bade him look round and see what hecould observe. The device, however clumsy, succeeded,and no less than seventeen persons wereapprehended at the boy's selection, and conductedto Lancaster Castle. These seventeen personswere tried at the assizes, and found guilty ; butthe judge, whose name has unfortunately beenlost, unlike sir James Waltham and sir EdwardBromley, saw something in the case that excitedhis suspicion, and, tliuugh the juries had not hesitatedin any one instance, respited the convicts,and sent up a report of the affair to the government.Twenty-two years on this occasion had notelapsed in vain. Four of the prisoners were byejudge's recommendation sent for to the LADY DAVIES.polls, and were examined first by the king's physiciansand then by Charles the First in person,The boy's story was strictly scrutinised. In finehe confessed that it was all an imposture ; andwhole seventeen received the royal pardon'.LADY DAVIES.Eleanor Tuchet, daughter of George lord Audley,married sir John Davies, an eminent lawyer inthe time of James the First, and author of a poemof considerable merit on the Immortality of theSoul. This lady was a person of no contemptibletalents ; but what she seems most to have valuedherself upon, was her gift of prophecy ; and sheaccordingly printed a book of Strange and WonderfulPredictions. She professed to receive her propheciesfrom a spirit, who communicated to heraudibly things about to come to pass, though thevoice could be heard by no other person Sir JohnDavies was nominated lord chief justice of theking's bench in I626. Before he was inductedinto the office, lady Eleanor, sitting with him onSunday at dinner, suddenly burst into a passion oftears. Sir John asked her what made herTo which she replied, " These are your fumtears." Sir John turned off the prediction with amerry answer. But in a very few days he wasseized with an apoplexy, of which he presently■* History of Wholly, by Thomas Dunham Whitaker, p. 211ler^^lDoctor LAMB. 419died* — She also predicted the death of the dukeof Buckingham in the same year. For this assumptionof the giifl of prophecy, she was cited beforethe high-commission-court and examined in lG34t\EDWARD FAIRFAX.It is a painful task to record, that Edward fairfax,the Harmonious and elegant translator of Tasso,prosecuted six of his neighbours at York assizes inthe year 1622, for witchcraft, on his children.The common facts of imps, fits, and the apparitionof the witches, were deposed against the prisoners."The grand jury found the bill, and the accusedwere arraigned. But, we are told, " the judge,having a certificate of the sober behaviour of theprisoners, directed the jury so well as to inducethem to bring in a verdict of acquittal '." The poetafterwards drew up a bulky argument and narrativein vindication of his conduct.DOCTOR LAMB.Dr. Lamb was a noted sorcerer in the time ofCharles the First. The famous Richard Baxter, inhisCertaintyoftheWorldofSpirits, printed in l(JiJl,kos recorded an appropriate instance of the mira• Wood, Athlete OxonienaM. Vol. 11. p. 507.<> Heylyn, Life of Laud.■ Hutchinson on Witchcraft.2 E 24.20DOCTOR LAMB.cultus performances of this man. Meeting twoof his acquaintance in the street, and they havingintimated a desire to witness some example ofhis skill, he invited them home with him.then conducted them into an inner room, whipresently, to their no small surprise, they saw atree spring up in the middle of the apartmentThey had scarcely ceased wondering at this phenomenon,when in a moment there appeared threediminutive men, with little axes in their hands forthe purpose of cutting down this tree. Thewas felled ; and the doctor dismissed his guessfully satisfied of the solidity of his pretensions.That very night however a tremendous hurricanearose, causing the house of one of the guests torock fi'om side to side, with every appearance thatthe building would come down, and bury him andhis wife in the ruins. The wife in great terrorasked, " Were you not at Dr. Lamb's to-day ?"The husband confessed it was true. " And didyou not bring away something from his house?"The husband owned that, when the little men felledthe tree, he had been idle enough to pick up someof the chips, and put them in his pocket. Nothingnow remained to be done, but to produce thechips, and get rid of them as fast as they could.This ceremony performed, the whirlwind immediatelyceased, and the remainder of the night becameperfectly calm and serene.Dr. Lamb at length became so odious byofi lortre^^lLubin Candied.reputation for these infernal practices, that thepopulace rose upon him in 1040, and tore him topieces in the streets. — Nor did the effects of hisill fame terminate here. Thirteen years after, awoman, who had been his servant-maid, was apprehendedon a charge of witchcraft, was tried, and inexpiation of her crime was executed at Tyburn.URBAIN Grander.A few years previously to the catastrophe ofDr. Lamb, there occurred a scene in France whichit is eminently to the purpose of this work to record.Urbain Grandier, a canon of the church,and a popular preacher of the town of Loudunin the district of Poitiers, was in the year 1634brought to trial upon the accusation of magic.The first cause of his being thus called in questionwas the envy of his rival preachers, whosefame was eclipsed by his superior talents. Thesecond cause was a libel falsely imputed to himupon cardinal Richelieu, who with all his eminentqualities had the infirmity of being inexorableupon the question of any personal attackthat was made upon him. Grandier, beside ibiseloquence, was distinguished for his courage andresolution, for the gracefulness of his figure, andthe extraordinary attention he paid to the neatnessof his dress and the decoration of his person, whichlast circumstance brought upon him the imputationURBAIN Chandler.of being too much devoted to the service offair.About this time certain nuns of the conventUrsulines at Loudun were attacked with a dieiwhich manifested itself by very extraordinary symtoms, suggesting to many the idea that they werepossessed with devils. A rumour was Immediatelyspread that Gravities, urged by some offence liehad conceived against these nuns, was the author,by the skill he had in the arts of sorcery, of thesepossessions. It unfortunately happened, that thesame capuchin friar who assured cardinal Richelieuthat Grandier was the writer of the libel againsthim, also communicated to him the story of thepossessed nuns, and the suspicion which had fallenon the priest on their account. The cardinal seizedwith avidity on this occasion of private vengeance,wrote to a counsellor of state at Loudun, one ofhis creatures, to cause a strict investigation to bemade into the charge, and in such terms as plainlyimplied that what he aimed at was the destructionof Grandier.The trial took place in the month of Au]1634 i and, according to the authorisedof the trial, Grandier was convicted upon theevidence of Astarte, a devil of the order ofSeraphim, and chief of the possessing devils,of Eases, of Celsus, of Acaos, of Cedon, of Asmodeusof the order of thrones, of Alex, of Babylon,of Naphthalim, of Cham, of UiAstrology.49aAlias of the order of principalities, and sentencedto be burned alive. In other words, he was convictedupon the evidence of twelve nuns, who,being asked who they were, gave in these names,and professed to be devils, that, compelled by theorder of the court, delivered a constrained testimony.The sentence was accordingly executed,and Grandier met his fate with heroic constancy.At his death an enormous drone fly was seen buzzingabout his head ; and a monk, who was presentat the execution, attested that, whereas thedevils are accustomed to present themselves in thearticle of death to tempt men to deny God theirSaviour, this was Beelzebub, which in Hebrewsignifies the God of flies, come to carry away tohell the soul of the victim'.IASTROLOGY.The supposed science of astrology is of a natureless tremendous, and less appalling to the imagination,than the commerce with devils and evilspirits, or the raising of the dead from the peaceof the tomb to effect certain magical operations,or to instruct the living as to the events that arespeedily to befal them. Yet it is well worthy ofattention in a work of this sort, if for no other reason,because it has prevailed in almost all nationsand ages of the world, and has been assiduouslyMenagi&no, Tom. II, p. 252, el teqq.ASTROLOGY.cultivated by men, frequently of great talent,who were otherwise distinguished for the soundnessof their reasoning powers, and for the steadinessand perseverance of their application topursuits in which they engaged.The whole of the question was built upon thesupposed necessary connection of certain aspectsand conjunctions or oppositions of the stars andheavenly bodies, with the events of the world andthe characters and actions of men. The humanmind has ever confessed an anxiety to pry intothe future, and to deal in omens and propheticsuggestions, and, certain coincidences having occurredhowever fortuitously, to deduce from themrules and maxims upon which to build an anticipationof things to come.Add to which, it is flattering to the prideman, to suppose all nature concerned with and interestedin what is of importance to ourselves. Ofthis we have an early example in the song of Deborahin the Old Testament, where, in a fit ofpious fervour and exaltation, the poet exclaimsThey fought from heaven ; the stars in thtcourses fought against Sisera."The general belief in astrology had a memorableeffect on the history of the human mind. All meninthe first instance have an intuitive feeling offreedom in the acts they perform, and of consequenceof praise or blame due to them in just prosJudges, V-20.ASTROLOGY.portion to the integrity or baseness of the motivesby which they are actuated. This is in realitythe most precious endowment of man. Henceit comes that the good man feels a pride andself-complacency in acts of virtue, takes credit tohimself for the independence of his mind, and isconscious of the worth and honour to which hefeels that he has a rightful claim. But, if all ouracts are predetermined by something out of ourselves,if, however virtuous and honourable are ourdispositions, we are overruled by our stars, andcompelled to the acts, which, left to ourselves, weshould most resolutely disapprove, our conditionbecomes slavery, and we are left in a state themost abject and hopeless. And, though our situationin this respect is merely imaginary, it doesnot the less faU to have very pernicious resultsto our characters. Men, so far as they are believersin astrology, look to the stars, and not tothemselves, for an account of what they shall do,and resign themselves to the omnipotence of a fatewhich they feel it in vain to resist. Of consequence,a belief in astrology has the most unfavourabletendency as to the morality of man i and,were it not that the sense of the liberty of ouractions is so strong that all the reasonings in theworld cannot subvert it, there would be a fatal closeto all human dignity and all human virtue.WILLIAM LILLY.WILLIAM LILLY.One of the most striking examples of the ascendancyof astrological faith is in the instance ofWilliam Lilly. This man has fortunately left us anarrative of his own life; and he comes sufficientlynear to our time, to give us a feeling of reality inthe transactions in which he was engaged, and tobring the scenes home to our business and bosoms.Before he enters expressly upon the history ofhis life, he gives us incidentally an anecdote whichmerits our attention, as tending strongly to illustratethe credulity of man at the periods of whiletreat.Lilly was born in the year 1602. When cicircumstances led his yet undetermined thoughtsto the study of astrology as his principal pursuit,he put himself in the year 1632 under thetuition of one Evans, whom he describes as poor,ignorant, drunken, presumptuous and knavish,but who had a character, as the phrase was, forerecting a figure, predicting future events, dishveering secrets, restoring stolen goods, andfor raising a spirit when he pleased. Sir KnellDigby was one of the most promising characterof these times, extremely handsome and gracein his person, accomplished in all military exercises,endowed with high intellectual powers,and indefatigably inquisitive after knowledge.To render him the more remarkable, he was thecertain*forsca^^iWILLIAM LILLY.eldest son of Everard Digby, who was the mosteminent sufferer for the conspiracy of the GunpowderTreason.It was, as it seems, some time before Lilly becameacquainted with Evans, that lord Bothwelland sir Kenelm Digby came to Evans at his lodgingsin the Minores, for the express purpose ofdesiring him to shew them a spirit. Sir Kenelmwas born in the year l603 ; he must have beentherefore at this time a young man, but sufficientlyold to know what he sought, and to choose thesubjects of his enquiry with a certain discretion.Evans consented to gratify the curiosity of hisillustrious visitors. He drew a circle, and placedhimself and the two strangers within the circlebegan his invocations. On a sudden, Evanswas taken away from the others, and found himself,he knew not how, in Battersea Fields nearthe Thames. The next morning a countrymandiscovered him asleep, and, having awaked him, inanswer to his enquiries told him where he was.Evans in the afternoon sent a messenger to hiswife, to inform her of his safety, and to calm theapprehensions she might reasonably entertain.Just as the messenger arrived, sir Kenelm Digbycame to the house, curious to enquire respectingthe issue of the adventure of yesterday. Lilly receivedthis story from Evans ; and, having askedhim how such an event came to attend on the experiment,was answered that, in practising the in-WILLIAM LILLY.vocation, he had heedlessly omitted the necsutfumigation, at which omission the spirit itaken offenceLilly made some progress in astrology uniEvans, and practised the art in minor mattersa certain success ; hut his ambition led him toaspire to the highest place in his profession. Hemade an experiment to discover a hidden treasurein Westminster Abbey; and, having obtained leavefor that purpose from the bishop of Lincoln, deanof Westminster, he resorted to the spot with abothirty persons more, with divining rods,fixed on the place according to the rules, andbegan to dig; but he had not proceeded far, beforea furious storm came on, and he judged itadvisable to *' dismiss the demons," and desistThese supernatural assistants, he says, had takenoffence at the number and levity of the penpresent ; and, if he had not left off* when hehe had no doubt that the storm would have growmore and more violent, till the whole struckwould have been laid level with the ground.He purchased himself a house to which totire in 1636 at Hersham near Walton on Thaihaving, though originally bred in the lowestsecurity, twice enriched himself in some degreemarriage. He came to London with a viewpractise his favourite art in IG-tl ; but, having receiveda secret monition warning him that he wasnot yet sufficiently an adept, he retired againthe country for two years, and did not finally commencehis career till 1C44, when he published aProphetical Almanac, which he continued to do tillabout the time of his death. He then immediatelybegan to rise into considerable notice. Mrs. Lisle,the wife of one of the commissioners of the greatseal, took to him the urine of Whitlocke, one ofthe most eminent lawyers of the time, to consulthim respecting the health of the party, when heinformed the lady that the person would recoverfrom his present disease, but about a month afterwould be very dangerously ill of a surfeit, whichaccordingly happened. He was protected by thegreat Selden, who interested himself in his favour;and he tells us that Mental, speaker of the houseof commons, was at all times his friend. He furthersays of himself that he was originally partialto king Charles and to monarchy : but, when theparliament had apparently the upper hand, he hadthe skill to play his cards accordingly, and securedhis favour with the ruling powers. Whitlocke,in his Memorials of Affairs in his Own Times,takes repeated notice of him, says that, meetinghim in the street in the spring of lti4-5, he enquiredof Lilly as to what was likely speedily tohappen, who predicted to him the battle of Naseby,and notes in iG^S that some of his prognosticationsfell out very strangely, particularly as to the king'sfall from his horse about this time." Lilly appliedto Whitlocke in favour of his rival, Wharton, theastrologer, and his prayer was granted, and againin behalf of Oughtred, the celebrated mathematician.Lilly and Booker, a brother-astrologer, were s)for in great form, with a coach and four horses,the head-quarters of Fairfax at Windsor, towardsthe end of the year 1617, when they told thegeneral, that they were " confident that God wouldgo along with him and his army, till thework for which they were ordained was perfectwhich they hoped would be the conquering theirand the parliament's enemies, and a quiet settlementand firm peace over the whole nation." Thetwo astrologers were sent for in the same state inthe following year to the siege of Coacheswhich they predicted would soon fall into p<sion of the parliament.Lilly ill the mean while retained in secret hispartiality to Charles the First. Mrs. Sherwood,a lady who was fully in the king's confidence, cameto consult him, as to the place to which Charlesshould retire when he escaped from HamptonCourt. Lilly prescribed accordingly ; but Ash-bokharadisconcerted all his measures and theking made his inauspicious retreat to the isle ofWight. Afterwards he was consulted by the samelady, as to the way in which Chaises should proceedrespecting the negociations with the parliamentarycommissioners at Newport, when Lillyadvised that the king should sign all the pro]-II'yardsthewouldfectedC!^!theirsettee:ate in'HiWILLIAM LILLY.nations, and come up immediately with the commissionersto London, in which case Lilly did notdoubt that the popular tide would turn in hisfavour, and the royal cause prove triumphant.Finally, he tells us that he furnished the saw andaquafortis, with which the king had nearly removedthe bars of the window of his prison inCarisbrook Castle, and escaped. But Charles manifestedthe same irresolution at the critical momentin this case, which had before proved fatal to hissuccess. In the year lG-1-9 Lilly received a pensionof one hundred pounds per annum from thecouncil of state, which, after having been paid himfor two years, he declined to accept any longer.In iGdU he received a present of a gold chain andmedal from Charles X king of Sweden, in acknowledgmentof the respectful mention he hadmade of that monarch in !his almanacs.Lilly lived to a considerable age, not havingdied till the year 1681. In the year 1666 he wassummoned before a committee of the house ofcommons, on the frivolous ground that, in hisMonarchy or No Monarchy published fifteen yearsbefore, he had introduced sixteen plates, amongwhich was one, the eighth, representing personsdigging graves, with coffins, and other emblemssignificative of mortality, and, in the thirteenth, acity in thames. He was asked whether these thingsreferred to the late plague and fire of London.Lilly replied in a manner to intimate that theyMATTHEW HOPKINS.did ; but he ingenuously confessed that he h;not known in what year they would happen. Hesaid, that he had given these emblematical representationswithout any comment, that those whowere competent might apprehend their meaning,whilst the rest of the world remained in the intranee which was their appointed portion.MATTHEW HOPKINS.Nothing can place the credulity of the Englishnation on the subject of witchcraft about thistime, in a more striking point of view, than thehistory of Matthew Hopkins, who, in a pamphletpublished in 1047 in his own vindication, assumesto himself the surname of the Witch-finder. Hefell by accident, in his native county of Suffolk,into contact with one or two reputed witches, and,being a man of an observing turn and an ingeniousinvention, struck out for himself a trade, whichbrought him such moderate returns as sufficed tomaintain him, and at the same time gratified hisambition by making him a terror to many, and theobject of admiration and gratitude to more, whofelt themselves indebted to him for ridding themof secret and intestine enemies, against whom, aslong as they proceeded in ways that left no footstepsbehind, they felt they had no possibility ofguarding themselves. Hopkins career was somethingUke that of Titus Oates in the fullowiiiIflIATTHEW HOl'KIS-reign, but apparently much safer (or the adventurer,since Oates armed against himself a veryformidable party, while Hopkins seemed to assaila few only here and there, who were poor, debilitated,impotent and helpless.After two or three successful experiments. Hopkinsengaged in a regular tour of the counties ofNorfolk, Suffolk, Essex and Huntingdonshire. Heunited to him two confederates, a man namedJohn Stern, and a woman whose name has notbeen handed down to us. They visited everytown in their route that invited them, and securedto them the moderate remuneration of twentyshillings and their expences, leaving what wasmore titian this to the spontaneous gratitude ofthose who should deem themselves indebted tothe exertions of Hopkins and Iiiss party. By thisexpedient they secured to themselves a favourablereception, and a set of credulous persons whowould listen to their dictates as so many oracles.Being three of them, they were enabled to playthe game into one another's hounds, and were sufficientlystrong to overawe all timid and irresoluteopposition. In every town to which they came,they enquired for reputed witches, and havingtaken them into custody, were secure for the mostpart of a certain number of zealous abettors, whotook care that they should have a clear stage fortheir experiments. They overawed their helplessvictims with a certain air of authority,' as if they2 F+34 MATTHEW HOPKINS.had received a commission from heaven for thediscovery of misdeeds. They assailed the poorcreatures within multitude of questions constructedin the most artful manner. They stripped them'naked, in search for the devil's marks in differentparts of their bodies, which were ascertained byrunning pins to the head into those parts, that, ifthey were genuine marks, would prove themselvessuch by their insensibility. They swam their victimsin rivers and ponds, it being an undoubtedfact, that, if the persons accused were true witches,the water, which was the symbol of admission intothe Christian church, would not receive them intoits bosom. If the persons examined continued obstinate,they seated them in constrained and uneasyattitudes, occasionally binding them with cords,and compelling them to remain so without food orsleep for twenty-four hours. They walked them upand down the room, two taking them under eacharm, till they dropped down with fatigue. Theycarefully swept the room in which the experimentwas made, that they might keep away spiders andflies, which were supposed to be devils or theirimps in that disguise.The most plentiful inquisition of Hopkins andhis confederates was in the years 1C4'4, 1645 and16+G. At length there were so many personscommitted to prison upon suspicion of witchcraft,that the government was compelled to take inhand the affair. The rural magistrates bestMATTHEW HOPKINS.whom Hopkins and his confederates brought theirvictims, were obliged, willingly or unwillingly, tocommit them for trial. A commission was gi-antedto the earl of Warwick and others to hold a sessionsof jail-delivery against them for Essex atChelmsford. Lord Warwick was at this time themost popular nobleman in England. He was appointedby the parliament lord high admiral duringthe civil war. He was much courted by the independentclergy, was shrewd, penetrating andactive, and exhibited a singular mixture of piousdemeanour with a vein of facetiousness and jocularity.With him was sent Dr. Calais, the mosteminent divine of the period of the Commonwealth,to see (say Baxter ') that no fraud was committed,or wrong done to the parties accused. It may wellbe doubted however whether the presence of thisclergyman did not operate unfavourably to the personssuspected. He preached before the judges. Itmay readily be believed, considering the temperof the times, that he insisted much upon thehorrible nature of the sin of witchcraft, whichcould expect no pardon, either in this world or theworld to come. He sat on the bench with thejudges, and participated in their deliberations. Inthe result of this inquisition sixteen persons werehanged at Yarmouth in Norfolk, fifteen at Chelmsford,and sixty at various places in the county ofSuffolk.■ Certainly of the World of Spirit.2 F i24S6 MATTHEW HOPKINS.Whitlocke in his Memorials of English Affairs,under the date of 1649, speaks of many witchesbeing apprehended about Newcastle, upon the informationof a person whom he calls the Witch-finder,who, as his experiments were nearly thesame, though he is not named, we may reasonablysuppose to be Hopkins ; and in the following yearabout Boston in Lincolnshire. In 1652 and 1653the same author speaks of women in Scotland, whowere put to incredible torture to extort from thema confession of what their adversaries imputed tothem.The fate of Hopkins was such as might be expectedin similar cases. The multitude are at firstimpressed with horror at the monstrous chargesthat are advanced. They are seized, as by contagion,with terror at the mischiefs which seem toimpend over them, and from which no innocenceand no precaution appear to afford them sufficientprotection. They hasten, as with an unanimouseffort, to avenge themselves upon these malignantenemies, whom God and man alike combine toexpel from society. But, after a time, they beginto reflect, and to apprehend that they have actedwith too much precipitation, that they have beenled on with uncertain appearances. They see onevictim led to the gallows after another, withoutstint or limitation. They see one dying with themost solemn asseverations of innocence, and anotherconfessing apparently she knows not what.CROMWEL. 437what 13 put into lier mouth by her relentless persecutors.They see these victims, old, crazy andimpotent, harassed beyond endurance by the ingeniouscruelties that are practised against them.They were first urged on by implacable hostilityand fury, to be satisfied with nothing but blood.But humanity and remorse also have their turn.Dissatisfied with themselves, they are glad to pointtheir resentment against another. The man thatat first they hailed as a public benefactor, theypresently come to regard with jealous eyes, andbegin to consider as a cunning impostor, dealingin cool blood with the lives of his fellow-creaturesfor a paltry gain, and, still more horrible, for thelie of a perishable and short-lived fame. Themultitude, we are told, after a few seasons, roseupon Hopkins, and resolved to subject him toone of his own criterions. They dragged him toa pond, and threw him into the water for a witch.It seems he floated on the surface, as a witchought to do. They then pursued him with hootingand reviling, and drove lira for ever intothat obscurity and ignominy which he had amplymerited.There is a story of Cromwel recorded by Echard,the historian, which well deserves to be mentioned,as strikingly illustrative of the credulity which prevailedabout this period. It takes its date from the■138Cromwell.morning of the third of September, 1 651, whenCromwel gained the battle of Worcester againstCharles the Second, which he was accustomed tocall by a name sufficiently significant, his "crowningvictory." It is told on the authority of a colonelLindsey, who is said to have been an intimatefriend of the usurper, and to have been commonlyknown by that name, as being in reality the seniorcaptain in Cromwel's own regiment. " On thismemorable morning the general," it seems, " tookthis officer with him to a woodside not far from thearmy, and bade him alight, and follow him intothat wood, and to take particular notice of whathe saw and heard. After having alighted, and securedtheir horses, and walked some little wayinto the wood, Lindsey began to turn pale, and tohe seized with horror from some unknown cause.Upon which Cromwel asked him how he did, orhow he felt himself He answered, that he wasin such a trembling and consternation, that he hatnever felt the like in all the conflicts and battles thad ever been engaged in : but whether it pro ■needed from the gloominess of the place, or thetemperature of his body, he knew not. ' Hownow?' said Cromwel, 'What, troubled with thevapours ? Come forward, man.' They had notgone above twenty yards further, before Lindseyon a sudden stood still, and cried out, ' By all thatis good I am seized with such unaccountable terrorand astonishment, that it is impossible for iCROMWEL.to stir one step further.' Upon which Cromwelcalled him, 'Faint-hearted fool!" and bade lira,stand there, and observe, or be witness.' Andthen the general, advancing to some distance fromhim, met a grave, elderly man with a roll of parchmentin his hand, who delivered it to Cromwel,and he eagerly perused it. Lindsey, a little recoveredfrom his fear, heard several loud wordsbetween them : particularly Cromwel said, ' Thisis but for seven years j I was to have had it forone-and-twenty ; and it must, and shall be so.*The other told him positively, it could not be formore than seven. Upon which Cromwel criedwith great fierceness, ' It shall however be forfourteen years.' But the other peremptorily declared,' It could not possibly be for any longertime; and, if he would not take it so, there wereothers that would.' Upon which Cromwel at lasttook the parchment : and, returning to Lindseywith great joy in his countenance, he cried, ' Now,Lindsey, the battle is our own ! I long to be engaged.'Returning out of the wood, they rode tothe army, Cromwel with a resolution to engage assoon as possible, and the other with a design toleave the army as soon. After the first charge,Lindsey deserted his post, and rode away with allpossible speed day and night, till he came into thecounty of Norfolk, to the house of an intimatefriend, one Mr. Thoroughbred, minister of theparish of Brimstone. Cromwel, as soon as he44'0 DOROTHY MATELEY.missed him, sent all ways after him, with a promiseof a great reward to any that should bringhim alive or dead. When Mr. Thoroughbred sawhis friend Lindsey come into his yard, his horseand himself much tired, in a sort of a maze, hesaid, * How now, colonel ? We hear there is likelyto be a battle shortly : what, fled from your coloursV * A battles said the other ; * yes therehas been a battle, and I am sure the king is beaten.But, if ever I strike a stroke for Cromwel again,may I perish eternally 1 For I am sure he hasmade a league with the devil, and the devil willhave him in due times Then, desiring his protectionfrom Cromwell inquisitors, he went in,and related to him the story in all its circumstances*It is scarcely necessary to remind thereader, that Cromwel died on that day seven years,September the third, 1658.Echard adds, to prove his impartiality as an historian," How far Lindsey is to be believed, andhow far the story is to be accounted incredible, isleft to the readers faith and judgment, and not toany determination of our own."DOROTHY MATELEY.I find a story dated about this period, which,though it does not strictly belong to the subject ofnecromancy or dealings with the devil, seems wellto deserve to be inserted in this work. The topicDOROTHY MATELEY.of which I treat is properly of human credulity ;and this infirmity of our nature can scarcely bemore forcibly illustrated than in the following example.It is recorded by the well-known JohnBunyan, in a fugitive tract of his, entitled the Liteand Death of Mr. Badman, but whjcii has sincebeen inserted in the works of the author in twovolumes folio. In minuteness of particularity anddetail it may vie with almost any story which humanindustry has collected, and human simplicityhas ever placed upon record.There was," says my author, " a poor woman,by name Dorothy Lately, who lived at a smallvillage, called Ashover, in the county of Derby.The way in which she earned her subsistence,was by washing the rubbish that came from thelead-mines in that neighbourhood through a sieve,which labour she performed till the earth hadpassed the sieve, and what remained was particlesand small portions of genuine ore. This womanwas of exceedingly low and coarse habits, andwas noted to be u profane swearer, curser, liar andthief; and her usual way of asserting things waswith an imprecation, as, ' I would I might sinkinto the earth, if it be not so," or, ' I would thatGod would make the earth open and swallow mcup, if I tell an untruth.'Now it happened on the '23rd of March, I(iG(),according to our computation 1661 ], that she waswashing ore on the top of a steep hill about a qiiar-I442 DOROTHY MATELEY.ter of a mile from Ashover, when a lad who wasworking on the spot missed two-pence out of hispocket, and immediately bethought himself ofcharging Dorothy with the theft. He had thrownoff his breeches, and was working in his drawers.Dorothy with much seeming indignation deniedthe charge, and added, as was usual with her, thatshe wished the ground might open and swallowher up, if she had the boy's money.One George Hopkins, a man of good reportin Ashover, happened to pass at no great distanceat the time. He stood a while to talk tothe woman. There stood also near the tub a littlechild, who was called to by her elder sister to comeaway. Hopkins therefore took the little girl bythe hand to lead her to her that called her. Bihe had not gone ten yards from Dorothy, whenheard her crying out for help, and turning baito his great astonishment he saw the woman, wilher tub and her sieve, twirling round and round,and sinking at the same time in the earth. Shesunk about three yards, and then stopped, at thesame time calling lustily for assistance. But atthat very moment a great stone fell upon herhead, and broke her skull, and the earth felland covered her. She was afterwards digged u|and found about four yards under ground, andthe boy's two pennies were discovered on herperson, but the tub and the sieve had altogetherdisappeared."iWITCHES HANGED BY SIR MATTHEW HALE. 443WITCHES HANGED BY SIR MATTHEWHALE.One of the most remarkable trials that occur inthe history of criminal jurisprudence, was that ofAmy Duty and Rose Cullender at Bury St. Edmund'sin the year lC64. Not for the circumstancesthat occasioned it ; for they were of thecoarsest and most vulgar materials. The victimswere two poor, solitary women of the town ofLowestoft in Suffolk, who had by temper anddemeanour rendered themselves particularly obnoxiousto their whole neighbourhood. Wheneverthey were offended with any one, and this frequentlyhappened, they vented their wrath in cursesand ill language, muttered between their teeth, andthe sense of which could scarcely be collected ;and ever and anon they proceeded to utter darkpredictions of evil, which should happen in revengefor the ill treatment they received. Thefishermen would not sell them fish ; and the boysin the street were taught to fly from them withhorror, or to pursue them with hooting and scurrilousabuse. The principal charges against themwere, that the children of two families were manytimes seized with fits, in which they exclaimedthat they saw Amy Duty and Hose Cullendercoming to torment them. They vomited, and intheir vomit were often found pins, and once ortwice a two-penny nail. One or two of the childWITCHES HANGED BY SIR MATTHEW HALE.drew died ; for the accusations spread over a periodof eight years, from 1656 to the time of the trial.To back these allegations, a waggoner appeared,whose waggon had been twice overturned in onemorning, in consequence of the curses of one ofthe witches, the waggon having first run againsther hovel, and materially injured it. Anothertime the waggon stuck fast in a gate way, thoughthe posts on neither side came in contact with thewheels ; and, one of the posts being cut down,the waggon passed easily along.This trial, as I have said, was no way memorablefor the circumstances that occasioned it, butfor the importance of the persons who were present,and had a share in the conduct of it. Thejudge who presided was sir Matthew Hale, thenchief baron of the exchequer, and who had beforerendered himself remarkable for his undaunted resistanceto one of the arbitrary mandates of Cromwel,then in the height of his power, which wasaddressed to Hale in his capacity of judge. Halewas also an eminent author, who had treated uponthe abstrusest subjects, and was equally distinguishedfor his piety and inflexible integrity. Anotherperson, who was present, and accidentallytook part in the proceedings, was sir ThomasBrowne, the superlatively eloquent and able authorof the Religio Medici. (He likewise took a partonthe side of superstition in the trial of the Lancashirewitches in 1634.) A judge also who as-witchesHanged ilY SKI MATTHEW HALE. 4-45sister at the trial was Keeling, who afterwards occupiedthe seat of chief justice.Sir Matthew Hale apparently paid deep attentionto the trial, and felt much perplexed hy theevidence. Seeing sir Thomas Browne in court,and knowing him for a man of extensive informationand vast powers of intellect, Hale appealedto him, somewhat extrajudicially, for his thoughtson what had transpired. Sir Thomas gave it as li'sopinion that the children were bewitched, and inforcedhis position by something that had lately occuredin Denmark. Keeling dissented from this, andinclined to the belief that it might all be practice,and that there was nothing supernatural in the affair.The chief judge was cautious in his proceeding.He even refused to sum up the evidence, lest hemight unawares put a gloss of his own upon anythingthat had been sworn, but left it all to thejury. He told them that the Scriptures left nodoubt that there was such a thing as witchcraft,and instructed them that all they had to do was,first, to consider whether the children were reallybewitched, and secondly, whether the witchcraftwas sufficiently brought Iiome to the prisoners atthe bar. The jury returned a verdict of guilty ;and the two women were hanged on the seventeenthof March 1004, one week after their trial.The women shewed very little activity during thetrial, and died protesting their innocence".■ Trial of the Witches executed nt Bury St. Edmund*.446 WITCHES HANGED BY Sill MATTHEW HALE.»This trial is particularly memorable for the cisubstances that attended it. It has none of therust of ages : no obscurity arises from a long Istaof years interposed between. Sir Matthew Haleand sir Thomas Browne are eminent authors ; andthere is something in such men, that in a mannerrenders them the contemporaries of all times, theliving acquaintance of successive ages of the world.Names generally stand on the page of history asmere abstract realities ; but in the case of thesemen we are familiar with their tempers and prejudices,their virtues and vices, their strength andtheir weakness.They proceed in the first place upon the asstion that there is such a thing as witchcraft, anrf~therefore have nothing to do but with the cogencyor weakness of evidence as applied to this particularcase. Now what are the premises on whichthey proceed in this question ? They believe inaGod, omniscient, all wise, all powerful, andwhose " tender mercies are over all his works*'They believe in a devil, awful almost as God himself,for he has power nearly unlimited, and a willto work all evil, with subtlety, deep reach ofthought, vigilant, " walking about, seeking whilemay devour." This they believe, for they reito " the Scriptures, as confirming beyond doubtthat there is such a thing as witchcraft." Nowwhat office do they assign to the devil, " the princeof the power of the air," at whose mighty attri-lOQ^^IWITCHES HANGED BY SIB MATTHEW HALE. 447butes, combined with his insatiable malignity, thewisest of us might well stand aghast? It is thefirst law of sound sense and just judgment,aercehir ad imam,Qualis ab incoepto procesaerit, et sibi monster ;that every character which we place on the sceneof things should demean himself as his beginningpromises, and preserve a consistency that, to amind sufficiently sagacious, should almost serve ushi lieu of the gift of prophecy. And how is thisdevil employed according to sir Matthew Hale andsir Thomas Browne? Why in proffering himselfas the willing tool of the malice of two doting oldwomen. In afflicting with tits, in causing them tovomit pis and nails, the children of the parentswho had treated the old women with barbarity andcruelty. In judgment upon these women sit twomen, in some respects the most enlightened of anage that produced Paradise Lost, and in conformationof this blessed creed two women are executedin cool blood, in a country which adjust achievedits liberties under the guidance and the virtues ofHampden.What right we have in any case to take awaythe life of a human being already in our power, andunder the forms of justice, is a problem, one of thehardest that can be proposed for the wit of man tosolve. I3ut to see some of the wisest of men, sittingin judgment upon the lives of two humanr creatures in consequence of the forgery and tricks448 WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN.of a set of malicious children, as in this case undoubtedlyit was, is beyond conception deplorable.Let us think for a moment of the inexpressibleevils which a man encounters when dragged fromhis peaceful home under a capital accusation, ofhis arraignment in open court, of the . orderlycourse of the evidence, and of the sentenceawarded against him, of the " damned minutesand days he counts over'* from that time to his execution,of his being finally brought forth before amultitude exasperated by his supposed crimes,and his being cast out from off the earth as . unworthyso much as to exist among men, and allthis being wholly innocent. The consciousness ofinnocence a hundred fold embitters the pang.And, if these poor women were too obtuse of soulentirely to feel the pang, did that give their superiorsa right to overwhelm and to crush them ?WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN.The story of witchcraft, as it is reported to havepassed in Sweden in the year I67O, and has manytimes been reprinted in this country, is on severalaccounts one of the most interesting and deplorablethat has ever been recorded. The scene lies inDalecarlia, a country for ever memorable as havingwitnessed some of the earliest adventures ofGustavus Vasa, his deepest humiliation, and thefirst commencement of his prosperous fortune.The Dalecarlians are represented to us as the simplest,the most faithful, and the bravest of the sonsof men, men debauched and unsuspicious, butwho devoted themselves in the most disinterestedmanner for a cause that appeared to them worthyof support, the cause of liberty and independenceagainst the crudest of tyrants. At least such theywere in 1520, one hundred and fifty years beforethe date of the story we are going to recountThe site of these events was at Mohra and Elf-dalein the province that has just been mentioned.The Dalecarlians, simple and ignorant, but ofexemplary integrity and honesty, who dwelt amidstimpractic-able mountains and spacious mines ofcopper and iron, were distinguished for superstitionamong the countries of the north, where allwere superstitious. They were probably subjectat intervals to the periodical visitation of alarms ofwitches, when whole races of men became wildwith the infection without any one's being wellable to account for it.In the year 1()70, and one or two precedingyears, there was a great alarm of witches in thetown of Mohra. There were always two or threewitches existing in some of the obscure quartersof this place. But now they increased in number,and shewed their faces with the utmost audacityTheir mode on the present occasion was to makea journey through the air to Blockula, an imaginaryscene of retirement, which none but the'2 G450 WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN.witches and their dupes had ever seen. Herethey met with feasts and various entertainments,which it seems had particular charms for the personswho partook of them. The witches used togo into a field in the environs of M ora, and cryaloud to the devil in a peculiar sort of recitation,Antecessor, come and carry us to Blockula 1"Then appeared a multitude of strange beasts, men,spits, posts, and goats with spits run through theirentrails and projecting behind that all might haveroom. The witches mounted these beasts of burthenor vehicles, and were conveyed through theair over high walls and mountains, and throughchurches and chimneys, without perceptible impediment,till they arrived at the place of their destination.Here the devil feasted them with variouscompounds and confections, and, having eaten totheir hearts* content, they danced, and then fought.The devil made them ride on spits, from whichthey were thrown ; and the devil beat them withthe spits, and laughed at them. He then causedthem to build a house to protect them against theday of judgment, and presently overturned thewalls of the house, and derided them again. Allsorts of obscenities were reported to follow uponthese scenes. The devil begot on the witchessons and daughters : this new generation intermarriedagain, and the issue of this further conjunctionappears to have been toads and serpents.How all this pedigree proceeded in the two orWitchcraft IN SWEDEN.three years in which Blockula had ever been heardof, I know not that the witches were ever calledon to explain.But what was most of all to be deplored, thedevil was not content with seducing the witchesto go and celebrate this infernal sabbath ; he furtherinsisted that they should bring the childrenof Mohra along with them. At first he was satisfied,if each witch brought one; but now he demandedthat each witch should bring six or sevenfor her quota. How the witches managed withthe minds of the children we are at a loss to guess.These poor, harmless innocents, steeped to thevery lips in ignorance and superstition, were bysome means kept in continual alarm by the wicked,or, to speak more truly, the insane old women,and said as their prompters said. It does not appearthat the children ever left their beds, at thetime they reported they had been to Blockula.Their parents watched them with fearful anxiety.At a certain time of the night the children wereseized with a strange shuddering, their limbs wereagitated, and their skins covered with a profuseperspiration. When they came to themselves,they related that they had been to Blockula, andthe strange things they had seen, similar to whathad already been described by the women. Threehundred children of various ages are said to havebeen seized with this epidemic.The whole town of Mohra became subject to2 G 24k02 WITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN.the infection, and were overcome with the deepestaffliction. They consulted together, and drew upa petition to the royal council at Stockholm, intreatingthat they would discover some remedy,and that the government would interpose its authorityto put an end to a calamity to which otherwisethey could find no Unit. The king of Swedenwas at that time Charles the Eleventh, father ofCharles the Twelfth, and was only fourteen yearsof age. His council in their wisdom deputed twocommissioners to Mohra, and furnished them withpowers to examine witnesses, and to take whateverproceedings they might judge necessary to- ■put an end to so unspeakable a calamity.They entered on the business of their commissionon the thirteenth of August, the ceremony havingbeen begun with two sermons in the great churchof Mohra, in which we may be sure the damnablesin of witchcraft was fully dilated on, and concludingwith prayers to Almighty God that in hismercy he would speedily bring to an end the tremendousmisfortune, with which for their sins hehad seen fit to afflict the poor people of Mohra.The next day they opened their commission. Seventywitches were brought before them. Theywere all at first stedfast in their denial, allegingthat the charges were wantonly brought againstthem, solely from malice and ill will. But thejudges were earnest in pressing them, till at lengthfirst one, and then another, burst into tears, andWITCHCRAFT IN SWEDEN. 453confessed all. Twenty-three were prevailed onthus to disburse their consciences ; but nearlythe whole, as well those who owned the justice oftheir sentence, as those who protested their innocenceto the last, were executed. Fifteen childrenconfessed their guilt, and were also executed.Thirty-six other children (who we may infer didnot confess), between the ages of nine and sixteen,were condemned to run the gauntlet, and to bewhipped on their hands at the church-door everySunday for a year together. Twenty others werewhipped on their hands for three SundaysThis is certainly a very deplorable scene, and ismade the more so by the previous character whichhistory has impressed on us, of the simplicity, integrity,and generous love of liberty of the Dale-carling.For the children and their parents wecan feel nothing but unmingled pity. The caseof the witches is different. That three hundredchildren should have been made the victims of thisimaginary witchcraft is doubtless a grievous calamity.And that a number of women should havebeen found so depraved and so barbarous, as bytheir incessant suggestions to have practised onthe minds of these children, so as to have robbedthem of sober sense, to have frightened them intofits and disease, and made them believe the mostodious impossibilities, argued a most degenerateNarrative truiislalcd by Dr. Horne. apud Satan's InvisibleWorld by Sinclair, and Sndducismus Triiimphatns by (glanville.454 WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.character, and well merited severe reprobation, butnot death. Add to which, many of these womenmay be believed innocent, otherwise a great majorityof those who were executed, would not havedied protesting their entire freedom from what wasimputed to them. Some of the parents no doubt,from folly and ill judgment, aided the alienation ofmind in their children which they afterwards sodeeply deplored, and gratified their senseless aversionto the old women, when they were themselvesin many cases more the real authors of the evilthan those who suffered.WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.As a story of witchcraft, without any poetry init, without any thing to amuse the imagination, orinterest the fancy, but hard, prosy, and accompaniedwith all that is wretched, pitiful and withering,perhaps the well known story of the NewEngland witchcraft surpasses every thing else uponrecord. The New Englanders were at this time,towards the close of the seventeenth century, rigorousCalvinists, with long sermons and tedious monotonousprayers, with hell before them for everon one side, and a tyrannical, sour and austere Godon the other, jealous of an arbitrary sovereignty,who hath " mercy on whom he will have mercy,and whom he will he hardened." These men,with long and melancholy faces, with a drawlingWITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.and sanctified tone, and a carriage that would "atonce make the most severely disposed merry, andthe most cheerful spectators sad," constitutednearly the entire population of the province ofMassachiiset's Bay.The prosecutions for witchcraft continued withlittle intermission principally at Salem, during thegreater part of the year 1692. The accusationswere of the most vulgar and contemptible sort,invisible pinching and blows, fits, with the blastingand mortality of cattle, and pains stuck fastin the ground, or losing their wheels. A conspicuousfeature in nearly the whole of these storieswas what they named the "spectral sight;" inother words, that the profligate accusers firstfeigned for the most part the injuries they received,and next saw the figures and action of the personswho inflicted them, when they were invisible toevery one else. Hence the miserable prosecutorsgained the power of gratifying the wantonness oftheir malice, by pretending that they suffered bythe hand of any one whose name first presenteditself, or against whom they bore an ill will. Thepersons so charged, though unseen by any but theaccuser, and who in their corporal presence wereat a distance of miles, and were doubtless whollyunconscious of the mischief that was hatchingagainst them, were immediately taken up, and castinto prison. And what was more monstrous andincredible, there stood at the bar the prisoner on456 WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.trial for his life, while the witnesses were permittedto swear that his spectre had haunted them, andafflicted them with all manner of injuries. Thatthe poor prosecuted wretch stood astonished atwhat was alleged against him, was utterly overwhelmedwith the charges, andJknew not what toanswer, was all of it interpreted as so many presumptionsof his guilt. Ignorant as they were,they were unhappy and unskilful in their defence;and, if they spoke of the devil, as was but natural,it was instantly caught at as a proof how familiarthey were with the fiend that had seduced themto their damnation.The first specimen of this sort of Accusation inthe present instance was given by one Paris, ministerof a church at Salem, in the end of the year1691, who had two daughters, one nine years old,the other eleven, that were afflicted with fits andconvulsions. The first person fixed on as the mysteriousauthor of what was seen, was Tituba, afemale slave in the family, and she was harassedby her master into a confession of unlawful practicesand spells. The girls then fixed on SarahGood, a female known to be the victim of a morbidmelancholy, and Osborne, a poor man thathad for a considerable time been bed-rid, as personswhose spectres had perpetually haunted and tormentedthem : and Good was twelve months afterhanged on this accusation.A person, who was one of the first to fall underWITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND. 4f57the imputation, was one Geor^ Burroughs, also aminister of Salem. He had, it seems, buried twowives, both of whom the busy gossips said he hadused ill ill their life-time, and consequently, it waswhispered, had murdered them. This man wasaccustomed foolishly to vaunt that he knew whatpeople said of him in his absence ; and this wasbrought as a proof that he dealt with the devil.Two women, who were witnesses against him, interruptedtheir testimony with exclaiming thatthey saw the ghosts of the murdered wives present(who lead promised them they would come), thoughno one else in the court saw them ; and this wastaken in evidence. Burroughs conducted himselfin a very injudicious way on his trial; but, whenhe came to be hanged, made so impressive a speechon the ladder, with fervent protestations of innocence,as melted many of the spectators into tears.The nature of accusations of this sort is everfound to operate like an epidemic. Fits and convulsionsare communicated from one subject toanother. The " spectral sight," as it was called,is obviously a theme for the vanity of ignorance.Love of fame," as the poet teaches, is an '* universalpassion." Fame is placed indeed on a heightbeyond the hope of ordinary mortals. But in occasionalinstances it is brought unexpectedly withinthe reach of persons of the coarsest mould ; andmany times they will be apt to seize it with proportionableavidity. When too such things are458 WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.talked of, when the devil and suits of hell aremade familiar conversation, when stories of thissort are among the daily news, and one person andanother, who had a little before nothing extraordinaryabout them, become subjects of wonder, thesetopics enter into the thoughts of many, sleepingand waking : " their young men see visions, andtheir old men dream dreams*In such a town as Salem, the second in point ofimportance in the colony, such accusations spreadwith wonderful rapidity. Many were seized withfits, exhibited frightful contortions of their limbsand features, and became a fearful spectacle to thebystander. They were asked to assign the causeof all this ; and they supposed, or pretended tosuppose, some neighbour, already solitary andafflicted, and on that account in ill odour with thetownspeople, scowling upon, threatening, and tormentingthem. Presently persons, specially giftedwith the " spectral sight," formed a class by themselves,and were sent about at the public expencefrom place to place, that they might see what noone else could see. The prisons were filled withthe persons accused. The utmost horror was entertained,as of a calamity which in such a degreehad never visited that part of the world. It happened,most unfortunately, that Baxter's Certaintyof the World of Spirits had been published but theyear before, and a number of copies had been sentout to New England. There seemed a strangeWITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND,coincidence and sympathy between vital Christianityin its most honourable sense, and the fearof the devil, who appeared to be " come downunto them, with great wrath." Mr. IncreaseMather, and Mr. Cotton Mather, his son, twoclergymen of highest reputation in the neighbourhood,by the solemnity and awe with which theytreated the subject, and the earnestness and zealwhich they displayed, gave a sanction to the lowestsuperstition and virulence of the ignorant.AH the forms of justice were brought forwardon this occasion. There was no lack of judges,and grand juries, and petty juries, and executioners,and still less of prosecutors and witnesses. Thefirst person that was hanged was on the tenth ofJune, five more on the nineteenth of July, five onthe nineteenth of August, and eight on the twenty-secondof September. Multitudes confessed thatthey were witches ; for this appeared the only wayfor the accused to save their lives. Husbands andchildren fell down on their knees, and imploredtheir wives and mothers to own their guilt. Manywere tortured by being tied neck and heels together,till they confessed whatever was suggestedto them. It is remarkable however that not onepersisted in her confession at the place of execution.The most interesting story that occurred in thisaffair was of Giles Cry, and Martha, his wife.The woman was tried on the ninth of September,460 WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND.and hanged on the twenty-second. In the interval,on the sixteenth, the husband was brought up fortrial. He said, he was not guilty ; but, beingasked how he would be tried ? he refused to gothrough the customary form, and say, " By Godand my country." He observed that, of all thathad been tried, not one had as yet heed pronouncednot guilty ; and he resolutely refused in that modeto undergo a trial. The judge directed thereforethat, according to the barbarous mode prescribedin the mother-country, he should be laid on hisback, and pressed to death with weights graduallyaccumulated on the upper surface of his body, aproceeding which had never yet been resorted tobythe English in North America. The man persistedin his resolution, and remained mute till beexpired.The whole of this dreadful tragedy was kepttogether by a thread. The spectre-seers for a considerabletime prudently restricted their accusationsto persons of ill repute, or otherwise of noconsequence in the community. By and by howeverthey lost sight of this caution, and pretendedthey saw the figures of some persons well connected,and of unquestioned honour and reputation,engaged in acts of witchcraft. Immediatelythe whole fell through in a moment. The leadinginhabitants presently saw how unsafe it would beto trust their reputations and their lives to themercy of these profligate accusers. Of fifty-sixWITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND. 46lbills of indictment that were offered to the grand-juryon the third of January, 1693, twenty-sixonly were found true bills, and thirty thrown outOn the twenty. six bills that were found, threepersons only were pronounced guilty by the pettyjury, and these three received their pardon fromthe government. The prisons were thrown open ;fifty confessed witches, together with two hundredpersons imprisoned on suspicion, were set at liberty,and no more accusations were heard of.The "afflicted," as they were technically termed,recovered their health ; the " spectral sight " wasuniversally scouted; and men began to wonderhow they could ever have been the victims of sohorrible a delusion".• Cotton Mather, Wonders of the Invisible World ; Cales,More Wonders of the Invisible World ; Neal, History of NewEngland.[f*rCONCLUSION.The volume of records of supposed necromancyand witchcraft is sufficiently copious, without itsbeing in any way necessary to trace it throughits latest relics and fragments. Superstition is socongenial to the mind of man, that, even in theearly years of the author of the present volume,scarcely a village was unfurnished with an oldman or woman who laboured under an ill reputeon this score ; and I doubt not many remainto this very day. I remember, when a child, thatI had an old woman pointed out to me by anignorant servant-maid, as being unquestionablypossessed of the ominous gift of the " evil eye,"and that my impulse was to remove myself asquickly as might be from the range of her observation.But witchcraft, as it appears to me, is by nomeans so desirable a subject as to make one unwillingto drop it. It has its uses. It is perhapsright that we should be somewhat acquainted withthis repulsive chapter in the annals of human nature.As the wise man says in the Bible, " It isgood for us to resort to the House of those thatmourn ;" for there is a melancholy which is attendedwith beneficial effects, and " by the CONCLUSION.ness of the countenance the heart is made better*'But I feel no propensity to linger in these drearyabodes, and would rather make a speedy exchangefor the dwellings of healthfulness and a certainhilarity. We will therefore with the reader's permissionat length shut the book, and say, <* Lo, itis enough."There is no time perhaps at which we can morefairly quit the subject, than when the more enlightenedgovernments of Europe have called forthe code of their laws, and have obliterated thestatute which annexed the penalty of death to thisimaginary crime.So early as the year I672, Louis XFV promulgatedan order of the council of state, forbiddingthe tribunals from proceeding to judgment in caseswhere the accusation was of sorcery only".In England we paid a much later tribute tothe progress of illumination and knowledge ; andit was not till the year 1736 that a statute waspassed, repealing the law made in the first year ofJames 1, and enacting that no capital prosecutionshould for the future take place for conjuration,sorcery and enchantment, but restricting the punishmentof persons pretending to tell fortunes anddiscover stolen goods by witchcraft, to that appertainingto a misdemeanour.As long as death could by law be awardedMenagiana, Tom II, p. 264. Voltaire, Siecle de LouisXIV, Chap. xxxi.CONCLUSION.iC)5against those who were charged with a commercewith evil spirits, and by their means inflictingmischief on their species, it is a subject not unworthyof grave argument and true philanthropy,to endeavour to detect the fallacy of such pretences,and expose the incalculable evils and thedreadful tragedies that have grown out of accusationsand prosecutions for such imaginary crimes.But the effect of perpetuating the silly and superstitioustales that have survived this mortal blow,is exactly opposite. It only serves to keep alivethe lingering folly of imbecile minds, and still tofeed with pestiferous clouds the thoughts of theignorant. Let us rather hail with heart-felt gladnessthe light which has, though late, broken inupon us, and weep over the calamity of our forefathers,who, in addition to the inevitable ills ofour sublunary state, were harassed with imaginaryterrors, and haunted by suggestions,Wlioae horrid image did unfix their hair,And make; their seated hearts knock at their ribs,Against the use of nature.ERRATA.Page 27i line 14, read '^ for the most part100, note b, dele Plinius.Ill, line penult, read '•*• himself."129, line 8, dele and.143, line 14, read « Cerberus**243, line 11, r^tiu/ «' adherent."294, line 14, read <^ flagitious.'302, line 21, read 'taskmaster.'369, line 9, read " no where*