THEBUBBLESOFCANADATHEBUBBLESOFCANADABY THE AUTHOR OFTHE CLOCKMAKER."'* I say, Jack, Ism blowed if he didn't call it a sliap-po/ Why the devilcouldn't he call it a hat at once^that comes now of his not speakingEnglish*'LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,9n%liiin in UMiiaau to fer Matests-1839.R ARDR^ITYlBri VPrinted by J. L. (*ox and Sons, 75, Great Queen Street,L!nco1n'«-Inn FieldsLondon, 24/A Dec. 1838.c-My dear Warburton,I shall offer no apology to you for the manner inwhich I have executed this work, as you are well awarethat I could command neither the time nor the materialsthat were necessary to do it properly : even the smallportion of time I have been able to devote to it, out of ahasty visit to London, has been subject to constant interruptions; and many important documents which oughtto have been referred to, have, I find (from the littleinterest hitherto taken in Canadian affairs), not foundtheir way to England. Wherever I could obtain authenticworks and official papers, I have used them as freely asI could, that as little as possible might rest on individualassertion.Such as it is, I beg of you to accept it, as a proof ofmy desire to comply with your wishes, as far as it hasbeen in my power to do so. If you are satisfied withit, I am content. As respects the rest of the world, weknow too little of each other to require that I shouldexplain or they should listen.Yours always,id. id.To Jambs Warburton, Esq.,&c. &c. &c.TABLE OF CONTENTS.PageLetter I.Introductory remarks 1Letter ILCharge of misgovernment, advanced by Lords Durham andBrougham, controverted — Evidence of the Duke de laRochefoucault Harcourt and Professor Lillian 8Letter III.Extent, population and trade British America — Contradictoryopinions of Lord Brougham — Establishment of English lawsin Canada — Impolitic and and unjust abrogation of themby Quebec Act 18Letter IV.Constitutional act — Form of government — Feudal laws — Presentstate of the law in Canada — People unfit for constitutionalgovernment 34Letter V.A review of the proceedings of the legislature of Canadafrom 1792, when it first assembled, to 1819, when a demandwas made for a provision for the civil list 53Letter VI.Sources of revenue in Canada — Reference to committee ofParliament of alleged grievances — Unjust electoral divisionof Canada — Unconstitutional proceedings of Assembly-freshgrievances— Lord Goderich's review of proceedings 85Letter VII.Ninety-two resolutions of Canadian Assembly — Reference ofthe same to committee of 1834 — Report of committee 131CONTENTS.PageLeltea VIII.Review by Lord Aberdeen of the steps taken by governmentto carry out the recommendation of committee of 1828 . • • • 192Letter IX.Appointment of commission of inquiry — their instructions —Lord Glenelg's reply to the demands of the Assembly 219Letter X.Abandonment of grievances and demand of constitutionalchanges — Specification of changes required, and separateconsideration of each. — 1st. That the Legislative Councilshould be elective. — 2d. That the Executive Council shouldbe responsible to the House of Assembly.— 3d. That theTenures Act and Land Company Act should be repealed*—4th. That the crown revenues should be surrendered unconditionally.— 5th. That the management of the waste landsshould be given up to them • 247Letter XI.Resolutions introduced by Lord John Russell — Right of Parliamentto interfere considered — Conduct of Assembly —Revolt — Conduct of Catholic clergy, and reflections thereonMitigating circumstances attending the rebellion — Missionof Lord Durham, dangerous schemes proposed by him,bad effect of his proceedings on the other colonies — Generalreview of the topics embraced in this work — Importance ofthe crisis, and effect of Canadian independence on the colonialpossessions of Great Britain 297'I*r»KBUBBLES or CANADALetter I.My Dear Warburton,As the people of this country know butlittle of the dissensions in Canada, they verywisely confine their observations to the dissensionsof' those who govern it. This is amore intelligible as well as a more amusingsubject. Every body talks of Lord Broughamand Lord Durham, but nobody speaks ofCanada. Instead, therefore, of inquiring whatis to become of that valuable colony, what measuresare, or ought, to be adopted, to ensure itstranquillity, and to protect British subjects andBritish property there, people very properly limittheir attention to the more interesting questionwhat will the Governor General do when Parliamentmeets ? To inquire whether the Eng-B\2 THE bubbleswish or the French population of Canada is inthe right, requires some investigation to ascertainfacts, and some constitutional knowledgeto judge of those facts when collected. It is,at best, but a dry subject. But to decidewhether Lord Brougham or Lord Durham hasthe best of the dispute is a matter so well suitedfor easy conversation, and humorous argument,that it is no wonder it has more attractions thanthe other. Such, however, is the acerbity ofpolitics in this country, that even this affairis made a party question, and the worst motivesare imputed for everything that is said or doneby either. There are not wanting those whogravely assert, that while Lord Brougham wasaffecting to brush off the flies from the heels ofan old rival, he intentionally switched him sohard as to arouse his temper and induce himto kick. They maintain that there are twosorts of tickling, one that is so delicate as toproduce laughter and pleasurable sensations,and another that irritates both the skin and thetemper by the coarseness of its application.They say that his lordship is much addictedto the latter species, and applies it equally toboth friends and foes ; in short, that his play istoo rough to be agreeable. While, on the otherhand, there are some who are so unkind as toOF CANADA. 3insinuate that Lord Durham was very willingto take offence, and to shelter himself under it.That he felt he had voluntarily undertaken aload which he was unable to draw, and thatknowing greater expectations had been formedof him than he could ever realise, had no objectionto kick himself out of harness, and extricatehimself by overthrowing friend or foe,so long as the public were willing to believethe fault to be that of the tester, and not ofthe steed.Be that as it may, the exhibition has beenan entertaining one, and they deserve somecredit for having afforded amusement andoccupation to the public at this dull season ofthe year. There they are, the crowd hasgathered round them, the idle and the vulgarstand gaping, and each one looks anxiouslyfor what is to follow. What can be moreagreeable to a British mob, a people essentiallyfond of the prize fight, than the contest of thesetwo champions, men who have always courtedtheir applause, and valued their noisy demonstrationsof pleasure higher than the quietrespect of those of more taste and more refinement?It affords, however, no pleasureto the colonist. He regards one as a man ofsplendid talents and no conduct, and the otherB 2THE BUBBLESas a man who, without the possession of either,has advanced to his present high station merelyby the force of extreme opinions. He has nosympathy with either. The one is too muchactuated by his implacable hatred, the otherby his inordinate pride. The former is dangerousfrom his disposition to do mischief, andthe latter unsafe, from his utter inability to effectany good.After all the addresses that have been presentedby the Canadians, this language maypossibly appear strange and strong; but addressesafford no proof. They are cheap commoditieseverywhere. Place-hunters mayflower,and vulgar men may fawn, and office-holderstremble and obey, but the truth must still betold. A governor is the representative of royalty,and colonists have been taught to veneratethe office, whatever they may think of the man.At the present crisis it is the test of loyalty.You will search in vain among those addressesfor the names of the disaffected; and if thosewho signed them have expressed themselvesstrongly, they felt it was no time to measurewords, when hesitation bears so strong a resemblanceto a repugnance springing from adifferent cause. But even among these customaryofferings of official respect, you willOF CANADA. 5find several exhibiting a choice of expressionthat bespeak a desire to separate the approbationof measures from the usual deference to rankand station, and others marking the distinctionin explicit terms. The colonist by no meansregrets his resignation, because he has shewnfrom his irritable temper, inconsiderate conduct,and crude and dangerous schemes, that, of allmen, he was the most unfit depository for theextraordinary powers that were entrusted tohim ; but he does regret that public attentionshould be diverted from so important a subjectas our Canadian affairs, to so unimportant a matteras my Lord Durham's private quarrels.He is desirous that the questions at issue betweenthe people of Canada and Great Britainshould be understood, and he doubts not thatthe good sense and good feeling of this countrywill apply the proper remedies. In compilinga statement of these grievances, pretensions, orclaims (or by whatever other name you maychoose to designate them), I shall hope to contributetowards this desirable object. I feel,however, my dear friend, that before 1 enterupon the subject, I ought to apologise to youfor the bulk of this work. Indeed, when youtold me at Morose that you had been in Egyptduring nearly the whole period of these CanalTHE BUBBLEStian disputes and therefore wished to have ahistory of them, I had not the slightest ideathat in undertaking to give you one, I was goingto write a book. But, though I will fulfilmy promise, I will not exceed it. I shall confinemyself to a sketch of the origin, progress,and present state of agitation in Lower Canada.I will shew you the pretensions that have beenput forth, the concessions that have been made,and the open questions that now remain ; youwill then be able to judge whether these grievanceshave led to disaffection, or disaffectionhas given rise to grievances, and in either casewillie able to perceive what ought to be theremedy. Facts and not theories are wanted ;you must know the cause and nature of a diseasebefore you can prescribe for it.If ever you had the misfortune to have had thetooth-ache, you have doubtless found that everyoneof your friends had an infallible remedy,each of which eventually proved, upon trial, tobe nothing more than a palliative, a nostrum thatsoothed the anguish for a time, by conciliatingthe nerve ; but that the pain returned, withevery change of atmosphere, with increasedpower, while the sedative application becameless and less efficacious the oftener it was repeated.You have also found, as others haveOF CANADA. 7experienced before you, that while you were thustemporising with an evil which required moreprompt and skilful treatment, you had lost theopportunity of filling the cavity and preservingthe tooth, by suffering decay to proceedtoo far to admit of the operation, and, afteryears of suffering, had to submit at last tocold iron, the ultitaia ratio of dentists. Whetherthe system of palliatives and concessions,that has been resorted to in Canada, is a wiseand proper one, I shall not presume to say ; butall men must agree that it at least has the merit'of displaying an amiable inclination to avoidgiving pain. Whatever doubts may arise as tothe conciliatory measures of past years, therecan be none whatever entertained that theycannot be persisted in any longer with advantage.I shall content myself, however, withmerely presenting you with a statement of thecase, and you shall decide for yourself whetherstopping or forcible extraction be now theproper remedy.THE BUBBLESLetter II.After the late unhappy and wicked rebellionin Canada was suppressed, it was foundnecessary to punish with death a few of themost conspicuous traitors, for the atrocious murdersthey had committed. In the colonies,although the justice of this act was fully admitted,the necessity that existed for it was generallydeplored. So much blood had been shedin the field, and so much misery entailed uponthe country, by that rash and unprovoked revolt,that the people would gladly have beenspared the spectacle of a further sacrifice ofhuman life, if the outraged laws of the countrybad not imperatively called for retribution.They felt, too, that although nothing could justifytheir having desolated the country with fireand sword, in support of mere speculative pointsof government, some pity was due to deludedmen, who had been seduced from their allegianceby promises of support, and direct encouragementto revolt, by people of influenceand standing in the mother country ; but althoughthey knew that mischievous counselshad been given, they certainly were not proofCANADA. 9pared to hear similar sentiments publiclyavowedin the parliament of the nation. It was, therefore,not .without mingled feelings of surpriseand sorrow that they heard one honourablemember invoke defeat and disgrace upon HerMajesty's troops, whose service was alreadysufficiently painful without this aggravation;and a noble lord, in another branch of thelegislature, denounce, with indignant eloquence,the juries who had tried and the judgesthat had sentenced these convicted criminals.They ought, however, to have known, and certainlya little reflection would have suggested,that the instinctive horror of those distinguishedmen at such an event was quite natural, andthat they who advocate revolutionary doctrinemust necessarily shudder at the untimely fateof those who have dared to act upon them. Itwas a warning not to be disregarded, a consummationthat might be their own, and a lessonfraught with a most salutary moral. As theirperceptions were acute enough to make the application,it is to be hoped their prudence willbe sufficient to avoid a similar result. Nor isthe language held by my Lord Durham in hisrecent valedictory proclamation, less surprising.He has thought proper, in that extraordinarydocument, to give the sanction of his high10 THE BUBBLESstation to the popular error that the Canadahave been misgoverned and thereby expresseda deliberate censure upon the conduct of ablerand better men than himself who have precededhim. Nom, there are various kinds of misgovernment,which may be effected by acts ofcommission or omission, or of both, for a defectiveform of government and misgovernmentare widely different. If his lordship meant touse the word in either of those senses, and consideredthe French Canadians as the subjectsof it, then I beg leave most respectfully to state,that he was not warranted by facts in sayingso, and that it is an additional proof, if anywere wanting, that he knew as little of theaffairs of the colony at his departure from thence,as he admits that he did on his arrival there.If, on the other hand, he used it as a cant termto adorn a rhetorical flourish, we shall acceptthe explanation, and consider it as such, classingit with promises profusely made on hisacceptance of office which he has not performed,and similar ones ostentatiously offered on hisresignation which he is equally unable to fulfil.My Lord Brougham has expressed more fullyand intelligibly the same opinion in the Houseof Lords, and has since been at great pains torepublish it, first, in the pamphlet form, to cir-OF CANADA. 1 1culate as a cheap commodity ; and, secondly, inacollection of his speeches, to be impressed byhis friend the schoolmaster, as a specimen ofeloquence, on the minds of village Hampden.Although this statesman is followed by few,and attached to none, he is too eloquent andtoo powerful not to command the attention ofall, and presents the singular anomaly of beingunable to add weight or influence to any partyto which he may lend his support, and yetbeing the most fearful opponent in the Houseto those whom it may be his pleasure to attack.With respect to Canada, he was pleased to say,Another rule prevails — * Refuse all they ask ;•* turn a deaf ear to every complaint ; mock them** with hopes never to be realized ; insult them** with rights which when they dare to use shall** be rudely torn from them ; and for abiding bythe law, in seeking redress of their wrongs*punish them by the infliction of a dictator anda despotism.' " Truisms are seldom repeated ;they require but to be enounced, to be assentedto. Paradoxes are more fortunate ; they startleand perplex, and he who cannot originate canat least copy. I was, therefore, not surprisedat hearing an humble imitation of this diatribeat a meeting of the lower orders of Edinburghat Carlton Hill. That the audience might find12 THE BUBBLEStime to attend, the assembly was held by torchlighta fitting emblem for incendiary doctrines.Tories and Whigs were alike reprobated by anorator, who, when he had exhausted the topicsof domestic misrule, deplored in most patheticterms the lot " of our oppressed and enslavedbrethren in Canada." If this be true of them, itis an appeal to humanity, and when in Britainwas that appeal made in vain ? It is, however,the character of humanity to be credulous. Themendicant impostor, aware of the fact, profitsby the knowledge of it, and weaves a tale ofmisfortune or oppression to excite pity and extortmoney ; the political juggler, in like manner,draws upon his imagination for facts, andhaving established a grievance, makes a tenderof his services as a reformer.As this charge of misgovernment has beenoften made of late, it is probable it will berepeated, and as it must materially modifythe opinion we are to form, both of the revolt,and of the measures to be adopted hereafter inconsequencethereof, I shall now proceed tocontrovert this assertion ; but before I enterupon it, permit me to say, that I shall not treatthis as a party question. As a colonist, at oncea native and a resident of a distant part of theempire, I am not only unconnected with, butOF CANADA. 13perfectly independent of either of the greatparties of this country, of Tories or Whigs orRadicals ; nor do 1 consider this as a subject atall involving the principles for which they severallycontend. The question is one whollybetween the people of this country and thecolonists, and must be considered as such ; andso far from my Lord Durham's assertionbeing true, that there has been misgovernment,I am prepared to show, that every administrationin this country, without exception, fromthe conquest of Canada to the present time,whether Tory or Whig, or mixed, or by whatevername they may be designated, have beenactuated but by one feeling, an earnest desireto cultivate a good understanding with theirnew subjects of French extraction, and on oneprinciple, a principle of concession. Canadahas had more privileges and indulgencesgranted to it than any other of our Americancolonies : unpopular officers have been removed ;obnoxious governors have been recalled ; constitutionalpoints abandoned to them ; all reasonablechanges made (or, as they would expressit, grievances redressed); and the interestsof commerce and of persons of Britishorigin postponed to suit their convenience, oraccommodate their prejudices ; in short, every4 THE BUBBLESthing has been done, and everything concededto conciliate them, that ingenuity could deviseor unbounded liberality grant, and no sacrificehas been considered too great to purchase theiraffections, short of yielding up the colony totheir entire control ; and for all this forbearanceand liberality they have been met with ingratitude,abuse, and rebellion. For the truth ofthis assertion, I call upon France and theUnited States to bear me testimony. Hear theDuke de la Rochfoucault Harcourt : " NoCanadian has just grounds of complaint againstthe British Government; the inhabitants ofCanada acknowledge unanimously that theyare better treated than under the ancient Frenchgovernment ; but they love the French, forgetthem not, long after them, hope for their arrival,will always love them, and betray thesefeelings too frequently, and in too frank a manner,not to incur the displeasure of the English,who, even in Europe, have not made an equalprogress with us in discarding the absurd prejudicesof one people against another.They pay no taxes, live well, at an easyrate, and in plenty ; within the compass of theircomprehension they cannot wish for any othergood. They are so little acquainted with theprinciples of liberty, that it has cost a greatOF CANADA. 15deal of trouble to establish juries in theircountry ; they oppose the introduction of thetrial by jury ; in civil cases these are not yet inuse. But they love France, this beloved countryengages still their affections. In their estimationa Frenchman is a being far superior to anEnglishman."The farmers are a frugal set of people, butignorant and lazy. In order to succeed in enlargingand improving agriculture in this province,the English Government must proceed with greatprudence and perseverance ; for in addition tothe unhappy prejudices which the inhabitantsof Canada entertain in common with the farmersof all other countries, they also foster astrong mistrust against every thing which theyreceive from the English ; and this mistrust isgrounded on the idea that the English are theirconquerors, and the French their brethren.There are some exceptions from this bad agriculturalsystem, but they are few. The bestcultivators are always landholder arrived fromEngland."** Upon the whole, the work of education inLower Canada is greatly neglected. At Soresand Three Rivers are a few schools, kept bythe nuns; in other places men or women instructchildren. But the number of schools is,16 TH£ BUBBLESupon the whole, so very small, aud the modeof instruction so defective, that a Canadian whocan read is a sort of phenomenon. From themajor part of these schools being governed bynuns and other women, the number of the latterwho can read is, contrary to the custom of othercountries, much greater in Lower Canada thanthat of men.The English Government is chained withdesignedly keeping the people of Lower Canadain ignorance ; but were it sincerely desirous ofproducing an advantageous change in this respect,it would have as great obstacles to surmounton this head as in regard to agriculturalimprovements."Hear also Professor Lillian, a distinguishedAmerican scholar :"It is questionable whether any conqueredcountry was ever better treated by its conquerorsthan Canada ; the people were left in completepossession of their religion, and revenuesto support it— of their property, laws, customs,and manners ; and even the defence of theircountry is without expense to them ; and it isa curious fact, that (unless by the great counterbalancingadvantages it produces), so farfrom being a source of revenue, it is a chargeon the treasury of the empire. It would seemOF CANADA. 17as if the trouble and expense of governmentwas taken off their hands, and as if they wereleft to enjoy their own domestic comforts withouta drawback. Such is certainly the appearanceof the population ; and it is doubtfulwhether our own favoured communities arepolitically more happy ; — they are not exposedin. a singular manner to poverty and the dangerof starvation, which so often invade the English,manufacturer, and which, aided by theirdemagogues, goad them on to every thing butoften rebellion. Lower Canada is a fine countryand will hereafter become populous andpowerful, especially as the British and Anglo-americanpopulation shall flow in more extensively,and impart more vigour and activity tothe community. The climate, notwithstandingits severity, is a good one, and very healthy andfavourable to the freshness and beauty of thehuman constitution. All the most importantcomforts of life are easily and abundantly obtained."'His, you will observe, is but the evidence ofopinion ; produce your £sects. Agreed. To thefacts then let us proceed.18 THE BUBBLESLetter III.By the treaty of peace in the year 1763, Canada,the conquest of which had been achievedon the plains of Abraham, by General Wolfe,was ceded, in full sovereignty and right, to hisBritannic Majesty by the King of France, andthe French inhabitants who chose to remain inthe country became subjects of Great Britain,and were secured in the enjoyment of their propertyand possessions, and the free exercise oftheir religion. Thus terminated the power ofFrance in that portion of North America ; andhere it may be useful to pause and consider,with this vast addition of territory, how extensiveand important are our transatlantic possessions.They may be computed in round numbers,to comprise upwards of four millions of geographicalsquare miles, extending across thewhole Continent, from the Atlantic in the east,to the shores of the North Pacific Ocean on thewest ; on the parallel of the 49® of north latitudetheir extreme breadth is about 3,066 geographicalmiles, and their greatest depth fromthe most southern point of Upper Canada inOF CANADA. 19Lake Erie, to Smith's Sound in the Polar regions,rather more than 2,150, thus embracinga large portion of the Arctic Seas, and of theAtlantic and Pacific.The population of this country may be estimatedat little short of two millions ; while theexport trade to it exceeds that to Russia, Prussia,Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Francecollectively, and nearly equals that to the UnitedStates, the most commercial country in theworld next to Great Britain. These exportshave. increased above 40 per cent, in three years.In carrying on this trade, about seven thousandBritish vessels are employed ; the tonnageof those inwards and outwards being each waynearly 1,000,000 tons annually, either to GreatBritain or her other colonies, all of them, be itremembered, navigated by her own seamenand employing British capital ; and seveii-eighths of the whole produce so transportedbeing paid for in labour to her own people,and all the profits, agencies, and beverages ofthis enormous trade divided among her ownsubjects. Can the possible loss of such a tradebe contemplated, without apprehending consequencesserious to the manufacturing interests,and prejudicial to national prosperity ?In four years not less than £300,000 hasc 220 THE BUBBLESbeen paid by emigrants as passage-money toher ship-owners ; and if out of the number of170,000 who emigrated during that period, only20,000* had become burdensome at home, andhad cost their parishes only £4 per head perannum, the expenses to the community (whichhave been saved) would have been £320,000.Such are the interests now at stake, andwhich you are called upon to surrender. MyLord Brougham, the advocate ^^ for the diffusionof useful knowledge," thus sanctions the doctrinethat colonies though large are unwieldy,and though possessing intrinsic value, costmore for their support and protection, than counterbalancesany advantage to be derived fromthem. *' I have always held (he observed onthe 2d of February last, when speaking on theCanada question), the severance of a colony tobe a benefit and no loss, provided it can beeffected in peace, and leave only feelings ofkindness on either side." At the same time hehurled defiance (I use his own words) at thehead of the premier' to point out where hehad ever changed his principles. The nobleviscount was silent, the challenge was not accepted,and his consistency remained unimpeached.I am more interested in colonialBee Letter to E. Baines, Esq., M J'.OF CANADA. 21prosperity than either of them, having no desireto be handed over to the tender merciesof republicans, and will take the liberty to referto that instance that was so triumphantly demanded.I allude to a more deliberate opinion,the result of study and reflection, emanatingnot from the excitement of debate and the conflictof party spirit, but from the retirement ofhis closet. On a former occasion he thus expressedhimself on this subject : —Each nation derives greater benefit fromhaving an increasing market in one of its ownprovinces, than in a foreign country.** The colonial trade is always increasing andcapable of indefinite augmentation ; every operationof colonial traffic replaces two capitals,the employment and distribution of which putsin motion and supports the labour of the differentmembers of the same state.The increasing wealth of Russia, Prussia,or Denmark, can never benefit Great Britainunless by the increasing demand for Britishproduce which it may occasion. It may, andoften is, on the contrary, turned against herwealth and power ; whilst the riches of colonieshave a certain tendency to widen the marketfor British produce, and can never injure thewealth or power of the mother country.22 THE BUBBLESThe possession of remote territories is theonly thing which can secure to the populationof a country those advantages derived from aneasy outlet, or prospect of outlet, to those personswho may be ill provided for at home.It is absurd to represent the defences andgovernment of colonies as a burden. It is ridiculousfor the United Kingdom to complain,that she is at the expense of governing anddefending her colonial territories*'Among the benefits to be derived from the** diffusion of useful knowledge," it is certainlynot the least that we are enabled to comparethe professions of public men with their acts,and the actors with each other. My LordsBrougham and Durham have both travelled thesame road — selected similar topics — supportedthem by the same arguments — and aimed atoneconclusion ; and yet, strange to say, theystand opposed to each other. Coming from asmall province, and a very limited sphere ofaction, I may be allowed the privilege of astranger, and be permitted to express my surprise.I had read in the speech to which 1have referred, of certain commissioners of inquirywho were placed in an extraordinarysituation, " where each one generally differedfrom his colleague in the views he took of theOF CANADA, 23argument, and frequently also from himself;but both agreeing in the conclusions at whichthey arrived, by the course of reasoning oneway, and deciding another," It is an awkwardposition for men to be found in ; but little didI anticipate finding the noble author illustrating,in his own person, the case he has describedwith such pointed and bitter irony. But this18 a digression, and I must return to my subject.Whether a country extending over such animmense space, containing such a great andgrowing population, and affording such an extensiveand profitable trade, has been misgoverned,is therefore a question of the firstimportance. The affirmative of this propositionwhich the governor-general has advanced, hasinspired the rebels with new hopes; and forms,no doubt, a principal ingredient of that satisfactionwhich he says his adminstration hasgiven to the inhabitants of the neighbouringrepublic. It is a charge, however, in which thehonour of the nation is deeply concerned, andshould neither be flippantly made nor easilycredited.In the month of October following the treaty.His Majesty published his proclamation, underthe great seal of Great Britain, for erectedTHE BUBBLESing four new civil governments, to wit, those ofQuebec, East Florida, West Florida, and Granada,in the countries and islands in America,which had been ceded to the Crown by thedefinitive treaty. In this proclamation theKing exhorted his subjects as well of his kingdomsof Great Britain and Ireland, as of hiscolonies in America, to avail themselves, withallconvenient speed, of the great benefits andadvantages that would accrue, from the greatand valuable acquisitions ceded to his Majestyin America, to their commerce, manufactures,and navigation. As an encouragement to themto do so, he informed them that in the commissionshe had given to the civil governors of thesaid four new provinces, he had given expresspower and directions that, so soon as the stateand circumstances of the said colonies wouldadmit thereof, they should, with the advice andconsent of the members of his Majesty's councilsin the said provinces, summon and call generalassemblies of the people within the said governments,in such manner as was used in thosecolonies and provinces in America which wereunder his Majesty's immediate government;and that in the meantime, and until such assembliescould be called, all persons inhabiting,in, or resorting to his Majesty's said colonies.OF CANADA. 26might confide in his Majesty's royal protectionfor the enjoyment of the benefit of the laws ofbis realm of England ; that for that purposehis Majesty. had given power, under the greatseal, to the governors of his Majesty's said newcolonies, to erect and constitute, with the adviceof his Majesty's said councils respectively,courts of judicature and public justice, withinthe said colonies, for the hearing and determiningall causes, as well criminal as civil,according to law and equity, and as near asmay be, agreeably to the laws of England ;with liberty to all persons who might thinkthemselves aggrieved by the sentence of suchcourts, in all civil cases, to appeal, under theusuid limitations and restrictions, to his Majestyin his Privy Council.On the 21st day of November 1763,* aboutsix weeks after the publication of the aforesaidproclamation his Majesty issued his commissionof captain-general and govemor-in-chief of theprovince of Quebec, to Major-general Murray,which was received by him ^ and published inthe province in the month of August 1764. Thiscommission, and the insurrection that accompaniedit everywhere, pre-supposed. that the laws ofEngland were in force in the province, being*. See Smith's History of Canada.26 THE BUBBLESfull of allusions and references to those laws ona variety of different subjects, and did not containthe least intimation of a saving of any partof the laws and customs that prevailed there, inthe time of the French government.It appears, therefore, upon the whole, fromthe proclamation and commission, to have beenhis Majesty's intention, with respect to thesaid province of Quebec, to assimilate the lawsand government of it to those of the other Americancolonies and provinces which were underhis Majesty's immediate government, and notto continue the municipal laws and customs bywhich the conquered people had heretoforebeen governed, any farther than as those lawsmight be necessary to the preservation of theirproperty. And his Majesty's ministers, at thetime of passing those instruments, were evidentlyof opinion that, by the refusal of GeneralAmherst to grant to the Canadians the continuanceof their ancient laws and usages ; andby the reference made in the fourth article ofthe definitive treaty of peace to the laws ofGreat Britain, as the measure of the indulgenceintended to be shown them with respect to theexercise of their religion, sufficient notice hadbeen given to the conquered inhabitants ofthat province, that it was his Majesty's CANADA. 27sure that they should be governed for the futureaccording to the laws of England. It is evidentalso, that the inhabitants, after being thus apprisedof his Majesty's intention, had consentedto be so governed, and had testified their saidconsent, by continuing to reside in the country,and taking the oath of allegiance to his Majesty,when they might have withdrawn themselvesfrom the province, with all their effects,and the produce of the sale of their estates,within the eighteen months allowed by hisMajesty in the treaty of peace, for that purpose.In consequence of this introduction of thelaws of England into the province, by theaforesaid proclamation and commission, GovernorMurray and his Council, in the great ordinancedated on the 17th day of September 1764(passed at the commencement of the civilgovernment of the province, for the establishmentof courts of justice in it), directed thechief justice of the province (who was to holdthe superior court or Court of King's Bench,established by that ordinance), to determine allcriminal and civil causes agreeable to the lawsof England and the ordinances of the province;and the judges of the inferior court, establishedby the said ordinance (which was called theCourt of Common Pleas), to determine the28 THE BUBBLESmatters before them agreeably to equity, havingregard nevertheless to the laws ofEnglandy asfar as the circumstances and situation of thingswould permit, until such time as proper ordinancesfor the information of the people couldbe established by the governor and council,agreeable to the laws of England ; with this justand prudent proviso, ^ that the French lawsand customs should foe allowed and admittedin all causes in the said court between the nativesof the said province, in which the causeof action arose, before the 1 st day of October1764.'In consequence of these instruments of government,the laws of England were generallyintroduced into it, and consequently becamethe rule and measure of all contracts andother civil engagements entered into by theinhabitants after the introduction of them, thatis, after the establishment of the civil governmentof the province, or after the said 1st dayof October 1764.At this time the population of Canadaamounted to 66,000 souls, and was confined tothe banks of the St. Lawrence and its tributarystreams. As the people had now become Britishsubjects, it was deemed expedient to introduce,as soon as possible, emigrants of EnglishOF CANADA. 29extraction, as wel^for the purpose of creatinga defensive power within the province, as toinduce the French to acquire the language, andadopt the habits of their conquerors. Theofficers and soldiers of. the array that hadserved in America were rewarded with grantof land in the country which they had conqueredand liberal offers were made to peoplein the other provinces, and to emigrants fromEurope to remove thither. The facilities ofinternal transport, the fertility of the soil, andsalubrity of the climate, operated so powerfullythat in a short time the influx of strangers wasso great as to induce the hope that it wouldspeedily rival the New England states in populationand in wealth ; and no doubt can nowbe entertained that if the terms of the proclamationhad been honestly adhered to,, these expectationswould have faeea fully realised. Asamatter of policy nothing coidd have beenmore wisest than^sinee it had now become aBritish colony, to endeavour, as soonias .possible*.to make it so in fact as well as in name.The introduction of English laws. had a naturaltendency to disseminate the language, by the study of it, necessary to the CanadianFrench, and a constant intercourse with theemigrants , could not Jail, by reading their30 THE BUBBLEScustoms fiuniliar, to have gradually led to theiradoption. This change, though great in thefirst instance, and no doubt repugnant to theirfeelings, would have gradually recommendeditself to the French, and by the time a newgeneration had sprung up, all inconveniencewould have ceased to be felt any longer. Thefirst fatal error that was committed was orderinga code of laws to be prepared for the province,with such modifications as would secure to theFrench the system of tenure and inheritance,to which they had been accustomed. Thisoccasioned much delay, and enabled theirleaders to represent that any change wouldalienate the affections of the inhabitants, whowould naturally extend to the government thedislike that they felt to their institutions. Unfortunately,while this was under consideration,the time had arrived when they could enforcetheir demands with a threat, and the rebellionwhich shortly afterwards broke out in theEnglish colonies (now constituting the UnitedStates), made their conciliation become a matterof state policy. It was therefore determinedat once to restore the French laws as theyexisted at the conquest, and the celebratedQuebec Act, 14 Geo. 3, c. 83, was passed forthat purpose. This statute enacted, ^' that hisOF CANADA. 31Majesty's subjects professing the religion of theChurch of Rome, in the said province of Quebec,may have, hold and enjoy, the free exerciseof their religion, subject to the King's supremacy,and that the clergy of the said churchmay hold receive, and enjoy their accustomeddues and rights, with respect to such personsonly as shall profess the said religion ; and thatit shall be lawful for his Majesty, his heirs orsuccessors, to make such provision for the supportof the Protestant clergy within the saidprovince, as he or they shall from time to timethink necessary and expedient." Sut hy farthe most important clause was that which afterreciting that the English laws which had prevailedthere for ten years j administered andregulated under commissions to governors hadbeen found inapplicable to the state and circumstancesof the country J enacted that from andafter the \st of May 1775, the said Englishlaws and practice of courts should be annulled.It is true that the criminal law of England wasexcepted, and that the system of torture whichhad been in previous existence was abolishedfor ever. During the time they were underFrench domination a person suspected of crimewas seized, thrown into prison, and interrogated.Without knowing the charge brought32 THE BUBBLESagainst him, and without being confronted withhis accuser. He was deprived of the assistanceeither of his friends, relations, or counsel. Hewas sworn to tell the truth, or rather to accusehimself, without any value being attached tohis testimony. Questions were then artfullyput, which are described as more difficult forinnocence to unravel than vice to deny. Theprisoner was never confronted with the personwho had deposed against him, except at themoment before judgment was pronounced, orwhen the torture was applied, or at his execution,which judgment in capital cases was invariablyfollowed by confiscation of property.This act also constituted a council with thepower to make ordinances, conjointly with thegovernor, but not to impose taxes except formaking roads. The ordinances were to be laidbefore his Majesty for allowance, and thosetouching religion not to be in force until formallyapproved of by the King.This flagrant violation of the promises heldout in the proclamation, and of the terms uponwhich the people of British origin had settled inthe provinces, filled them with dismay. Theyfelt that they had the wretched choice presentedto them of abandoning their property and removingfrom theology or of remaining a miserableOF CANADA. 33minority, to be ruled and governed by foreigners,whose favour could only be conciliated bytheir forgetting their country, their language,and religion, as soon as possible, and becomingFrenchmen. They accordingly lost no time inforwarding petitions, in which they were joinedby the merchants of London, interested in theNorth American trade, to the king and the twohouses of parliament, expressive of their senseof the injury they had sustained, and of themisery likely to be entailed by this act uponthe province, but no repeal was effected, andshe act remained as it was passed.Importunity often prevails against conviction,and the most noisy applicant is generallythe first relieved, not because he is the mostdeserving, but because he is the most troublesome.The French Canadians appear to havebeen fully aware of this fact, and to have actedupon it ; and the £english finding their opponentsfirst in the field, have been put on thedefensive, and instead of seeking what was dueto themselves, have been compelled to expostulatethat too great a share has been given totheir rivals. The advantage gained by this position,the former have constantly maintained ;and, it is a singular fact, that while the latterare the only aggrieved party in the country theD34 THE BUBBLESformer have forestalled the attention of thepublic, and engrossed the whole of its sympathy.Every page of this work will confirm and illustratethis extraordinary fact. The Quebec Actwas obnoxious, not merely to the British partyin Canada, but to the inhabitants of those colonieswhose gallantry so materially contributedto its conquest. It has been the singular fateof this unfortunate bill to have excited tworebellions. It caused the cup of Americangrievance, which was already filled to the brim,to overflow into revolt, and has subsequentlygiven rise to a train of events that have inducedthe very men that it was designed to conciliate,to follow the fatal example that had been setto them by their republican neighbours.OF CANADA. 35Letter IV.As soon as the struggle had ended in theold colonies, by their successful assertion ofindependence, a vast emigration of the loyaliststook place into Canada, comprising a greatnumber of persons of character and property ;and these people, who had been accustomed tothe exercise of the electoral privilege, unitedwith those of their countrymen who had previouslysettled there in demanding a modificationof the Quebec Act, and the establishmentof a local legislature. The petitions of thesepeople gave rise to the Act of the 31st Geo. 3,c. 31, commonly called the Constitutional Act,to which and to the Quebec Act, of the 14thof the same reign, c. 83, alluded to in my formerletter, is to be attributed all the trouble experiencedin governing Canada. In the fatalconcessions to the Canadians contained in theseActs, is to be found the origin of that anti-britishfeeling which, engendered by the powersconferred by those Acts, has increased withevery exercise of those powers, until it hasassumed the shape of concentrated hatred andd236 THE BUBBLESopen rebellion. By this Act Canada wasdivided into two provinces, respectively calledUpper and Lower Canada. The latter, towhich all my remarks will hereafter be confined,lies between the parallels of the 46® and52® of North latitude, and the meridian of 57®50' and 80® 6' West longitude from Greenwich.It is bounded on the north by the territory ofthe Hudson's Bay Company, on the east by theGulph of St. Lawrence, on the south by NewBrunswick and part of the United States, andon the west by a line that separates it fromUpper Canada, and contains more than 250,000square miles.To this country this celebrated Act gave aconstitution, consisting of a Governor andExecutive Council of eleven members, appointedby the Crown ; a Legislative Council,forming the second estate, appointed in likemanner by the Crown, consisting of fifteenmembers (but subsequently, as we shall see,increased to forty) ; and a Representative Assembly,or House of Commons, composed of fiftymembers (afterwards increased to eighty-eight),each having powers as nearly analogous to thoseof King, Lords, and Commons, as the variedcircumstances of the two countries and the dependenceof the colony would admit.OF CANADA. 37The enacting power they bestowed upon thecolony, introduced from year to year anotherset of statutes, in addition to what they weresubject to already, so that they now have aunion of French, English, and provincial law.Such a confusion, you may easily imagine,imposed great difficulties, as well upon thosewho had to administer, as those who werebound to obey those laws ; but of the extentof those difficulties, of the impediments theyoffered to the transfer of real estate, of thefeuds to which they gave rise, and the obstaclesthey presented to the settlement and prosperityof the country, it is impossible for an Englishmanto form any idea without first inquiringinto the structure of this singular code. Thesubject, however, is too important to be disposedof in this cursory manner, and I shall, therefore,even at the hazard of being thought tedious,endeavour to give you some general account ofthe situation of the country in this particular.I am the more induced to do so, because, independentof the explanation which it will giveof much that I have to say to you, it appearsto be indispensable to the full understanding ofthe Tenures' Act, which is now one of the greatcomplaints of the disaffected.There exists in Lower Canada no regular38 TH£ BUBBLEScode in which the laws of the land are systematicallyincorporated, nor would it indeedbe a task of ordinary difficulty to collect andcondense them, so diverse are their elements,and so complex their character.* The jurisprudenceof the country may be said to embracethe French, the English, and the Roman orcivil laws, and these are all so blended in practice,that it is often doubtful whence the ruleof decision will be drawn, although the line ofdistinction is better defined in theory. Thestatute law of the province may be stated underfive heads :— 1st, The articles of capitulation,that form part of the guaranteed rights of theinhabitants; 2d, The 31st Geo. III. cap. 31, orthe constitutional act, and all other Britishstatutes expressly extending to the colonies;3d, The edicts, declarations, and ordinances ofthe Kings of France officially registered in theprovince ; 4th, The ordinances of the governorand council anterior to 1792 ; and 5th, Theacts of the provincial legislature subsequentto 1792. The common law is the custom ofParis as modified by the customs of the country,and this law was co-extensive with thewhole province until the passing of the CanadaSec Roulette.tenures' bill in 1825, which restricted the applicationof the French law to the feudal sectionof the colony, and Introduced bodily theEnglish laws to the remainder of the province.The criminal law of the province is the Englishcode as it stood in 1774, and the statutesof a declaratory or modifying nature that havesince passed the local legislature.When the country was first settled by theFrench, the feudal tenure was in full vigour onthe continent of Europe, and naturally transplantedby the colonizers to the new world.The King of France, as feudal lord, granted tonobles and respectable families, or to officers ofthe army, large tracts of land, termed seigniories,the proprietors of which were termedseigniors ; and held immediately from the Kingenjief, or en roture, on condition of renderingfealty and homage on accession to heigniorialproperty ; and in the event of a transfer, bysale, or gift, or otherwise (except in hereditarysuccession), the seigniory was subject to thepayment of a quint, or fifth part of the wholepurchase-money ; and which, if paid by thepurchaser immediately, entitled him to theTabat, or a reduction of two-thirds of the quint.The custom still prevails, the King of GreatTHE BUBBLESBritain having succeeded to the claims of theKing of France.*The position and extent of these seigniorialgrants are : —Territorial Dlvisloa.^1§1Extent of SelgnionlGrants.Almost unlitforcultivation inArgenti.Acres.the Seignioriesandrea.Quebec, including Anti-1cost and other Isles. /Montreal and Islands -Three Rivers and St.lFrancis, &c. - -JGasp and Isles •5,639,3193,269,9661,220,3081,547,0865,656,6992,786,0111,039,7071,318,1172,600,000500,000400,000600,00012,676,67910,800,5344,100,000Estimating the number of acres of land inLower Canada under cultivation, at 4,000,000,it will be perceived what a large portion of territoryis embraced under the seigniories.Quints is a fifth-part of the purchase-moneyof an estate held en Lief yfhich must be paid bythe purchaser to the feudal lord, that is, to theKing. If the feudal lord believes the Jtef tobe sold under value, he can take the estate tohimself by paying the purchaser the price hegave for it, with all reasonable expenses. Re-life is the rent or revenue of one year forSec Martin's * Canada,' and House of Commons Report.OF CANADA. 41mutation fine, when an estate is inherited onlyby collateral descent. Lods et vented are finesof alienation of one-twelfth part of the purchase-money,paid to the seigneur by the purchaser,«n the transfer of property, in the same manneras quints are paid to the King on the mutationoijief; and are held en rofwr^, which is an estateto which heirs succeed equally. Franc ale nobleis s>^e/y or freehold estate, held subject to noseignorial rights or duties, and acknowledgingno lord but the King. The succession to Fiefsis different from that of property held en rotureor by villainage. The eldest son, by right,takes the chateau, and the yard adjoining it;also an arpent of the garden joining the manorhouse, and the mills, ovens, or presses withinthe seigniory, belong to him ; but the profitarising from these is to be divided among theother heirs. Females have no precedence ofright, and M^hen there are only daughters, the^f is equally divided among them. Whenthere are only two sons, the eldest takes two-thirdsof the lands, besides the chateau, mill,&c., and the younger, one-third. When thereare several sons, the elder claims half the lands,and the rest have the other half divided amongthem. Pensive is an estate held in the feudalmanner, subject to the seigniorial fines or dues.42 THE BUBBLESAll the Canadian habitans small farmers, arecensitaires. Property, according to the lawsof Canada, is either propre, that is held bydescent, or acquits , which expresses being acquiredby industry or other means. Communnisi de Men is partnership in property by marriage; for the wife, by this law, becomes anequal partner in whatever the husband possessedbefore and acquires after marriage, andthe husband is placed in the same position inrespect to the wife's dowry property. This lawmight operate as well as . most general laws, ifboth husband and femme came to the finale oflife on the same day ; but very unhappy consequenceshave arisen when the one died beforethe other. For instance, when the wife dies beforethe husband, the children may claim half ofthe father's property, as heirs to the mother ;and the mother's relations have often persuadedand sometimes compelled them so to do.The dot or dowry, is the property which thewife puts into the community de bien : moveableor immoveable property, falling to her by descent,is a proper and does not merge in thecommunity. Dower in Canada, is either customaryor stipulate. The first consists of halfthe property which the husband was possessedof at the time of marriage, and half of all theOF CANADA. 43property which he may inherit or acquire — ofthis the wife has the use for life, and the childrenmay claim it at her death. If they benot of age, the wife's relations can take it outof the £either's hands for them, and may compelhim to sell his property to make a division.Stipulated dower is a portion which the husbandgives instead of the customary dower.Those farmers who hold land from the seigneuren roture, and who are termed financiersor censitaires do so subject to certainconditions, viz. : a small annual rent from2s. 6d. to 5^. (or perhaps . more of late years)for each arpent in front, to this is added somearticles of provision annually, according to themeans of the farmer, who is also bound to grindhis corn at the moulin banal, or the seigneur'smill, when one-fourteenth is taken for the lord'suse as a future or payment for grindingThe lods et ventes form another part of theseigneur's revenue ; it consists of a right to one*twelfth part of the purchase money of everyestate within his seigniory that changes itsowner by sale or other means equivalent tosale : this twelfth to be paid by the purchaser,and is exclusive of the sum agreed on betweenthe latter and the seller, and if promptly paid,a reduction of one-fourth is usually made (in44 THE BUBBLESthe same manner as two-thirds of the quintdue to the Crown is made.) On such an occasiona privilege remains with the seigneur butseldom exercised, called the droit de retractwhich confers the right of pre-emption at thehighest bidden price within forty days after thesale has taken place.All the fisheries within the seigniories contributealso to the lord's income, as he receivesof the fish caught, or an equivalent inmoney for the same : the seigneur is also privilegedto fell timber any where within his seignioryfor the purpose of erecting mills, constructingnew or repairing old roads, or forother works of public and general utility. Inaddition to the foregoing obligations on thefarmer, he is, if a Roman Catholic, bound topay to his curate one twenty-sixth part of allgrain produced, and to have occasional assessmentslevied on him for building and repairingchurches, parsonage houses, &c.The duties of the seigneur to his tenantsare also strictly defined, — he is bound in someinstances to open roads to the remote parts ofhis fief, and to provide mills for the grindingof the feudal tenants' corn ; — he cannot disposeby sale of forest lands, but is bound to concedethem, and upon his refusal to do so, the appliedCANADA. 45cant may obtain from the Crown the concessionhe requires, under the usual seighiorial stipulations,in which case the rents and duesappertain to the King.The soccage tenure, like the franc aleroturievy leaves the farmer or landholder whollyunshackled by any conditions whatsoever asto rents, corpses, mutation fines, bangles (corngrinding obligation) without in fact any otherobligation than allegiance to the King, andobedience to the laws. The quantity of landthus granted in Lower Canada amounts toupwards of 7,000,000 acres-while under theseigniorial grants there are nearly 11,000,000acres held by a vast number of small proprietors.It is very difficult to conceive how the statesmanwho sanctioned the act that substitutedthis extraordinary code for that of England,could have imagined it could ever be productiveof anything but discord in a country inhabitedby two races of different origin and differentlanguage. Any person at all acquainted withthe prejudices and passions that operate onman, will easily understand that the French,jealous of any innovation, are constantly suspiciousof an intention on the part of the Englishto infringe upon their rights, and introTHE BUBBLESduce their own system of jurisprudence, towhich they are accustomed and attached, insteadof that which they neither understandnor approve; and, on the other hand, thatthe English, naturally an enterprising andcommercial people, find the feudal tenure anintolerable burden, and spurn with indignationthe idea of being subjected to the governmentof a race whom they have conquered, and tothe operation of laws, which even the peoplewith whom they originated, have rejected asunsuited to the exigencies of the times. Inaddition to this grievous error of establishinga code of laws that exists nowhere else, threeothers were committed of equal magnitude •first, in dividing Canada into two provinces,and thus separating the French, from the majorityof the English ; secondly, in permittingthe language of the courts, and the records ofthe legislature, to be French ; and, thirdly, ingiving at so early a period, and before thepeople were fitted to receive it, a constitutionalgovernment.The concentrated settlement of the Frenchalong the shores of the St. Lawrence necessarilyexcluded the English emigrants fromthat fertile territory and compelled them toremove to the borders of the lakes. In additionOF CANADA. 47to this obvious cause of their not settling inthe immediate neighbourhood of the Canadians,it is evident that the nature of the feudal tenureto which those lands were subject, and theintroduction of French laws in direct contraventionof the proclamation, rendered such aseparation of the two races inevitable. Underthese circumstances one would naturally havesupposed that a wise government would haveendeavoured, as far as possible, to counteractthe tendency of these causes, to alienate, aswell as separate, these people of different origin.But, alas, the filial principle of conciliationhad now been adopted as the rule ofaction, and the favourable opportunity of An*lifting the colony, and amalgamating thepopulation, by identifying the interests of both,was not only neglected, but the most effectualmode was adopted to make the distinction asmarked and as permanent as possible. Notcontent with this act of folly and injustice, theFrench were entrusted with an almost exclusivepossession of the popular branch of thel^islature, and even constituted, at the sametime, toll-keepers to the adjoining province.Both the ports of Quebec and Montreal wereassigned to the French, and the inhabitants ofUpper Canada were thus cut off* from all com-48 THE BUBBLESmedication with the mother country, but suchas might be granted by the Americans or theirGallic neighbours. If the persons who framedthat act had compared the state of the revoltedcolonies with that of Canada, and reflected thatthey were settled nearly a century later thanthe other, they certainly never would haveattempted to do such injustice as to subjectthe trade of another colony to the exactions ofan illiterate and prejudiced people. If, however,the necessities of the times demanded asacrifice on this important point, surely theyshould have paused before they gave them aconstitutional government, and enquired whetherthey were sufficiently intelligent to receivethe institutions of a free and enlightened people.The experiment of constitutional governmentwas never tried by a people less qualified for thetask than the Canadians.Until the conquest they may be said to haveknown no other form of government than adespotic one ; few of them could read or write,and the habits of implicit obedience in wHichthey had been trained to their superiors renderedthem unable to comprehend the nature of theirown rights, or those of the other branches ofthe legislature. The powers exercised by theseveral French governors and intendants knewOF CANADA. 49no bounds; and, unrestrained by law, theirdecisions were dictated by the caprice of themoment. The inhabitants were compelled toserve as soldiers without pay, in the frequentwars with the English, and were treated withthe greatest severity by their superiors. Theexactions of the military, instead of being restrainedwere encouraged, and on all occasionsthe protection of the governor or intendant wasnecessary to insure success, while merit inevery instance was overlooked. Remonstrancesagainst oppression had frequently been transmittedto the government in France, but werealways either suppressed or disregarded. Theircharacter at this period is thus drawn by theAbbe Raynal, whose account, as his partialitymust have been all in their favour, I prefer asthe most unobjectionable. He observes :That those whom rural labour fixed in thecountry, allowed only a few moments to thecare of their flocks and to other indispensableoccupations during winter. The rest of thetime was passed in idleness at public houses,or in running along the snow and ice in sledges,in imitation of the most distinguished citizens.When the return of spring called them out tothe necessary labours of the field, they ploughed60 THR BUBBLESthe ground superficially, without ever manuringit, sowed it carelessly, and then returnedto their former indolent manner of life tillharvest time.This amazing negligence might be owingto several causes. The contracted such ahabit of idleness during the continuance ofthe severe weather, that labour appeared insupportableto them even in the finest weather.The numerous festivals prescribed by their religion,which owed its increase to their establishment,prevented the first exertion, as wellas interrupted the progress of industry. Menare ready enough to comply with that speciesof devotion that flatters their indolence Lastingpassion for war, which had been purposelyencouraged among these bold and courageousmen, made them averse from the labours ofhusbandry. Their minds were so entirely captivatedwith military glory that they thoughtonly of war, though they engaged in it withoutpay.The inhabitants of the towns, especially ofthe capital, spent the winter as well as thesummer in a constant scene of dissipation.They were alike insensible of the beauties ofnature or of the pleasures of the imagination.OF CANADA. 51They had no taste for arts or science, for readingor instruction. Their only passion wasamusement^^ There appeared in both sexes a greaterdegree of devotion than virtue, more religionthan probity ; a higher s^ose of honour thanreal honesty. Superstition took place of morality,which will always be the case whenevermon are taught to believe that ceremonies willCQOipansayte for good works, and that crimes are^jcpiajted by prayers."A slater folly can hardly be conceived thanconferring a constitutional government upona people so situated. Wherever the experimenthas been tried, whether in jPra^qe, in the republicof South America, in Spain, in Portugal*GisQQe^ Newfoundland, or Lower Canada, ithas invariably failed. The constitution ofangled, m it now exists, is the growth of9ge&f and would have been ^ unsuitable to ourancestors five hundred years ago as it is to theJuster Canadians of the present day. Regardmuir be had to the character and condition ofthe people to whom such a form of governmenti^ .offeree What may suit the inhabitants ofEngland: may be, and is, very unsuitable tothose of any other country. It is not sufficientthat the machinery he good, but, if we desiree252 THE BUBBLESto avoid accidents and insure success, wemust place skilful people in the managementof it, who are thoroughly acquainted with itspower, and have a perfect knowledge of itsprinciple of action. The limited monarchy ofEngland was found unsuited to America, althoughthe people were of British extraction,accustomed to free institutions, and perfectlyinstructed in its practical operation. Theywere so unfortunate as not to possess anymaterials out of which to construct a House ofLords, and therefore so modified their constitutionas to meet the altered circumstances ofthe country. This humble imitation is a cheaparticle, and good of its kind, though badly puttogether; but a better and more costly onewould not have corresponded with the limitedmeans and humble station of a poor people.Their choice is a proof of their wisdom, andtheir having the opportunity to choose, at atime of life when they were able to make a judiciousselection, is also a proof of their goodfortune. Had the Canadians been called upon,at the time of the conquest, to point out whatgovernment they would have preferred, theywould unquestionably have solicited that of asingle intendant; they had never known anyother, and it was the only one for which theyOF CANADA. 53were fitted. So strong, indeed, is the force ofhabit, that rejecting the constitution, whichthey cannot understand, and do not appreciate,they have, after a vain attempt to accommodatethemselves {o it, resorted to the usage of formerdays, and (however unfortunate they may havebeen in the character and conduct of the personthey selected as their leader) have adopted theusage of their forefathers, and implicitly yieldedtheir confidence and obedience to one man.54 THE BUBBLESLetter V,Having thus traced historically the measuresof government, from the conquest of thecountry to the time when the ConstitutionalAct rent into operation in the province (26thDecember 1791), which forms the first importantepoch in the history of the colony, I shalldivide the time that intervened between thatperiod and the present into four other portions :The second extends from the meeting of thefirst provincial House of Assembly in December1792 to 1818, when a demand was made for acivil list ; the third from thence to 1828, whenthe pretensions of the Assembly had assumeda distinct and definite form, and were referredto a committee of Parliament ; the fourth fromthence to 1834, when a further reference ofadditional grievances was made to another parliamentarycommittee ; and the fifth from 1834to the present period. Such a division willelucidate the growth and increase of thoserevolutionary principles (the natural and obviousresult of such a form of government)which first appeared in an insidious attemptto monopolise the whole civil power by suchOF CANADA. 65^ complete control in matters of legislation andfinance as would render her Majesty's representative,and the Legislative Council, subservientto the interests, prejudices, and passionsof the French Canadian majority, andfinally terminated in open rebellion. I do notmean by this to affirm that all that has sincetranspired was the result of a preconceived design,systematically acted upon ; but as uncontrolledpower was given by the constitutionto the French party, that these pretensionswere the natural result of such a power, andthat they were unhesitatingly put forward assoon as their leaders had become acquaintedwith the working of the constitution, and awarethat they were invested with the means of imposingtheir own terms upon government.The first assembly met on the 17 th of December1792, and as the representation had beenmost injudiciously based on the principle ofpopulation, thirty-five out of the fifty membersof this first house were French, and fifteen onlyEnglish, a minority too large and respectable tobe suffered to continue longer than to teach themajority the forms of business, and we accordinglyfind, at a subsequent period, that it wasreduced to three. The change from arbitraryto constitutional government was so great, that66 THE BUBBLESthe French were for some time under the influenceof those grateful feelings which such astate of things so naturally engendered. Inone of their addresses to his Majesty, solicitingthe establishment of a legislature, they thusexpress their sense of his mild and paternalgovernment :Sir, — Your most obedient and faithful newsubjects in the province of Canada take theliberty to prostrate themselves at the foot ofyour throne, in order to lay before you the sentimentsof respect, affection, and obediencetowards your august person, with which theirhearts overflow, and to return to your Majestytheir most humble thanks for your paternal careof their welfare.** Our gratitude obliges us to acknowledge,that the faithful appearances of conquest byyour Majesty's victorious arms did not longcontinue to excite our lamentations and tears.They grew every day less and less, as we graduallybecame more acquainted with the happinessof living under the wise regulations ofthe British empire. And even in the verymoment of the conquest we were far fromfeeling the melancholy effects of restraint andcaptivity ; for the wise and virtuous generalwho conquered us, being a worthy representedCANADA.time of the glorious sovereign who entrustedhim with the command of his armies, left us inpossession of our laws and customs ; the freeexercise of our religion was preserved to us,and afterwards was confirmed by the treaty ofpeace ; and our own former countrymen wereappointed judges of our disputes concerningcivil matters. This excess of kindness towardsus we shall never forget. These generous proofsof the clemency of our benign conqueror willbe carefully preserved in the annals of our history; and we shall transmit them from generationto generation to our remotest posterity.These, Sir, are the pleasing ties by which, inthe beginning of our subjection to your Majesty'sgovernment, our hearts were so stronglybound to your Majesty; ties which can neverbe dissolved, but which time will only strengthenand draw closer."Impressed with a sense of the benefits conferredupon them by this great change, travelledby parliamentary forms with which theywere wholly unacquainted, and not yet awareof the unlimited means of annoyance, if not ofcontroul, with which they were invested, wefind them for some time proceeding with decorumand moderation. But there were notwanting those in the colony who were filled58 THE BUfifiLKSwith alarm at the sight of the first Canadianassembly, which, even with the largest minorityever known, contained a majority of more than,twice as many Frenchmen as Englishmen, andpossessed the power to increase that majorityat its pleasure. £even those whose faith in theoperation of British institutions, had led themto hold a different opinion as to the resuh,were constrained to admit their error, whenthey found the house proceeding to choose aspeaker, who admitted his inability to expresshimself in English (a precedent of choosingthat officer from the majority, which has eversince been followed), and also resorting to theexpensive mode of recording their proceedingsin their own language. They perceived withgrief that the natural tendency of those things,instead of stimulating the new subjects to thestudy of constitutional law in its originalsources, was to force Englishmen to studyFrench, and in no small dree to becomeFrenchmen, and coalesce with the Nation Ancienne,to give a complete ascendancy tothose of foreign origin, their laws, language,and characteristics, in the popular branch ofthe legislature, and to encourage in the leaders,at a future day, that exclusive ambition thatnow distinguishes them. They could not fail.Of CANADA. 59also, to draw an unfavourable contrast betweenthis extraordinary concession, and the moreprovident conduct of the American Congress,which, while admitting the territory of Louisiana,inhibited by Frenchmen, as one of thestates of the confederation, enacted that allminute of proceedings in the court and legislatureof their sister state should be exclusivelyRecorded in the language of the constituency ofthe United States. This judicious enactmenthas naturally made the study of the Englishtongue a primary object with the Louisianians,wide though in numbers, at the time of admission,th were about half the amount of theCanadians in 1791, they now generally speakGT Understand English, and have changed theirdid laws for *a new code, while the legislatureard people of Canada remain as much Frenchas4be inhabitants of Normandy*It was fit tbat^ as &r as Englishmen andtheir descendants were concerned, this constitutionwas a mere delusion. At a very earljrperiod we find theiti putting in practice that maH0Buvr6^ which became so common afterwardsof absenting themsdvei^ from the house, whenmeasures wei to be considered to which theyWere averse, and thereby compelling the speakerto ad^urn the debate #t>r want of a quorum.60 THE BUBBLESThis first House of Assembly, after four sessionsterminated on the 4th of May, 1796.The conduct of the members, though respectfulboth to the governor and the other branchof the legislature, gave evident proof that theywould afford no encouragement to Englishcommerce or English settlers. The principleadopted and acted upon most pertinaciouslywas to avoid direct assessment, and throw allpublic burthens, as well as local charges, uponthe revenue, to be derived from duties leviedoff of trade. It was in some measure owing tochance, but mainly to the influence of thegovernor, that a road act, so important to thecountry, which imposed a moderate contributionof money or labour on the people, for theimprovement of their property, was carriedthrough the Assembly. But an appeal to thepassions and prejudices of the people by theirembryo demagogues was so successful on thisoccasion, in representing this necessary act asthe commencement of foreign taxation andEnglish oppression, that they attempted tostarve out the inhabitants of Quebec and Montreal,by withholding all the usual supplies offood. A bankrupt law was refused to therequest of the merchants, and they also declinedto sanction '* An Act to Amend the Laws,OF CANADA.Customs, and Usages in force in the Province,relative to the Tenure of Lands, and the rightsderived therefrom," refusing to make the smallestsacrifice to what they called the cupidityof English landholders, and the prejudices ofAmerican settlers. So peremptory, indeed,was the refusal, that the faction was considereddecisive as to any innovation upon the Frenchlaws, which, with the feudal tenures of lands,were cherished as the means of deterring emigrantsfrom seeking au asylum in the province;thus rendered French in fact, though Britishin name. During the existence of this house,also, is to be found the first pretension to encroachon the right of the Crown, in an enquiryinto the forfeited lands of the Jesuits, and aclaim for their restoration to French controul.It is, however, worthy of remark, as forming acomplete contrast with recent conduct, that ofeleven acts sanctioned at the end of the session,all were permanent but one.Thus, my dear friend, do you see that thecauses of the present posture of affairs are tobe traced back to a very early period, not asmy Lord Durham has asserted, to raisgovem-mentofthe Canadians, but to inconsiderate concessions,which though designed to conciliatethem, have not only signally failed of their object.62 THE BUBBLESbut been productive of mischief to themselves,and incalculable iD^ry to the colony. Thaithis is the view that impartial men take of thesubject, appears fropoi the following extractfrom the work of a distinguished foreigner, theauthor of the Resources of America :*^* The unwise act a£ Lord Grenville, passedthrough Parliament in the year 1 794, permit*ing the people of Lower Canada to coijiducttheir pleadings and promulgate thdrlawsinthe French language, has prevented them &oqiever becoming British, and so far weakenedthe colony as an outwork of the mother country.It has always been the policy of ableconquerors, as soon as possible, to incorporatetheir vanquished subjects with their own citizens,by giving them their own language andlaws, and not suffering them to retain thoseof their pristine dominion. These were amongthe most efficient means by which ancientRome built up and established her empire oyerthe whole world ; and these were the mostefficient aids by which modern France spreadher dominion so rapidly over the continent icEurope. While Lower Canada. con tinueslo beFrench in language, religion, laws, habits, andmanners, it is obvious that her people will .notbe good British subjects ; and Britain may most• Bristol.OF CANADA, 63assuredly look to the speedy loss of her NorthAmerican colonies, unless she immediatelysets about the establishment of an able, statesmanlikegovernment there, and the directionthitherward of that tide of emigration from herown loins, which now swells the strength andresources of the United States. Her JVorthAmerican colonies gone, her West India islandswill soon follow."The second House of Assembly was openedon the 25th of January, 1797, and ended in1301. The privilege of participating in thelegislative power of the country for four years,had awakened the members to a sense of theirown importance, and the Canadian French toa knowledge of their supremacy; and theyaccordingly returned a more democratic housethan the preceding, and representatives pledgedto an exclusive devotion to the interests of theirown party. The prejudices awakened by theLoad Act, and the fraternising doctrines of theFrench revolution, contributed also to producethis result. It is true the minority were onlyreduced to fourteen; but the attorney-generalwas defeated as a candidate for the county ofQuebec, and several influential members of thelate house shared a similar fate; so that ai-thoughthe numerical proportions were nearly64 THE BUBBLESsimilar, tit; British interest was evidently al |ready on the decline.A manifest change had taken place in the feelingsof the different branches of the legislature.The governor, acting on the defensive, no longer jproposed measures of internal improvement, Iwhich he knew would provoke angry discussions,or be met with a refusal ; but relied jmore upon the Legislative Council, whichalone represented or protected British interests, |while the house, finding that temporary actshad a direct tendency to lessen the influence <and independence of the executive, discontinuedthe practice of passing permanent laws.To remedy the evil of having so many prejudicedand illiterate members in the assembly,it was proposed by the minority to establish aqualification, which, although it could notpossibly increase their own numbers, it washoped might at least have the advantage ofaffording them more liberal and enlightenedcolleagues ; but this measure, like all othersintroduced by them, was considered of foreignorigin, and excluded accordingly. The majority,however, though pertinacious, still preservedappearances, and as the minority feltthemselves unequal to procure the passage ofany bill, either of internal improvement or forOF CANADA. 65the facilitating the foreign trade, they forboreto provoke the discussion, and preferred usingtheir influence to the mere preservation of whatfew privileges were left to them. The thirdprovincial parliament began on the 1st ofJanuary 1801, and terminated, after five sessions,on the 2d of May 1804. The temperof this house, and the proportion of its parties,were similar to that of the last.Among the topics insisted upon in the governnor's speech, was recommendation fora grantof money for free schools for the instruction ofthe rising generation in the first rudiments ofuseful learning, and in the English tongue ;and it was noticed with feelings of grief, thoughnot with surprise, that the house, in their reply,omitted the words " English tongue," andshortly afterwards applied the commentary bya vote for the purchase of " French books," forthe use of the members. Although there werenot a few of their number who were unfortunatelyincapable, from a deficiency of education,of using them, yet it was evident that thereexisted as little inclination to adopt the language,as there was to introduce the laws ofGreat Britain.In accordance with this spirit of preferencefor French laws, an act was passed to revive66 THE BUBBLESthe serment decisive, or oath, by which, uri-dercertain circumstances, a debtor may bepermitted to clear himself of a commercial debt,by simply swearing to its having been paid andsatisfied, without even stating the time or placeof payment; an act which has been describedas a most prolific source of fraud and perjury,and deeply injurious to the mercantile interestsof the country, as well as to the character of thepeople. Such, indeed, was the jealousy of themajority of the English, that they were notinclined to pass even those laws, which had anexclusive application to them and their tenures.Thus a bill was introduced for registering deedsof lands in free and common soccage, whichonly affected the English, but it met with thecustomary fate of all such attempts.The leaders began now to affect to perceivea latent danger in every act of the government,and a bill requiring rectors, curates, and prieststo read certain laws after divine service, wasdenounced as opening a door for exercising aninfluence over the clergy ; and an effort wasmade to introduce in their stead the captainsof militia, which was only relinquished to avoidthe awkward admission that too many of thoseofficers were deficient in the necessary qualificationto perform the duty. The great in-OF CANADA. 67crease of the trade of the province at this time,in consequence of the war, so far from excitingthe emulation of the French, and stimulatingthem to participate in its advantages, awakenedtheir jealousy, and they stigmatised it as theparent of crime, the source of undue distinctions,and the means of filling the country withpersons of foreign origin. They not only declinedin any way to aid its extension, butimposed taxes upon it for all those objects thatelsewhere in America are provided for by localassessment. Such conduct could not fail toretard the improvement of the country, by preventingthe investment of capital, and discouragingenterprise ; and that it had this effect isevident from the slow growth of Lower Canada,when compared with that of the adjoiningcolony, where a different system prevailed.The fourth house of assembly met on the11th January, 1805, and terminated, after foursessions, on the 14th April, 1808.The pressure of the feudal tenure becomingdaily more and more severely felt by the inhabitantsof the cities, two unsuccessful attemptswere now made to obtain some mitigation ofit. The first was a bill to abolish the retraitlinger, or right of redemption by therelations of signora lands. Any relation, itF 268 Tick liUBBLESwas stated, of the seller, if of the same line,from whence the property descended, may, withina year and a day, by this law, take it from thepurchaser of the property, on condition of returningthe price. A person, therefore, buyinga lot of land for one hundred pounds, and expendingupon it one thousand in buildings,may be deprived of the whole, by a relation ofthe seller* refunding the original purchase-money,buildings not being considered necessaryexpenses.The second was " a bill to enable the seigneursto compound for their feudal rights anddues with their vassals and censitaires." Thiswas particularly intended as a relief against thediscouraging effects of lods and vents, by whichthe twelfth part of the labour and expense oferecting buildings (however expensive) onground, subject to the imposition, is for thebenefit of the seigneur. These bills, however,like all that had preceded them, for similarpurposes, did not receive a second reading, iiorwas tmy remedy applied until the ImperialParliament interfered nearly twenty years afterwards.To show, however, the nature of thechange which these leaders were disposed topatronise, they voted £750 for translating Hat-sell'sParliamentary Proceedings into French,♦ See " Political Annals ;" also Canadian Magazine.OF CANADA. 60and to rebut the charge of their aversion tointernal improvement, and to shew they werenot inattentive to the agricultural prosperity ofthe province, they passed a bill enjoining theapplication of tar to apple trees for the destructionof caterpillars. From a body thusconstituted little good could be expected. Themerchants and other British subjects residentin Canada, finding all attempts in the legislatureuseless, appealed, through the medium ofthe press, to the sympathies of the Englishpublic. They contended that if the support ofthe civil government were not to rest on directtaxes, it should at least be secured by permanentacts of indirect taxation — that local establishments,such as court-houses, gaols, andhouses of correction, should be defrayed byassessments on the districts for whose benefitthey were required, and that recourse should behad to indirect taxes of temporary duration,only for the general improvement of the countryin its internal communications with theadjoining states and colonies, or its agricultureand commerce.This was denounced by the demagogues ofthe day as an attack upon the liberties of thesubject ; and certain toasts at a public dinner,approving of those commercial and financial*r«^^^ oi it ■■WW ill were voted to be an in-««lc ii tiber mMfcstj crffthe bocee, and warrantswitt kesed asaiiist the printers who weretaken into custody, and ootnpcUed to apologise(u€ tbetr ojiidvct.* It » wortliT of remark,that at tkb time the first attempt was made toprocure a drawback of duties on articles thatwere exported after marine first paid a duty ;• Tux -* ««T ff f rvaui emi tfai£flmrf lftl tn m Ckami^ knew!>ov t.) Tir»£:rai£ t^SLfelT*^ asti ccicrtuBed JBrt Botioiis <ni tke«l5*«t of the Tlberrr c/ ti* pfv«s wd appnr frnai m povsal ofthe forts d»t called dove the ndicBatiaB of the h o — c, andoccasioned the issvzic^ of warruiB to apprehend the ffendenl oftb focxa! meet:*is« that sanctioned, and the printers that daredto disseminate ffarh wicked doctrine*.1. The bonocnble members of the legislative council, whowere fnendlT to constitutional taxation as proposed bj orworthy number in the House of Assembly.2. Our representatives in provincial parliament, who proposeda constitutional and proper mode of taxation, Ibr building gaols,and who opposed a tax on commerce for that purpose, as contraryto the sound practice-of the parent state.3. May or representatives be actuated by a patriotic spirit forthe good of the prince, as dependant on the British empire, anddirected of local prejudices.4. Prosperity to the agriculture and commerce of Canada, andmay they aid each other as their true interests dictate, by sharinga due proportion of advantages and burthens.5. The city and county of Montreal, and the grand juries of thedistrict, who recommended local assessment for local purposes.6. May the city of Montreal be enabled to support a newspaper,though deprived of its natural and useful advantages, apparentlyfor the benefit of an individual.7. May the commercial interests of this province have its dueinfluence on the administration of its government.OP CANADA. 71but, as usual, it failed in a body whose wholespirit was anti-commercial. These instancesare adduced, not for their intrinsic importance,but as illustrative of the question proposedby me for your consideration in my first letter,whether disaffection has not given rise to grievances,rather than grievances to disaffection.Having now tasted the sweets of power in thepunishment of the printers, the house commenceda system of high-handed measures withany person who obstructed their views; andfollowed it up by removing from the house allpersons attached to the executive, and impeachingothers holding high official stations,in the hope that, by representing the adherentsof government as enemies to the country, theaffections of the people would be graduallyalienated from their rulers, and ultimately preparethem to join in those measures of forcibleresistance, which now, for the first time, appearto have been contemplated. The first experimentwas made by the expulsion from the house,contrary to the constitutional act, of EzekielHart, on account of his professing the Jewishreligion. This measure naturally alarmed theBritish inhabitants, and gave them a melancholyforeboding of the events that were in reservefor them. The violent language of debate, the72 THE BUBBLESconstant appeal to popular prejudice, the undisguisedanti-English feeling of the legislativedemagogues, and the seditious and revolutionarylanguage of the ** Canadian" newspaper, devotedto their interests, left no room to hopethat the constitution could long work, in suchunskilful and unprincipled hands. The fifthprovincial parliament was opened by Sir JamesCraig on the 10th of April, 1809, when theirattention was called to the unsettled state ofaffairs with the Americans, and they were requiredto consider of such means as might benecessary to place the province in a posture ofdefence. Instead of proceeding, according tothe urgency of the case, to deliberate on thispressing emergency, they commenced by anattack on the judges, and devising the meansof removing them from the legislature ; andmanifested so much heat in their proceedings,and such a disrespectful inattention tothe subject submitted to them, that, afterfive weeks wasted in angry discussions, thegovernor was under the necessity of expressinghis displeasure by a dissolution. On meetingthe sixth parliament, which assembled on the20th of January, 1810, he informed them thathe was instructed to assent to any bill for renderingthe judges, in future, ineligible to seatsOf CA.\AUA.the house of assembly, in wliicb the twohouses should concur. This house, though alittle moderated in tone by the firmness exhibitedin dissolving them, were not to be divertedfrom its schemes of ambition ; and now, for thefirst time, was developed that deep-laid plan,which has since so signally succeeded, of placingevery officer of the government at the mercyof the popular branch, and rendering the armof the executive perfectly powerless. On the10th of February they resolved, most unexpectedly," that this house will vote in thissession the necessary sums for defraying thecivil expenses of the government of this province."Animated by the prosperous state ofthe revenue, in consequence of the Americanembargo, the opportunity was considered afavourable one, by assuming the civil list, to geta controul over the officers of government, who,being servants vf the imperial state as well asthe colony, would, by this measure, be at themercy of the house, which would thus becomealike independent of foreign or domestic controul.As long as the expenditure of the civilestablishment exceeded the revenue, derivedfrom taxes on commerce, their liberality wascontent to permit the deficiency to be suppliedby parliament ; but now that the treasury was74 THE BUBBLESmore than adequate to the task, they thoughtthat a voluntary offer of this kind would throwthe government off of its guard, and be probablyaccepted. The governor at once penetratedtheir designs, and very prudently and properlyanswered, that it would be necessary to havethe concurrence of the legislative council, " inamatter in which, not merely as a co-ordinatebranch of the legislature, but as composed ofindividuals having a large stake in the countryit was interested ;" but that he would transmitto his Majesty their address as a proof of theirability and their willingness to provide for thecivil expenditure when called upon so to do.In this year (1810) the treasury receipts were,£70,398 13 7And the expenditure .,. 58,564 14 3Leavingaclear surplus revenues 11,833 19 4A bill disqualifying the judges was passed,and sent to the legislative council, who agreedto it, with a clause suspending its operationto the end of the present house of assembly.Anxious to shew their contempt of the legislativecouncil, and forgetful, as well of therespect due to the representative of the King,as of constitutional rights, they immediatelyexpelled the judges by resolution, as they hadOF CANADA. 76previously done Mr* Hart, leaving the governorin the dilemma of sanctioning the act by issuingnew writs for elections, or of dissolving thehouse. It is needless to say that he adoptedthe latter course, and appealed* again to thesense of the public. But here, unhappily, therewas no public opinion to appeal to, which, inthe words of a very able provincial writer,* isexplained: — "by the peculiar habits of thoughtand character, which distinguish the FrenchCanadians. These habits and character, originallyformed by the despotic government, civil,military, and ecclesiastical, of Louis the Fourteenthof France, induced the French Canadianpopulation chiefly to regard the immediateagents of authority, who came in daily or frequentcontact with them, by oral command orcommunication. Thus, long after the conquest,the lowest agent of authority had only to presenthimself, in the name of the King, to beinstantly obeyed. It was not a king, a governor,a general, a judge, or a bishop, with whomthey had personal communication ; these awfulauthorities they surveyed at a distance, withdue reverence ; but their immediate obediencewas considered as due to a seigneur, a justice ofpeace, an officer of militia, a bailiff, and a cure,or priest. When the British Parliament, thereMr. Fleming.76 THE BUBBLESfore, established a house of assembly, themembers of that newly constituted authority,though chosen by themselves, were admitted toa great share of the habitual submission whichtheir constituents were accustomed to pay toevery agent of authority, who came into immediatecontact with them. By the new constitution,the habitants, in fact, supposed thatthey were commanded by the governor, atevery election, to choose rulers over themselves;and, having once chosen them, they readilyadmitted them to great authority and influenceover their opinions and conduct. Believingthis to be the disposition of the ignorant peasantryqf Lower Canada, we can have no difficultyin supposing that what, in a free andintelligent community, is properly called PublicOpinion, is in this province merely the effectof the opinions of the immediate agents ofauthority, including the members of the assembly,operating upon the natural desires of apeople attached to the laws, language, habits,manners, and prejudices their French ancestors.The immediate agents of authority, therefore,who interfere the least with those characteristics,will be the most favoured by them.We flatter ourselves that these explanationshave enabled our readers to recognise the influxOF CANADA. 77once which predominated at the new electionin April 1810. The sovereign was a Protestantking of a Protestant nation ; the governorwas a Protestant, as was the majority of hisexecutive council ; the majority of the legislativecouncil was also Protestant, and partlycomposed of persons in office, who receivedsalaries. On the other hand, the members ofthe dissolved assembly were persons who professedthe Romish religion, who held no lucrativeoffice under the government, and who hadbeen chosen as friendly to their civil and religiousrights, and opposed to every measurewhich could disturb the routine of their hereditarylabours and enjoyments. Indolent, particularlyin mind, they could not analyze theconduct of their representatives, and discriminatethe parts which belonged to inordinateand selfish ambition, from those which mightbe ascribed to zeal for their service. The oldmembers were so confident of the effectsof those characteristics of their constituents,that they derided every doubt of re-election."These expectations were justified by theevent. The new and seventh house, assembledon the 12th of December 1810, and the Englishminority were now reduced to nine members.In the interim, Sir James Craig, and the supsTHE BUBBLESporters of his government, were continual objectsof obloquy and ridicule, and reports ofthe disapprobation of his conduct, and of hisspeedy recal and disgrace by his Majesty, werefabricated, as a means of enlisting the peasantryon the side of those who were determinedsystematically to oppose the King's representative,whenever he would not consentto become the tool of their ambition.The seditious and revolutionary doctrines disseminatedthrough " the Canadian," a paperdevoted to this purpose, induced the governorto seize the press and imprison the conductors,and we are probably indebted to this firm anddecided measure, and to the determination*The nature of the arts used by the demagogues to inflamethe minds, and alienate the affections of the peasantry, will appearfrom the following extracts from the governor's proclamation :'* It is true, the most base and diabolical falsehoods are industriouslypromulgated and disseminated. In one part it is announcedas my intention to embody and make soldiers of you, andthat having applied to the late house of representatives to enableme to assemble twelve thousand of you for that purpose, and theyhaving declined to do so, I had therefore dissolved them. Thisis not only directly false, such an idea never having entered into mymind, nor the slightest mention having ever been made of it ; butit is doubly wicked and atrocious, because it has been advanced bypersons who must have been supposed to speak with certainty onthe subject, and was therefore the more calculated to impose uponyou. In another part you are told that I wanted to tax yourlands, and that the late house of assembly would consent onlyto tax wine, and upon that account, I had dissolved the house.Inhabitants of St. Denis ! this is also directly false ; I never hadthe most distant idea of taxing you at all ; such had never beenOF CANADA, 79manifested in these two successive dissolutionsof the assembly to the subdued and alteredtone of their debates. It is observable that intheir reply to his speech, they admit the facthere contended for, and virhich they have sinceso strenuously denied. ** That harmony and agood understanding so conducive to the prosperityand happiness of the colony, are moredifficult to be maintained in this province thanin any other of his Majesty's colonies, from thedifference in opinions, customs, and prejudicesfor a moment the subject of my deliberations, and when the latehouse offered to pay the civil list, I could not have taken any stepin a matter of such importance without the King's instructions,and. therefore it was still long before we came to the considerationof how it was to be paid. In truth, not one word was ever,to my knowledge, mentioned on the subject'' In other parts, despairing of producing instances from whatI have done, recourse is had to what I intend to do, and it isboldly told you that I mean to oppress you.<' For what purpose should 1 oppress you ? Is it to servethe King ? Vieille that monarch, who during fifty years has neverissued one order, that had you for its object, that was not for yourbenefit and happiness, — will he now, beloved, honoured, adoredby his subjects, covered with glory, descending into the vale ofyears, accompanied with the prayers and blessings of a gratefulpeople, — will he, contrary to the tenor of a whole life of honourand virtue, now give orders to bis servants to oppress his Canadiansubjects ? It is impossible that you can for a moment believeit. You will spurn from you with just indignation the miscreantwho will suggest such a thought to you.** These personal allusions to myself, these details, in any otherease, might be unbecoming, and beneath me ; but nothing can beunbecoming, or beneath me, that can tend to save you from the gulfof crime and calamity into which guilty men would plunge you'See Christie's * Canada J*80 THE BUBBLESof his Majesty's subjects residing therein." Theprompt check interposed by the executive to theviolation of constitutional rights, in the expulsionof the judges* had the desired effect, andthey now passed a bill to disqualify them, towhich the governor assented, as he said, ^'withpeculiar satisfaction, not only because I thinkthe matter right in itself, but because I considerpassing an act for the purpose as a com-complete renunciation of an erroneous principle,which put me under the necessity of dissolvingthe last parliament." Feeling thatnothing was to be gained from such a man byintimidation, they proceeded to the usual businesswith more decency of conduct and moredispatch, than had characterised any sessionNothing can be more painful and humiliating than the situationof the judges of Lower Canada since this period. They havebeen kept in a state of great pecuniary distress by the house withholdingtheir salaries, and their peace of mind destroyed by themost unfounded attacks on their character. If an attorney be detectedin fraudulent proceedings, and punished, or be dissatisfiedwith a judgment of the court, the judge is at once impeachedamidst the plaudits of the house. After preliminary proceedings,and an opportunity offered of abuse, the proceedings are generallydropt, on the ground that government is partial and corrupt. Bya singular fatality, every man that accuses a judge finds it a stepto preferment. Judge Villiers was the accuser of Judge Kerr,on charges sixteen years old. Philip Garret, a party and witnessthereto, was made a judge in 1832. Ebenezer Peck, who broughtcharges against Judge Fletcher, was presented with a silk gownin 1832. And A. Queene, the same. See ' Canada Question' formore particulars.OF CANADA. 81since the constitutional act had gone into operation.In the mean time, Sir George Provostarrived to take the command of the government,and we are indebted to the determinedattitude assumed by his predecessor, to thehereditary hatred borne by the Canadians tothe Americans, to the fear they entertained ofpassing into the hands of an uncompromisingpeople, and to the large sum expended uponthe embodied militia, that they did not thenavail themselves of the opportunity of throwingoff the dependence, which it has since beentheir unceasing object to effect. But thoughtheir attention was in some measure directed tothe protection of their property from the commonenemy, they did not fail to convince impartialmen, by their conduct, that they werepreserving the country for themselves, and notfor the empire, of which they then formed a part,by the fortune of war and not from choice. Tobring the government of the country into contempt,it was necessary to impugn the integrityof the bench and the impartial administrationof the law, and they therefore impeached thejudges ; and when the governor, whose liberalpatronage had hitherto shielded him from attack,declined to suspend these functionariestill the . result of their complaint should beG82 THE BUBBLESknown, and refused to make their punishmentprecede their trial, they resolved ♦^that hisexcellency the goyemor-in-chief, by his answerto the address of the house, had violated theconstitutional rights and privileges thereof."Sufficient has now been said to show youthat the evils of Canada have their originin the defects of the constitutional act, whichby substituting French for English laws, bysecuring to them an overwhelming majority inthe assembly, and in separating them from. UpperCanada, have had the effect of making thema French and not an English colony. Nationalantipathies, added to a difference in religion,laws, and language, have contributed to engenderand foster a feeling of hostility betweenthe two races, until it has found vent in opencollision. It would exceed the limits I haveassigned to myself to review the proceedings ofeach separate house : suffice it to say, that thesystem of persecution, the commencement ofwhich I have exhibited in the foregoing pages,was subsequently pursued with unremittingzeal. Having driven the judges from thehouse, (though they failed in their impeachments*)they succeeded in extorting from♦ " The administrator-in-chief has received the commands of hisRoyal Highness the Prince Regent, to make known to the houseOF CANADA. 83government, their discharge from the council.They then vacated the seats of executive councillorsby the unconstitutional mode of resolution,and finding there was no means of controllingtheir power, proceeded by repeated expulsionsof assembly of this province his pleasure, on the subject of certaincharges preferred by that house against the chief justice ofthe province, and the chief justice of the Court of King's Benchfor the district of Montreal.'* With respect to such of those charges as relate to acts doneby a former governor of the province, which the assembly, assumingto be improper or illegal, imputed, by a similar assumption,to advice given by the chief justice to that governor, hisRoyal Highness has deemed that no inquiry could be necessary,inasmuch as none could be instituted without the admission of theprinciple, that the governor of a province might, at his own discretion,divest himself of all responsibility, on points of politicalgovernment.With a view, therefore, to the general interests of the province,his Royal Highness was pleased to refer for considerationto the lords of the privy council such only of the chargesbrought by the assembly as related to the rules of practice establishedby the judges in their respective courts, those being pointsupon which, if any impropriety had existed, the judges themselveswere solely responsible.** By the annexed copy of his Royal Highness's Order inCouncil, dated the 29th June 1815, the administrator-in-chiefconveys to the assembly the result of this investigation, which hasbeen conducted with all that attention and solemnity which theimportance of the subject required.** In making this communication to the assembly, it now becomesthe duty of the administrator-in-chief, in obedience to the commandsof his royal highness the Prince Regent, to express the regretwith which his royal highness has viewed their late proceedingsagainst two persons who have so long and so ably filled the highestjudicial offices in the colony, a circumstance the more to bedeplored as tending to disparage, in the eyes of the inconsiderateG 284 THE BUBBLESto drive out a member, for advice offered to thegovernor in a ministerial capacity ; and reprimandedanother officer for legal opinions givento the executive in the usual course of hisprofession. Every thing was done that ingenuitycould devise, not only to weaken theinfluence of government, but to represent thatinfluence as unfriendly to the country and prejudicialto its interests. Nothing, however,occurred until the year 1818, to bring theminto direct collision with the mother country,until Sir John Sherbrooke demanded thatthey should provide for the civil expenses ofthe province.and ignorant, their character and services, and thus to diminishthe influence to which, from their situation and their uniform proprietyof conduct, they are justly entitled.*' The above communication, embracing such only of the chargespreferred against the said chief justices as relate to the rules ofpractice, and as are grounded on advice assumed to have beengiven by the chief justice of the province to the late Sir JamesCraig, the administrator-in-chief, has been further commanded tosignify to the assembly, that the other charges appeared to hisMajesty's government to be, with one exception, too inconsiderableto require investigation, and that that (namely the oneagainst the chief justice of the court of King's Bench for thedistrict of Montreal, which states him to have refused a writ ofhabeas corpus), was, in common with all the charges whio^ do notrelate to the rules of practice, totally unsupported by any evidencewhatever.(Signed) Gordon Drummond,Administrator-in-Chief."OF CANADA. 85Letter VI.The opportunity had now arrived that designingmen had so craftily sought for, of fasteninga quarrel upon the government, of involvingit in a defence of its officers, and ofmaking their promised compliance a condition'for obtaining any change that might be thoughtconducive to the great ends of weakening Britishinfluence. After discussions, first on the grossamount to be granted, and then on the specificappropriation, had excited and consolidatedthe party, they took the higher ground of disputingthe right of the crown to those revenueswhich were secured to it by permanent grants.In order that you may clearly understand thequestion, it is necessary to state that the publicincome of Lower Canada arises from threesources : —1st. The crown duties levied under the Britishstatute of the 14 Geo. Ill, or the imperialactofSGeo. IV.2d. Provincial duties, payable in virtue oflocal laws, proceeding immediately from theprovincial legislature, or rendered permanent86 THE BUBBLESwithout their consent, by the last-mentionedimperial act.3d. The Queen's casual and territorial revenue,which arises from her Majesty's landedproperty ; namely, the Jesuits' estates, theQueen's posts, the forges of St. Maurice, theQueen's wharf, droit de quents, lods and vents,land fund, and timber fund.With respect to crown duties, levied under14 Geo. Ill, until they were unwisely surrenderedin 1831, they were, with the territorialrevenue, controlled and dispensed by her Majesty'sresponsible servants, while those leviedunder the imperial act of 3 Geo. IV, and all provincialacts, have always been under the disposalof the legislature. As the crown duties, leviedunder the 14 Geo. Ill, had generally, if notalways, been inadequate to the support of thecivil government and the administration of justice.Sir John Sherbrooke was instructed, inpursuance of the general system of retrenchmentadopted throughout the empire, to callupon the legislature to appropriate, out of theprovincial duties, a sum equal to the annualdeficiency. To this reasonable request they havemanifested a uniform repugnance, sometimesgranting it, always objecting, and, finally, refusingaltogether. They alleged now, for the firstOF CANADA. 87tim, that thrown duties were illegal, inasmuchas the statute under which they were levied hadbeen repealed. The reason of their making thisobjection was, because the proceeds were notunder their control, and their object was tomake the executive dependent upon them forits support, by an annual vote. The existenceof this statute was an insurmountable difficulty,and as they had not the power to repeal it,their only resource was to impugn its legality.The appropriation of the duties was thus providedfor in the Act : —That all the monies that shall arise by thesaid duties, except the necessary charges ofraising, collecting, levying, recovering, answering,paying and accounting for the same, shallbe paid by the collector of his Majesty's customsinto the hands of his Majesty's receiver-generalin the said province for the time being,and shall be applied in the first place in makinga more certain and adequate provision towardsdefraying the expenses of the administration ofjustice, and of the support of civil governmentin that province ; and that the lord hightreasurer, or commissioners of his Majesty'streasury, or any three or more of them for thetime being, shall be, and is or are hereby empoweredfrom time to time, by any warrant or88 THE BUBBLESwarrants under his or their hand or hands, tocause such money to be applied out of the saidproduce of the said duties towards defrayingthe said expenses ; and that the residue of thesaid duties shall remain and be reserved in thehands of the said receiver-general for the futuredisposition of parliament."The statute on which they relied was the18th Geo. III. The history of that act of parliamentyou will doubtless recollect. Great Britainhad set up a claim to impose taxes, for thepurpose of general revenue, upon the colonies(now forming the United States), which, asmight naturally be supposed, excited universalopposition— causing at first, popular tumult, andafterwards open rebellion. Finding that thisclaim could neither be justified nor enforced,it was expressly renounced, in the followingwords : —"Whereas taxation by the parliament ofGreat Britain for the purpose of raising a revenuein his Majesty's colonies, provinces, andplantations in North America, has been foundby experience to occasion great uneasiness anddisorders among his Majesty's faithful subjects,who may nevertheless be disposed to acknowledgethe justice of contributing to the commondefence of the empire, provided such contributeCANADA. 89tion should be raised under the authority of thegeneral court or general assembly of each respectivecolony, province, or plantation ; and,whereas, in order as well to remove the saiduneasiness and to quiet the minds of his Majesty'ssubjects who may be disposed to returnto their allegiance, as to restore the peace andwelfare of all his Majesty's dominions, it isexpedient to declare that the king and parliamentof Great Britain will not impose anyduty, tax, or assessment for the purpose of raisinga revenue in any of the colonies, provinces,or plantations.*^ That from and after the passing of that act,the king and parliament of Great Britain wouldnot impose any duty, tax, or assessment whatever,payable in any of his Majesty's colonies,provinces, and plantations in North America,and the West Indies, except only such dutiesas it might be expedient to impose for the regulationof commerce ; the net produce of suchduties to be always paid and applied to and forthe use of the colony, province, and plantationin which the same shall be respectively levied,in such manner as other duties collected by theauthority of the respective general courts, orgeneral assemblies of such colonies, provinces,or plantations are ordinarily paid and applied."90 THE BUBBLESThat the renunciation of a right to imposetaxes hereafter involves a repeal of those in existence,is an assumption vi^hich it is not necessaryto refute. Indeed, no person did the partythe injustice to believe that they sincerelythought so themselves, especially as in thatprovince there was a local act, 35 Geo. Ill, c. 9,adopting its phraseology, and recognizing itsexistence and validity, by raising an additionalrevenue, for the further support of the government,to which purpose this act alone hadany reference. It answered, however, the purposesof the party ; it disorganized the government,and prevented English emigrants fromremoving to a colony in which evident preparationwas making for a separation from theparent state. It also served to scatter the seedsof complaints, which soon germinated, andripened into a plentiful harvest. It is thefashion in this country to call every change reform,the exercise of every acknowledged right,an abuse, and every salutary restraint a grievance.In the colonies we have long looked toGreat Britain as our model, and we have importedthis fashion from her, as well as manyother modern innovations. If agitation is successfulhere, why may not it be so there ? — ifpopular clamour requires and obtains confessCANADA.Ulsons at home, there is no good reason why itshould not be equally fortunate abroad ; if thosewho are the moat clamorous, are first attendedto, because they are the most distinctly heard,why may not the colonists learn to exalt theirvoices also, in hopes of similar success? — as theold cock crows so does the young. The Englishhave long held themselves up as models,and such distinguished people must not be surprisedif they who ape their manners, occasionallycopy some of their follies also. The forceof example is too strong to he restrained byprecept. These financial disputes extendedover the whole period of the administration ofthe Duke of Richmond, Lord Dalhousie, andSir James Kempt, with more or less intensity,according to the supply of fresh fuel furnishedby irritating matter of an extraneous nature.Complaints soon multiplied upon complaints ;public meetings were held; violent speechesmade, valiant resolutions passed ; and, finally,delegates chosen to demand a redress of grievancesfrom the Imperial Parliament.When the delegates arrived in this countrythey found public opinion with them. It is theinterest, as well as the duty of theKnglish to governtheir colonies justly and kindly; and noman but a Frenchman would affirm that their inclinationrequires the incitement of either. Their92 THE BUBBLEScomplaints were referred to a committee composedof persons by no means indisposed towardsthe petitioners, who, after a patient and laboriousinvestigation of the subjects in dispute, madea report, which was acknowledged by theassembly to be both an able and an impartialone, and quite satisfactory. > It will be unnecessaryto recapitulate the subjects referred, orto transcribe the report, because both the oneand the other will be best understood by aminute of Lord Aberdeen, to which I shallhereafter allude more particularly, in which hedistinctly proves that the recommendations ofthat committee, so far as depended upon thegovernment, were most strictly and fully compliedwith. By adopting this course, I shallbe able to spare you a great deal of uselessrepetition.The manner in which the report of the committeewas received by the dominant party inCanada, the praise bestowed upon its authors,and the exultation they expressed at their success,deceived the government as to the sourceof these noisy demonstrations of pleasure. Theyconceived it to be the natural impulse of generousminds towards those who had thus kindlylistened to their solicitations, and liberallygranted even more than they had required. Butthey knew not their men. It was the shoutOF CANADA. 93of victory that they mistook for the plaudits ofloyalty. It was not designed to greet the earsof benefactors with grateful acknowledgments,but to wound the feelings of their neighbourswith the cheers of triumph. They devoted butlittle time to mutual congratulations. Sternerfeelings had supplied the place of rejoicing.They set themselves busily to work to improvetheir advantage ; and, having established themselvesin the outworks which were thus surrenderedto them, they now turned their attentionto storming the citadel. While government^as engaged in carrying into execution therecommendations of the committee with asmuch dispatch as the peculiar state of politicsin Great Britain at that time permitted, theassembly put themselves in a posture of complaintagain. Fourteen resolutions were passed,embodying some of the old and embracing somenew grievances, and an agent appointed toadvocate their claims.While representations in the name of thewhole population were thus sent to England,expressing only the sentiment of one portion ofthe people, the settlers of British origin wereloud in their complaints that they were unrepresented,and that they had no constitutionalmeans of being heard. Fearing that this re-THE BUBBLESmonstrance, which was so well founded, mightbe redressed in the same quarter to which theyhad applied so successfully for relief themselves,the assembly affected to listen to theirpetitions, and made a new electoral division ofthe province. Territories inhabited principallyby persons of French origin, they divided intonumerous small counties ; while others, wherea large body of those of British origin resided,they so divided that, by joining that territorywith another more numerous in French inhabitants,the votes of the British were renderedineffectual. The proportion stood thus :Say 32 counties, returning two memberseach, by French majorities2 Ditto - - ditto, one each (say Montmorencyand Drummond) -1 English majority, Gigantic -5 Ditto . - - - Sherbrooke,Stanstead, Missisquoi, Ottawa,and Stafford, 2 each - - .Total - 40 Counties.British.m ^1 'm ^Foreign.2"Two cities, French majority, Quebec andMontreal, 4 each - - - . -Two towns - ditto - Three Rivers, 2;and William Henry, 1 - - - -Total, 88 Members.OF CANADA. 95Of the extreme partiality of this divisionthere never has been but one opinion in thecolonies, until they were so fortunate as to befavoured with* the distinction drawn by thecommissioners, who admitted that its operationwas a practical exclusion, but exonerated thebill from a charge of unfairness— an instance ofeven-handed justice (deciding in favour of bothparties) which ought to have won them thepraise of all men. In addition to this exclusion,so extraordinarily designated as unjustbut not unfair, they established the quorum ofthe house for the transaction of business atforty, being only four less than a moiety of thewhole body. The large number thus requiredto be present to constitute a house still furtherdepressed the influence of the minority, andenabled the majority to deprive them of theirparliamentary privileges at pleasure, by renderingthe transaction of business impossible, exceptwhen it suited the convenience of thestronger party to allow it.Having disposed of the complaints of theBritish settlers in a way to prevent them frombeing troublesome in the house, they returnedto the consideration of their own grievances ;and that the motives actuating the party mightnot be disclosed, and to prevent any member96 THE BUBBLESof the opposition from being present at theirdeliberations, they adopted the extraordinarymode of permitting a person moving for a committeeto name all the individuals whom hedesired to be appointed as members. Theyalso resolved that, if the legislative council didnot concur in a bill for paying their emissary toEngland, they would, in the plenitude of theirpower, pay him themselves out of the publicrevenue without their concurrence. This singularassumption stands recorded thus : —"Monday, 28th March 1831 Resolved,that in the present state of the public affairs ofthis province, it is indispensably necessary thatsome person, having the confidence of thishouse, should proceed forthwith to Englandto represent to his Majesty's government theinterests and sentiments of the inhabitants ofthe province, and support the petitions of thishouse to his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament.*' Resolved, — that in the event of the billsent up by this house to the legislative councilon the 5th instant, not receiving the concurrenceof that house in the present session, theHonourable Denis B. Viger, Esq., member ofthe legislative council, named agent of the provincein the said bill, be requested to proceedOF CANADA. 97to England without delay, for the purposesmentioned in the foregoing resolution.Resolved, — that it is expedient that thenecessary and unavoidable disbursements of thesaid Denis Benjamin Viger, for effecting thepurposes aforesaid, not exceeding £1,000, beadvanced, and paid to him by the clerk of thishouse, out of the contingent fund thereof, tillsuch time as the said disbursements can beotherwise provided for."And to shew their contempt of that co-ordinatebranch of the legislature, and their determinationto legislate for the colony withouttheir concurrence, and by their sole authority,as well as to stigmatize the officers of the governmentas enemies of the country, they furtherresolved —"That until such time as the royal assentshall be given to a bill conformable to a resolutionof this house of the 1 7th March 1825, forvacating the seats of members accepting offices,and similar to the bills passed by this house inthe years 1826, 1827, 1828, and 1830, the secondand fourth of which were reserved for thesignification of his Majesty's pleasure, the seatof any member of this house who shall acceptof any office or place of profit under the crownin this province, or become accountable for anyH98 THE BUBBLESpublic money hereafter appropriated within thisprovince, shall, by this acceptance, be deemedby this house to be vacant, and a new writ shallbe issued for a new election, as if such personso accepting was naturally dead ; neverthelesssuch person shall be capable of being again reelected,and of sitting and voting in this house,as if his seat had not been vacated as aforesaid.Resolved, —That any member of this housesitting and voting therein after such acceptance,be expelled this house."At the same time, while they refused togovernment the means of paying its officers,they were most prodigal of the public moneyupon themselves and their dependants. Thereare certain funds appropriated for the contingentexpenses of the house ; and, legally,neither the house nor any of its officers haveany right to apply them to any other purposes.It is a trust fund, on the expenditure of whichdoubtless a certain degree of discretion may beexercised, but still a discretion having certainlimits. It is quite manifest that if the housecould legally apply this fund to other objectsthan those for which it was specifically appropriated,they would, for all the purposes ofsuch application, exercise sole legislative power,OF CANADA. 09to the exclusion of the other two branches ofthe l^islature. The case of Mr. Viger, abovereferred to, is a flagrant violation of this principle.The expenses for printing alone duringthis year (1831) for the assembly, at one onlyof its favourite establishments, was considerablyover £5,000, exclusive of other presses;and this enormous sum is also exclusive of thecost of printing the laws, or of the expensesof the council. Pretexts were not wanted,where the disposition existed, to provide fortheir dependants. A subpoena was all thatwas necessary to obtain a warrant for a gratuity,which, to one individual, covered achaise of £120, and on one petition amountedto £700. " Some witnesses," says a gentlemanof the bar at Quebec, " one sees as regularlyabout a fortnight after the sessions asswallows in the spring ; and although they do notlast quite so long, yet they hardly leave Quebecbefore either the house or the roads break up,"It will hardly be credited, that this house,which is so clamorous for cheap government,expends on itself thirteen thousand pounds ayear — one thousand of which is paid to Mr.Papineau, the patriot ; and that the grossamount of the legislative expenses is ^18,000.Some idea of the purity " of our enslaved andH 2100 THE BUBBLESOppressed brethren " may be formed from thefact that, previous to 1829, the amount ofmonies voted for education had not exceeded£2,500. At that period it was found it couldbe turned to a better account than education,they therefore constituted the members of thehouse visitors of t^ schools in the countiesthey represent the money being drawn ontheir certificates only, to which by law theyare privileged to affix their crosses, instead ofthe more difficult process of writing theirnames. Since then the grants have wonderfullyincreased.In 1830 . . £27,8401831 . . 25,2611832 . . 29,2331833 . . 22,500When the fourteen resolutions above referredto were passed, the governor, who had recentlyarrived, could not but feel astonishedthat the same people who had so lately expressedtheir delight and satisfaction at thereport of the proceedings of parliament, andwho knew that the recommendations of thecommittee were in a train of execution, shouldbe again as clamorous as ever, and very prudentlyand properly entreated them to put jeanend to complaint, by bringing forward at onceOF CANADA. 101every grievance they had, that it might be metand redressed at the same time. The earnestmanner in which this is pressed upon them isworthy of notice. What were the sources ofhis lordship's satisfaction, which he twice expressesin this answer, I am utterly at a loss toimagine, unless we may conjecture it to havearisen from the consciousness of possessing aphilosophy which enabled him to subdue andcontrol his indignation at the insatiable demandsand gross ingratitude of those whom it was hisduty to address.I can assure you," he said, " gentlemen,that 1 have derived satisfaction from listeningto the petition which has just been read byMr. Speaker, because the subject-matter of itis distinct and tangible, and because I feelassured that of the causes of complaint thereinset forth, many will be eventually removed, andothers modified ; in the meanwhile it is veryagreeable to me to have it in my power to statethat some of those causes of complaint havebeen already put by me in a train of ameliorationat least, if not of removal altogether ; andI beg the house of assembly to believe thatmy efforts shall be unremitting in pursuing thesame course to the utmost extent of my authorityas the King's representative. Thus far I102 THE BUBBLEScan, with a safe conscience, declare, that thepresent communication is satisfactory to me;but I cannot conceal frown the house, that itwould have been infinitely more so, could I fedassured that the whole matter of their complaintsis comprised in this petition. Gentlemen, Imust go a step further than this, and confess toyou, that I cannot divest my mind of anxietyon this subject; it is with the view of beingrelieved from this state of anxiety that I nowcome forward to entreat you will admit meto your confidence, and acquaint me whetherI am to expect any, and what further, communicationson the subject of complaints andgrievances.** I think I have even a claim upon you forthe confidence I now solicit. The propositionswhich upon a recent occasion I was commandedby the King to make to you on the subject offinance, were laid before you in the plainestand most straightforward manners nothingwas concealed— nothing was glossed over ; andI even believe that I should have been justifiedhad I made those propositions more palatableto you than I have done ; but I considered thatanything which could bear, even for a moment,the appearance of trick or manoeuvre on sograve an occasion, was unworthy of his MajestyCANADA. 103ty's government, and an injustice to the rankand loyal character of the Canadian people.What I now ask in return for this fair dealing,is a corresponding proceeding on the part of thehouse of assembly. Am 1 to understand, thatthe petition which I have just heard read conveysall that the house of assembly have to complainof up to this day ? Or am I to understandthat there remains something behind — someunripe grievance or complaint which it may beintended to bring forward hereafter, when thosenow produced shall have been disposed of?This is the information 1 ask of you. This,gentlemen, is the information which I willeven implore you to afford me, in the name ofthe King, our sovereign, who is sincerity itself,and in the name of the brave and honest peopleof Canada, who are so well entitled to expectfair dealing in every quarter : and now, if therebe any stray complaint, any grievance, howeverinconsiderable in itself, which may have beenoverlooked when this petition was adopted bythe house, I beseech you, gentlemen, to takeit back again, in order that the deficiency maybesupplied, and that thus both king andpeople may be enabled at one view to see thewhole extent of what you complain of, andwhat you require.104 THE BUBBLESWhether this appeal to your candour shalldraw from you any further declaration, statingthat your petition contains the whole matter ofyour complaints and grievances, or that youshall maintain silence, 1 shall equally considerthat I have acquired a full and distinct knowledgeof the whole of your complaints andgrievances up to the present period ; and yourpetition will be accompanied by an assurancefrom me to that effect, and my most ferventwishes that it may be productive of such measuresas shall restore perfect harmony to thisfavoured land, where 1 firmly believe a largershare of happiness and prosperity is to be foundthan amongst any people in the universe.*' Castle of St. Louis, Quebec,23d March 1831."Having given them this gracious reception,his lordship communicated these resolutions tothe secretary for the colonies ; to whose answer,as it enumerates the complaints for the purposeof giving to each a distinct and separa '^ answer,I refer you for the particulars as well of theresolutions as of the remedies.The King has been graciously pleased toexpress his approbation of the efforts made byyour lordship to ascertain, with precision, thefull extent of the grievances of which theOF CANADA. 105assembly consider themselves entitled to complain; and assuming, in concurrence with yourlordship, that the address of the assemblycontains a full development of those grievances,the exposition which is to be found there of theviews of that body, justifies the satisfactoryinference that there remains scarcely any questionupon which the wishes of that branch ofthe legislature are at variance with the policywhich his Majesty has been advised to pursue;and I therefore gladly anticipate the speedyand effectual termination of those differences,which have heretofore so much embarrassed theoperations of the local government,No oflSce can be more grateful to the Kingthan that of yielding to the reasonable desiresof the representative body of Lower Canada ;and whilst his Majesty's servants have the satisfactionof feeling, that upon some of the mostimportant topics referred to in the address ofthe assembly, its wishes have been anticipated,they trust that the instructions which I am nowabout to convey to you, will still further evincetheir earnest desire to combine with the dueand lawful exercise of the constitutional authorityof the crown, an anxious solicitude for thewell-being of all classes of his faithful subjectsin the province.100 THE BUBBLES1 proceed to notice the various topics embracedin the address of the assembly to theKing. I shall observe the order which theyhave followed ; and, with a view to perspicuity,1 shall preface each successive instruction,which I have his Majesty's commands to conveyto your lordship, by the quotation of thestatements made upon the same topic by theAssembly themselves.First, it is represented that the progresswhich has been made in the education of thepeople of the province, under the encouragementafforded by the recent acts of the legislature,has been greatly impeded by the diversionof the revenues of the Jesuits' estates, originallydestined for this purpose.His Majesty's government do not deny thatthe Jesuits' estates were, on the dissolution ofthat order, appropriated to the education of thepeople ; and I readily admit, that the revenuewhich may result from that property should beregarded as inviolably and exclusively applicableto that object.It is to be regretted, undoubtedly, that anypart of those funds were ever applied to anyother purpose ; but although, in former times,your lordship's predecessors may have had tocontend with difficulties which caused and exodCANADA. 107cased that mode of appropriation, I do not feelmyself now called upon to enter into any considerationof that part of the subject.If, however, I may rely on the returnswhich have been made to this department, therents of the Jesuits' estates have, during thefew last years, been devoted exclusively to thepurposes of education, and my despatch, dated24th December last, marked ' separate,' sufficientlyindicates that his Majesty's ministershad resolved upon a strict adherence to thatprinciple several months before the present addresswas adopted.The only practical question which remainsfor consideration is, whether the application ofthese funds for the purpose of education shouldbe directed by his Majesty or by the provinciallegislature. The King cheerfully and withoutreserve confides that duty to the legislature, inthe full persuasion that they will make such aselection amongst the different plans whichmay be presented. to their notice, as may mosteffectually advance the interests of religion andsound learning amongst his subjects ; and Icannot doubt that the assembly will see thejustice of continuing to maintain, under thenew distributions of these funds, those scholasticestablishments to which they are nowapplied.108 THE BUBBLES'' I understand that certain buildings on theJesuits' estates which were formerly used forcollegiate purposes, have since been uniformlyemployed as a barrack for the King's troops.It would obviously be highly inconvenient toattempt any immediate change in this respect,and I am convinced that the assembly wouldregret any measure which might diminish thecomforts or endanger the health of the King'sforces. If, however, the assembly should bedisposed to provide adequate barracks so aspermanently to secure those important objects,his Majesty will be prepared (upon the completionof such an arrangement in a mannersatisfactory to your lordship) to acquiesce in theappropriation of the buildings in question tothe same purposes as those to which the generalfunds of the Jesuits' estates are now aboutto be restored.I should fear that ill-founded expectationsmay have been indulged respecting the valueand productiveness of these estates ; in this, asin most other cases, concealment appears tohave been followed by exaggeration, as itsnatural consequence. Had the application ofthe assembly for an account of the proceeds ofthese estates been granted, much misapprehensionwould probably have been dispelled. MyOF CANADA. 109regret for the effect of your decision to withholdthese accounts, does not, however, render meinsensible to the propriety and apparent weightof the motives by which your judgment wasguided. Disavowing, however, every wish forconcealment, 1 am to instruct your lordship tolay these accounts before the assembly in themost complete detail, at the commencement oftheir next session, and to supply the housewith any further explanatory statements whichthey may require respecting them.It appearing that the sum of £7, 1 54. 15^. 4^rf.has been Recovered from the property of the lateMr. Caldwell, in respect to the claims of thecrown against him on account of the Jesuits'estates, your lordship will cause that sum to beplaced at the disposal of the legislature forgeneral purposes. The sum of <£ 1,200. 3^. 4rf.,which was also recovered on account of thesame property, must also be placed at the disposalof the legislature, but should, with referenceto the principles already noticed, beconsidered as applicable to the purposes ofeducation exclusively."Secondly. — ^^The house of assembly representthat the progress of education has been impededby the withholding grants of land promisedfor schools in the year 1 80 1 .110 THE BUBBLESOn reference to the speech delivered inthat year by the then governor to the twohouses of provincial legislature, I find thatsuch an engagement as the address refers towas actually made ; it of course therefore isbinding on the crown, and must now be carriedinto effect, unless there be any circumstancesof which I am not apprised, which may havecancelled the obligation contracted in 1801, orwhich may have rendered the fulfilment of itat the present time impracticable. If any suchcircumstances really exist, your lordship willreport them to me immediately, in order thatthe fit course to be taken may be further considered.Thirdly. — The rejection by the legislativecouncil 01 various bills in favour of educationis noticed as the last of the impediments to theprogress of education.Upon this subject it is obvious that hisMajesty's government have no power of exercisingany control, and that they could not interferewith the free exercise of the discretionof the legislative council, without the violationof the most undoubted maxims of the constitution.How far that body may have actuallycounteracted the wishes of the assembly on thissubject I am not very exactly informed, norOF CANADA. 1 IIwould it become me to express an opinion onthe wisdom or propriety of any decision whichthey may have formed of that nature. Theassembly may, however, be assured, that whateverlegitimate influence his Majesty's governmentcan exercise, will always be employed topromote in every direction all measures whichhave for their object the religious, moral, orliterary instruction of the people of LowerCanada.Fourthly. — ^^The address proceeds to state,that the management of the waste lands of thecrown has been vicious and improvident, andstill impedes the settlement of those lands.This subject has engaged, and still occupies,my most anxious attention, and I proposeto address your lordship upon it at length in aseparate despatch. The considerations connectedwith the settlement of waste lands aretoo numerous and extensive to be convenientlyembodied in a despatch embracing so manyother subjects of discussion.Fifthly. — ^^The exercise by parliament ofits power of regulating the trade of the province,is said to have occasioned injurious uncertaintyin mercantile speculations, and prejudicialfluctuations in the value of real estate,and of the different branches of industry connectedwith trade.112 THE BUBBLES'^ It is gratifying to find that this complaintis connected with a frank acknowledgment thatthe power in question has been beneficiallyexercised on several occasions for the prosperityof Lower Canada. It is, I fear, an unavoidableconsequence of the connexion whichhappily subsists between the two countries,that Parliament should occasionally require ofthe commercial body of Lower Canada, somemutual sacrifices for the general good of theempire at large : I therefore shall not attemptto deny, that the changes in the commercialpolicy in this kingdom during the few lastyears may have been productive of occasionalinconvenience and loss to that body, sincescarcely any particular interest can be mentionedin Great Britain of which some sacrificehas not been required during the same period.The most which can be effected by legislationon such a subject as this, is a steady though gradualadvance towards those great objects whichan enlightened regulation contemplates. Therelaxation of restrictions on the trade of theBritish Colonies, and the development of theirresources, have been kept steadfastly in viewamidst all the alterations to which the addressrefers, and I confidently rely on the candour ofthe house of assembly, to admit that, upon theOF CANADA. 113whole, no inconsiderable advance towards thosegreat ends has been made. They may restassured, that the same principles will be steadilyborne in mind by his Majesty's government,in every modification of the existing law whichthey may at any future period have occasion torecommend to parliament.Sixthly. — ^^The assembly in ^^Their addressproceed to state that the inhabitants of thedifferent towns, parishes, townships, extra-parochialplaces and counties of the province,suffer from the want of sufficient legal powers forregulating and managing their local concerns.I am happy in the opportunity which atpresent presents itself, of demonstrating thedesire of his Majesty's government to cooperatewith the local legislature in the redressof every grievance of this nature. The threebills which your lordship reserved for the significationof his Majesty's pleasure in the lastsession of the assembly, establishing the parochialdivisions of the province, and for the incorporationof the cities of Quebec and Montreal,will be confirmed and finally enacted byhis Majesty in council, with the least possibledelay, and I expect to be able very shortly totransmit to your lordship the necessary ordersin council for that purpose.I114 THE BUBBLESI very sincerely regret that the bill passedfor the legal establishment of parishes in themonth of March 1829, should have been defeatedby the delay which occurred in transmittingthe official confirmation of it to the province.The case appears to have been, thatowing to the necessity, whether real or supposed,of laying the act before both houses ofparliament for six weelts before its confirmationby the King in Council, many months elapsedafter its arrival in this kingdom before thatform could be observed, and his late Majesty'sprotracted illness delayed still longer thebringing it under the consideration of the Kingin Council.If it should be the opinion of the Coloniallegislature that additional provisions are wantingto enable the local authorities in counties,cities, or parishes, to regulate their own moreimmediate affairs, your lordship will understand,that you are at liberty, in his Majesty'sname, to assent to any well-considered lawswhich may be presented to you for that purpose.Seventhly. — I proceed to the next subjectof complaint, which is, that uncertainty andconfusion has been introduced into the laws forthe security and regulation of property, by theOF CANADA. 115intermixture of different codes of laws and rulesof proceeding in the courts of justice."The intermixture to which the addressrefers, so far as I am aware, arises from theEnglish criminal code having been maintainedby the British statute of 1774, and from thevarious acts of parliament which have introducedinto the province the soccage tenure,and subjected all lands so holden to the Englishrules of alienation and descent.As a mere matter of fact, there can be nodoubt that the infusion of these parts of thelaw of England into the provincial code, wasdictated by the most sincere wish to promotethe general welfare of the people of LowerCanada ; this was especially the case with regardto the criminal law, as is sufficiently apparentfrom the language of the 1 th section ofthe 14 Geo. Ill, c. 83. With regard to theadvantage* to be anticipated from the substitutionof tenure in soccage for feudal services,I may remark, that Parliament couldscarcely be otherwise than sincerely convincedof the benefits of that measure, since the maximsupon which they proceeded are in accordancewith the conclusion of almost all theoreticalwriters and practical statesmen. I am not,indeed, anxious to show that these were just,I 2116 THE BUBBLESbut 1 think it not immaterial thus to havepointed out that the errors, if any, which theyinvolve, can be attributed only to a sincere zealfor the good of those whom the enactments inquestion more immediately affect.** I fully admit, however, that this is a subject oflocal and internal policy, upon which far greaterweight is due to the deliberate judgment ofenlightened men in the province than to anyexternal authority whatever. Your lordshipwill announce to the council and assembly,his Majesty's entire disposition to concur withthem in any measures which they may thinkbest adapted for insuring a calm and comprehensivesurvey of these subjects in all theirbearings. It will then remain with the twohouses to frame such laws as may be necessaryto render the provincial code more uniform, andbetter adapted to the actual condition of societyin Canada. To any laws prepared for that mostimportant purpose, and calculated to advanceit, his Majesty's assent will be given with theutmost satisfaction. It is possible that a workof this nature would be best executed bycommissioners, to be specially designated forthe purpose; should such be your lordship'sopinion, you will suggest that mode of proceedingto both houses of the provincial legislateCANADA. 117ture, who, 1 am convinced, would willinglyincur whatever expense may be inseparablefrom such an undertaking, unless they shouldthemselves be able to originate any plan ofinquiry and proceeding, at once equally effectiveand economical.Eighthly. — ^^The administration of justice issaid to have become inefficient and unnecessarilyexpensive,** As the provincial tribunals derive theirpresent constitution from local statute, and notfrom any exercise of his Majesty's prerogative,it is not within the power of the King to improvethe mode of administering the law, or todiminish the costs of litigation. Your lordshipwill, however, assure the house of assembly,that his Majesty is not only ready, but mostdesirous, to co-operate with them in any improvementsof the judicial system which thewisdom and experience of the two houses maysuggest. Your lordship will immediately assentto any bills which may be passed for that purpose,excepting in the highly improbable eventof their being found open to some apparentlyconclusive objection ; even in that case, however,you will reserve any bills for improvingthe administration of the law for the significationof his Majesty's pleasure.118 THE BUBBLESNinthly. — ^^The address ^^Then states, that ^^Theconfusion and uncertainty of which the Housecomplain has been greatly increased by enactmentsaffecting real property in the colonymade in the Parliament of the United Kingdomsince the establishment of the provinciallegislature, without those interested havingeven had an opportunity of being heard ; andparticularly by a recent decision on one ofthe said enactments in the provincial court ofappeals.His Majesty's Government can have nocontroversy with the house of assembly uponthis subject. The house cannot state in strongerterms, than they are disposed to acknowledge,,the fitness of leaving to the legislature of LowerCanada exclusively the enactment of every lawwhich may be required respecting real propertywithin that province. It cannot be denied, thatat a former period a different opinion was entertainedby the British government ; and thatthe statute-book of this kingdom contains variousregulations on the subject of lands inLower Canada, which might, perhaps, havebeen more conveniently enacted in the provinceitself: I apprehend, however, that thisinterference of Parliament was never invokedexcept on the pressure of some supposed necesseCANADA. 119city ; and that there Rever was a period inwhich such acts were introduced by the ministersof the crown without reluctance."To a certain extent, the statute 1 Will. IV,c. 20, which was passed at the instance of hisMajesty's Government in the last session ofParliament, has anticipated the complaint towhich I am now referring, and has preventedits recurrence, by authorizing the local legislatureto regulate whatever relates to the incidentsof soccage tenure in the province, withoutreference to any real or supposed repugnancyof any such regulations to the law ofEngland. If there is any other part of theBritish statute law, bearing upon this topic, towhich the council and assembly shall object,his Majesty's Government will be prepared torecommend to Parliament that it should berepealed."Tenthly. — It is stated that several of thejudges of the courts in the province have longbeen engaged in, and have even taken a publicpart in the political affairs and differences ofthe province, at the same time holding officesduring pleasure, and situations incompatiblewith thedue discharge of the judicial functions."Under this head again, it is very gratifying tothe ministers of the crown to find, that they120 THE BUBBLEShad, in a great measure, obviated by anticipationthe complaint of the house of assembly.In the despatch which I addressed to yourlordship, on the 8th February, No. 22, everyarrangement was made which could be eithersuggested or carried into effect by his Majesty'sauthority, for removing the judges of the provincefrom all connection with its politicalaffairs, and for rendering them independent atonce of the authority of the Crown, and thecontrol of the other branches of the legislature ;thus placing them exactly in the same positionas that of the judges of the supreme courts atWestminster."The judges themselves have, it appears,with laudable promptitude, concurred in givingeffect to these recommendations by discontinuingtheir attendance at the executive council.Nothing therefore, in fact, remains for terminatingall discussions upon this subject, but thatthe house of assembly should make such a permanentprovision for the judges as, withoutexceeding a just remuneration, may be adequateto their independent maintenance in that rankof life which belongs to the dignity of theirstation.*' 1 am not aware that any judge in LowerCanada holds any oflSce, excepting that of exodCANADA. 121active councillor, during the pleasure of theCrown, or which is in any respect incompatiblewith she due discharge of his official functions; if any such case exists, your lordshipwill have the goodness immediately to reportto me all the circumstances by which it may beattended, in order that the necessary instructionson the subject may be given. In the meantimeI may state, without reserve, that no judgecan be permitted to retain any office correspondingwith the description thus given by thehouse of assembly, in combination with thatindependent position on the bench to which Ihave referred."Eleventh. — ^^The address proceeds to statethat, during a long series of years, executiveand judiciary offices have been bestowed almostexclusively upon one class of subjects in theprovince, and especially upon those least connectedby property, or otherwise, with itspermanent inhabitants, or who have shownthemselves the most averse to the rights, liberties,and interests of the people. It is added,that several of these persons avail themselvesof the means afforded by their situations to preventthe constitutional and harmonious co-operationof the government and the house ofassembly, and to excite ill-feeling and discord122 THE BUBBLESbetween them, while they are remiss in theirdifferent situations to forward the public business.1 quote thus largely the language of theaddress, because 1 am desirous to meet everypart of it in the most direct manner, as well asin the most conciliatory spirit. It is not fromany want of that spirit that 1 recommend youto suggest for the consideration of the houseof assembly, how far it is possible that hisMajesty should clearly understand, or effectuallyredress a grievance which is brought underhis notice in terms thus indefinite. If anypublic officers can be named who are guilty ofsuch an abuse of their powers, and of suchremissness in their duties as are implied in thepreceding quotation, his Majesty would not beslow to vindicate the public interest by removing,any such persons from his service. If itcan be shown that the patronage of the Crownhas been exercised upon any narrow and exclusivemaxims, they cannot be too entirelydisavowed and abandoned, especially if it betrue that the permanent inhabitants of thecolony do not enjoy a full participation in allpublic employments, the house of assemblymay be assured that his Majesty can have nodesire that any such invidious distinctionsOF CANADA. 123should be systematically maintained. Beyondthis general statement it is not in my power toadvance. I am entirely ignorant of the specificcases to which the general expressions of theassembly point. I can only state, that sincehis Majesty was pleased to intrust to myself theseals of this department, no opportunity hasoccurred for exercising the patronage of theCrown in Lower Canada, to which it is possiblethat the assembly can refer, nor have myinquiries brought to light any particular case ofa more remote date to which their languagewould appear to be applicable.Twelfthly. — ^Thenext subject of complaintis developed in the following words : — " Thatthere exist no sufficient responsibility on thepart of the persons holding these situations, norany adequate accountability amongst those ofthem intrusted with public money ; the consequenceof which has been the misapplication oflarge sums of public money, and of the moneyof individuals by defaulters, with whom depositswere made under legal authority, hitherto withoutreimbursement or redress having beenobtained, notwithstanding the humble representationsof your petitioners."It would be impossible, without a violation oftruth, to deny that at a period not very remote124 THE BUBBLESheavy losses were sustained both by the publicand by individuals, from the want of a propersystem of passing and auditing their ac€X)unts,I find, however, that in his despatch of the 29thSeptember, Sir George Murray adverted to thissubject in terms to which I find it difficult tomake any useful addition. His words are asfollows : — "The complaints which have reachedthis office respecting the inadequate securitygiven by the receiver-general and by thesheriffs, for the due application of public moneyin their hands, have not escaped the very seriousattention of the ministers of the Crown;the most effectual security against abuses ofthis nature would be to prevent the accumulationof balances in the hands of public accountants,by obliging them to exhibit their accountsto some competent authority at short intervals,and immediately to pay over the ascertainedbalance. The proof of having punctually performedthis duty should be made the indispensablecondition of receiving their salaries, andof their continuance in office.In the colony of New South Wales a regulationof this nature has been established underhis Majesty's instructions to the governor ofthat settlement, and has been productive ofgreat public convenience. If a similar practiceOF CANADA. 125were introduced in Lower Canada for the regulationof the oflSce of receiver-general, and forthat of sheriff, the only apparent difficulty wouldbe to find a safe place of deposit for theirbalances. I am, however, authorised to state,that the lords' commissioners of his Majesty'sTreasury will hold themselves responsible tothe province for any sums which the receiver-generalor sheriff may pay over to the .Your excellency will, therefore,propose to the legislative council and assemblythe enactment of a law binding these officersto render an account of their receipts at shortintervals, and to pay over the balances in theirhands to the commissary-general, upon conditionthat that officer should be bound, ondemand, to deliver a bill on his Majesty's Treasuryfor the amount of his receipts. I trustthat, in this proposal, the legislature will finda proof of the earnest desire of his Majesty'sgovernment to provide, as far as may be practicable,an effectual remedy for every case ofreal grievance.If the preceding instructions have provedinadequate to the redress of the inconvenienceto which they refer, I can assure your lordshipof the cordial concurrence of his Majesty'sgovernment in any more effective measures126 THE BUBBLESwhich may be recommended for that purpose,either by yourself or by either of the houses ofthe provincial legislature.The losses which the province sustained bythe default of the late Mr. Caldwell is a subjectwhich his Majesty's Government contemplatewith the deepest regret — a feeling enhanced bythe painful conviction of their inability to affordto the provincial revenues any adequate compensationfor so serious an injury ; what is intheir power they have gladly done by the instructionconveyed to your lordship in theearly part of this despatch, to place at the disposalof the legislature, for general purposes,the sum of £7,154. 15^. 4|^rf., recovered fromMr, Caldwell's property. The assembly will,I trust, accept this as a proof of the earnestdesire of his Majesty's Government to consultto the utmost of their ability the pecuniaryinterests of the province.Thirteenth. The address proceeds to statethat " the evils of this state of things have beengreatly aggravated by enactments made in theParliament of the United Kingdom, withouteven the knowledge of the people of this colony,which enactments have rendered temporaryduties imposed by the provincial legislaturepermanent, leaving in the hands of public/OF CANADA. 127officers, over whom the assembly has no effectualcontrol, large sums of money arisingwithin this province, which are applied by personssubject to no sufficient accountability."I understand this complaint to refer to the28th clause of the Stat. 3 Geo. IV, c. 119. Theduties mentioned in that enactment are continueduntil some act for repealing or alteringthem shall be passed by the legislative counciland assembly of Lower Canada, and until acopy of any such new act shall have beentransmitted to the governor of Upper Canada,and shall have been laid before both houses ofParliament, and assented to by his Majesty.The motive for this enactment is explained inthe preamble, to have been the necessity of obviatingthe evils experienced in the Upper Provincefrom the exercise of an exclusive controlby the legislature of Lower Canada over importsand exports at the port of Quebec. Iacknowledge without reserve, that nothing butthe necessity of mediating between the two provinceswould have justified such an interferenceby Parliament ; and if any adequate securitycan be devised against the recurrence of similardifficulties, the enactment ought to berepealed. The peculiar geographical positionof Upper Canada, enjoying no access to the128 THE BUBBLESsea, except through a province wholly independenton itself, on the one hand or througha foreign state on the other, was supposed inthe year 1822 to have created the necessity forenacting so peculiar a law for its protection. Ishould be much gratified to learn, that no suchnecessity exists at present, or can be reasonablyanticipated hereafter ; for upon sufficient evidenceof that fact, his Majesty's Governmentwould at once recommend to Parliament therepeal of that part of the statute to which theaddress of the house of assembly refers. Theministers of the Crown would even be satisfiedto propose to Parliament the repeal of the enactmentin question, upon proof that the legislatureof the Upper Province deem such protectionsuperfluous ; perhaps it may be foundpracticable to arrange this matter by communicationsbetween the legislatures of the two provinces.The ministers of the Crown are preparedto co-operate to the fullest extent in anymeasure which the two legislatures shall concurin recommending for the amendment orrepeal of the Statute 3 Geo. IV, c. 1 19, s. 28.Fourteenth. — The selection of the legislativecouncillors and the constitution of thatbody, which forms the last subject of complaintin the address, I shall not notice in this place.OF CANADA. 129any further than to say, that it will form thematter of a separate communication, since thetopic is too extensive and important to be convenientlyembraced in my present despatch."The preceding review of the questionsbrought by the house of assembly, appears tomeentirely to justify the expectations which Ihave expressed at the commencement' of thisdespatch, of a speedy, effectual, and amicabletermination of the protracted discussions ofseveral years. It would be injurious to thehouse of assembly to attribute to them.<;\anvysuch captious spirit as would keep alive a contestupon a few minor and insignificant details,after the statement I have made of the generalaccordance between the views of his Majesty'sgovernment and their own, upon so many importantquestions of Canadian policy. Littleindeed remains for debate, and that little will,I am convinced, be discussed with feelings ofmutual kindness and good wilt, and with anearnest desire to strengthen the bonds of unionalready subsisting between the two countries.His Majesty will esteem it as amongst themost enviable distinctions of his reign, tohave contributed to so great and desirable aresult.K130 THE BUBBLES*^ Your lordship will take the earliest opportunityof transmitting to the house of assemblya copy of this despatch. ,*' I have, &c.(signed) Goderich."OF CANADA. 131Letter VII.The time had now arrived (1832) when everygrievance, so far as the remedy lay with thegovernment, had been removed, according tothe recommendations of the committee. Whateverrequired the co-operation of the assemblythemselves, remained untouched. They hadasked what they did not require, and hopedwould not be granted, so that the odium ofrefusal might serve as a pretext for furtheragitation. Several of the changes solicitedwould have weakened their influence, and theypreferred to suffer things to remain as theywere. There now existed no impediment tothe public tranquillity ; and, if their intentionshad been honest, we should have heard nomore of Canadian discontent. Several men ofcharacter and standing in the colony, who hadhitherto acted with the French faction, nowseparated themselves from them, declaring thatthey had obtained all, and even more than theyhad sought, and that they had now nothingfurther to ask but to enjoy in tranquillity thefruits of their labour. When they found therewas no corresponding feeling in the breasts oftheir colleagues, and that these concessionswere merely used as the groundwork of furtherK 2132 THE BUBBLESchanges, they became alarmed, and for the firsttime were made sensible of what the publichad always known with unfeigned sorrow, thatthey had been all along the dupes of their ownliberal notions and the artifices of others. Theyhad now full time to reflect upon the mischiefthey had done and their own inability to makereparation, and have added another illustrationto the numbers we already have onrecord of how much easier it is to open theflood-gates of popular prejudice and passion,than to close them against the force of the current.They are now likely to become the victimsof their own folly, and to be overwhelmedin the ruins caused by the inundation to whichthey have unfortunately contributed, by cuttingaway the embankments. It is to be hoped thatthe lesson will not be lost upon England ; andit may, perhaps, afibrd these unhappy mensome consolation if the safety of others is confirmedby the contemplation of the fatal effectsof their folly. The request of Lord Aylmer,that they would bring forward all their demands,and, if they had any further ones, toadd them to their catalogue, or that he shouldfeel himself entitled to report there were noneothers, was received with surprise, but insilence, and he very fairly concluded that theyOF CANADA. 133had exhausted their budget. This was thenatural inference, and it appears that parliamentflattered itself also that the whole subjectwas now fully before them* It is true the toneand temper of the house of assembly were notmaterially altered, and that the next four yearswere consumed in local disputes, during whichno appropriation was made for the public ser-service;but all this was charitably supposedto be the effect of previous excitement, and itwas thought not unnatural that some timeshould elapse before their angry feelings couldwholly subside. But what was their astonishment,after their declining the unprecedentedrequest of the governor to exhibit any furthercomplaints if they had any, to find that, in1834, they were prepared to come forward withninety-two resolutions of fresh grievance ! Thisextraordinary step revived the hopes of everyloyalist throughout the adjoining colonies.Surely, they said, this last ungrateful, unprovokedattempt will open the eyes of theEnglish nation to the ulterior views of Papineauand his party ! It takes much provocation toarouse the British lion; but, surely, this lastthrust will be more than he can bear! Hewill make his voice to be heard across the watersand sedition will fly terrified to its cover.134 THE BUBBLESBut, alas ! they vere rnktakeu. Noble andspirited as the animal once was, he is now olda^d infirm — a timid people have filed his teeth,and shortened his claws, and stupefied himwith drugs, and his natural pride disdains toexhibit an unsuccessful imbecility. It was receivedwith a meekness and mildness that filledevery body that had known him in formeryears with astonishment and pity ; they couldnot recognise, in the timid and crouching creaturebefore them, the same animal whose indomitablecourage and muscular strength had formerlyconquered these same Canadians, evenwhen supported by all the resources of France,who now, single-handed and alone, defied himto combat. But this is too painful a picture todwell upon.This singular document is well worthy ofyour perusal ; its want of intrinsic weight ismore than compensated by its prolixity. Theastounding number of ninety-two resolutionswas well calculated to delude strangers, andto induce them to think that the evils underwhich they laboured were almost too many forenumeration. As imagination is always morefertile than truth, they very wisely resorted tothe former, and were thus enabled to supplythemselves with any charge they required. ItOF CANADA. 135would doubtless have appeared singular to thesympathisers of England, if the aggregate hadamounted to so remarkable a number ^ onehundred : it would have struck them as a suspiciouscoincidence that they should have exactlyreached " a round number," and filled a^'^ell known measure, and therefore, with anacuteness peculiar to people accustomed tofabricate tales of fictitious distress, they wiselystopped at ninety-two. But it must notbe supposed that even Canadian exaggerationcould find a grievance for each number. Somewere merely declamatory, and others personal ;some complimented persons on this side of thewater, whose politics they thought resembledtheir own, and others expressed or implied acensure against obnoxious persons, while notafew were mere repetitions of what had beenpreviously said. Such a state paper, drawnup on such an occasion by the most eminentmen in the house for the perusal of such a bodyof men as the members of the imperial parliament,is of itself a proof how little fitted theCanadians are for constitutional government.1. Resolved, That His Majesty's loyal subjects, thepeople of this Province of Lower Caiiada> have shownthe strongest attachment to the British Empire, of whichthey are a portion ; that they have repeatedly defended136 THE BUBBLESit with courage in time of war ; that at the time whichpreceded the independence of the late British Colonieson this continent they resisted the appeal made to themby those colonies to join their confederation.2. Resolved That the people of this province haveat all times manifested their confidence in His Majesty'sGovernment, even under circumstances of the greatestdifficulty and when the government of the province hasbeen administered by men who trampled under foot therights and feelings dearest to British subjects ; and thatthese sentiments of the people of this province remainunchanged.3. Resolved, That the people of this Province havealways shown themselves ready to welcome and receiveas brethren those of their fellow subjects who, havingquitted the United Kingdom or its dependencies, havechosen this province as their home, and have earnestlyendeavoured (as far as on them depended) to affordevery facility to their participating in the political advantages,and in the means of rendering their industry available,which the people of this province enjoy ; and toremove for them the difficulties arising from the vicioussystem adopted by those who have administered the governmentof the province, with regard to those portionsof the country in which the newcomers have generallychosen to settle.4. Resolved, That this House, as representing thepeople of this province, has shown an earnest zeal toadvance the general prosperity of the country, by securingthe peace and content of all classes of its inhabitants,without any distinction of origin or creed, andupon the solid and durable basis of unity of interest,and equal confidence in the protection of the mothercountry.OF CANADA. 1375. Resolved, That this House has seized every occasionto adopt, and firmly to establish by law in thisprovince, not only the constitutional and parliamentarylaw of England, which is necessary to carry the Governmentinto operation, but also all such parts of the publiclaw of the United Kingdom as have appeared to thishouse adapted to promote the welfare and safety of thepeople, and to be conformable to their wishes and theirwants; and that this house has, in like manner, wiselyendeavoured so to regulate its proceedings as to renderthem, as closely as the circumstances of this colony permit,analogous to the practice of the House of Commonsof the United Kingdom.6. Resolved, That in the year 1827 the great majorityof the people of this province complained, in petitionssigned by 87^000 persons, of serious and numerousabuses which then prevailed, many of which had thenexisted for a great number of years, and of which thegreater part still exist, without correction or mitigation.7. Resolved, That the complaints aforesaid, and thegrievances which gave rise to them, being submitted tothe consideration of the Parliament of the United Kingdom,occasioned the appointment of a committee of theHouse of Commons, of which the Honourable EdwardGeoffrey Stanley, now his Majesty's principal secretaryof state for the colonial department, and several others,who are now members of his Majesty's government,formed part ; and that, after a careful investigation anddue deliberation, the said committee, on the 18th July1828, came to the following very just conclusions :Istly. " That the embarrassments and discontentsthat had long prevailed in the Canadass, hadarisen from serious defects in the system of laws,and the constitutions established in those colonies.138 THE BUBBLES2(lly. '' That these embarrassments were in agreat measure to be attributed to the manner inwhich the existing system had been administered.3d1y. '' That they had a complete conviction thatneither the suggestions which they had made, norany other improvements in the laws and constitutionsof the Canada will be attended with thedesired eiTect, unless an impartial, conciliating, andconstitutional system of government were observedin these royal and important colonies."8. Resolved. That since the period aforesaid, the constitutionof this province, with its serious defects, hascontinued to be administered in a manner calculated tomultiply the embarrassments and discontents which havelong prevailed ; and that the recommendations of theCommittee of the House of Commons have not beenfollowed by effective measures of a nature to producethe desired effect.9. Resolved, That the most serious defect in theConstitutional Act — its radical fault^^the most activeprinciple of evil and discontent in the province; themost powerful and most frequent cause of abuses ofpower; of infractions of the laws ; of the waste of thepublic revenue and property, accompanied by impunityto the governing party, ami the oppression aud consequentresentment of the governed, is that injudiciousenactment, the fatal results of which were foretold 6ythe Honourable Charles James Fox at the time of itsadoption, which invests the Crown with that exorbitantpower, (incompatible with any government duly balancedand founded on law and justice, and not on force andcoercion) of selecting and composing without any ruleor limitation, or any predetermined qualification, anentire branch of the legislature, supposed from theOF CANADA, 139nature of its attributions to be independent, but inevitablythe servile tool of the authority which creates,composes and decomposes it, and can on any day modifyit to suit the interests or the passions of themoment10. Resolved, That with the permission of a powerso unlimited the abuse of it is inseparably connected ;and that it has always been so exercised in the selectionof the Members of the Legislative Council of this province,as to favour the spirit of monopoly and despotismin the executive, judicial) and administrative departmentsof government, and never in favour of the public interests.11. Resolved, That the effectual remedy for this evilwas judiciously foreseen and pointed out by the Committeeof the House of Commons, who asked JohnNeilson, Esquire (sone of the agents who had carried toEngland the petition of the 87,000 inhabitants of LowerCanada), whether he had turned in hiss mind any planby which he conceived the Legislative Council mightbe better composed in Lower Canada; whether hethought it possible that the said body could commandthe confidence and respect of the people, or go in harmonywith the house of assembly, unless the principle ofelection were introduced into its composition in somemanner or other ; and also, whether he thought that thecolony could have any security that the legislative councilwould bQ properly and independently composed, unlessthe principle of election were introduced into it in somemanner or other ; and received from the said John Neil-scianswers, in which (among other reflections) he saidin substance, that there were two modes in which thecomposition of the legislative council might be bettered ;the one by appointing men who were independent of the140 THE BUBBLESexecutive (but that to judge from experience therewould be no security that this would be donee and thatif this mode were found impracticable the other wouldbe to render the legislative council elective.12. Resolved, That, judging from experience, thishouse likewise believes there would be no security in thefirst mentioned mode, the course of events having buttoo amply proved what was then foreseen ; and that thishouse approves all the inferences drawn by the saidJohn Neilson from experience and facts ; but that withregard to his suggestion that a class of electors of ahigher qualification should be established, or a qualificationin property fixed for those persons who might sitin the council, this house have, in their address to hisMost Gracious Majesty, dated the 20th March 1833,declared in what manner this principle could, in theiropinion, be rendered tolerable in Canada, by restrainingit within certain bounds, which should in no case bepassed.13. Resolved, That even in defining bounds of thisnature, and requiring the possession of real property asacondition of eligibility to a legislative council, chosenby the people, which most wisely and happily has notbeen made a condition of eligibility to the house ofassembly, this house seems rather to have sought toavoid shocking received opinions in Europe, where customand the law have given so many artificial privilegesand advantages to birth and rank and fortune, than to consultthe opinions generally received in America, wherethe influence of birth is nothing, and where, notwithstandingthe importance which fortune must alwaysnaturally confer, the artificial introduction of great politicalprivileges in favour of the possessors of large property,could not long resist the preference given at freeOF CANADA. 141elections to virtue, talents and information, whichfortune does not exclude but can never purchase, andwhich may be the portion of honest, contented, anddevoted men, whom the people ought to have the powerof calling and consecrating to the public service, in pre-^terence to richer men, of whom they may think lesshighly.14. Resolved, That this house is no wise disposed toadmit the excellence of the present constitution of Canaduy although his Majesty s secretary of state forthe colonies has unseasonably and erroneously asserted,that it has conferred on the two Canadass the institutionsof Great Britain ; nor to reject the principle of extendingthe system of frequent elections much furtherthan it is at present carried ; and this system oughtespecially to be extended to the legislative council,although it may be considered by the colonial secretaryincompatible with the British government, which he. callsa monarchical government, or too analogous to the institutionswhich the several states, composing the industrious,moral, and prosperous confederation of theUnited States of America, have adopted for themselves.15. Resolved, That in a dispatch, of which the dateis unknown, and of which a part only was communicatedto this house by the governor-in-chief on the 14thJanuary 1834, his Majesty's secretary of state for theColonial Department (this . house having no certainknowledge whether the said despatch is from the presentcolonial secretary or from his predecessor) says, thatan examination of the composition of the legislativecouncil at that period (namely, at the time when itscomposition was so justly censured by a Committee ofthe House of Commons) and at the present, will sufficientlyshow in what spirit his Majesty's Government142 THE BUBBLEShas endeavoured to carry the wishes of Parliament intoeffect.16. Resolved That this House receives with gratitudethis assurance of the just and benevolent intentions,with which, in the performance of their duty, hisMajesty's ministers have endeavoured to give eiTect tothe wishes of parliament.17* Resolved, That unhappily it was left to the principalagent of his Majesty's Government in this provinceto carry the wishes of the Imperial Parliament intoeffect ; but that he has destroyed the hope which hisMajesty's faithful subjects had conceived of seeing thelegislative council reformed and ameliorated, and hasconfirmed them in the opinion that the only possiblemode of giving to that body the weight and respectabilitywhich it ought to possess, is to introduce into it theprinciple of election.18. Resolved, That the legislative council, strengthenedby a majority inimical to the rights of this houseand of the people whom it represents, has received newand more powerful means than it before possessed ofperpetuating and of rendering more offensive and morehurtful to the country the system of abuses of whichthe people of this province have up to this day ineffectuallycomplained, and which up to this day, parliamentand his Majesty's government in England haveineffectually sought to correct.19. Resolved, That since its pretended reform thelegislative council has, in a manner more calculated toalarm the inhabitants of this province, and more particularlyin its Address to his Majesty of the 1st of April1833, renewed its pretension of being specially a^painted to protect one class of his Majesty's subjectsin this province, as supposing them to have interestsOF CANADA. 143•which could not be sufficiently represented in the assembly,seven-eights of the members of which are by thesaid council most erroneously stated to be of Frenchorigin and speak the French language : that this pretensionis a violation of the constitution, and is of anature to excite and perpetuate among the severalclasses of the inhabitants of this province mutual distrustand national distinctions and animosities, and togive one portion of the people an unjust and factioussuperiority over the other, and the hope of dominationand undue preference.20. Resolved That by such claim the legislativecouncil, after a reform which was held up as one adaptedto unite it more closely with the interests of the colonyin conformity with the wishes of parliament, calls downas one of its first acts, the prejudices and severity of hisMajesty's Government upon the people of this provinceand upon the representative branch of the legislaturethereof, and that by this conduct the legislativeeoiin<»l has destroyed amongst the people all hopewhich was left them of seeing the said council, so longas it shall remain constituted as it now is, act in harmonywith the house of assembly.2L Resolved, That the legislative council of thisprovince has never been any thing else but an impotentscreen between the governor and the people, which byenabling the one to maintain a conflict with the othershas served to perpetuate a system of discord and contention; that it has unceasingly acted with avowed hostilityto the sentiments of the people as constitutionallyexpressed by the house of assembly ; that it is notright under the name of a legislative council to imposean aristocracy on a country which contains no naturalmaterials for the composition of such a body ; that the144 THE BUBBLES«parliament of the United Kingdom in granting to hisMajesty* s Canadian subjects the power of revising theconstitution under which they hold their dearest rights,would adopt a liberal policy free from all considerationof former interests and of existing prejudices ; and thatby this measure equally consistent with a wise andsound policy, and with the most liberal and extendedviews, the parliament of the United Kingdom wouldenter into a noble rivalry with the United States ofAmerica, would prevent his Majesty's subjects fromseeing any thing to envy there ; and would preserve afriendly intercourse between Great Britain and this province,as her colony so long as the tie between us shallcontinue, and as her ally whenever the course of eventsmay change our relative position.22. Resolved, That this house so much the more confidentiallyemits the opinions expressed in the precedingresolution, because, if any faith is to be placed in thepublished reports, they were at no distant period emittedwith other remarks in the same spirit, in the commonshouse of the United Kingdom by the Right HonourableEdward Geoffrey Stanley, now his Majesty's principalsecretary of state for the Colonial department, andby several other enlightened and distinguished members,some of whom are among the number of his Majesty's presentministers ; and because the conduct of the legislativecouncil since its pretended reform demonstrates that thesaid opinions are in no wise rendered less applicable orless correct by its present composition,23. Resolved, That the legislative council has at thepresent time less community of interest with the provincethan at any former period ; that its present compositioninstead of being calculated so change the character ofOF CANADA. 145>the body to put an end to complaints, and to bringabout that co-operation of the two houses of the legislaturewhich is 80 necessary to the welfare of the country is suchas to destroy all hope that the said council will adoptthe opinions and sentiments of the people of this province^and of this house with regard to the inalienableright of the latter to the full and entire control of thewhole revenue raised in the province, with regard to thenecessity under which this house has found itself (forthe purpose of effecting the reformation which it has solong and so vainly demanded of existing abuses) toprovide for the expenses of the civil government by annualappropriations only, as well with regard to a varietyof other questions of public interest , concerning whichthe executive government, and the legislative councilwhich it has selected and created, differ diametricallyfrom the people of this province and from this house.24. Resolved, That such of the recently appointedcouncillors as were taken from the majority of the Assembly,and had entertained the hope that a sufficientnumber of independent men, holding opinions in unisonwith those of the majority of the people and of theirrepresentatives, would be associated with them, mustnow feel that they are overwhelmed by a majority hostileto the country, and composed of men who have irretrievablylost the public confidence, by showing themselvesthe blind and passionate partisans of all abuses ofpower, by encouraging all the acts of violence committedunder the administration of Lord Dalhousie, by havingon all occasions outraged the representatives of thepeople of the country ; of men, unknown in the countryuntil within a few years, without landed property orhaving very little, most of whom have never been re-146 THE BUBBLESturned to the Assembly (some of them having even beenrefused by the people), and who have never given anyproofs of their fitness for performing the functions oflegislators but merely of their hatred to the country ;and who, by reason of their community of sentimentwith him have found themselves, by the partiality of thegovernor in- chief, suddenly raised to a station in whichthey have the power of exerting during life, an influenceover the legislation and over the fate of this province,the laws and institutions of which have ever been theobjects of their dislike.25. Resolved, That in manifest violation of the constitution,there are among the persons last mentionedseveral who were born citizens of the United States orare natives of other foreign countries, and who at thetime of their appointment had not been naturalized byActs of the British Parliament ; that the residence ofone of these persons (Horatio Gates) in this countryduring the last war with the United States was onlytolerated ; he refused to take up arms for the defence ofthe country in which he remained merely for the sake oflucre ; and after these previous facts, took his seat in thelegislative council on the 16th March 1833; and fifteendays afterwards, to wit, on the 1st April, voted for theaddress before-mentioned, censuring those who duringthe last war were under arms on the frontiers to repulsethe attacks of the American armies and of the fellow-citizensof the said Horatio Gates : that another (JamesBaxter) was resident during the said late war within theUnited States, and was bound by the laws of thecountry of his birth, under certain circumstances, forciblyto invade this province, to pursue, destroy, and capture,if possible, his Majesty's armies, and such of his CANADA. 147tian subjects as were in arms upon the frontiers to repulsethe attacks of the American armies and of the saidJames Baxter who (being at the said time but slightlyqualified as far as property is concerned) became bythe nomination of the governor-in-chief, a legislator forlife in Lower Canada, on the 22d of March 1833 ; andeight days afterwards, on the 1st of April aforesaid,voted that very address which contained the calumniousand insulting accusation which called for the expressionof his Majesty's just regret, *' that any word had beenintroduced which should have the appearance of ascribingto a class of his subjects of one origin, views at variancewith the allegiance which they owe to his Majesty**Resolved, That it was in the power of the present£^overnor-in-chief, more than in that of any of his predecessors(by reason of the latitude allowed him as to thenumber and the selection of the persons whom he mightnominate to be members of the legislative council) toallay, for a time at least, the intestine divisions whichrend this colony, and to advance some steps towardsthe accomplishment of the wishes of Parliament, by inducinga community of interest between the said counciland the people, and by giving the former a more independentcharacter by judicious nominations.27. Resolved, That although sixteen persons havebeen nominated in less than two years by the presentgovernor to be members of the said council (a numbergreater than that afforded by any period of ten yearswider any other administration), and notwithstandingthe wishes of parliament, and the instructions given byhis Majesty's government for the removal of the grievancesof which the people had complained, the samemalign influence which has been exerted to perpetuate inL 2148 THE BUBBLESthe country a system of irresponsibility in favour of publicfunctionaries, has prevailed to such an extent as to renderthe majority of the legislative council more inimicalto the country than at any former period ; and that thisfact confirms with irresistible force the justice of thecensure passed by the committee of the house of commonson the constitution of the legislative council as ithad theretofore existed, and the correctness of the opinionof those members of the said committee who thoughtthat the said body could never command the respect ofthe people, nor be in harmony with the house of assem-^ably, unless the principle of election was introducedinto it28. Resolved, That even if the present governor-in'chief lady by making a most judicious selection, succeededin quieting the alarm and allaying for a timethe profound discontent which then prevailed, that:form of government would not be less essentially viciouswhich makes the happiness or misery of a country dependon an executive over which the people of thatcountry have no influence, and which has no permanentinterest in the country ,^ or in common with its inhabitants; and that the extension of the elective principleis the only measure which appears to this house to-affordany prospect of equal and sufficient protectionin future to all the inhabitants of the province withoutdistinction.29^ Resolved, That the accusations preferred againstthe house of assembly by the legislative council as recomposedby the present governor-in-chief, would becriminal and seditious, if their very nature did not renderthem harmless, since they go to assert,, that if in its liberalityand justice the parliament of the United Kingdom.OF CANADA. 149had granted the earnest prayer of this house in behalfof the province (and which this house at this solemn moment,after weighing the dispatches of the secretary ofstate for the colonist department and on the eve of ageneral election now repeats and renews), that theconstitution of the legislative council may be altered byrendering it elective, the result of this act of justice andbenevolence would have been to inundate the countrywith blood.30. Resolved, That by the said address to his Majesty,dated the 1st of April last, the legislative councilcharges this house with having calumniously accusedthe King's representative of partiality and injustice inthe exercise of the powers of his office, and with deliberatelycalumniating his Majesty's officers, both civil andmilitary, as a faction induced by interest alone to contendfor the support of a government inimical to the rightsaid opposed to the wishes of the people : with referenceto which this house declares that the accusations preferredby it have never been calumnious, but are trueand well founded, and that a faithful picture of theexecutive government of this province in all its parts isdrawn by the legislative council in this passage of itsaddress.31. Resolved, That if, as this house is fond of believinghis Majesty^s government in England does notwish systematically to nourish civil discord in this colony,the contradictory allegations thus made by the twohouses make it imperative on it to become better acquaintedwith the state of the province than it now appearsto be, if we judge from its long tolerance ofthe abuses which its agents commit with impunity ; thatit ought not to trust to the self-praise of those who havethe management of the affairs of a colony, passing ao»150 THE BUBBLEScording to them into a state of anarchy ; that it ought tobe convinced that if its protection of public functionaries,accused by a competent authority (that is to say by thishouse in the name of the people), could for a time, byforce and intimidation, aggravate, in favour of thosefunctionaries and against the rights and interests of thepeople, the system of insult and oppression which theyimpatiently bear, the result must be to weaken our confidencein, and our attachment to his Majesty's government,and to give deep root to the discontent and insurmountabledisgust which have been excited by administrationsdeplorably vicious, and which are now excitedby the majority of the public functionaries of the colony,,combined as a faction, and induced by interest alone tocontend for the support of a corrupt government, inimicalto the rights and opposed to the wishes of thepeople.32. Resolved, That in addition to its wicked and calumniousaddress of the 1st April 1833, the legislativecouncil, as recomposed by the present governor-inches,has proved how little community of interest it haswith the colony, by the fact that out of sixty-four billswhich were sent up to it, twenty-eight were rejected byit, or amended in a manner contrary to their spirit andessence ; that the same unanimity which had attendedthe passing of the greater part of these bills in the assembly,accompanied their rejection by the legislative council,and that an opposition so violent shows clearly thatthe provincial executive and theqouncil of its choice, inleague together against the representative body, do not,or will not, consider it as the faithful interpreter and theequitable judge of the wants and wishes of the people,nor as fit to propose laws conformable to the publicwill ; and that under such circumstances it would lavaOF CANADA. 151been the duty of the head of the executive to appeal tothe people by dissolving the provincial parliament hadthere been any analogy between the institutions of GreatBritain and those of this province.33. Resolved That the legislative council, as recomposedby the present governor-in-chief, must be consideredas embodying the sentiments of the colonial executivegovernment, and that from the moment it was sorecomposed the two authorities seem to have bound andleagued themselves together for the purpose of proclaimingprinciples subversive of all harmony in the province,and of governing and domineering in a spirit of blind andinvidious national antipathy.34. Resolved, That the address voted unanimously onthe 1st April 1833, by the legislative council, as recomposedby the present governor-in chief, was concurredin by the honourable the chief justice of the province,Jonathan Sewell, to whom the right honourable LordViscount Goderich, in his dispatch, communicated to thehouse on the 25th November Isis recommended *' acautious abstinence " from all proceedings by which hemight be involved in any contention of a party nature ;by John Hale, the present receiver-general, who, inviolation of the laws, and of the trust reposed in him,and upon illegal warrants issued by the governor, haspaid away laisse sums of the public money, without anyregard to the obedience which is always due to the law ;by Sir John Caldwell, baronet, the late receiver general,a speculator, who has been condemned to paynearly £100,000 to reimburse a like sum levied upon thepeople of this province, and granted by law to his Majesty,his heirs and successors, for the public use of theprovince, and for the support of his Majesty's governsTHE BUBBLESment therein and who has diverted the greater part ofthe said sum from the purposes to which it was destined,and appropriated it to his private use ; by M mathew. Belagrantee of the crown, who has been unduly and illegallyfavoured by the executive, in the lease of theforges of St. Maurice, in the grant of large tracts ofwaste lands, and in the lease of large tracts of landformerly belonging to the order of Jesuits ; byJohn Stewart, an executive councillor, commissioner ofthe Jesuits' estates, and the incumbent of other lucrativeoffices : all of whom are placed by their pecuniaryand personal interests, under the influence of the executive; and by the honourable George Moffatt, PeterM'Gill, John Molson, Horatio Gates, Robert Jones,and James Baxter, all of whom, as well as those beforementioned, were, with two exceptions, born out of thecountry, and all of whom, except one, who for a numberof years was a member of the assembly, and has extensivelanded property, are but slightly qualified in thatrespect, and had not been sufficiently engaged in publiclife to afford a presumption that they were fit to performthe functions of legislators for life; and by AntoineGaspard Couillard, the only native of the country, ofFrench origin, who stooped to concur in the address, andwho also had never been engaged in public life, and isbut very moderately qualified with respect to real property,and who, after his appointment to the counciland before the said 1st of April, rendered himself dependenton the executive by soliciting a paltry and subordinateplace of profit.35. Resolved, That the said address, voted by sevencouncillors, under the influence of the present head ofthe executive, and by five others of his appointmentOF CANADA. 153(one only of the six others who voted it, the Hon.George Mofiatt, having been appointed under his predecessor)is the work of the present administration of thisprovince, the expression of its sentiments, the key to itsacts, and the proclamation of the iniquitous and arbitraryprinciples, which are to form its rule of conductfor the future,36» Resolved, That the said address is not less injuriousto the small number of members of the legislativecouncil who are independent, and attached to theinterests and honour of the country, who have been membersof die Assembly, and are known as having partakenits opinions and seconded its efforts, to obtain for it theentire control and disposal of the public revenue ; ashaving approved the wholesome, constitutional, andnot, as styled by the council, the daring steps taken bythis house of praying by address to his Majesty that thelegislative council might be rendered elective ; as condemninga scheme for the creation of an extensive monopolyof lands in favour of speculators residing out of thecountry; as believing that they could not have beenappointed to the council with a view to increase the constitutionalweight and efficacy of that body, in which theyfind themselves opposed to a majority hostile to theirprinciples and their country ; as believing that the interestsand wishes of the people are faithfully representedby their representatives, and that the connexion betweenthis country and the parent state will be durable in proportionto the direct influence exercised by the people iuthe enactment of laws adapted to insure their welfare ;and as being of opinion, that his Majesty's subjectsrecently settled in this country will share in all theadvantages of the free institutions and of the improvesTHE BUBBLESments which would be rapidly developed if by meansof the extension of the elective system the administrationwere prevented from creating a monopoly of powerand profit in favour of the minority who are of one originand to the prejudice of the majority, who are of anotherand from buying, corrupting, and exciting a portion ofthis minority in such a manner as to give to all discussionsof local interest the alarming character of strife andnational antipathy ; and that the independent membersof the legislative council, indubitably convinced of thetendency of that body, and undeceived as to the motiveswhich led to their appointment as members of it, nowrefrain from attending the sittings of the said council, inwhich they despair of being able to effect any thing forthe good of the country.37. Resolved, That the political world in Europe isat this moment agitated by two great parties, who indifferentcountries appear under the several nantes ofservices, royalists y tories and conservatives on the oneside, and of liberals constitutional, republicans,whigs, reformers, radicals and similar appellations onthe other ; that the former party is, on this continent,without any weight or influence except what it derivesfrom its European supporters, and from a triflingnumber of persons who become their dependents for thesake of personal gain, and from others, who from ageor habit cling to opinions which are not partaken byany numerous class; while the second party overspreadsall America. And that the colonial secretary is mistakenif he believes that the exclusion of a few salariedofficers from the legislative council could suffice tomake it harmonise with the wants, wishes and opinionsof the people, as long as the colonial governors retainOF CANADA. 155the power of preserving in it a majority of membersrendered servile by their antipathy to every liberalidea,38. Resolved That this vicious system which hasbeen carefully maintained has given to the legislativecouncil a greater character of animosity to the countrythan it had at any former period, and is as contrary tothe wishes of parliament, as that which, in order toresist the wishes of the people of England for the parliamentaryreform, should have called into the Houseof Lords a number of men notorious for their factiousand violent opposition to that great measure.39* Resolved That the legislative council, representingmerely the personal opinions of certain members ofa body so strongly accused at a recent period by thepeople of this province, and so justly censured by thereport of the committee of the house of commons, isnot an authority competent to demand alterations inthe constitutional Act of the 3\st Geo. 3, c. 31, and thatthe said act ought not to be and cannot be altered, err-keptat such time and in such manner as may be wishedhy th people of this province, whose sentiments thishouse is alone competent to represent ; that no interferenceon the part of the British legislature with thehaws and constitution of this province, which should noti^je founded on the ashes of the people, freely expressedeither through this house, or in any other constitutionalmanner, could in any wise tend to settle any ofshe difficulties which exist in this province, but, on thecontrary, woidd only aggravate them and prolong theircontinuance.40. Resolved, That this house expects from the justiceof the parliament of the United Kingdom, that no156 THE BUBBLESmeasure of the nature aforesaid, founded on the falserepresentations of the legislative council and of themembers and tools of the colonial administration, allinterested in perpetuating existing abuses, will beadopted to the prejudice of the rights, liberties andwelfare of the people of this province; but that on thecontrary, the Imperial Legislature will comply withthe wishes of the people and of this house, and willprovide the most effectual remedy for all evils presentand future, either by rendering the legislative councilelective, in the manner mentioned in the Address of thishouse to his most gracious Majesty, of the 20th March1833^ or by enabling the people to express still moredirectly their opinions as to the measures to be adoptedin that behcdf, and with regard to such other modificationsof the constitution as the wants of the people andthe interest of his Majesty* s government in the provincemay require ; and that this house perseveres in thesaid Address.41. Resolved; That his Majesty's secretary of statefor the colonial department has acknowledged in hisdespatches that it has frequently been admitted thatthe people of Canada ought to see nothing in the institutionsof the neighbouring states which they couldregard with envy and that he has yet to learn that anysuch feeling now exists among his Majesty's subjects inCanada : to which this house answers that the neighbouringStates have a form of government very fit toprevent abuses of power and very effective in repressingthem ; that the reverse of this order of things has alwaysprevailed in Canada under the present form of government; that there exists in the neighbouring States astronger and more general attachment to the nationalOF CANADA.institutions than in any other country, and that thereexists also in those States a guarantee for the progressiveadvance of their political institutions towards perfection,in the revision of the same at short and determinateintervals, by conventions of the people, iu order thatthey may, without any shock or violence, ba adapted tothe actual state of things.42. Resolved, That it was in consequence of a correctidea of the state of the country and of society generallyin America, that the committee of the House of Commonsasked, whether there was not in the two Canadass agrowing inclination to see the institutions became moreand more popular, and in that respect more and morelike those of the United States ; and that John Nelson,Esq., one of the agents sent from this country, answered,that the fondness for popular institutions had made greatprogress in the two Canadass ; and that the same agentwas asked, whether he did not think that it would bewise that the object of every change made in the institutionsof the province should be to comply more andmore with the wishes of the people, and to render thesaid institutions extremely popular : to which questionthis house, for and in the name of the people whom itrepresents, answers, solemnly and deliberately, " Yes,it would be wise ; it would be excellent."43. Resolved, That the constitution and form of governmentwhich would best suit this colony are not to besoughtsolely in the analogies offered by the institutionsof Great Britain, where the state of society is altogetherdifferent front our own ; and that it would be wise toturn to profit by the information to be gained by observingthe effects produced by the different and infinitelyvaried constitutions which (he kings and parliament of158 THE BUBBLESEngland have granted to the several plantations andcolonies in America and by studying the way in whichvirtuous and enlightened men have modified such colonialinstitutions, when it could be done with the assent of theparties interested.44. Resolved, That the unanimous consent with whichall the American states have adopted and extended theelective system, shows that it is adapted to the wishes,manners, and social state of the inhabitants of this continent; that this system prevails equally among those ofBritish and those of Spanish origin, although the latter,during the continuance of their colonial state had beenunder the calamitous yoke of ignorance and absolutism ;and that we do not hesitate to ask from a prince of theHouse of Brunswick, and a reformed Parliament, allthe freedom and political powers which the princes ofthe House of Stuart and their parliaments granted tothe most favoured of the plantations formed at a periodwhen such grants must have been less favourably regardedthan they would now be.45. Resolved, That it was not the best and most freesystems of colonial government which tended most tohasten the independence of the old English colonies ;since the province of New York, in which the institutionswere most monarchical in the sense which that wordappears to bear in the despatch of the colonial secretary,was the first to refuse obedience to an act of the Parliamentof Great Britain : and that the colonies of Connecticutand Rhode Island, which, though closely andaffectionately connected with the mother country for along course of years, enjoyed constitutions purely democratic,were the last to enter into a confederationrendered necessary by the conduct of bad servants of theOF Canada. 159Crown, who called in the supreme authority of the parliamentand the British constitution to aid them togovern arbitrarily, listening rather to the governors andtheir advisers than tole people and their representatives,and shielding with their protection those nho consumedthe taxes rather than those who paid them.46. Resolved, That with a view to the introductionof whatever the institutions uf the neighbouring Statesoffered that was good and applicable to the state of theprovince, this house had among other measures passedduring many years, a bill founded on the principle ofproportioning arithmetically the number of representativesto the populace of each place represented ; andthat if, by the pressure of circumstances and the urgentnecessity which existed that the number of representativesshould be increased, it has been compelled to assent toamendments which violate that principle, by giving tocounties containing a population of little more than4,000 souls, the same number of representatives as toseveral others of which the population is five times asgreat, this disproportion is, in the opinion of this house,an act of injustice, for which it ought to seek a remedy:and that in new countries where the population increasesrapidly, and tends to create new settlements, it is wiseand equitable that by a frequent and periodical census,such increase and the manner in which it is distributedshould he ascertained, principally for the purpose ofsettling the representation of the province on an equitablebasis.47. Resolved, That the fidelity of the people and theprotection of the government are co-relative obligations,of which the one cannot long subsist without the other ;that by reason of the defects which exist in the laws and160 THE BUBBLESconstitution of this province^ and of the manner in whichthose laws and that constitution hare been administered,the people of this province are not sufficiently protectedin their lives, their property, and their honour; andthat the long series of acts of injustice and oppressionof which they have to complain, have increased withalarming rapidity in violence and in number under thepresent administration.48. Resolved, That in the midst of these disordersand sufferings, this house and the people whom it represents,had always cherished the hope and expressedtheir faith that his Majesty's government in England didnot knowingly and wilfully participate in the politicalimmorality of its colonial agents and officers ; and thatit is with astonishment and grief that they have seen iathe extract from the despatches of the colonial secretary;communicated to this house by the govenior-in-chiefiduring the present session, that one at least of the membersof his Majesty's government entertains towardsthem feelings of prejudice and animosity, and inclines tofavour plans of oppression and revenge, ill adapted tochange a system of abuses, the continuance of whidi^would altogether discourage the people, extinguish inthem the legitimate hope of happiness which, as Britishsubjects, they entertained and would leave them onlythe hard alternative of submitting to an ignominiousbondage, or of seeing those ties endangered which unitethem to the mother country.49. Resolved, That this house and the people, whomit represents do not wish or intend to convey anythreat ; but that, relying, as they do, upon the principlesof law and justice, they are, and ought to be, politically-strongenough not to be exposed to receive insult fromOF CANADA. 1 G 1any maa whomsoever or bound to suffer it in silence ;that the style of the said extracts from the despatchesof the colonial secretary > as communicated to this houseis insulting and inconsiderate to such a degree that nolegally constituted body although its functions were infinitelysubordinate to those of legislation could or oughtto tolerate them ; that no similar example can be foundseveninthe despatches of those of bis predecessors in office,least favourable to the rights of the colonies; that the tenorof the said despatches is incompatible with the rights andprivileges of this house, which ought not to be called inquestion or defined by the colonial secretary, but which,as occasion may require, will be successively promulgatedand enforced by this house.50. Resolved That with regard to the following expressionsin one of the said despatches, *' Should eventsunhappily force upon parliament the exercise of itssupreme authority, to compose the internal dissensionsof the colonies, it would be my object and my duty, asaservant of the crown, to submit to parliament suchmodifications of the charter of the Canadass as shouldtend, not to the introduction of institutions consistentwith monarchial government, but to maintaining andstrengthening the connexion with the mother country,by a close adherence to the spirit of the British constitution,and by preserving in their proper place andwithin their due limits the mutual rights and privilegesof all classes of his Majesty's subjects ;" — ^if they are tobe understood as containing a threat to introduce intothe constitution any other modifications than such as areasked for by the majority of the people of this province,whose sentiments cannot be legitimately expressed byaBy other authority than its representatives, this houseM162 THE BUBBLESwould esteem itself wanting in candour to the people ofEngland if it hesitated to call their attention to thefact* that in less than twenty years the population of theUnited States of America will be as great or greaterthan that of Great Britain, and that of British Americawill be as great or greater than that of the formerEnglish colonies was when the latter deemed that thetime was come to decide that the inappreciable advantageof governing themselves instead of being governedought to engage them to repudiate a system of colonialgovernment which was, generally speaking, much betterthan that of British America now is.51. Resolved, That the approbation expressed bythe colonial secretary, in his said despatch, of the presentcomposition of the legislative council, whose acts,since its pretended reform, have been marked by partyspirit and by invidious national distinctions and preferences,is a subject of just alarm to his Majesty's Canadiansubjects in general, and more particularly to thegreat majority of them, who have not yielded at anytimeto any other class of the inhabitants of this provincein their attachment to his Majesty's government, intheir love of peace and order, in respect for the laws,and in their wish to effect that union among the wholepeople which is so much to be desired, to the end thatall may enjoy freely and equally the rights and advantagesof British subjects, and of the institutions whichhave been guaranteed to and are dear to the country ;that the distinctions and preferences aforesaid havealmost constantly been used and taken advantage of bythe colonial administration of this province, and themajority of the legislative councillors,* executive councillors,judges, and other functionaries dependent uponOF CANADA. 163it ; and that nothing but the spirit of the union amongthe several classes of the people, and their convictionthat their interests are the same, could have preventedcollisions incompatible with the prosperity and safety ofthe province.52. Resolved, That since a circumstance, which didnot depend upon the choice of the majority of the people,their French origin and their use of the French language,has been made by the colonial authorities a pretext forabuse, for exclusion, for political inferiority, for a separationof rights and interests ; this house now appeals tothe justice of his Majesty's government and of parliament,and to the honour of the people of England;that the majority of the inhabitants of this country arein nowise disposed to repudiate any one of the advantagesthey derive from their origin and from theirdescent from the French nation, which, with regard tothe progress, of which it has been the cause, in civilization,in the sciences, in letters, and in the arts, hasnever been behind the British nation, and is now theworthy rival of the latter in the advancement of thecause of liberty and of the science of government ; fromwhich this country derives the greater portion of itscivil and ecclesiastical law, and of its scholastic and charitableinstitutions, and of the religion, language, habits,manners, and customs of the great majority of its inhabitants.53. Resolved, That our fellow-subjects of Britishorigin, in this province, came to settle themselves inSi country, *' the inhabitants whereof, professing thereligion of the church of Rome, enjoyed an establishedform of constitution and system of laws, by which theirpersons and their property had been protected, governed*M 2164 THE BUBBLESand ordered during a long series of years, front the firstestablishment of the province of Canada;" that promptedby these considerations and guided by the rules of justiceand of the law of nations, the British parliamentenacted that, " in all matters of controversy, relative toproperty and civil rights, resort should be had to thelaws of Canada ;" that when parliament afterwardsdeparted from the principle thus recognised, firstly, bythe introduction of the English criminal law, and afterwardsby that of the representative system, with all theconstitution and parliamentary law necessary to its per*feet action, it did so in conformity to the sufficientlyexpressed wish of the Canadian people ; and that everyattempt on the part of public functionaries or of otherpersons (who on coming to settle in the province, madetheir condition their own voluntary act) against the existenceof any portion of the laws and institutions peculiarto the country, and any preponderance given to suchpersons in the legislative and executive councils, in thecourts of law, or in other departments, are contrary tothe engagements of the British parliament, and to therights guaranteed to his Majesty's Canadian subjects , onthe faith of the national honour of England on that ofcapitulations and treaties.54. Resolved, That any combination, whether effectedby means of acts of the British parliament, obtained iucontravention to its former engagements, or by meansof the partial and corrupt administration of the presentconstitution and system of law, would be a violation ofthose rights, and would, as long as it should exist, beobeyed by the people, from motives of fear and constraint,and not from choice and affection ; that theconduct of the colonial administrations, and of theirOF CANADA. 165agents aud instruments in this colony has, for the mostpart, been of a nature unjustly to create apprehensionsas to the views of the people and government of themother country, and to endanger the confidence andcontent of the inhabitants of this province, which canonly be secured by equal laws, and by the observanceof equal justice, as the rule of conduct in all the departmentsof the government.55. Resolved, That whether the number of that classof his Majesty's subjects in this province, who are ofBritish origin, be that mentioned in the said address ofthe legislative council, or whether (as the truth is) itamounts to less than half that number, the wishes andinterests of the great majority of them are common tothem and to their fellow-subjects of l^Vench origin, andspeaking the French language ; that the one class lovethe country of their birth, the other that of their adoption; that the greater portion of the latter have acknowledgedthe generally beneficial tendency of the laws andinstitutions of the country, and have laboured in concertwith the former to introduce into them gradually, andby the authority of the provincial parliament, the improvementsof which they have, from time to time,appeared susceptible, and have resisted the confusionwhich it has been endeavoured to introduce into them,in favour of schemes of monopoly and abuse, and thatall without distinction wish anxiously for an impartialand protecting government.56. Resolved, That in addition to administrative andjudicial abuses, which have had an injurious effect uponthe public welfare and confidence, attempts have beenmade, from time to time, to induce the parliament ofthe United Kingdom, by deceiving its justice and abusiveTHE BUBBLESiiig its benevolent intentions, to adopt measures calculated<to bring about combinations of the nature abovementioned,and to pass acts of internal legislation forthis province, having the same tendency, and with regardto which, the people of the country had not been consulted; that, unhappily, the attempts to obtain thepassing of some of these measures were successful, especiallythat of the act of the 6 Geo. 4, c. 59, commonlycalled the "Tenures Act," the repeal of which wasunanimously demanded by all classes of the people,without distinction, through their representatives, a veryshort time after the number of the latter was increased ;and that this house has not yet been able to obtain fromhis Majesty's representative in this province, or fromany other source, any information as to the views of hisMajesty's government in England, with regard to therepeal of the said act.57. Resolved, That the object of the said act was,according to the benevolent intentions of parliamentand as the title of the act sets forth, the extinction offeudal and seigniorial rights and dues on land held enfief and a cens in this province, with the intention offavouring the great body of the inhabitants of thecountry, and protecting them against the said dues,which were regarded as burdensome ; but that the provisionsof the said act, far from having the effect aforesaid,afford facilities for seigniors to become, in oppositionto the interests of their censitaires, the absoluteproprietors of the extensive tracts of unconceded landswhich, by the law of the country, they held only forthe benefit of the inhabitants thereof, to whom theywere bound to concede them in consideration of certainlimited dues ; that the said act, if generally acted upon.OF CANADA. 167would shut out the mass of the permanent inhabitantsof the country from the vacant lands in the seigniories,while, at the same time, they have been constantly preventedfrom settling on the waste lands of the crown oneasy and liberal terms, and under a tenure adapted tothe laws of the country, by the partial, secret, andvicious manner in which the crown land department hasbeen managed, and the provisions of the act aforesaid,with regard to the laws applicable to the lands in question; and that the application made by certain seigniorsfor a change of tenure, under the authority of the saidact, appear to prove the correctness of the view thishouse has taken of its practical effect.58. Resolved, That it was only in consequence of anerroneous supposition that feudal charges were inherentin the law of this country, as far as the possession andtransmission of real property, and the tenures recognizedby that law, were concerned, that it was enacted in thesaid act that the lands, with regard to which a changeof tenure should be effected, should thereafter be heldunder the tenure of free and common soccage ; that theseigniorial charges have been found burdensome in certaincases, chiefly by reason of the want of adequatemeans of obtaining the interference of the colonialgovernment and of the courts of law, to enforce theancient law of the country in that behalf, and that theprovincial legislature was, moreover, fully competent topass laws, providing for the redemption of the saidcharges in a manner which should be in accordance withthe interests of all parties, and for the introduction ofthe free tenures recognized by the laws of the country ;that the House of Assembly has been repeatedly occupied,and now is occupied about this important subject ;168 THE BUBBLESbut that the said Tenures Act insufficient of itself toeffect equitably the purpose for which it was passed, isof a nature to embarrass and create obstacles to theeffectual measures which the legislature of the country,with a full knowledge of the subject, might be disposedto adopt ; and that the application thus made (to theexclusion of the provincial legislature) to the parliamentof the United Kingdom, which was far less competentto make equitable enactments on a subject so complicatedin its nature, could only have been made with aview to unlawful speculations and the subversion of thelaws of the country.59. Resolved, That independently of its many otherserious imperfections, the said act does not appear* tohave been founded on a sufficient knowledge of the lawswhich govern persons and property in this country, whenit declares the laws of Great Britain to be applicable tocertain incidents to real property therein enumerated ;and that it has only served to augment the confusion anddoubt which had prevailed in the courts of law, and inprivate transactions with regard to the law which appliedto lands previously granted in free and common soccage.60. Resolved, That the provision of the said act whichhas excited the greatest alarm, and which is most atvariance with the rights of the people of the country, andwith those of the provincial parliament, is that whichenacts that lands previously held en fief ox en censureshall, after a change of tenure shall have been effectedwith regard to them, be held in free and common soccage,and thereby become subject to the laws of Great Britain,under the several circumstances therein mentioned andenumerated ; that besides being insufficient in itself, thisprovision is of a nature to bring into collision, in the oldOF CANADA. 169settlements, at multiplied points of contiguity, two oppositesystems of laws, one of which is entirely unknown tothis country, in which it is impossible to carry it intoeffect ; that from the feeling manifested by the colonialauthorities and their partisans towards the inhabitantsof the country, the latter have just reason to fear thatthe enactment in question is only the prelude to the finalsubversion, by acts of parliament of Great Britain,fraudulently obtained in violation of its former engagements,of the system of laws by which the persons andproperty of the people of this province were so longhappily governed.61. Resolved, That the inhabitants of this countryhave just reason to fear that the claims made to theproperty of the seminary of St. Suffice, at Montreal,are attributable to the desire of the colonial administration,and its agents and tools, to hasten this deplorablestate of things; and that his Majesty's government inEngland would, by reassuring his faithful subjects onthis point, dissipate the alarm felt by the clergy, andby the whole people without distinction, and merit theirsincere gratitude.62. Resolved, That it is the duty of this house topersist in asking for the absolute repeal of the saidtenures act, and until such repeal shall be effected, topropose to the other branches of the provincial parliamentsuch measures as may be adapted to weaken thepernicious effects of the said act.63. That this house has learned with regret, from oneof the said despatches of the colonial secretary, that hisMajesty has been advised to interfere in a matter whichconcerns the privileges of this house: that in the casethere alluded to, this house exercised a privilege solemnly170 THE BUBBLESestablished by the house of commons before the principleon which it rests became the law of the land ; thatthis privilege is essential to the independence of thishouse and to the freedom of its votes and proceedings ;that the resolutions passed by this house on the 15th ofFebruary 1831, are constitutional and well-founded andare supported by the example of the commons of GreatBritain ; that this house has repeatedly passed bills forgivingeffect to the said principle, but that these billsfailed to become law, at first from the obstacles opposedto them in another branch of the provincial legislatureand subsequently by reason of the reservation of the lastof the said bills for the signification of his Majesty'spleasure in England whence it has not yet been sentback; that until some bill. to the same effect shall becomelaw this house persists in the said resolutions ; andthat the refusal of his excellency, the present governorsto sign a writ for the election of a knight representativefor the county of Montreal, in the place ofDominique Mondelet, Esq., whose seat had been declaredvacant, is a grievance of which this house is entitled toobtain the redress, and one which would alone havesufficed to put an end to all intercourse between it andthe colonial executive, if the circumstances of the countryhad not offered an infinite number of other abuses andgrievances against which it is urgently necessary toremonstrate.64. Resolved, That the claims which have for manyyears been set up by the executive government to thatcontrol over and power of appropriating d great pot'tion of the revenues levied in this province, whichbelong of right to this house y are contrary to the rightsand to the constitution of the country ; and that withOF CANADA. 171regard to the said claims, this house persists in the(declarations it has heretofore made,65. Resolved That the said claims of the executivehave been vague aud varying; that the documents relativeto the said claims, and the accounts and estimates of expenseslaid before this house have likewise been varyingand irregular, and insufficient to enable this house to proceedwith full understanding of the subject on the mattersto which they related ; that important heads of the publicrevenue of the province, collected either under the provisionsof the law or uinler arbitrary regulations madeby the executive, have been omitted in the said accounts ;that numerous items have been paid out of the publicrevenue without the authority of this house, or any acknowledgmentof its control over them, as salaries forsinecure offices, which are not recognized by this houseand even for other objects for which, after mature deliberation,it had not deemed it expedient to appropriateany portion of the public revenue ; and that no accountsof the sums so expended have been laid before thisbouse.66. Resolved, That the executive government hasendeavoured, by means of the arbitrary regulationsaforesaid, and particularly by the sale of the wastelands of the Crown, and of the timber on the same,to create for itself out of the revenue which this houseonly has the right of appropriating, resources independentof the control of the representatives of thepeople ; and that the result has been a diminution ofthe wholesome influence which the people have constitutionallythe right of exercising over the administerlive branch of the government, and over the spirit andtendency of its measures.172 THE BUBBLES67. Resolved That this house having, from time totime, with a view to proceed by bill, to restore regularityto the financial system of the province, and to providefor the expences of the administration of justice andof his Majesty's civil government therein, asked theprovincial government by address for divers documentsand accounts relating to financial matters, and to abusesconnected with them, has met with repeated refusals,more especially during the present session and the precedingone; that divers subordinate public functionaries,summoned to appear before committees of this house togive information on the said subject, have refused to doso in pursuance of the said claim set up by the provincialadministrations to withdraw a large portion of the publicincome and expenditure from the control and even fromthe knowledge of this houses that during the presentsession one of the said subordinate functionaries of the executivebeing called upon to produce the originals of sundryregisters of warrants and reports, which it was importantto this house to cause to be examined, insistedon being present at the deliberations of the committeeappointed by the house for that purpose ; and that thehead of the administration being informed of the fact,refrained from interfering, although in conformity toparliamentary usage, this house had pledged itself thatthe said documents should be returned, and althoughthe governor in-chief had himself promised communicationof them.68. Resolved, That the result of the secret andunlawful distribution of a large portion of the publicrevenue of the province has been, that the executivegovernment has always, except with regard to appropriationsfor objects of a local nature, considered itselfOF CANADA. 173bound to account for the public money to the lordscommissioners of the treasury in England and not tothis house nor according to its votes or even in conformityto the laws passed by the provincial legislature ;and that the accounts and statements laid before thishouse from time to time have never assumed the shapeof a regular system of balanced accounts, but have beendrawn up, one after another, with such alterations andirregularities as it pleased the administration of the dayto introduce into them, from the accounts kept with thelords of the treasury, in which the whole public moneyreceived was included, as well as all the items ofexpenditure, whether authorized or unauthorized by theprovincial legislature.69. Resolved, That the pretensions and abuses aforesaidhave taken away from this house even the shadowof control over the public revenue of the province, andhave rendered it impossible for it to ascertain at anytimethe amount of revenue collected, the disposableamount of the same, and the sums required for the publicservice; and that the house having during manyyears passed bills, of which the models are to be foundin the statute-book of Great Britain, to establish a regularsystem of accountability and responsibility in thedepartment connected with the receipt and expenditureof the revenue; these bills have failed in the legislativecouncil.70. Resolved, That since the last session of the provincialparliament, the governor-in chief of this province,and the members of his executive government, relyingCD the pretensions above-mentioned, have, without anylawful authority, paid large sums out of the publicrevenue, subject to the control of this house ; and that.V.174 THE BUBBLESthe said sums were divided according to their pleasureand even in contradiction to the votes of this house, asincorporated in the supply bill passed by it during thelast session, and rejected by the legislative council.71. Resolved That this house will hold responsiblefor all agonies which have been, or may hereafter be paid,otherwise than under the authority of an act of thelegislature, or upon an address of this house, out of thepublic revenue of the province, all those who may haveauthorized such payments, or participated therein, untilthe said sums shall have been reimbursed, or a bill orbills of indemnity freely passed by this house shall havebecome law*72. Resolved, That the course adopted by this housein the supply bill, passed during the last session, of attachingcertain conditions to certain votes, for the purposeof preventing the accumulation of incompatibleoffices in the same persons, and of obtaining the redressof certain abuses and grievances, is wise and constitutional,and has frequently been adopted by the house ofcommons, under analogous circumstances : and that ifthe commons of England do not now so frequentlyrecur to it, it is because they have happily obtained thethe entire control of the revenue of the nation, and becauserespect shewn to their opinions with regard to the redressof grievances and abuses, by the other constituted authorities,has regulated the working of the constitutionin a manner equally adapted to give stability to hisMajesty's government, and to protect the interests ofthe people.73. Resolved, That it was anciently the practice ofthe house of commons to withhold supplies until grievanceswere redressed ; and that in following this courseOF CANADA. 175in the present conjuncture, we are warranted in our proceeding,as well by the most approved precedents, asby the spirit of the constitution itself.74. Resolved, That if hereafter, when the redress ofall grievances and abuses shall have been effected, thisbouse shall deem it fit and expedient to grant supplies,it ought not to do so otherwise than in the manner mentionedin its fifth and sixth resolutions of the 16th March1833, and by appropriating by its votes in an especialmanner, and in the order in which they are enumeratedin the said resolutions, the full amount of those headsof revenue, to the right of appropriating which claimshave been set up by the executive government. .75. Resolved, That the number of the inhabitants ofthe country being about 600,000, those of French originare about 525,000, and those of British or other origin75,000 ; and that the establishment of the civil governmentof Lower Canada for the year 1832, according tothe yearly returns made by the provincial administration,for the information of the British parliament, containedthe names of 157 officers and others receiving salaries,ivho are apparently of British or foreign origin, and thenames of 47 who are apparently natives of the country,of French origin : that this statement does not exhibitthe whole disproportion which exists in the distributionof the public money and power, the latter class being forthe most part appointed to the inferior and less lucrativeoffices, and most frequently only obtaining even these\^j becoming the dependants of those who hold theft^gfaer and more lucrative offices; that the accumulationc^ many of the best paid and most influential, and at the-oame time incompatible offices, in the same person,ivhich is forbidden by the laws and by sound policy.176 THE BUBBLESexists especially for the benefit of the former class ; andthat two-thirds cf the persons included in the last commissionof the peace issued in the province are apparentlyof British or foreign origin and one third only of Frenchorigin.76. Resolved That this partial and abusive practiceof bestowing the great majority of official places in theprovince on those only who are least connected with itspermanent interests, and with the mass of its inhabitants,had been most especially remarkable in the judicialdepartment > the judges for the three great districtshaving, with the exception of one only in each, beensystematically chosen from that class of persons, who,being born out of the country, are the least versed in itslaws, and in the language and usages of the majority ofits inhabitants ; that the result of their intermeddling inthe politics of the country, of their connexion with themembers of the Colonial administration, and of theirprejudices in favour of institutions foreign to and at variancewith those of the country, is that the majority ofthe said judges have introduced great irregularity intothe general system of our jurisprudence, by neglecting*to ground their decisions on its recognised principles ;and that the claim laid by the said judges to the powerof regulating the forms of legal proceedings in a mannercontrary to the laws, and without the interferenceof the legislature, has frequently been extended to thefundamental rules of the law and of practice ; and thatin consequence of the same system, the administrationof the criminal law is partial and uncertain, and such. asto afford but little protection to the subject, and hasfailed to inspire that confidence which ought to be itsinseparable companion.OF CANADA. 17777 • Resolved, That in consequence of their connectionwith the members of the provincial administrationsand of their antipathy to the country, some of thesaid judges have, in violation of the laws, attemptedto abolish the use in the courts of law of the languagespoken by the majority of the inhabitants of thecountry, which is necessary to the free action of thelaws, and forms a portion of the usages guaranteedto tfaem in the most solemn manner by the law ofnations and by the statutes of the British Parliament.78, Resolved, That some of the said judges, throughpartiality for political purposes, and in violation of thecriminal law of England as established in this country,of their duty, and their oath, have connived with diverslaw officers of the crown, acting in the interest of the provincialadministration, to allow the latter to engross andmonopolize all criminal prosecutions of what naturesoever, without allowing the private prosecutor to interveneor be heard, or any advocate to express his opinionamicus curitB, when the Crown officers opposed it ; thatin consequence of this, numerous prosecutions of a politicalnature have been brought into the courts of law by theCrown officers against those whose opinions were unfavourableto the administration for the time being ; whileit was impossible for the very numerous class of hismajesty's subjects to which the latter belonged to commencewith the slightest confidence any prosecutionagainst those who, being protected by the administrationsand having countenanced its acts of violence, hadl>een guilty of crimes or misdemeanors ; that the tribunalaforesaid have, as far as the persons composing themire concerned, undergone no modification whatever, andinspire the same fears for the future.NI ■178 THE BUBBLES79. Resolved, That this bouse, as representing thepeople of this province, possesses of right, and has exercisedwithin this province when occasion has required it,all the powers, privileges, and immunities claimed andpossessed by the Commons house of Parliament in thekingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.80. Resolved, That it is one of the undoubted privilegesof this house to send for all persons, papers, andrecords, and to command the attendance of all persons,civil or military, resident within the province, as witnessesin all investigations which this house may deem itexpedient to institute ; and to require such witnesses toproduce all papers and records in their keeping, wheneverit shall deem it conducive to the public good to doso.81. Resolved, That as at the grand inquest of the province,it is the duty of this house to inquire concerningall grievances, and all circumstances which may endangerthe genii welfare of the inhabitants of the province,or be of a nature to excite alarm in them with regardto their lives, their liberty, and their property, to theend that such representations may be made to our mostgracious Sovereign, or such legislative measures introduced,as may lead to the redress of such grievances,or tend to allay such alarm ; and that far from having*a right to impede the exercise of these rights and privileges,the governor-in-chief is deputed by his Sovereign,is invested with great powers, and receives a large salary,as much for defending the rights of the subject and facilitatingthe exercise of the privileges of this house andof all constituted bodies, as for maintaining the prerogativesof the crown.82. Resolved That since the commencement of theOF CANADA. 179present sessions a great number of petitions relating tothe infinite variety of objects connected with the publicwelfare have been presented to this house and manymessages and important communications received by it,both from his Majesty's government in England andfrom his Majesty's provincial government ; that manybills have been introduced in this house and many importantinquiries ordered by it, in several of which thegovernor-in-chief is personally and deeply implicated;that the said petitions from our constituents, the peopleof all parts of this province ; the said communicationsfrom his Majesty's government in England and from theprovincial government ; the said bills already introducedor in preparation ; the said inquiries commenced andintended to be diligently prosecuted, may and mustnecessitate the presence of numerous witnesses, the productionof numerous papers, the employment of numerousclerks, messengers, and assistants, and much printing,and lead to inevitable and daily disbursements, formingthe contingent expenses of this house.83. Resolved, That from the year 1792 to the present,advances had constantly been made to meet theseexpenses, on addresses similar to that presented thisyear by this house to the governor-in-chief, according tothe practice adopted by the House of Commons ; thatan address of this kind is the most solemn vote of creditwhich this house can pass, and that almost the wholeamount of the sum exceeding £'277$000 has beenadvanced on such votes by the predecessors of hisexcellency the governor in-chief, and by himself (as heacknowledges by his message on the 18th January 1834),without any risk having ever been incurred by any othergovernor on account of any such advance, althoughN 2180 THE BUBBLESseveral of them have had differences attended by violenceand injustice on their part with the house of assembly,and without their apprehending that the then nextparliament would not be disposed to make good theengagements of the house of assembly for the time being ;and that this refusal of the governor in- chief, in the presentinstance, essentially impedes the dispatch of thebusiness for which the parliament was called together,is derogatory to the rights and honour of this house, andforms another grievance for which the present administrationof this province is responsible.84. Resolved, That besides the grievances and abusesbefore-mentioned, there exist in this province a greatnumber of others (a part of which existed before thecommencement of the present administration, which hasmaintained them, and is the author of a portion ofthem), with regard to which this house reserves to itselfthe right of complaining and demanding reparation, andthe number of which is too great to allow of their beingenumerated here : that this house points out as amongthat number,Istly. The vicious composition and the irresponsibilityof the executive council, the members of which are atthe same time judges of the court of appeals, and thesecresy with which not only the functions, but even thenames of the members of that body have been kept fromthe knowledge of this house, when inquiries have beeninstituted by it on the subject.2dly. The exorbitant fees illegally exacted in certainof the public offices, and in others connected with thejudicial department, under regulations made by the executivecouncil, by the judges, and by other functionariesusurping the powers of the legislature.OF CANADA. 181• 3dly. The practice of illegally calling upon the judgesto give their opinions secretly on questions which maybeafterwards publicly and contradictorily argued beforethem ; and the opinions themselves so given by the saidjudges as political partizans in opposition to the lawsbut in favour of the administration for the time being.4thly. The undulation of public places and offices inthe same persons and the efforts made by a number cffamilies connected with the administration to perpetuatethis state of things for their own advantage, and for thesake of domineering for ever with interested views andill" the spirit of party, over the people and their representatives.5thly. The intermeddling of members of the legislativecouncils in the elections of the representatives of thepeople, for the purpose of influencing and controllingthem by force, and the selection frequently made ofreturning officers for the purpose of securing the samepartial and corrupt ends ; the interference of the presentgovernor-in-chief himself in the said elections ; hisapproval of the intermeddling of the said legislativecouncillors in the said elections; the partiality withwhich he intervened in the judicial proceedings connectedwith the said elections, for the purpose of influencing thesaid proceeding in a manner favourable to the militarypower, and contrary to the independence of the judicialpower; and the applause which, as commander of theforces, he bestowed upon the sanguinary execution ofthe citizens by the soldiery.6thly. The interference of the armed military force atsuch elections, through which three peaceable citizens,,whose exertions were necessary to the support of theirfamilies, and who were strangers to the agitation of the182 THE BUBBLESelection, were shot dead in the streets; the applausebestowed by the governor-in-chief and commander ofthe forces on the authors of this sanguinary militaryexecution (who had not been acquitted by a petty jury),for the firmness and discipline displayed by them on thatoccasion.7thly, The various faulty and partial systems whichhave been followed ever since the passing of the constitutionalact, with regard to the management of the wastelands in this province, and have rendered it impossiblefor the great majority of the people of the country tosettle on the said lands; the fraudulent and ill^^lmanner in which, contrary to his Majesty's instructions,governors, legislative and executive councillors, judges,and subordinate officers have appropriated to themselveslarge tracts of the said lands ; the monopoly of an extensiveportion of the said lands in the hands of speculatorsresiding in England, with which the province is nowthreatened ; and the alarm generally felt therein withregard to the alleged participation of his Majesty'sgovernment in this scheme, without its having deignedto re-assure his faithful subjects on this head, or to replyto the humble address to his Majesty adopted by thishouse during the last session.Sthly. The increase of the expenses of the governmentwithout the authority of the legislature, and the disproportionof the salaries paid to public functionaries to theservices performed by them, to the rent of real property,and to the ordinary income commanded by the exertionsof persons possessing talent, industry, and economy,equal to or greater than those of the said functionaries.9thly. The want of all recourse in the courts of lawon the part of those who have just and legal claims onthe government.OF CANADA. 183lOthly. The too frequent restoration of bills for thesignification of his Majesty's pleasure, and the neglectof the Colonial Office to consider such bills, a great numberof which have never been sent back to the province^and some of which have even been returned so late thatdoubts may be entertained as to the validity of thesanction given to them ; a circumstance which has introducedirregularity and uncertainty into the legislationof the province, and is felt by this house as an impedimentto the re-introduction of the bills reserved duringthe then preceding sessions.llthly. The neglect on the part of the Colonial Officeto give any answer to certain addresses transmitted bythis house on important subjects ; the practice followedby the administration of communicating in an incompletemanner, and by extracts, and frequently without givingtheir dates, the despatches received from time to timeon subjects which have engaged the attention of thishouse ; and the too frequent references to the opinionof his Majesty^s ministers in England, on the part of theprovincial administration, upon points which it is intheir power and within their province to decide.r2tbly. The unjust retention of the college at Quebec,which forms part of the estates of the late Order ofJesuits, and which from a college has been transformedinto a barrack for soldiers ; the renewal of the lease ofa considerable portion of the same estates, by the provincialexecutive, in favour of a member of the legislativecouncil, since those estates were returned to the legislature,and in opposition to the prayer of this house, andto the known wishes of a great number of his Majesty'ssubjects, to obtain lands there and to settle on them ;and the refusal of the said executive to communicate the184 THE BUBBLESsaid leases and other information on the subject to thishouse.ISthly. The obstacles unjustly opposed by the sexe*eutive^ friendly to abuses and to ignorance to the establishmentof colleges endowed by virtuous and disinterestedmen for the purpose of meeting the growingdesire of the people for the careful education of theirchildren.*14thly. The refusal of justice with regard to theaccusations brought by this bouse in the name of thepeople, against judges for flagrant acts of malversationand for ignorance and violation of the law.15thly. The refusals on the part of the governorsand more especially of the present governor-in-chief, tocommunicate to this house the information asked for byit from time to time, and which it had a right to obtain,on a great number of subjects connected with the publicbusiness of the province.16thly. The refusal of his Majesty's Government toreimburse to the province the amount for which the lateTo illustrate the malignant spirit inherent in the party thereonly needed this accusation. Mr. M'Gill, a respectable resident,on his demise some years ago, left jCI 0,000, wherewith to endow acollege for the purpose of education, to be called after him. Theheir-at-law and executor, one of the clique, refused to part withthe funds, and disputed the will. After being worsted in the Colonialcourts, it was carried by appeal to London, and ultimately thedecision of the courts in Canada confirmed, by which the bequest,with interest, now amounting to more than j£21,000, is ordered tobe applied according to the testator's will. We shall merely statethat Viger prosecuted the suit— that Papineau advised the defenceand that Bes Rivers, the executor, since the cause has beendecided against him, is bankrupt. The crime of the will we suppose,was, that it did not restrict the uses of the college to theFrench party. — See Canada Question,OF CANADA. 185receiver-general was a defaulter and its neglect toenforce the recourse which the province was entitled toagainst the property and person of the late receiver-general.85. Resolved That the facts mentioned in the foregoingresolutions demonstrate that the laws and constitutionsof the province have not at any period beenadministered in a manner more contrary to the interestsof his Majesty's government and to the rights of thepeople of this provinces than under the present administrationsand render it necessary that his ExcellencyMatthew Lord Aylmer, of Barth, the present governof this province^ be formally accused bythis house of having while acting as governor, in contradictionto the wishes of the Imperial Parliament, andto the instructions he may have received, and againstthe honour and dignity of the crown, and the rights andprivileges of this house and the people whom it represents,so recom posed the legislative council as to augmentthe dissensions which rend this colony ; of havingseriously impeded the labours of this house, acting asthe grand inquest of the country ; of having disposed ofthe public revenue of the province, against the consentof the representatives of the people, and in violation ofthe law and constitution ; of having maintained existingabuses, and created new ones ; of having refused to signawrit for the election of a representative to fill a vacancywhich had happened in this house, and to complete thenumber of representatives established by law for thisprovince ; and that this house expects from the honour,patriotism, and justice of the reformed Parliament of theUnited Kingdom, that the Commons of the said parliamentwill bring impeachments, and will support such186 TH£ BUBBLESimpeachments before the House of Lords against the saidMatthew Lord Aylmer, for his illegal, unjust, andunconstitutional administration of the government of thisprovince ; and against such of the wicked and perverseadvisers who have misled him, as this house may hereafteraccuse, if there be no means of obtaining justiceagainst them in the province, or at the hands of hisMajesty *s executive government in England.86. Resolved, That this house hopes and believes thatthe independent members of both houses of the],Parlia-ment of the United Kingdom will be disposed, bothfrom inclination and a sense of duty, to support theaccusations brought by this house ; to watch over thepreservation of its rights and privileges, which havebeen so frequently and violently attacked, .more especiallyby the present administration ; and so to act, thatthe people of this province may not be forced by oppressionto regret their dependance on the British empireand to seek elsewhere a remedy for their affliction.unresolved That this house learned, with gratitude,that Daniel O'Counell, Esq. had given notice in theHouse of Commons in July last, that during the presentsession of the Imperial Parliament, he would call itsattention to the necessity of reforming the legislative andexecutive councils in the two Canadass; and that theinterest thus shown for our own fate by him whom thegratitude and blessings of his countryman have, withthe applause of the whole civilized world, proclaimedgreat and liberator, and of whom our fellow-countrymenentertain corresponding sentiments, keeps alive in us thehope that, through the goodness of our cause and theservices of such a friend, the British Parliament will notpermit a minister, deceived by the interested representCANADA. 187nations of the provincial administration and its creaturesand tools to exert (as there is reason from his despatchesto apprehend that he may attempt to do) the highestdegree of oppression in favour of a system which, inbetter times he characterized as faulty, and againstsubjects of his Majesty who are apparently only knownto him by the great patience with which they havewaited in vain for promised reforms.88. Resolved, That this house has the same confidencein Joseph Hume, Esq., and feels the same gratitude forthe anxiety which he has repeatedly shown for the goodgovernment of these colonies, and the amelioration oftheir laws and constitutions, and calls upon the saidDaniel O'Ccnnell and Joseph Hume, Esqrs., whoseconstant devotedness was, even under a tory ministry,and before the reform of parliament, partially successfulin the emancipation of Ireland, from the same bondageand the same political inferiority with which the communicationsreceived from the colonial secretary duringthe present session menace the people of Lower Canada,to use their efforts that the laws and constitution of thisprovince may be amended in the manner demanded bythe people thereof ; that the abuses and grievances ofwhich the latter have to complain may be fully andentirely redressed; and that the laws and constitutionmay be hereafter administered in a manner consonantwith justice, with the honour of the crown and of thepeople of England, and with the rights, liberties, andprivileges of the people of this province, and of thishouse by which they are represented.89. Resolved, That this house invites the membersof the minority of the legislative council who partakethe opinions of the people, the present members188 THE BUBBLESof the House of Assembly, until the next generalelection, and afterwards all the members then elected,and such other persons as they may associate with them,to form one committee or two committees of correspondence,to sit at Quebec and Montreal in the firstinstance, and afterwards at such place as they shallthink proper ; the said committees to communicate witheach other and with the several local committees, whichmay be formed in different parts of the province, and toenter into correspondence with the Hon. Denis BenjaminViger, the agent of this province in England, with thesaid Daniel O'Connell and Joseph Hume, Esqrs. and withsuch other members of the House of Lords or of theHouse of Commons, and such other persons in theUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland as theymay deem expedient, for the purpose of supporting theclaims of the people of this province and of this house ;of furnishing such information documents, and opinionsas they may think adapted to make known the state,wishes, and wants of the province : the said committeesalso to correspond with such persons as they shall thinkproper in the other British colonies, which are all interested,that the most populous of their sister coloniesdo not sink under the violent attempt to perpetuate theabuses and evils which result as well from the vices ofits constitution as from the combined malversation ofthe administrative, legislative and judicial departments,out of which have sprung insult and oppression for thepeople, and, by a necessary consequence, hatred andcontempt, on their part, for the provincial government.90. Resolved, That the Honourable Denis BenjaminViger be requested to remain at the seat of his Majesty'sgovernment, at least during the present session of theOF CANADA. 189Imperial Parliament, to continue to watch over theinterests of the province with the same zeal and the samedevotedness as heretofore, without suffering himself tobe discouraged by mere formal objections on the partof those who are unwilling to listen to the complaints ofthe country.91. Resolved, That the fair and reasonable expensesof the said two committees of correspondence, incurredby them in the performance of the duties entrusted tothem by this house, are a debt which it contracts towardsthelh ; and that the representatives of the people arebound in honour to use all constitutional means to reimbursesuch expenses to the said committee, or to suchperson as may advance money to them for the purposesabove-mentioned.92. Resolved, That the message from his excellencythe governor-in-chief, received on the 13th of Januarylast, and relating to the writ of election for the county ofMontreal, with the extract from a despatch whichaccompanied it, the message from the same, received thesame day, and relating to the supply bill, and the messagefrom the same, received on the 14th January last,with the extract from the despatch which accompaniedit, be expunged from the journals of this house.These resolutions, and the memorial accompanyingthem, were referred to a committeecomposed, like the last, chiefly of liberal members,and containing several persons whoseopinions were well known to be favourable totheir cause. The Canadian delegate, Mr.190 THE BUBBLESMorn,* was heard at great length, and I mustrefer you to the testimony given by him as aproof how all the vague assertions contained intheir petition and resolutions vanished, whenthey were subjected to a critical and close examination.There are few instances on recordin which a witness was so skilfully examined,or where a clever man, as he undoubtedly is,was brought to refute himself so completely ashehas done. After a patient hearing of all hecould say, the committee reported (June 1834)as follows : —That the most earnest anxiety had existed,on the part of the home government, to carryinto effect the suggestions of the committee of1 828 ; and that the endeavours of the governmentto that end had been unremitting, andguided by the desire, in all cases, to promotethe interest of the colony ; and that in severalimportant particulars their endeavours had beencompletely successful ; that in others, however,they had not been attended with that successwhich might have been anticipated, heats andanimosities and differences having arisen ; thatit appeared to the committee some mutual mis-seethe evidence taken before the committee, and publishedby order of Parliament.OF CANADA. 191conception had prevailed ; and that ' they believedthey should best discharge their duty bywithholding any further opinion on the pointsin dispute ; and were persuaded the practicalmeasures for the future administration of LowerCanada might best be left to the mature considerationof the government responsible fortheir adoption and execution."Id THE BUBBLESLetter VIII.Shortly afterwards the whole of the proceedingsof government, since the year 1828 tothe present period, were del ailed in a very ableand lucid statement of my Lord Aberdeen, inwhich he claims for himself and colleagues thecredit of a full and faithful compliance withthe recommendations of the Canada committee,as far as the powers of the executive permittedthem to do so. I have, therefore, abstainedfrom entering into the particulars myself, andprefer giving this narrative to compiling one ofmy own. It is not only infinitely better donethan I could hope to do it, but it is desirable,in such cases, to draw one's information fromthe most authentic sources. I am neither theadvocate nor the panegyrist of any of theseadministrations — what my opinion of theirpolicy may be is of little consequence; buteven if it were much more favourable than ithappens to be, I should refrain from expressingit, for I have yet to learn how a poor man caneulogise the character of those who are inpower, and yet sustain the reputation of his ownOF CANADA. 193sincerity. With the wisdom of their measuresI have nothing to do at present ; my object isto show there has been no oppression, and that,whatever imputation these proceedings deserve,they are at least exempted from that of unkindness.I must therefore request a careful perusalof the following document : —In the following pages Lord Aberdeen will attemptto shew that there was sufficient reason to anticipate theentire conciliation of Lower Canada from the accomplishmentof the resolutions of the Canada committee,and that, to the utmost of the power of the Crown, thoseresolutions were, in fact, carried into execution.The appointment of the Canada committee of 1828was, on every account, an important proceeding. Theredress of grievances had been demanded, not by anisolated party, but by both of those great bodies whichdivide between them the wealth and political authorityof the province. With views essentially dissimilar, orrather hostile they had concurred in an appeal to themetropolitan government.By each body of petitioners were departed agents authorizedto interpret their wishes, and to enforce theirclaims. The committee itself was certainly not composedof gentlemen unfavourable to the views of the great numericalmajority of the house of assembly. They prosecutedthe enquiry with great diligence and zeal. Theyexamined the agents of both parties, and every otherperson capable of throwing light on the subject referredto them. None of the questions brought under theirO194 THE BUBBLESnotice, either by the petitioners or by the witnesses, wasunexplored ; and, in the result, a report was made, inwhich, with an explanation of every known or supposedgrievance, were combined suggestions for the guidanceof the executive government in applying the appropriateremedies.The house of assembly in Lower Canada, in theiranswer to the address with which the administrator of thegovernment opened the session of the provincial parliamentin the winter of 1828, characterized this report interms which may be transcribed as expressing, on thehighest local authority, the claims of that document torespect, as affording a guide at once to the Canadian assembly,and to the ministers of the crown, of the rightsto be asserted by the one, and conceded by the other.** The charges and well-founded complaints," observedthe house, '^ of the Canadians before that august senate,were referred to a committee of the house of commons,indicated by the colonial minister, that committee exhibitinga striking combination of talent and patriotism,uniting a general knowledge of public and constitutionallaw to a particular acquaintance with the state of boththe Canadass, formally applauded almost all the reformswhich the Canadian people and their representativesdemanded and still demand. After a solemn investigation,after deep and prolonged deliberation, the committeemade a report, an imperishable monument of theirjustice and profound wisdom, an authentic testimonialof the reality of our grievances, and of the justice ofour complaints, faithfully interpreting our wishes andour wants. Through this report, so honourable to itsOF CANADA* 195authors his Majesty's government has become betterthan ever acquainted with the true situation of this province^and can better than ever remedy existing grievancesand obviate difficulties for the future." Languagemore comprehensive or emphatic could not havebeen founds in which to record the acceptance by thehouse of assembly of the report of 1828, as the basis onwhich they were content to proceed for the adjustmentof all differences. The questions in debate becamethenceforth by the common consent of both parties,reducible to the simple enquiry whether the Britishgovernment had, to the fullest extent of their lawfulauthority, faithfully carried the recommendations of thecommittee of 1828 into execution.On a review of all the subsequent correspondence,Xjord Aberdeen finds himself entitled to state that, inconformity with the express injunctions, and the paternalwishes of the King, his Majesty's confidential advisershave carried into complete effect every suggestionoffered for their guidance by the committee of the houseof commons.It is necessary to verify this statement by a carefulsend minute comparison between the advice received,sind the measures adopted. To avoid the possibility oferror, the successive recommendations of the committeeof 1828 shall be transcribed at length, with no otherdeviation than that of changing the order in which thetopics are successively arranged in their report, anorder dictated by considerations of an accidental andtemporary nature, but otherwise inconvenient, as posts106 THE BUBBLESpining many of the weightier topics to some of comparativelylight importance.Firsts then the report of 1828 contains the followingadvice of the Canada committee on the subject of finance'^ Although from the opinion given by the law officersof the crown your committee must conclude that thelegal right of appropriating the revenues arising from theact of 1774 is vested in the crown they are prepared tosay that the real interests of the provinces would bebest promoted by placing the receipt and expenditureof the whole public revenue under the superintendenceand control of the house of assembly." " If the officersabove enumerated are placed on the footing recommended'(that is in a state of pecuniary independenceon the assembly) '* your committee are of opinion thatall the revenues of the province^ except the territorialand hereditary revenues should be placed under the controland direction of the legislative assembly."The strict legal right of the crown to appropriate theproceeds of the statute 14G.III., c. 88^ being thus directlymaintained the renunciation of that right was recommendedon condition that ** the governor the membersof the executive council and the judges should be madeindependent of the annual votes of the house of assemblyfor their respective salaries." What then has beenthe result ? His Majesty has renounced these his acknowledgedlegal rights, but has not stipulated for the performance,on the part of the assembly, of the conditionthus imposed upon them, and, to the present moment,that condition remains unfulfilled. By the British statuteOF CANADA. 1971 & 2 W. IV.^ c. 73, which was introduced into parliamentby bis Majesty's then confidential advisers, the appropriationof the revenues of the 14 G.IIL, is transferredto the assembly absolutely, and without either that qualificationwhich the committee proposed, or any other.Here, then, it cannot be denied that their advice hasbeen followed, not only with implicit deference, but inaspirit of concession which they did not contemplate.Secondly, On the subject of the representation ofthe people in Lower Canada, the opinion of the committeewas expressed in the following terms :— '^ Yourcommittee are now desirous of adverting to the representativesystem of Lower Canada, with respect towhich, all parties seem to agree that some change shouldtake place." After detailing the various causes whichhad led to an inequality in the number of the membersof the assembly in favour of the French inhabitants ofthe seigniories, and therefore to the prejudice of theinhabitants of English origin in the townships, the committeepassed from the subject with the following generalremark. '' In providing a representative system forthe inhabitants of a country which is gradually comprehendingwithin its limits newly peopled and extensivedistricts, great imperfections must necessarily arise fromproceeding in the first instance on the basis of populationonly. In Upper Canada, a representative system hasbeen founded on the compound basis of territory andpopulation. This principle, we think, might be advantageouslyadopted in Lower Canada."It was with the entire concurrence of his Majesty'sgovernment, that the legislature of Lower Canada assesTHE BUBBLESsued to themselves the duty of giving effect to thispart of the advice of the committee. That report hadlaid doyen the general principle that leith one exceptionall changes, if possible, be carried into effect by thelocal legislature themselves ;" and to that principle theministers of the crown adhered, even in a case where thedominant majority of the assembly had an interest directlyopposed to that of the great body of English inhabitants,for whose special relief the new representationbill was to be enacted. Such a bill was accordinglypassed, aud was reserved for the signification of his Majesty'spleasure. It actually received the royal assentand is, at this day, the law of the province.In this case, also, the concessions made to the Canadianinhabitants of French origin were far greater thanthe authors of the report of 1828 could have had incontemplation. The Upper Canadian principle of combiningterritory and population, as the basis of electivefranchise, was not adopted in Lower Canada : the assemblysubstituted for it a new division of the country, ofwhich the effect has been to increase rather than todiminish the disproportion between the number of membersreturned by the English and those representing theFrench Canadian interest. This result of the bill wasdistinctly foreseen by the official advisers of the crown,and it became the subject of grave deliberation whetherhis Majesty should be advised to acquiesce in ascheme which followed the advice of the Canada committee,so far indeed as to effect a material change inthe representative body, and so far as to give to theEnglish settlers a few more voices in the assembly, butOF CANADA. 199not so far as to secure to them any additional weight inthe deliberations of that house. It is not within theobject of this minute to defend or to explain the motivesof the ultimate decision in favour of the bill. Fordie present purpose it is enough to say, that the acceptanceof it gave to the Canadians of French origin farmore than the report of 1828 authorised them to expect.Thirdly. Inferior only in importance to the topicsalready noticed is that of the independence of thejudges respecting which the following passage may beextracted from the report of 1828: — *' On the otherhand your committee while recommending such a concessionon the part of the crown' (the concession, thatis, of the revenue), ** are strongly impressed with theadvantage of rendering the judges independent of theannual votes of the house of assembly for their respectivesalaries. Your committee are fully aware of theobjections in principle, which may be fairly raisedagainst the practice of voting permanent salaries to thejudges who are removable at the pleasure of the crown;but being convinced that it would be inexpedient thatthe crown should be deprived of the power of removal ;and having well considered the public inconveniencewhich might result from their being left in dependenceon the annual vote of the assembly ; they have decidedto make the recommendation, in their instance, of apermanent vote of salary."Thus the Canada committee of 1828 were of opinionthat the judges ought to be independent of the assemblyfor their incomes, but ought to continue liable to removalp «200 THE BUBfiL£Sfrom office at the pleasure of the Crown. Yet so farhave the British government been from meting out reliefto the province grudgingly, or in any narrow spirit, thatthey have left nothing unattempted which could secureto the judges, not merely that pecuniary independencewhich the committee advised, but that independenttenure of office also, which their report expressly dissuaded.In the adjacent province of Upper Canada,both objects have been happily accomplished. In hisdispatch of the 8lh February 1831, No. Xxii, the Earlof Ripon explained to Lord Aylmer the course of proceedingwhich had been adopted for asserting the independenceof the judas in this kingdom, and signified tothe governor his Majesty's commands to avail himselfof the earliest opportunity for proposing to thelegislative council and assembly of Lower Canada, theenactment of a bill declaring that the commissions of allthe judges of the supreme courts should be granted toendure their good behaviour, and not during the royalpleasure ; and Lord Aylmer was further instructed, inthe name and on the behalf of his Majesty, to assent toa bill for carrying that object into effect. Lord Ripon,however, declared it to be, of course, an essential conesedition of this arrangement, that *' an adequate and permanentprovision should be made for the judges." Itremains to state the result. A bill was passed by thehouse of assembly, by which, indeed, the tenure of thejudicial office was made to depend on the good behaviourof the judges, and by which a provision, adequatein amount, was made for them. But that provision wasOF CANADA. 201SO granted as to be liable to be diminished or takenaway by the annual votes of the house of assembly.To this measure so popular in its general character orpretensions were also ** tacked*' (to adopt the usualparliamentary phrase) clauses by which a right to disposeof the territorial revenue of the Crown was assertedand by which all the public officers in the colony — thegovernor himself not being expressly excepted— weremade amenable to a tribunal, to be constituted for thetrial of all impeachments preferred by the representativesof the people. Such was the return made to anact of grace which the Canada Committee themselveshad expressly dissuaded. To have acquiesced in itwould have involved a sacrifice of whatever is due to thedignity of the King and to the liberties of his Majesty'ssubjects. His Majesty's assent was, therefore, with-holdenthough not without the expression of the deepestregret, and the most distinct offer to assent to anyother bill for establishing the independence of the judgeswhich should be exempt from such objections. Thehottse of assembly, however, have never since tenderedan act of that nature for the acceptance of his Majesty,or of his Majesty's representative in the province.Fourthly. The next topic is that of the compositionof the legislative and executive councils respecting whichthe following suggestions occur in the report of 1828:—-*' One" (it is said) " of the most important subjects towhich their inquiries have been directed, has been thestate of the legislative councils in both the Canadass, andthe manner in which these assemblies have answered the202 THE BUBBLESpurposes for which they were instituted. Your committeestrongly recommend that a more independentcharacter, should be given to these bodies ; that themajority of their members should not consist of personsholding pisces at the pleasure of the Crown ; and thatany other measures that may tend to connect more intimatelythis branch of the constitution with the interest ofthe colonies would be attended with the greatest advantage.With respect to the judges, with the exceptiononly of the chief justice, whose presence on particularoccasions might be necessary, your committee entertainno doubt that they had better not be involved in thepolitical business of the house. Upon similar grounds,it appears to your committee that it is not desirable thatjudges should hold seats in the executive council."With what scrupulous exactness these recommendationshave been followed, will now be shewn. Withrespect to the judges. Lord Ripon, in the despatch ofthe 8th of February already quoted, conveyed to LordAylmer his Majesty's commands to signify to the legislativecouncil and assembly, his Majesty's settled purposeto nominate, on no future occasion, any judge as amember, either of the executive or of the legislativecouncil of the province. It was added, that the singleexception to that general rule would be, that the chiefjustice of Quebec would be a member of the legislativecouncil, in order that the members of that body mighthave the benefit of his assistance in framing laws of ageneral and permanent character. But his Majesty declaredhis purpose to recommend, even to that highOF CANADA. 203officer a cautious abstinence from all proceedings bywhich he might be involved in any political contentionsof a party nature.It was not in the power of the King's government toremove from the legislative council any of the judgeswho had already been appointed to be members of thatbody ; because the terms of the constitutional act secureto them the enjoyment of their seats for life. But inaprivate despatch of the same date the four gentlemenwho had at that time combined the judicial characterwith seats in the council were earnestly exhorted to resigntheir places as councillors, and were assured thatnothing should be wanting to rescue them from any possibilityof misconstruction, as to the motives by whichthat advice had been dictated or obeyed. In point offact, it was not accepted : but the judges unanimouslyagreed to withdraw from all active interference in thebusiness of the council, and have never since attendedits sittings. The chief justice indeed, as was recommendedby the Canada committee, forms the singleexception ; but even that gentleman, as far as the informationof this office extends, has confined his interferencewithin the limits prescribed to him by the committeeand by the Earl of Ripon.The principles laid down by the committee of 1828,for regulating the composition of the legislative council,have been not less strictly pursued, in every other respect.Since the date of their report, eighteen new members havebeen appointed. Of that number there is not one whoholds any office or place of emolument at the pleasure ofthe crown, or who is in any other manner dependent uponTHE Bubblesthe favour of his Majesty, or his official advisers. Ofeighteen new member, ten are of French origin.total number of counsellors is thirty-five, of whom onseven hold public offices. Amongst them is the bishopQuebec, who is, in the fullest sense of the term, independentof the crown. The chief justice, whose dependence isaltogether nominal, is another. Of the whole body ofthirty-five members, there remain therefore but five overwhom the executive government can, with any reascplausibility, be said to possess any direct influence.It is therefore not without a reasonable confidence,the words iu which the committee of 1828 suggestproper composition of the legislative council, mayadopted as precisely descriptive of the manner init is actually composed. "A more independent characterhas been given to that body. The "majority of the members"does not consist of "persons holding office at thepleasure of the crown." This branch of the constitutionhas been connected " more intimately with the interestsof the province," by the addition of a large body ofindependent Canadian gentlemen.But the case may be carried still further, and it may beshewn that, in respect to the councils, the extorts of LordAberdeen's predecessors have left behind them the adviceof the Canada Committee. The executive council hasalso been strengthened by the addition of three membersof French origin, A seat was offered to Mr. Neilson, themost prominent of the delegates from the house of assemblyof 1828, and to M, Papineau, the speaker of thathouse. It need scarcely be said that it was impossible logive a more decisive proof of the wish of the ministers tAtbe^HOF CANADA. 206the crowd that the composition of the Canadian councilshould be acceptable to the great majority of the people.Fifthly. The next in order of the recommendationsof that committee relates to the clergy reserves a subjecton which they employed the following language: —'* As your committee entertain no doubt that the reservationof these lands in mortmain is a serious obstacle tothe improvement of the colony they think every properexertion should be made to place them in the bands ofpersons who will perform upon them the duties of settle*mente and bring them gradually into cultivation."Although the views of the committee were thus limitedlo the improvement of the clergy reserves, the governmentadvanced to the redress of the evil indicated in thereport, by a measure, not only far more decisive, buteminently remarkable for the confidence it expressed inthe provincial legislature. The constitutional act havingauthorised his Majesty, with the advice of the legislativecouncil and assembly, to vary or repeal any of the provisionstherein made for the allotment and appropriationof lands for the support of the Protestant clergy. LordRipon, availing himself of that enactment, proposedthat the power of repeal should be exercised by thoseladies, and should be accompanied with a declarationthat the reserved lands should merge in the generaldemesne of the crown. The object of this proposal wasto bring the reserves within the reach of the generalrules, under which all the waste lands of the provinceare progressively sold to the highest bidder. To preventany possible misconception of the views of hisMajesty's government, the draft of a bill for the accom-206 THE BUBBLESpunishment of this desi^ was transmitted to Lord Ayl-mer with instructions to give his assent if such a lawshould be presented for his acceptance. To obviate therisk of offence being* given, by suggesting to the houseof assembly the exact language as well as the generalscope of a measure to originate with them. Lord Ayl-mer was directed to proceed with the most cautiousobservance of the privileges of that body, and of all theconstitutional forms. Anticipating the contingency ofthe measure being adopted in substance, but with variationsin the terms. Lord Ripon further stated that, inthat event, the bill was not to be rejected by the governor,but was to be specially reserved for the significationof his Majesty's pleasure. ^In obedience to these directions, the bill was introducedinto the house of assembly, but did not pass intoa law. That it would have effectually removed thegrievance pointed out by the Canada committee hasnot been disputed ; nor can the ministers of the crownbe held in any sense responsible for the continuance ofan evil for which they had matured so complete a remedy.The only explanation which has ever been given of thefailure of the proposal is, that the solicitor-general, Mr.Ogden, had used some expressions, whence it was inferredthat his Majesty's government would reject thebill if altered in a single word. It is scarcely credible,that this should be an accurate surmise of the real causeof the loss of the Clergy Lauds Appropriation Bill. Itis not to be believed that the assembly of Lower Canadawould have rejected an unobjectionable proposal forthe redress of a grievance of which complaint had beenOF CANADA. 207long and loudly made for no other reason than that apublic officer not of the highest rank or considerationhad used some casual expression in which the ultimateviews of his Majesty's advisers were inaccurately explained.To the governor application could have immediatelybeen made for more authentic information ; andin fact the tenour of the despatch which had beenreceived by Lord Aylmer^ was perfectly well knownthroughout the province to every person who felt anyinterest in the subject. The measure has never sincebeen revived; and it must be therefore assumed thatthe assembly are less anxious than Lord Ripon supposed,for the removal of this obstruction to agriculture andinternal improvement. Be that as it may, the Britishgovernment are completely absolved from the responsibilitythrown upon them by this part of the report ofthe Canada committee.Sixthly. That body proceeding to other subjects connectedwith the wild lands of the province^ expressedtheir opinion that — " It might be well for the governmentto consider whether the crown reserves could notbe permanently alienated, subject to some fixed moderatereserved payment, either in money or in grain, asmight be demanded, to arise out of the first ten or fifteenyears of occupation." They add that, 'they arenot prepared to do more than osier this suggestion,which appears to them to be worthy of more considerationthan it is in their power to give to it ; but that inthis or in some such mode, they are fully persuaded thelands thus reserved, ought, without delay, to be permanentlydisposed of."208 TH£ BUBBLESIn pursuance of this advice Lord Ripon directed thesale of the crown reserves throughout the province, asopportunity might offer precisely in the same manneras any other part of the royal demesne. The system hasundergone an entire change ; and the crown reservesconsidered as distinct allotments left in their wild stateto draw a progressive-increasing value from the improvementof the vicinity, have no longer any existence.Seventhly. Another abuse connected with the wildlands of Lower Canada was noticed by the committee,in the following language: — ^^ One of the obstacleswhich is said greatly to impede the improvement of thecountry, is the practice of making grants of land in largemasses to individuals, who had held official situationsin the colony, and who had evaded the conditions of thegrant by which they were bound to provide for its cultivation,and now wholly neglect it. Although powershave been lately acquired by the government to entreatthose lands, and although we think that, under certainmodifications, this power may be advantageously used,we are nevertheless of opinion that a system should beadopted similar to that of Upper Canada, by the levyof a small annual duty on lauds remaining unimprovedand unoccupied contrary to the conditions of the grant."The remedial measure of a tax on wild land, which issuggested in the preceding passage, could, of course,originate only with the representatives of the people, andthe house of assembly have not indicated any dispositionto resort to that mode of taxation. To such a bill, iftendered by them, his Majesty's assent would have beencheerfully given. Yet the King's government did notOF CANADA. 209omit to avail themselves of all those remedial powerswith which the Crown is entrusted. It is little to say(though it may be stated with the strictest truth), thatsince the date of the report, the system reprobated bythe committee, of granting land in large masses to individuals,has been entirely discontinued. It is morematerial to add, that this change in practice is the resultof a series of regulations established, on Lord Ripoi/sadvice, in Lower Canada, and indeed throughout all theother British colonies. The system of gratuitous donationsof land has been abandoned absolutely and universally; and during the last three years all such propertyhas been disposed of by public auction to the highestbidder, at such a minimum price as to ensure the publicat large against the waste of this resource by nominal orfictitious sales. This is not the occasion for vindicatingthe soundness of that policy, which, however, if necessary,it would not be hard to vindicate. It is sufficientfor the immediate purpose of this minute to have shown,that on this as on other topics, the ministers of the Crowndid not confine themselves to a servile adherence to themere letter of the parliamentary recommendation, butembraced and gave the fullest effect to its genuinespirit.Eighthly. The committee sought to relieve the provincenot only from the evils of improvident reservationsand grants of wild lands, but from those incidentto the tenures on which the cultivated districts areholden. The following passages on this subject appearin their report : — " They do not decline to offer as theiropinion, that it would be advantageous, that the declare210 THE BUBBLESoratory enactment in the Tenures Act, respecting landsheld in free and common soccage should be retained."Your committee are further of opinion that meansshould be found of bringing into effective operation theclause in the Tenures Act, which provides for the mutationof tenure : and they entertain no doubt of the inexpediencyof retaining the seigneurs rights of the crown,in the hope of deriving a profit from them. The sacrificeon the part of the crown would be trifling and wouldbear no proportion to the benefit that would result to thecolony from such a concession." *' The committee cannottoo strongly express their opinion, that the Canadiansof French extraction should in no degree be disturbedin the peaceful enjoyment of their religion, laws,and privileges, as secured to them by the British acts ofparliament ; and so far from requiring them to hold landson the British tenure, they think that when the lands inthe seigneuries are fully occupied, if the descendants ofthe original settlers shall still retain their preference tothe tenure of Lief et seigneuries they see no objectionto other portions of unoccupied lands in the provincebeing granted to them on that tenure, provided that suchlands are apart from, and not intermixed with, the townships."The British government are again entitled to claim thecredit of having, to the utmost possible extent, regulatedtheir conduct by the language, and still more by thespirit of this advice.No application has been made for the creation of anew seigneurie, as indeed the period contemplated bythe committee, when the seigneurs lands would beOF CANADA. 2 1 1fully occupied still seems very remote. It is almostsuperfluous to add, that no attempt has been made tosuperinduce upon those lands any of the rules of the lawof England.The crown also has been prompt to bring into the mosteffective operation the clause of the Canada Tenures Actwhich provides for the mutation of tenures. But no lordorcensitaire having hitherto invoked the exercise of thepowers of the Crown, they have of necessity continueddormant. Respecting the soccage lands, some explanationseems necessary.The general principle adopted by the committee in thepassage already quoted, is that the inhabitants, both ofFrench and of British origins should respectively be leftin the enjoyment of the law regulating the tenures oftheir lands derived from their different ancestors, andendeared to either party, by habit, if not by national prejudices.It has already been shown that the FrenchCanadians have enjoyed the benefit of this principle tothe fullest possible extent. In the anxiety which has beenfelt to gratify their wishes, it may not be quite clear thatequal justice has been rendered to the inhabitants ofBritish descent. The maintenance of so much of theCanada Tenures Act as-rendered the soccage lands inheritableand transmissible according to English law, wasmost unequivocally recommended in the extracts alreadymade from the report. The provincial legislature, however,in their session of 1829, made provision for theconveyance of such lands in a manner repugnant to thisBritish statute. Of course his Majesty could not be advisedto assent to a law which directly contravened anp 2212 THE Bubblingact of parliament. Sach^ however was the anxiety ofthe King's ministers to avoid every needless cause of jealousy,that a bill (1 W. IV, c, 20) was introduced intoparliament by Lord Ripon, and passed into a law inorder to relieve his Majesty from this difficulty. TheCanadian Act was then accepted. Nor was this alLStriving to multiply, to the utmost possible extent,every proof and expression of respect and confidencetowards the provincial legislature, the government introducedinto the British statute, which has been last men-mentioned,a further enactment, of which the effect wasto absolve the Canadian legislature in future from everyrestraint laid upon them, by any act of parliament regulatingthe various incidents of the soccage tenure in theprovince. The barriers erected for the defence of theBritish settlers by the caution of parliament in the years1791 and 1826 were thus overthrown, in order thatthere might be the fewest possible exceptions to theprinciple of confiding to the Canadian legislature, theregulations of the internal interests of Lower Canada.No one will deny that this unsolicited concession wasmade in the spirit of the most large and liberal acceptanceof the advice of the Canada committee, so far atleast as the views and interests of the dominant majorityof the house of assembly are concerned.Ninthly. The next is the subject of the Jesuits'estates ; in reference to which the views of the committeeof 1828 are expressed as follows : — " With respectto the estates which formerly belonged to the Jesuits,your committee lament that they have not more fullinformation. But it appears to them to be desirableOF CANADA. 213^that the proceeds should be applied to the purposes ofgeneral education*Far indeed beyond the letter of this advice did theconcessions made by his Majesty, on the advice of LordRipon, proceed. Not only were the Jesuits* estates^' applied to the purposes of general education' butthe provincial legislature were authorised to determinewhat specific purposes of that kind should be preferred,and the proceeds of the estates were placed for thatpurpose unreservedly under their control. No suggestionhas been made impeaching the fulness of this concession,except as far as respects certain buildings occupiedfor half a century past as barracks. Even if a rentshould be payable by the Crown for the use of thosebarracks, (the single question admitting of debate,) itwould be idle, on that ground, to deny either the importanceof the concession made, or the almost unboundedconfidence in the house of assembly, perceptible in theform and manner in which the crown renounced to them,not merely a proprietary right, but even an administrativefunction.Tenthly. To the positive recommendations whichhave already been considered, succeeds another, ofwhich the end is rather to dissuade than to advise theadoption of any specific measure. ^' The committee (itit said) are desirous of recording the principle which, intheir judgment, should be applied to any alterations inthe constitutions of the Canadass, which were impartedto them under the formal act of the British legislatureof 1791. That principle is to limit the alterations whichit may be desirable to make, by any future British Acts,214 THE BUBBLESas far as possible to such points as from the relationbetween the mother country and the Canada can onlybe disposed of by the paramount authority of the Britishlegislature, and they are of opinion that all other changesshould, if possible, be carried into effect by the locallegislature themselves, in amicable communications withthe local government.So rigidly has this principle been observed, that of twoacts of parliament which, since 1821, have been passed,with reference to the internal concerns of the province,the common object has been so to enlarge the authorityof the provincial legislature as to enable his Majesty tomake with their concurrence, laws to the enactment ofwhich they were positively incompetent. The acts inquestion are those already noticed, by which the revenuesof Geo. III. were relinquished, aid the regulationof soccage tenures was transferred to the governor,council, and assembly.Eleventh. '^ The committee " (again to borrow theirown words) " recommended, for the future, that stepsshould be taken by official securities, and by a regularaudit of accounts, to prevent the recurrence of losses andinconveniences to the province, similar to those whichhad occurred in Mr. Calc well's case," and '' as connectedwith this branch of the enquiry, they recommended thatprecautions of the same nature should be adopted withregard to the sheriffs*'In reference to these suggestions. Sir George Murrayproposed to the house of assembly, and Lord Riponrepeated the proposal, that the public accountants shouldpay their balances, at very short intervals, into the handsOK CANADA. 215of the commissary-generals tendering the security of theBritish treasury for the punctual re-payment of all suchdeposits. The scheme embraced a plan for a regularaudit, and for the punctual demand of adequate securities.Sir James Kempt and Lord Aylmer were successivelyinstructed to propose to the legislative council and assemblythe enactment of such a law. The proposal wasaccordingly made to the assembly in the year 1829, andwas repeated in the year 1832. On each occasion it wasthe pleasure of the house to pass it by in silence. Thatthey had good reasons for their conduct, it would beunjust and indecorous to doubt. Those reasons, however,remain to this moment completely unknown to the executivegovernment, who, having exhausted all their authorityand influence in a fruitless attempt to give effectto this part of the Canada committee's recommendations,cannot, with any reason, be held responsible if they stillhave failed to produce the advantage contemplated to theprovince at large.*Twelfthly. A further recommendation of the committee• The executive government have not, however, abstained fromsuch measures as were within their own power. They have establisheda fire proof vault, with three keys, held by three separateofficers of high rank, all of whom must be present whenever it isopened; and they have provided that the receiver-general shallnot hold in his hands any balance exceeding ^10,000 without depositingit in this vault ; and that once at least in every year the contentsof the vault shall be inspected, or reported on, by five personsnamed by the governor for the purpose. They have also takensecurity from the receiver-general to the extent of j£10,000, withtwo sufficient sureties, and have required him to render statementsof bis accounts on the 1st January, 1st April, List July, and 1stOctober, in every year.216 THE BUBBLESis conveyed in the report, in the following terms: "Yourcommittee also beg leave to call the particular attentionof the government to the mode in which juries are composedin the Canadass, with a view to remedy any defectsthat may be found to exist in the present system."Here, again, the government pressed upon the houseof assembly the importance of giving effect to the viewsof .the committee ; and, in fact, a law has received theroyal assent, having for its object the improvement of thejury system — an object which has been pursued by thosemethods which the house of assembly themselves devisedor adopted.Thirteen tWy. The report proceeds to recommend, "thatthe prayer tof the Lower Canadians for permission toappoint an agent) in the same manner as agents areappointed by other colonies which possess local legislatures,should be granteesHis Majesty's government have accordingly repeatedlyauthorised the governor to assent to any bill which mightbe passed for that purpose. No such bill has, however,been presented for Lord Aylmer's acceptance. The assembly,in opposition to the advice of the committee, thatthe habits of other colonies should be followed as a precedent,have chosen to nominate, by resolutions of thathouse alone, gentlemen deputed to represent them inthis kingdom, but who have not, as in other coloniespossessing legislative assemblies, been appointed by. anact of the entire legislature.Fourteenth. Upon the most careful perusal of thereport of 1828, no other recommendations can be foundaddressed to the King's government, although the com-OF CANADA. 217mittens addressing themselves in that instance rather to thelocal legislature have advised that mortgages should bespecial and that in proceedings for the conveyance oflands the simplest and least expensive forms of conveyanceshould be adopted upon the principles of the law of England; that form which prevails in Upper Canada, beingprobably, under all circumstances, the best which could beselected ; and that the registration of deeds relating tosoccage lands, should be established as in Upper Canada.*' In addition*' it is added, '' to these recommendations,it appears to be desirable that some competent jurisdictionshould be established, to try and decide causesarising out of this description of property ;" (that is thesoccage lands) '' and that circuit courts should be institutedwithin the townships for the same purposes."In these passages the design of the committee was toadminister to the relief of the settlers of English origin,and their claims were pressed by Sir George Murray onthe attention of the assembly* Some advance has beenaccordingly made towards the establishment of a registryof deeds, and of local courts in the townships. Respectingthe law of mortgages, and the forms of conveyancing,it does not appear that the assembly have hithertointerposed for the relief of that part of the constituentbody.Concluding at this point the comparison between theadvice tendered to the government, and the measuresadopted in pursuance of it, it may be confidently asserted,that the general statement made at the commencementof this minute has been substantiated. To theutmost limit of their constitutional power and legitimate218 THE BUBBLESinfluence successive administrations have earnestly andsuccessively laboured to carry the report of 1828 intocomplete effect in all its parts. It has already beenshewn with how cordial an acquiescence that report wasrevived by the house of assembly, with what liberal'es the talent, the patriotism, the knowledge, andintiiLLvtf acquaintance with Canadian affairs, of itsauthors, were commended; how that document washailed as the faithful interpretation of the wishes andwants of the Canadian people ; and how the British governmentwere called upon by the house of assembly tolook to that report as their guide in remedying existinggrievances, and obviating difficulties for the future. Thatthis guide should have been studiously followed, thatits suggestions should have been invariably construedand enforced, with no servile adherence to the letter,but in the most liberal acceptance of its prevailing spirit,and yet that such efforts should have been unavailing toproduce the expected conciliation, may well justify thedeepest regret and disappointment.(Signed) Aberdeen.The perusal of this triumphant document naturallysuggests two reflections ; first, that thefaithful execution of the recommendations ofthe committee is much more entitled to ourapprobation than the recommendations themselves; and, secondly, that the Canadian assemblywere not to be satisfied with any concessionwhatever, short of independence.OF CANADA. 219Letter IX.As the memorials addressed to governmentby the English and French parties were** Vvariance in every material point, a comun^^jnof enquiry, of which the governor. Lord Gosport,vas head, was sent out to Canada in1835. Whether this commission was necessaryor not, is a matter with which I have nothingto do ; I merely mention the fact as illustrativeof the earnest desire that existed to composethese unfortunate difficulties, and to ascertainon the spot how much of concession could bemade, consistently with retaining the sovereigntyof the country. The commissioners weretold " Your investigations will have for theircommon object the advancement of the welfareand prosperity of Lower Canada by allmethods compatible with the integrity of theempire, and with the authority of the Kingas supreme in all parts of the British dominions.You will ever bear in mind that you aresent on a mission of peace and conciliation.You will therefore proceed in a spirit not ofdistrust, but of confidence ; remembering thatmuch of your success will depend, not only on220 THE BUBBLESthe zeal, ability and fairness of your enquiries,but also on your perfect separation from alllocal and party disputes, and on the unquestionablefrankness and impartiality of your generalconduct.You will observe, that the legislatureof Lower Canada must ultimately be the instrumentthrough which any benefits resultingfrom your mission must, to a very greatextent, be accomplished. His Majesty disclaimsthe intention of provoking any unnecessary parliamentaryinterference in the internal affairsof the province. To mediate between adverseparties, with an entire respect for the constitutionalrights common to them all, is the highoffice appropriate to his royal station, and thisfunction the King, aided by your enquiries andadvice, is anxious on the present occasion toperform."The governor was told by Lord Glenelg,your lordship therefore proceeds to Canada toadvocate no British interest, and to secure noselfish ends. To maintain the peace and integrityof the empire, and to mediate between contendingparties, by whom those blessings havebeen endangered, is the high and honourabletrust confided to you."Every thing that was tangible in the cele-OF CANADA. 221rated ninety-two resolutions, was put intoshape, and separately commented upon for hisguidance.1. It is alleged, observes his Lordship, thatthe patronage of his Majesty's government inLower Canada has been exercised in such amanner as to exclude the Canadians of Frenchdescent, not only from the larger number, butfrom allthe more lucrative and honourable of thepublic employments in their native country.*Had his Lordship thought proper to have entered into parti,colors, be might have compiled the following table, to show bowutterly false this accusation was. He might also have stated thatthe appointments contained in this table were made under everypossible disadvantage, in consequence of the avowed hostility ofthe French to the government and institutions of the English, andalso from the extreme difficulty of finding persons among themcompetent to discharge the duties assigned to them, and mightbave illustrated the last assertion by reference to the fact thaicut of two grand juries at this time at Montreal only one person wasfound that could write his name. Of the last seven hundred andthirty-eight appointments the proportion stood thus—Of French origin • 557Of British and Foreign . 181Of French origin appointed : —To Legislative Council • 18To Executive Council . 5To other offices of profit 29 [having held in all 35 offices*52 persons.Of British or Foreign appointed : —To the Legislative Council IITo the Executive . . 8To other offices . . 18 [having held in all 22 offices,37 persons.222 THE BUBBLESThe abuse of patronage is said to extend stillfurther; some persons are represented as havingbeen preferred to offices, in performing theduties of which they are unable to communicate,except through an interpreter, with thegreat body of those with whom their affairs areto be transacted. Other successful candidatesfor office are represented as persons who havemade themselves justly offensive to the houseof assembly; while, on the other hand, employmentscreated at the instance of that housewith a view to public improvements, have, itis alleged, been studiously denied to thosewhom the governor had reason to believe wouldbe most acceptable to the assembly.It would be scarcely possible to find anyterms more emphatic than those employed bythe Earl of Ripon, to enjoin the utmost impartialityin the distribution of public offices inLower Canada, without reference to nationalor political distinctions, or to any consideration,except that of superior capacity and fitness forthe trust. I adopt my predecessor's instructionsin their fullest extent ; I concur with him inthinking that personal merit and skill, orknowledge, qualifying a candidate for thevacant trust, are the chief circumstances toOF CANADA. 223which the governor of the province must haveregard ; and that in the distribution of offices,it is impossible to adhere with any minute exactnessto the rule which the numerical proportionsubsisting between the two races mightafford. But your lordship will remember thatbetween persons of equal or not very dissimilarpretensions, it may be fit that the choice shouldbe made in such a manner as in some degree tosatisfy the claims which the French inhabitantsmay reasonably urge to be placed in the enjoymentof an equal share of the royal favour.There are occasions also on which the increasedsatisfaction of the public at large with anappointment, might amply atone for some inferiorityin the qualifications of the personsselected. To take the most effectual security inhis-majesty's power against the recurrence ofany abuse in the exercise of this part of hisdelegated authority in Lower Canada, the Kingis pleased to command that, in anticipation ofany vacancies which may occur in the higheroffices in that province, and especially in alljudicial offices, your lordship should from timeto time transmit to the Secretary of State, forhis Majesty's consideration, the names of anygentlemen resident in Lower Canada, whom224 THE BUBBLESyou may think best qualified to perform suchtrusts with advantage to the public. His Majestyproposes to authorize the nomination, asopportunity may occur, of the persons so to besubmitted for his choice, having regard to suchrepresentations as he may receive from yourlordship, or from any other adequate authoritiesrespecting the competency of such personsto the public service. His Majesty is furtherpleased to direct that all offices in the gift of theking, of which the emolument shall amount to orexceed 200Z. per annum, shall be granted underthe public seal of the province, in pursuance ofwarrants to be issued by his Majesty for thatpurpose ; and that, except when the successfulcandidate shall have been previously approvedby his Majesty in the manner already mentioned,he should be informed that his appointmentis strictly provisional, until his Majesty'spleasure could be known. The control whichit is thus proposed to establish over the hithertounlimited powers of the governor, is not designedand will not be used as a means of securingto his Majesty's confidential advisers in thiskingdom any beneficial patronage whatever.I have already expressed my entire approbationof the system hitherto observed, of consideringOF CANADA. 226public employments la Lower Canada as properlyappropriate to the inhabitants of the province.Without giving a pledge against anydeviation from that rule in any solitary case(for such pledge might in the event proveembarrassing to all parties, and prejudicial tothe welfare of the province), I can yet have nodifficulty in acknowledging the rule as ageneral maxim from which no departure shouldbe admitted, unless on grounds so peculiar asplainly to justify the exception.It has also been represented that in some casesthe same individual is charged with numerousoffices of which the duties are incompatible,either by creating a larger demand on the timeof the officer than any one man is able to meet,or by placing him in situations of which theappropriate functions clash and interfere witheach other. From the generality of the termsin which this complaint has been made, it hasnot been in my power to ascertain the extentor reality of this grievance ; but in whateverdegree it may be found to exist, your lordshipwill understand that his Majesty expects thatit should be completely remedied : that all personsoccupying any such incompatible employmentsshould be called upon to renounce such226 THE BUBBLESas they cannot efficiently execute ; and that infuture the general rule must be, that no personshould be entrusted with any office of which hecannot discharge the proper duties with duepunctuality and method in his own person.2. Complaint is made of an unjust partialityin favour of the use of the English language inall official acts. The foundation of this complaintappears to be, that thirteen years ago abill for the union of the two Canadass wasbrought into Parliament by the then government,which, had it passed into a law, wouldhave made English the single official languageof both. I have no motive for defending ascheme which was rejected by the house ofcommons. A case is also said to have occurredat the distance of about eleven years since, inwhich the judges refused to entertain an actionbecause some part of the proceedings had beenwritten in the French language. This is admittedto be an isolated case ; and it is acknowledgedthat neither in the courts of law nor inthe legislature is any preference of one languageover the other really shewn. I therefore donot find any grievance on this subject susceptibleof a remedy ; nor is it in my power tostrengthen the injunctions of Lord Ripon, onOF CANADA. 227the impropriety of any such preference of theEnglish oyer the French tongue. As, however,the complaint has been again ui^ed by thehouse of assembly, your lordship will take theearliest opportunity of assuring them, that hisMajesty disapproves, and is desirous to discourageand prevent to the utmost of his power,the adoption of any practice which woulddeprive either class of his subjects of the use intheir official acts of that tongue with whichearly habits and education may have renderedthem most familiar. Your lordship will signifyyour willingness to assent to any law whichmay give, both to the French and the Englishinhabitants, the most ample security againstany such prejudice.3. Reference has been made to certain rulesof court made by the judges, of which the earliesthave been in force for thirty-four years, andthe latei^ for nineteen ; and which are said tobe illegal ; and even to amount to a violationof the faith of treaties, and of the pledges ofthe King and parliament. It is admitted, thatuntil the. year 1834, those rules had been overflowed,without any complaint having been preferredto his Majesty's government: I can,deed, undertake to say, that until the factQ 2228 TH£ BUBBLESwas stated in evidence before the Canada committeeof last year, the existence of such ruleswas altogether unknown in this country. Here,as on so many other topics, I am compelled torevert to the instructions of the Earl of Ripon,and to instruct your lordship to renew theproposal which he authorized Lord Aylmer tomake to the provincial legislature, that a commissionshould be appointed to revise any rulesof court made by the judges; and that on thereport of such a commission, all such rules asare either contrary to law or inexpedient shouldbe revoked. I am not less solicitous than mypredecessor, that such an inquiry should bemade to embrace all the practice and proceed-^kings of the superior tribunals, with a view torendering them more prompt and methodical,and less expensive. If the house of assemblyshould think that these objects can be bettereffected by any other method than that of acommission of inquiry, you will concur withthem in carrying it into effect*4. It is said that exorbitant fees have beenexacted in some public offices. I j^ave metwith no proof or illustration of this statement.You will, however, acquaint the house ofassembly that his Majesty will be happy toOF CANADA. 229concur with them in the revision of the fees ofevery office in the province without exception,and in the appointment, should they think itexpedient, of a commission of inquiry for thepurpose. His Majesty has no wish on thesubject, but that the remuneration of all publicofficers, from the highest to the lowest,should be so regulated as to provide for the efficientdisclaim of the public service ; an objectwhich cannot be secured without a fair remunerationto the persons employed by the public.5. A complaint is made of the practice ofcalling upon the judges for extra-judicial opinionson public questions. Here again I knownot how to reduce the general statement to anyspecific form ; I can therefore advance no furtherthan to lay down, for your lordship s guidance,the general rule, that you do not callupon the judges for their opinion on any questionwhich, by the most remote possibility,may subsequently come before them for decision.I should scarcely hesitate to interdictthe practice of consulting them, altogether andwithout a solitary exception, if I did not rememberthat there are public contingencies inwhich the King would, for the common goodof his subjects, be bound to take counsel with230 TH£ BUBBLESbis judges. Such cases, however, will be exceedinglyinfrequent, and will arise only uponsome of those great emergencies for which itis scarcely possible, or even desirable, that anydefinite provision should be made beforehand.To protect the independent exercise of thejudicial office, not only against just censure,but even against the breath of suspicion, willbe amongst your constant studies and mostanxious endeavours.6. Complaint is made of the interference <^the government and the legislative council inthe election of members of the assembly. Withthis general charge, I can deal only in termsequally general. If any such practice prevailed,of which however there is no proof before me,your lordship will avoid with the utmost careevery approach to it. I acknowledge, withoutany reserve or limitation, the duty of theexecutive government of Lower Canada toabstain altogether from interference, direct orindirect, in the choice of the representatives ofthe people ; such an encroachment on the principlesof the constitution would be unattendedeven with a plausible prospect of temporaryadvantage. I earnestly hope that the assemblywere misinformed as to the existence of anyOF CANADA. 2318u<;Ii practices ; for I am well convinced, thatit 18 by very different methods that the legitimateauthority and influence of the King 8government in Canada is to be maintained.7. 1 have read, not without deep concern, thelanguage in which the house of assembly havespoken, in their ninety-two resolutions, of theconduct of the troops during the elections atMontreal : it is described as a sanguinary executionof the citizens by the soldiery. Anxiousas I am to conciliate, by all just concessions,the favourable regard of the house, I am bound,by the strait obligations of justice to the Britisharmy, to protest against the application ofsuch language to any part of a body, not lessdistinguished by their humanity and discipline,than by their gallantry. The house had appointeda committee to inquire into those proceedings,and had not received the report ofthe committee when they proceeded to pronouncethis censure .on the conduct of his Majesty'stroops. The officers had been indicted beforeIt grand jury of the country, and the bills hadbeen thrown out for want of evidence. Inassuming to themselves the power to inquire,the assembly exercised their legitimate privilege:in passing a sentence of condemnation232 THE BUBBLESpending that inquiry, and in direct oppositionto the finding of the proper legal tribunal, theyexceeded their proper authority, and acted inopposition to the parliamentary usages of thiscountry. Nor can I receive such an unauthorizedexpression of opinion with that deferencewhich it is my duty and inclination to show forevery judgment of the house, falling within theappropriate sphere of their deliberation.8. The assembly further complain that thereis no method by which legal demands againstthe government can be enforced in the province.In the absence of any distinct proof or illustrationof the fact, I can only express his Majesty'sdesire that effectual means may be taken forremedying this alleged defect in the law.9. The too frequent reservation of bills forthe signification of his Majesty's pleasure, andthe delay in communicating the King's decisionupon them, is a grievance of which my inquireries lead me to believe the reality. Your lordshipwill understand that the power of reservingbills, granted by the Constitutional Act of 1791,is an extreme right, to be employed not withoutmuch caution, nor except on some evidentnecessity. You will also have the goodness toremember the indispensable necessity of trans*OF CANADA. 233Slitting, with the least possible delay, the transcriptof every law of which the operation issuspended, for the signification of the royalpleasure; and of accompanying every suchtranscript with such full and minute explanationsas may be necessary for rendering thescope and policy of them perfectly intelligible,and for explaining the motives by which yourlordship may have been influenced in declining"•o give your decision in the first instance. You"'^vill pledge his Majesty's government in thiscountry to the most prompt and respectfulattention to every question of this nature whichsay be brought under their notice.10. My predecessors in oflSce are charged"^vith having, on various occasions, neglected toconvey to the house his Majesty's answers to%:he addresses presented to him by that body."Whether this statement could be verified by acareful examination of any particular cases, Isein unable to state with certainty ; nor on sucha subject is it fit to make a conjectural statement.Your lordship will, however, assure thehouse, that his Majesty has been pleased tocommand, in tl^e most unqualified terms, thatevery communication that either branch of theprovincial legislature may see fit to make to234 THE BUBBLEShim, be laid before his Majesty immediately onits arrival in this kingdom, and that his Majesty'sanswer be conveyed to the province withthe utmost possible dispatch. The King cannot,however, forget that the delay which mayoccasionally have taken place in making knownin the province his Majesty's decision uponreserved bills, or upon addresses from eitherhouse of general assembly, may in some instanceshave been either occasioned or prolonged bycircumstances which no promptitude or zeal inhis Majesty^s service could have obviated ; as,for example, the rigour of the Canadian climateobstructing, during a certain period of the year,the direct approach to Quebec and Montreal,and the imperfect nature of the internal communicationsthrough his Majesty's dominionsin North America,1 1 • Much complaint is made of the refusalof information, for which the house of assemblyhave at different times applied to the governorof the province. After a careful examinationof the proceedings of the latest session in whichany such applications were made, I have notbeen able to avoid the conclusion that there isjust ground for the complaint. I do not perceivethat any advantage would arise fromOF CANADA. 235entering in this place into a very exact surveyof the communications between the house andthe governor respecting the production of papers.It is more useful, with a view to thefuture, to state the general principle by whichyour lordship will be guided. I think, then,that the correspondence between your lordshipand the secretary of state cannot be consideredas forming part of those documents of whichthe assembly are entitled to demand, as a matterof course, the unreserved and universal inspectionor perusal. In the official intercoursebetween his Majesty and his Majesty's representativein the province, conducted as suchintercourse necessarily is, through the interventionof the ministers of the crown, much confidentialcommunication must necessarily occur.Many questions require to be debated copiously,and in all the various lights in which they maypresent themselves to the governor or to thesecretary of state : and in such a correspondenceit is necessary to anticipate emergencies whicheventually do not occur, to reason upon hypotheticalstatements, and even to advert to theconduct and qualifications for particular employmentsof particular individuals. It wouldbe plainly impossible to conduct any public236 THE Bubblesaffirms of thb nature, except on such terms offree and onieslFained intercourse. It is no lessplainlY impossible to give general publicity tosuch communications, without needless injuryto the feelings of various persons, and constantimpediment to the public service. A rule whichshould entitle a popular assembly to call forand make public all the despatches passingbetween the King's government and his majestylocal representative, would so obstructthe administration of public affairs, as to producemischiefs far outweighing the utmostpossible advantage of the practice.In the same manner, there will occasionallybe communications, in their ow nature confidential,between the governor and many ofhis subordinate officers, which should also beprotected from general publicity.But though I think it right to make thisgeneral reservation against the unlimited productionof all public documents, I am readyto acknowledge that the restriction itself mayadmit and even require many exceptions ; andthat in the exercise of a careful discretion, thegovernor, as often as he shall judge it conduciveto the general good of the province, may communicateto either branch of the legislature anyOF CANADA. 237part of bis official correspondence, such onlyexcepted as may have been expressly declaredor manifestly designed, by the secretary of state,to be confidential.But I am not aware of any other documentconnected with the public affairs of the province,the concealment of which from the assemblywould be really useful or justifiable:especially whatever relates to the revenue andexpenditure in all their branches, or to thestatistics of the province, should be at once andcheerfully communicated to them. For example,it will be desirable to make to the twohouses such a communication of the blue books,or annual statistical returns, which are compiledfor the use of this department ; and yourlordship will solicit the assistance of the twohouses of the local legislature, in renderingthose returns as accurate and as comprehensiveas possible. In short, the general rule mustbe that of entire freedom from reserve. Theparticular exception, as it arises, must be vindicatedby the terms of the preceding instructions,or by some explanation sufficient to showthat secrecy was demanded, not for the protectionof any private interest, but for the wellbeingof the province at large. In every case288 THE BUBBLESin which the production of any paper, in answerto any address of either louise, may be refused,your lordship will immediately transmit to thisoffice a statement of the case,, with an explanationof the grounds of your decision.12. The occupation as a barrack of the buildingswhich anciently were part of the Jesuits'college, is strongly reprobated by the assembly.I can only remark that this exception from thegeneral transfer of the Jesuits' estates to theirdisposal, . was made and vindicated by LordRipon on a ground which has rather acquireda new force, than lost any of its original weight.After an occupation of those buildings for thispurpose, for much more than half a century,there has accrued to the Crown a prescriptivetitle, of which, however, his Majesty has neversought to avail himself. The King is, on thecontrary, anxious that the buildings should berestored, as promptly as possible, to their originaluse; nor will that measure be delayedfor a single day, after other and adequate provisionshall have been made for the accommodationof the troops ; but it is needless to remarkthat his Majesty has no funds at his disposalfor that purpose. The proposed transfer of allthe sources of local revenue to the house ofassembly lias deprived the King of the meansof providing for this or aoy similar service. Itmust rest, therefore, with the bouse to erect orpurchase other barracks sufficiently commodiousfor the garrison, upon which the boardof ordnance will immediately issue the necessaryinstructions fur evacuating the buildings atpresent occupied for that purpose.13. The lease of the forges of St. Maurice toMr. Bell has been made, and is now irrevocable.1 do not conceal my regret, that this propertywas not disposed of by public auction tothe highest bidder. Whatever arrangementsmay be hereafter settled respecting the territorialrevenue, it will be necessary to prevent thegranting of any crown property on lease in thesame manner by private contract, and moreespecially when the contractor is a member ofthe legislative council.14. Impediments are said to have been needlesslyraised to the endowment of colleges bybenevolent persons. 1 fear it is not to bedenied, that some unnecessary delay in decidingupon bills reserved for his Majesty'sconsideration, having such endowments fortheir object, did occur: a delay chiefly attributablelo political events and the consequent240 THE BUBBLESchanges of the colonial administration in thiskingdom. I have no wish to withhold a frankacknowledgment of error, when really doe tothe house of assembly, because I am persuadedthat in that frankness they will perceive thebest assurance of the sincerity with which, onbehalf of the ministers of the crown, a pledgeIS given for the more prompt and exact attentionhereafter to every measure which has forits object the institution in the province of anycolleges or schools for the advancement ofChristian knowledge or sound learning.IS. On the subject of the clergy reserves, ofwhich complaint is still made, the arrangementsproposed by Lord Ripon leave his Majesty nothingfurther to concede. The whole questionhas been referred to the decision of the provinciallegislature. To obviate misconceptions,the draft of a bill for the adjustment of theclaims of all parties was framed under his lordship'sdirections, and brought into the house ofassembly. Anticipating the possibility that thisbill might undergo amendments in its progressthrough the two houses, materially affecting itscharacter, Lord Ripon had instructed the governor,in that event, not to refuse his assent,but to reserve the bill for the signification ofOF CANADA. 241bis Majesty's pleasure. The loss of the billis, however, ascribed to the solicitor-generalhaving, in his place in the house, stated thatno amendment would be permitted. The 'sexpressions may have beenmisunderstood ; but if this was their purport,not only was the statement unauthorised, butdirectly at variance with the spirit of the instructionsof the home government. I muchr^ret the misapprehension, in whatever causeit may have originated, It may perhaps beascribed to the act, that Lord Aylmer did notthink himself at liberty to produce to the housethe Earl of Ripon's despatches on the subject.Your lordship will immediately communicatecopies of them, inviting the council and assemblyto resume the consideration of the question,upon the terms of Lord Ripon's proposal, toevery part of which they may be assured of hisMajesty's continued adherence.1 6. Lord Aylmer's refusal to issue a writ forthe election of a new member of the assembly,upon the declaration of the house that M.Mondelet's seat had become vacant, is condemnedby that body as a violation of theirrights. The question has lost much, if not all,of its practical importance since the parsing ofR242 THE BUBBLESthe recent law for vacating the seats of membersaccepting places of emolument under thecrown « Stilly in justice to Lord Cylinder, I ambound to affirm the accuracy of the distinctionin reference to which he appears to have acted.'In cases where the vacancy of a seat may consistentlywith existing usages, be notified bythe house to the governor without assigning thecause, he is bound to presume that the adjudicationof the house is right, and must carry itinto effect by issuing a new writ. But in caseswhere usage requires that in the notification tothe governor the cause of vacancies should bestated, then, if the cause alleged be insufficientin point of law, the governor is not at liberty tocomply with the request of the house. Theconcurrence of the governor and the bouse inany measure, cannot render it legal, if it beprohibited by the law of the land. To that ruleobedience is emphatically due by those to whomthe constitution has assigned the high functionsof legislation and of the executive government.I^ therefore, Lord Aylmer rightly judged thatM. Mondelet's seat had not been lawfully vacated,his lordship adhered to the strict line ofduty in declining to issue the writ for whichethe house applied. If he entertained a seriousOF CANADA. 248and honest doubt on the subject, his lordshipwas bound to pause until that doubt could beremoved by competent judicial authority. Thesubsequent introduction by statute of a law forvacating seats in such cases as that of M.Mondelet's, would seem sufficiently to establishthat his acceptance of office was not followedby that legal consequence.17. I now approach the case of Sir JohnCaldwell. It is a subject which has uniformlyexcited the deepest regret of my predecessors ;and I need hardly add, that I partake largelyof that feeling. His Majesty's government haveoffered to the province every reparation whichit has been in their power to make, for the originalerror of allowing monies to accumulate inthe hands of a public officer, without takingfull securities for the faithful discharge of histrust : they have placed at the disposal of theassembly whatever could be recovered from SirJohn Caldwell, or from his sureties ; and yourlordship will now, on the terms to which I havereferred in my accompanying despatch, be authorizedto surrender to the appropriation ofthat house, the only funds by which his Majestycould have contributed towards making goodthe dedication. Every practical suggestion hasr2244 THE BUBBLESalso been made to the assembly, for preventingthe recurrence of similar losses. Nothing, inshort, has been left undone, or at least unattempted,to mitigate the evil which the inadequacyof the securities taken from Sir JohnCaldwell, and the accumulations of publicmoney in his hands, occasioned. Perhaps thelegal proceedings against his property might becarried on with greater activity and effect ; andif so, your lordship will lend your aid with theutmost promptitude to that object. It is,indeed, much to be lamented, that for so manyyears together, on such a case as this, the lawshould have proved inadequate to secure for thepublic such property as was in the possessionof the defaulter, or his securities at the timeof his insolvency.I feel, however, that incomplete justice hashitherto been rendered to the people of LowerCanada, in Sir John Caldwell's case. Thatgentleman has been permitted to retain his seatat the legislative council, and still holds thatconspicuous station. Whatever sympathy Imay be disposed to feel for individual misfortune,and in whatever degree the lapse of yearsmay have abated those feelings of just indignationwhich were provoked by the first int^li-OF CANADA. 245hence of so gross a breach of the public trust,I cannot in the calm and deliberate administrationof justice, hesitate to conclude that it isnot fitting that Sir John Caldwell should retaina seat in the legislature of Lower Canada : hiscontinuance in that position, and his managementand apparent possession of the estateswhich formerly belonged to him in his ownright, must exhibit to the people at large anexample but too justly offensive to public feeling.Your lordship will cause it to be intimatedto Sir John Caldwell, that the King expectsthe immediate resignation of his office of legislativecouncillor ; and that in the event of thefailure of that reasonable expectation, his Majestywill be compelled, however reluctantly,to resort to other and more painful methods ofvindicating the government of the provinceagainst the reproach of indifference to a diversionof public money from its legitimate use tothe private ends of the accountant.I am not aware that there remains a singletopic of complaint unnoticed, either in the precedingpages or in my accompanying instructionsto your lordship and your fellow commissioners.It has been my endeavour to meeteach successive topic distinctly and circumstanceTHE BUBBLEStally, neither evading any of the difficulties ofthe case, nor shrinking from the acknowledgmentof any error which may he discovered inthe administration of affairs so various andcomplicated. I dismiss the subject for thepresent, with the expression of my earnest hopethat his Majesty's efforts to terminate thesedissensions may be met by all parties in thespirit of corresponding frankness and good-will;assured that, in that case, his Majesty will nothe disappointed in that which is the singleobject of his policy on this subject-the prosperityof Canada, as an integral and highlyimportant member of the British empire*OF CANADA 247Letter X.The arrival of the Commissioners of Inquiryin Canada put an end to all further prospectof grievances, and at once denied the hopesand awakened the anger of the disaffected.The very act of investigating the complaintsvi^hich they themselves had preferred was madea subject of invective; the commission wasdenounced as an insult to the assembly, whosevoice alone should be heard, and whose decisionsneither admitted of question by thecouncil nor by the government. Knowing thatthe instructions given to the commissionerswere of the most conciliatory description, thatevery change would be effected that they haddesired, and that, by their own showing, theywould be compelled to be tranquil, theypromptly changed their ground, abandonedthe untenable local topics, and boldly attackedthe constitution. The mask was now thrownoff, and republicanism openly avowed as their•object. That this development was prematurelyTHE BUBBLEShastened by the unexpected and immediateconcession of their requests, and their objectdisclosed sooner than they had intended, isevident from their address to the governor, solately as in 1831, whom it was their interestand intention to deceive. Early in that yearthey said to him, " It will be our earnest desirethat harmony may prevail among the severalbranches of the legislature, that full effect maybegiven to the constitution as established by law,and that it may be transmitted unimpaired topostetity.^^ Now different language was held,and that there might be no mistake, Mr. said :The people of this province were nowmerely preparing themselves for a future stateof political existence, which he trusted wouldbe neither a monarchy nor an aristocracy. Hthoped Providence had not in view for hiscountry a feature so dark as that it should bethemeans of planting royalty in America, neara country so grand as the United States. Hehoped, for the future, America would giverepublics to Europe."As proofs are always preferable to assertions,and as this is too important a chaito rest on the authority of an anonymous writer,exit,OF CANADA. 249I shall adduce a few more instances where theavowal is distinct and unequivocal. In aFrench journal devoted to the party, publishedin Montreal, we find the following sentiments:*' In examining with an attentive eye whatis passing around us, it is easy to convince oneselfthat our country is placed in very criticalcircumstances, and that a revolution will perhapsbe necessary to place it in a more naturaland less precarious situation. A constitutionto remodel, a nationality to maintain — theseare the objects which at present occupy allCanadians.** It may be seen, according to this, that thereexist two parties, of opposite interests andmanners— the Canadians and the English.These first-born Frenchmen have the habitsand character of such. They have inheritedfrom their fathers a hatred to the English;who, in their turn, seeing in them the childrenof France, detest them. These two parties cannever unite, and will not always remain tranquil; it is a bad amalgamation of interests, ofmanners, of language, and of religion, whichsooner or later must produce a collision. It issufficiently believed that a revolution is posesTHE BUBBLESBible, but it is believed to be far off; as for ai,I think it will not be delayed. Let them considerthese words of a great writer, and theywill no longer treat a relation and a separationfrom the mother country as a chimera — '' Thegreatest misfortune for man politically sayshe, ' is to obey a foreign power ; no humiliationno torment of the heart, can compare to this.The subjected nation, at least if she be not protectedby some extraordinary law, ought notto obey this sovereign. — ewe repeat it, an immediateseparation from England is the onlymeans of preserving our nationality. Sometimehence, when emigration shall have madeour adversaries our equals in number, moredaring, and less generous, they will deprive usof our liberties, or we shall have the same fateas our unhappy countrymen the Acacias.Believe me, this is the fate reserved for us, ifwe do not hasten to make ourselves independent! "In a pamphlet written by Mr. Papineau, hesays of the French :<* It (the French party) has not, it ought notto entertain a shadow of hope that it will obtainany justice whatsoever from any of the authoritiesconstituted as they are at present in thisOF CANADA. 251country. If it would entertain the same opinionof the authorities england that it entertainsof the authorities in this country, theseobstacles could easily be overcome."He then claims the colony as belongingsolely to his party :'* In consequence of the facilities afforded bythe administration for the settlement of Britonswithin OUR colony, they came in shoals to ourshores to push their fortunes."** They have established a system of paper-money,based solely upon their own credit, andwhich our habitants have had the folly to receiveas heady money, although it is not hard cash,current among all nations, but on the contrary,which is of no value, and, without the limits ofthe province, would not be received by any person.To obstruct the arrival of emigrants as muchas possible, resort was had to one of those measuresso common in Canadian legislation, inwhich the object of the bill is at variance withits preamble. An Act was passed, 6 Will. IV.,c. 13^ which, under the speciously humane pretenceof creating a fund to defray the expenceof madiod assistance to sick emigrants, and ofenabling indigent persons of that description toTHE BUBBLESproceed to the place of (heir destination, a capitationtax was imposed, which affected epigramtion to Upper as well as Lower Canada ; and (the operation of it was such, that even an inhabitantof the former province, returning to Ihis home by the St. Lawrence, was liable to Ithis odious impost.When every topic appeared to be exhausted, IMr. Rodier, a member of the assembly, was so ifortunate as to have discovered a new one, in |the cholera, which he charged the English with Jhaving introduced among them. Absurd as 1this may seem to be, it was not without its Ieffect, and the simple-minded credulous pea 1sentry were induced to believe it of a people of!whom they had lately heard from their leaders Inothing but expressions of hatred and abuse."VVhenlsee," 8aidhe"my country inmoum-ling, and my native land presenting to myeyeno-lthingbut one vast cemetery, I ask, what has been!the cause of all these disasters ? and the vuiceB*!of thousands of my fellow citizens respond from Itheir tombs, — it is emigration. It is not enoughto send amongst us avaricious egotists, without Iany other spirit of liberty than could be be-1stowed by a simple education of the counter, to Jenrich themselves at the expense of the Cana*OF CANADA. 253deans, and then endeavour to enslave them —they must also rid themselves of their beggars,and cast them by thousands on our shores-theymust send us miserable beings, who afterhaving partaken of the bread of our children,will subject them to the horrors of hungerand misery ; they must do still more — theymust send us, in their train, pestilence anddeath. If I present to you so melancholy apicture of the condition of this country,I have to encourage the hope that we mayyet preserve our nationality, and avoid thosefuture calamities, by opposing a barrier to thistorrent of emigration. It is only in the houseof assembly* we can place our hopes, and it isonly in the choice the Canadians make in theirelections, they can ensure the preservation oftheir rights and political liberties."Things were now rapidly drawing to a crisis.The legislature was assembled by the newgovernor, and addressed by him in a long andconciliatory speech, in which the evils of internaldissensions were pointedly and feelingly alludedIn a work published in France, for circulation in Canada, avery intelligible hint is given on this subject. '* As the house ofassembly votes rewards for the destruction of Moves, it is no lessurgent to devise means to prevent immigration from being a calamityfor these colonies,"254 THE BUBBLESto, and concessions sufficiently numerous madeto have gratified the vanity and appeased theirritation of any other people than those towhom it was addressed. Among other things,they were informed, that intending to remedythe evils of persons holding a plurality ofoffices, he had begun with the highest, anddischarged some of his executive councillors.This announcement was received in the samespirit as all others of a similar nature; and hisexcellency having cancelled the commission of -one gentleman, in consequence of his holdinga legal appointment under iste lusty the as 'semble thought that so good an example couldnot be followed too speedily, and immediatelydismissed him from the one he retained, becausehe was in the council. A supplicant for moneymust learn to subdue his feelings, and he who 'asks for bread must be prepared to encounterinsolence as well as destitution ; a dignifieddemeanour is but too apt to render povertyridiculous, and a wise man generally lays itaside, to be worn on the return of happier days.The local government was in great pecuniarydistress ; they were humble suitors at theportals of the house, and showed their discretion,in regarding as a mistake what wasOF CANADA. 255intended as an insult. Warrants were alsotendered to each branch of the legislature fortheir contingent expenses ; as these charges^x>ntaiiied, on the part of the house, the salaryof Mr. Roebuck and Mr. Viger, agents in Eng-Isund, not appointed conjointly with the council,lout by simple resolutions of the house, such anappropriation without law had always beenPotently opposed, and the constitutionalists,hearing such a sacrifice of principle would bemade, had, previously to the meeting of the legislature,made it the subject of much animadversion,and presented the governor with a resolution," That the claim which has recently beeninsisted upon by the house of assembly, andoccasionally acted upon by the legislativecouncil, to obtain, by separate addresses to thegovernor, advances of unappropriated money,under the plea of defraying contingent expenses,but in reality embracing the paymentof salaries or allowances not legally established,and more particularly as regards the pretensionsof the assembly for expenses not incurred^DT to be incurred for the business of the sessionsof that house, is altogether unfounded inlaw,unsupported by parliamentary usage, andsubversive of the rights and liberties of theBritish subject."256 THE BUBBLESIndependent of the constitutional objectionto the application of the public funds to thepayment of persons whom the legislative councilhad not only not concurred in appointing, butto whose mission they had pointedly objected,they deeply deplored that so extraordinary aconcession should be made as the payment ofevery demand of that body that obstinatelypersisted in refusing to make any vote for thesupport of the government. Peace, however,was deemed paramount to every other consideration,and that nothing might to be leftundone to attain it, even this sacrifice was notconsidered too greatThey were now called upon, in the usualmanner, to provide for the support of the judgesand the officers of government, the public chestcontaining at the time <£130,000 sterling.The house had no sooner retired from hearingthis address, than their speaker adoptedhis usual mode of inflaming his party by themost violent invectives against all the authoritiesboth at home and in the colony, chargingthe one with deceit and hypocrisy in theirwords, and the other with oppression andpeculation in their deeds. In a short time, hebrought matters to that condition he had solong desired.OF CANADA. 267The house voted an address to his Majesty, inwhich they announced that they had postponedthe consideration of the arrears, and determinedto refuse any future provision for the wants ofthe local administration, in order the better toinsist upon the changes which they requiredfrom the imperial authorities. Their utmostconcession (and they desired it might not betakenfor a precedent) was to offer a supply forsix months, that time being allowed to hisMajesty's government and the British parliamentto decide on the fundamental alterationsof the constitution and other important measuresincluded in the demands of the assembly.'. In this bill of supply, which was for sixmonths only, and merely passed for the purposeof throwing the odium of rejection on theother branch of the legislature, they excludedthe salaries of the councillors, of their assistantclerk, one of the judges, some usual incidentalcharges of the civil secretary's office, besidesother important salaries ; and, as they hadhoped, it was not concurred in. This was thefirst time they had left the executive withoutthe means of conducting the government, for thesole and avowed purpose of procuring changes258 THE BUBBLESin the constitution. Of the confusion and distresswhich this repeated refusal of the assemblyto co-operate with the other branches of thel^islature produced in the province, it is difficultto convey any adequate idea.The province was far advanced in the fourthyear since there had been any appropriation ofprovincial funds to the use of government ;and although a sum, temporarily contributedfrom the British Treasury, had relieved the civilofficers, so far as to give them one year's salaryduring that period, the third year was passingaway, during which they had not bad the smallestfraction of their earnings in the service of thepublic. The distress and embarrassment whichthis state of circumstances inflicted on thefunctionaries of the province, whose privateresources are generally very limited, were ashumiliating as they were unmerited. Manywere living on money borrowed at an exorbitantinterest ; some could not but be reducedto the verge of ruin ; and to show that thissuffering of individuals was not unattendedwith danger to the general welfare, it may beenough to remark, without painfully dwellingon private circumstances, that the judges of thecountry were amongst those who were left toOF CANADA. 269provide for their subsistence as best they might,after three years' stoppage of their officialincomes.This condition of affairs might naturally havebeen expected to terminate with the commencementof the present session. In the two previousyears the supplies had failed in theassembly, either from differences with thegovernor for the time being, or from the refusalof funds for the payment of their contingentexpenses ; but when the provincial parliamentlast met, these grounds of dissension were removed.You will not perceive the commissionersobserved) amongst the grounds assigned for prolongingthe financial difficulties, any complaintagainst the existing provincial administration, orthe assertion of any demerit in the parties whocontinued to be deprived of their lawful remuneration.No local cause of quarrel was alleged,of which the settlement might be indispensablebefore the public business could proceed ; onthe contrary, it was stated openly and withoutdisguise, that changes of a political nature werethe end in view, and that until certain actsshould be done, competent to no other authoritythan the imperial parliament, and comprisingorganic changes in the constitution, bys2260 THE BUBBLESvirtue of which the assembly itself existed,that the house would never make another pecuniarygrant to the government. Thus thepublic servants, no parties to the contest, wereafflicted merely as instruments, through whosesufferings to extort concessions totally independentof their will to grant or to refuse. Ibisscarcely necessary to remark, that the objectsfor the enforcement of which even such meansas these were thought expedient, had neverbeen positively refused, but had only beenreferred to the commission of inquiry, in orderthat, before the executive branch of the governmentundertook to recommend changes of avery important and extensive nature, it might,receive advice from persons entrusted with theconfidence of his Majesty. This, however,,did not prove enough. Apprehensions ofdelay from the commission, and doubts of thefreedom with which it would act, were expressedin the address ; and the assembly intimated,with frankness, that it would allow of no deliberation; that either its demands must beacceded to forthwith, or that it would employits power over the supplies, to render the governmentof the country impossible.The sufferings of these officers was a matterof undisguised satisfaction to the disaffectedOF CANADA. 261who made them the subject of much facetiouscomment on every occasion. The commissionersvery naturally observed on this peculiarity:Tf proof were wanting that national distinctionsdo exercise an influence on the course ofaffairs in this province, it might be supplied inthe absence of all sympathy on the part of thehouse of assembly in the existing distress of thepublic officers. Those officers of governmentare for the most part of English origin, which,we think, explains the treatment of the publicfunctionaries by the members of assembly. Ifboth spoke the same language, used the samehabits, and had those ordinary feelings of sympathywhich must follow from any familiar intercoursein private life, we do not believe itpossible that one of the two could find resolutionto plunge indiscriminately the whole ofthe other class into difficulties, not for any actsof their own, not even for any obnoxious sentimentsthey might hold, but in order that, bytheir losses, a third party might be inducedthrough compassion to surrender objects desiredat its hands."Such, however, were the means throughwhich they hoped to effect their object, whichthey now announced as follows :262 THE BUBBLES1. That the legislative council should beelective.2 That the executive council should beconverted into a ministry, responsible to theassembly.3. That the Tenures' Act and Land Company'sAct should be repealed.4. That the Crown revenues should be surrenderedunconditionally.5. That the management of the waste landsshould be given up to them.And they further declared, that they wouldpay no arrears, or vote any civil list, until thesedemands should be complied with.Here the government also made its stand,and very properly said, We shall concede nofurther ; these demands involve a surrender ofthe colony to one party within it, and we arenot justified in granting them, consistently withthe duty we owe to the Crown, to the public,or to the colonists of British origin.In order that you may understand the bearingsof these demands, which are now the realpoints in dispute (all others having been disposedof), it will be necessary for me to considerthem separately; but as I have alreadyshewn you that " nationality," " indecentCANADA. 263deuce' and republicanism were their avowedultimate objects, and also the quo animo inwhich they were demanded, you may naturallyinfer that they themselves considered them asmaterially contributing to that end, and essentialto prepare the country (as Mr. Papineaudescribed it) for a future state of political existence,which he trusted would be neither amonarchy nor an aristocracy. Indeed this hasnever been denied any where but in England,and here only by .a party who are desirous ofapplying the same elective principle to thehouse of lords, most probably with the view ofproducing a similar result.1st. The first demand was that the legislativecouncil should be elective.The legislative council is contemporaneouswith the house of assembly, owing its existenceto the constitutional act of 1791, and was thefirst instance known in the colonies of such abody having a distinct existence, separate andapart from the executive council. It consisted atfirst of fourteen members, and, in October 1837,of forty, eighteen of whom were French Canadians;but as there were several unable toattend from infirmities and old age. Lord Gosportreported that not more than thirty-one264 THE BUBBLEScould be assembled, thirteen English andeighteen French members, of whom three atmost were persons holding office under government.This body has, as far as the dependantnature of a colony permits, analogous duties toperform to those of the house of lords, and,when judiciously selected, is essential to deliberateand useful legislation, to sustain theprerogative, to uphold the connexion betweenthe mother country and the colony, and togive security to the hundred and fifty thousandsubjects of British origin in the province. Thismuch was admitted even by the commissionersof inquiry, whose reluctant tribute appears notto have been given until ingenuity had soughtin vain for a better substitute.In the revision and correction of bills sentup to them by the assembly, we have no doubt,however, that the council has often renderedvaluable services to the country, and has noless fulfilled one, perhaps, of its peculiar func- ^tons, by its rejection of measures which theconstitution would not admit, thereby relievingthe representative of the King from the duty ofwithholding the royal assent to them: such asbills in which the assembly encroached uponthe royal prerogative, tacked to their grants ofmoney conditions deemed in England unpar-OF CANADA.alimentary, or took it upon themselves to attemptthe repeal of a British statute."It has been the unceasing aim of Mr. Papi-nearand his party to libel this body as a combinedfaction, actuated by interest alone tostruggle for the support of a corrupt government,adverse to the rights and vnshes of thepeople. One of the charges brought against itwas that there were too many persons in itholding office, and that complaint was not withoutfoundation. Indeed it was so apparent,that, from 1829 to 1835, twenty-one new councillorswere appointed wholly independent ofgovernment. Another charge preferred againstit was the rejection in ten years of 169 billssent to them by the other house, as containedin the following tables : —TEAR.Rejected bythe CounciLAmended byCouncil.Total.]61827 - • -No Session.No Session.No Session.1828)1829} •1831 - . -1832 .Total - -•N266 THE BUBBLESThis charge has been reiterated in the othercolonies, where the explanation never followed,and in some instances, from the dfCimiBtaiitialand formal manner in which it is made, has notbeen without its effect. It will be observedthat they are charged with rejecting 169 insteadof 122 bills, every exercise of the constitutionalright of amendment being consideredequivalent to rejection. Every successive yearthe bills which had been disagreed to wereagain transmitted to them, to swell by their rejectionthe amount of their offences. Deductingthe number produced by this multiplying process,the amount of bills rejected falls underforty, which is an average of less than four ayear. In addition to this formidable list whichhad not been concurred in, another interminableone was offered of those which had notbeen considered, the explanation of which Ifind in the words of the commissioners : —Much obloquy has also, we must assert,been unjustly attempted to be thrown on thecouncil for the rejection of bills sent up to themlate in the session, when there were no longerthe means of forming a house in the assemblyto take into consideration any amendments thatmight be made on them."OF CANADA. 267Instead of preferring complaints against thisbody for acts of omission, they might have beenmore successful had they rested satisfied withcharging them with acts of commission ; for,although they can be justified for their rejectionof pernicious bills, what shall we say to theirwant of firmness in afterwards passing some ofthose very bills, under the dictation of thatassembly that was arming itself with freshcharges from these instances of its weakness ?But the time had now arrived when it wasalike independent of the crown and the people,and could neither be influenced by the timidfears of the executive, nor the violence andinvective of the assembly. So long as a majorityof office-holders and people connectedwith government had seats at the council board,the factious majority of the house could exercisea control over the council, through thestate of dependence and subjugation in whichthey kept the executive. Every governor hadlately shewn a desire to win the honour of pacifyingCanada, — had receded and conceded,offered conciliation and endured affronts, borneand forbore, in a manner that it is quite humiliatingto contemplate, — and had used hisinfluence in the legislative council to aid in thei.mm-'.t Iof b feUttiw is which, although theyare jnsfhreBtilledtollieiiieiif of kind intentions,harriot SD nuKh claim ilion oar admiration onthe scoreoftiMtriiierit or their dignity We find,indeed, the aid of the secretary for the coloniescalled in, and Mr. Stanley reporting them foreven insinuating a doubt of the loyalty of theseomnipotent men, and regretting that any wordquid hem introduced which should hare the appearanceof ascribing to a class of his Majesty'ssubjects of one origin views at Tance with theallegiance which they owe to his Majesty. Thehouse had, however, by tim incessant com-plaints purified the board erf* every person uponwhom this influence could be exerted. Thisindependence of executive influence is thusalluded to bv Lord Avlmer: — ** It would bedifficulty perhaps, to find in any British colonya legislative body more independent of theCrown than the legislative council of LowerCanada ; and so far am IJrom possessing ^ asthe King's representative any influence therethat I fill not conceal that I havcy on morethan one occasion regretted the course adoptedby the council. But whilst I make this confession,I will not deny but I have, on the contrary,much satisfaction in avowing that IOF CANADA. 269repose great confidence in that branch of thecolonial legislature. It is a confidence derivedfrom my knowledge of the upright, independentand honourable character of the greatmajority of those who compose it, and of theirfirm and unalterable attachment to his Majesty'sperson and government, and to theconstitution of the colonies as by law established."The council had actually become,what it ought to be, the representative of theindependent people of the country — of thewealth, intelligence, and virtue of the colony.The assembly, therefore, voted that it was moremischievous than ever, and resolved that itshould be elective. It is but due to themhere to say that this idea is not thoughtto have originated in Canada, but to havebeen communicated to them, with otherequally judicious advice, from England. Itis certain that it has been advocated here, ifnot strongly, at least warmly, and was supportedin the house of lords by Lord Brougham.From a careful perusal of what his lordshipsaid upon the occasion, which was declamatoryand not argumentative, 1 am inclined to believeit received his support, not so much because hethought so, as because the ministry did not270 THE BUBBLESthink so, as the whole speech appears to be theeffect of strongly excited feelings.Any organic change in the legislative councilinst be well considered, before it is granted,m two distinct and separate bearings, first, asit affects the connexion with this country, and,secondly, as it affects the interests of the coloniststhemselves. The avowed object of the assemblyin advocating this change, is to procurean identity of views in the two branches, whichwould be effected by their being elected by thesame persons, or what is the same thing, by thesame influences. Were this to take place, itwould be a duplicate of the house, registeringits Acts, but exercising no beneficial legislationupon them. A difference of opinion then,whenever it occurred, would not be betweenthe two houses, but between them and thegovernor, and it is easy to conceive how untenablehis position would soon become. Atpresent, although possessing a veto, and forminga constituent, he can hardly be said to beadeliberative branch of the legislature, but bythis change either such duties must necessarilydevolve upon him, and occasion the exercise ofincompatible powers, or in every instancewhere he differed in opinion, he would beOF CANADA. 271compelled to resort to a rejection of the measure.The commissioners, whose reasoning onthe subject is not very intelligible, have beenmore fortunate in the expression of their impartiality,having recorded at the same timetheir approbation of the principle, and theirconviction of the danger of its application. Theolivet of the French party, it is said, is to asimitate their institutions to those of the UnitedStates ; but the situation of the country is sodifferent from that of any state in the union,that there is no analogy whatever. Instead oftwo co-existent but independent chambers, itwould in act be only one body occupying twohalls.In Canada there is unfortunately wantingamong the French population, the salutarycontroul of public opinion. The population iswholly unfit for the exercise of the importantduties of self-government. Scattered over alai surface, ignorant of constitutional principles,and inattentive to public affairs, theyimplicitly follow a few leaders, who have thechoice and the management of their representativesin their own hands, and who, if thischange were conceded, would place in bothhouses such persons as would follow their instructions.It were needless to ask in such awhat would become of the British popu-^lataon ? Tint Mr. PapinettQ knows bat little ofIbe ocMtstitiitioa of the United States which heaffects to admire, and daims to imitate, willbest appear from the following extracts fromAmerican constitutional writers:^ AU the powers of gOYenmioit,'' says Mr.Jefferson, ** kgidatiTe, executive, and jndi-c^iy, resoh to the legislative body. Theconcentration of these in the same hands* isprecisely the definition of a despotic government.It will be no alleviation, that thesepowers will be exercised by a plurality ofhands, and not by a single one. One hundredand seventy-three despots would sorely be asoppressive as one. Let those who doubt it torntheir e3res on the repoUic of Venice. An electivedespotism is not the government we fought for ;but one which should not only be founded ohfree principles but in which the powers of governmentshould be so divided and balancedamong several bodies of magistracy, as that noone could transcend their legal limits withoutbeing effectually checked and restrained by theothers."Another author says,^* Another and most important advantagearising from this ingredient is, the great riflesCANADA. 273hence which it creates in the elements of thetwo branches of the legislature ; which constitutesa great desideratum in every practicaldivision of legislative power. In fact, this division(as has been already intimated) is of littleor no intrinsic value, unless it is so organized,that each can operate as a real check upon undueand rash legislation. If each branch issubstantially framed upon the same plan, theadvantages of the division are shadowy andimaginative; the visions and speculations ofthe brain, and not the waking thoughts of statesmenor patriots. It may be safely asserted,that for all (he purposes of liberty, and securityof stable laws, and of solid institutions, of personalrights, and of the protection of property,a single branch is quite as good as two, if theircomposition is the same, and their spirit andimpulses the same. Each will act as the otherdoes ; and each a ill be led by some commoninfluence of ambition, or intrigue, or passion,to the same disregard of public interests, andthe same indifference to the prostration of privaterights. It will only be a duplication ofthe evils of oppression and rashness with a duplicationof obstruction to effective redress. Inthis view the organization of the senate becomesT274 THE BUBBLESof inestimable value." Again he says, " Theimprobability of sinister combination willalways be in proportion to the dissimilarity ofthe genius of the two bodies; and thereforeevery circumstance consistent with harmony inall proper measures, which points out a distinctorganization of the component materials ofeach, is desirable."And again this is very powerfully put by aneminent republican writer :*the division of the legislature into twoseparate and independent branches, is foundedon such obvious principles of good policy, andis so strongly recommended by the unequivocallanguage of experience, that it has obtained thegeneral approbation of the people of this country.One great object of this separation of thelegislature into two houses acting separately,and with co-ordinate powers, is to destroy theevil effects of sudden and strong excitement, andof precipitate measures, springing from passion,caprice, prejudice, personal influence, and partyintrigue, and which have been found by sadexperience, to exercise a potent and dangeroussway in single assemblies. A hasty decision isnot so likely to arrive to the solemnities of a lawwhen it is to be arrested in its course and madeOF CANADA. 275to undergo the deliberation, and probably thejealous and critical revision, of another and arival body of men, sitting in a different place,and under better advantages, to avoid the prepossessionsand correct the errors of the otherbranch* The legislature of Pennsylvania andGeorgia consisted originally of a single house.The instability and passion which marked theirproceedings were very visible at the time, andthe subject of much public animadversion : andin the subsequent reform of their constitutions,the people were so sensible of this defect, andof the inconvenience they had suffered from it,that in both states a senate was introduced. Noportion of the political history of mankind ismore full of instructive lessons on this subject,or contains more striking proofs of the faction,instability, and misery of states under the dominionof a single, unchecked assembly, thanthose of the Italian republics of the middleages, and which in great numbers, and withdazzling but transient splendour, in the intervalbetween the fall of the western and easternempire of the Romans.* They were all alike illwould refer the reader, if he feels inclined to pursue thissubject, to Sir James Mcintosh's celebrated Introductory Lecture,written in 17^ ; in which by anticipation he composed with greatskill and ability the condemnation of his own conduct on theReform Bill.T 2276 THE BUBBLESconstituted, with a single unbalanced assembly.They were all alike miserable, and ended insimilar disgrace.The second demand was that the executivecouncil should be converted into a ministry responsibleto the assembly. The existence of acouncil to advise the governor in the conductof affairs may be traced back to the first establishmentof a civil government in this provinceunder the authority of Great Britain.The royal instructions to General Murray,dated 7th December 1763, commanded him toappoint a council as therein specified. The statuteof the 14th of Geo. III., c. 83, establishedit in a more formal manner, and conferred uponit certain legislative powers ; but in 1791 theconstitutional act provided for the existence oftwo councils, a legislative and an executive one ;and accordingly, by royal instructions, datedthe 16th September of that year, the latter wasappointed to consist of nine members, with asalary to each one respectively of one hundredpounds. Additional or honorary members havesince been occasionally added to the board.Of the functions of the executive council themost comprehensive description is that they arebound to give their advice to the governor wheatCANADA, 277ever it is requested.* There are certain cases inwhich the governor is required to act by andwith their advice, but in far the greater part ofthe business of government he is at liberty toreceive their advice or not as he pleases. Itaudits public accounts, has some direction ofthe crown lands, and constitutes a court ofappeal. It can assemble only on summons fromthe governor, is sworn to secresy, and confersno privilege on its members of either recordingtheir several opinions or entering their protestsindividually.This body, it is demanded, should be convertedinto a ministry and be made responsibleto the assembly ; the answer to this is stronglyand pointedly given in the report of the commissioners: —The house of assembly, in their answer tothe governor's speech at the opening of the latesession, and in their subsequent address to hisMajesty, dated the 26th of February 1836,expressed their desire for a * constitutional responsibility'of the executive council, based onthe practice of the United Kingdom. We havealready had occasion to advert to this proposalSee Appendix to Report of Commissioners.278 THE fiUB&LESincidentally in our report of the 12th of March,but a recapitulation of what we then advanced,and some further examination of the project,may not be superfluous here, especially as thesubject has excited such keen interest in UpperCanada since the time when we last noticed it.On that occasion we observed, that while inEngland it was a maxim of the constitutionthat no wrong could be imputed to the sacredperson of his Majesty, the head of the executivehere was a servant of his Majesty, responsibleto the King and to parliament for his conduct; that therefore it was necessary that ibismeasures should be under his control, in likemanner as their consequences rested upon hischaracter ; that to render the executive councilresponsible to any but the governor himself,would demand the allotment to them of newpowers commensurate with their new responsibility,and would require a corresponding diminutionof the powers of the governor ; thatthus the direct tendency of a council, responsiblein the sense we were then considering,was to withdraw partook the administrationfrom his Majesty's representative in this province,and to abridge to that extent the efficiencyof the functionary on whom, above allOF CANADA. 279others, his Majesty must rely for retaining theallegiance of the colony,We would now remark further, that thequestion is not between responsibility andirresponsibility absolutely, but only as to apeculiar sort of responsibility, which it is wishedto attach to the executive council. The weightiestresponsibility which can attach to any manin matters of a public nature for which he isnot punishable by law, or by loss of oflSce, isthe accountability to public opinion, and fromthis the executive councillors are not even nowexempt, though, in consequence of the rule ofsecresy (which we shall presently propose materiallyto relax), they are not so much open toitas might be wished. They are already amenableto the courts of law for any offence, legallypunishable, which may be brought home tothem ; they would also, we apprehend, bemade amenable to the jurisdiction of any courtwhich may be established for the trial of impeachmentsagainst public functionaries ; andthey are liable to be dismissed by the sameauthority which appoints them. These differentliabilities constitute a responsibility, than whichwe know not what other is borne by any publicservants.280 THE BUBBLES^* But if the councillors were rendered accountablefor the acts of government, andaccountable not to the executive authority bywhich they are appointed, but immediatelyto the house of assembly, we think that astate of things would be produced incompatiblewith the connexion between a colony andthe mother country. The council having toanswer for the course of government, must injusticebe allowed also to control it ; the responsibility,therefore, of the governor to his Majestymust also cease, and the very functions ofgovernor, instead of being discharged by theperson expressly nominated for that high trust,would in reality be divided among such gentlemenas from time to time might be carried intothe council by the pleasure of the assembly.The course of affairs would depend exclusivelyon the revolutions of party within the province.All union with the empire, through the bead ofthe executive, would be at an end ; the countryin short would be virtually independent ; andif this be the object aimed at, it ought to be putin its proper light, and argued on its propergrounds, and not disguised under the plausibledemand of assimilating the constitution of theseprovinces to that of the mother country."OF CANADA. 2811 shall not weaken the effect of this by anyremarks of my own, but merely observe, that ifa majority in the house, appointing the legislativecouncil, arid controlling the executive, isnot a state of independence as regards GreatBritain, and of despotism as regards the province,it must at least be admitted, that it confersall the advantages of such a condition butthe name.The third was a demand for the repeal ofthe Tenures Act and the Land Company's Act.On neither of these topics is it necessary todwell longer than to explain the nature of them.I have already observed that Canada was subjectto the old feudal law of France, and I referyou to page 35 of this work for an account of theirmore prominent features. The inconvenienceof this sort of tenure has been very stronglyfelt, and particularly in towns, as preventingthe transfer of property and its consequentimprovement. The English population, especiallyof Montreal, complain that to allowthe exercise of seigneurs rights over a citydestined by its situation to become a great commercialemporium,* is not merely to give a fatalSee Letters of Anti-Bureauerat.282 TU£ BUBBLESwound to the progress of the city itself, but itis weakly, impolitically, and unjustly to sacrificethe interests of trade and of future generations,throughout a large portion of both provinces,to which its extended commerce underhappier auspices, might be capable of givingprosperity and comfort. They say that thelods et vented or mutation fines, amountingby law to one-twelfth of the price upon everysale, constitute one of the greatest grievances,but by no means the only one, arising fromthe present tenure, and which can not beremoved while the seigneurs continues to beheldin mortmain.Supposing a manufactory or building, worth£12,000, to be erected upon a lot not worth£100, if the proprietor has occasion to sell, andcould even find a purchaser willing to give himthe sum he has expended in the erection ofthe edifice, he is nevertheless liable to lose£1,000 as a punishment for having had theindustry, the means, and the enterprise tobuild ; because the claim of the seigneurs isnot the twelfth of the original value of theground merely, but the twelfth of the amountof the money and labour of others laid out uponthe building also.OF CANADA. 283This, under the feudal system, becomes aprivileged debt to the seigneurs, who have notexpended a farthing. But this is not all — thenext and the next vendor, ad infinitum j musteach in turn lose to the seigneurs a twelfth ofthe purchase-money. So that if, in the exigenciesof trade, or by inevitable misfortunes, thebuilding should change hands a certain numberof times, the seigneurs will benefit by theseevils to the amount of £ 1 2,000, the full cost ofthe edifice, to which they have contributednothing, being one hundred and twenty timesthe original value of the lot. Instances areknown where the claim for lods et vented deferreduntil the occurrence of several sales, hasswept away at once the whole price for whichthe lot, buildings and all, have been sold.It has been asserted* by men of great localknowledge, that the entire value of all the realestate and buildings in the city of Montreal(the property of, and erected at the cost ofmany thousands of individuals) must, everyforty years or less, be paid into the hands of theseigneurs ; and this is exclusive of the rents ofthe seigneurs. Thus the value of all the real• J. Thorn, Esq.284 THE BUBBLES(estate and buildings existing forty years ago,when the buildings were much fewer, and thevalue of the real estate far less than at present,has certainly, within the last forty years, passedinto their hands. In like manner the numberof buildings, and value of real estate, will ofnecessity be so much augmented during thenext forty years, that at the end of that periodit is likely that the present value of all the realestate and buildings will also have passed intotheir hands, should the feudal tenure be allowedby sufferance still to retain its possession. Itis to be remarked that this enormous contribution,this appalling and blighting exaction, isprincipally raised from improvements of whichEnglishmen and English commerce are thecreators and cause.This old law also allows of a system of mortgagecalled hypothesis, which may affect theland in a variety of ways without enabling anyonecreditor of the owner of the land toknow what is passing or has passed betweenhis debtor and any other person. The systemof general mortgage aggravates in a tenfolddegree the evils of secret obligations. Forwhere mortgages spring from such a varietyof circumstances, and are created in such aor CANADA. 285variety of ways, their secresy, even if they werespecial, would be sufficiently pernicious; buttheir generality engenders evils absolutely intolerableand altogether incredible. Through thatgenerality of mortgages, a man cannot hold realproperty for an hour without vitiating its titleto the amount of all his previously granted notarialobligations. In this way, a man may pollutethe title of real property, that virtuallynever belonged to him. He may havebought a farm or a house on credit, may havebeen obliged by want of funds to restore it tothe seller, and may thus have burthened itwith a hundred previously contracted debts ofindefinite amount.The tacit hypothesis is of five kinds:— ^1. The dower of his wife, unless barred by anante-nuptial contract; 2. Security to his ward,in the event of his being appointed guardian toany minor, which he may be without his ownconsent, the office being in many cases compulsory; 3. The same obligation in the event *ofhis being named curator, trustee, or administratorof any intestate person ; 4. The obligationof an heir, entering on his inheritance,to the payment of the debts of the person fromwhom he received it, or sans benefice d'inven-286 THE BUBBLEStaire ; 5th, and lastly. The liability of publicservants for the due performance of their trusts.The wife's dower, moreover, is the inheritanceof the children of the marriage, and consequentlyan entail is created by it, as well as alife interest.The British government thought it was conferringa great benefit upon the Lower Canadiansin proposing to change the tenures, so a^to get rid of those circumstances which thusdepreciated the value of land, and retarded theimprovement of Canadian trade and agriculture; and all unblessed men would, and did,agree with the government on this point.The first provision on this subject consistedof two clauses of the Canada Trade Act(3 Geo. IV., c. 119, s. 31 & 32), by which hisMajesty was empowered to agree with all seigneursfor the commutation of their dues tothe Crown, and also to commute with suchcensitaires as held immediately of the Crown,and to re-grant both to one class and the othertheir lands in free and common soccage. Inaddition to, and amendment of this Act waspassed the 6 Geo. IV., c. 59.The most important clauses are as follow ;Sec. 1— Provides for the commutation (onOF CANADA. 287request) of the tenures of land held of theCrown.Sec. 2 — Provides that rights of the seigneurshall not be affected till such commutation isfully made.Sec. 3 — Declares that persons holding landsin fief, and obtaining a commutation from theCrown, shall be bound to grant a like commutation,if required, to those holding under them,for such indemnity as shall be fixed by expertsor (sec. 4), by proceedings in a court of law.Sec. 5 — Declares that on such agreement oradjudication the tenure shall be converted intofree and common soccage, but sec. 6 providesthat this shall not discharge a man of dues orservices then accrued to the lord.Sec. 7 — Persons applying for commutationare to give public notice to mortgagees andothers having claims on the lands.Sec. 8— Lands holden in free and commonsoccage in Lower Canada, are to be subject tothe laws of England.Sec. 9-provided, nevertheless, that nothingherein contained shall extend to prevent hisMajesty, with the advice and consent of thelegislative council and assembly of the provinceof Lower Canada, from making and enacting288 THE BUBBLESany such laws or statutes as may be necessaryfor the better adapting the before-mentionedrules of the laws of England, or any of them,to the local circumstances and condition of thesaid province of Lower Canada, and the inhabitantsthereof.Such are the provisions of the act, the repeal ofwhich is so imperiously demanded. Unreasonable,however, as the request was, thus to make adisgraceful retrograde movement to barbaroususages, it was met in the only way it could be :the act 1 W. IV., c. 20 was passed, leavingthe whole subject to be dealt with by theprovincial l^islature as it should think fit.The repeal of the Canada Land Companiesact is next insisted upon. On this subject, itwill be quite sufficient to state their demand,to which no honest man could give any otheranswer than it has already received — an unqualifiedrefusal. They require that an act ofparliament, incorporating this company, andconferring upon them certain privileges, and atitle to lands, upon which they have expendedlarge sums of money, should be repealed, andthe property confiscated. The only charitableway of viewing the demand, is to consider it notso much an evidence of moral turpitude, as aOF CANADA. 289manifestation of contempt and insolence towardsthe party to whom it was addressed.*Fourth. — then followed a demand for theunconstitutional surrender of the crown revenues.You will recollect that the Canada committeeof parliament, as it was called, reported,that although the duties, before alluded to,were vested in the Crown, they were preparedto say the real interests of the colony wouldbe best promoted by placing them underthe controul of the house of assembly. Beingprepared to say a thing, and being preparedto show or prove a thing, happen, unfortunately,to be widely different ; and, as thecommittee contented themselves with the former,we are not in possession of the grounds uponwhich they felt prepared to say so. Theywere doubtless quite sufficient at the time,although they, unfortunately, did not continueBut although they considered every institution and usage oftheir own so sacred as to admit of no change, they viewed thoseof the English in a very different light. The conceding and respectfulconduct of Government formed an amusing contrast withtheir audacious insolence. To mark their contempt for regalrights, they passed an Act to make notice of action served on theattorney-general, for damages against the Crown, legal and hinting.If the suit went against the Crown, it was provided, thatexecution might issue against the governor, and the furniture, orthe guns of the fortress.U290 THE BUBBLESto be 80 long enough for the act (1st and 2dWill. IV.) to reach Canada. For the real interestsof the colony, it is very evident, hare notbeen best promoted thereby. It would appearalso that that great and single minded man, theDuke of Wellington, (who probably knewquite as much of the French as the committeedid), was not prepared to say so, but, on thecontrary, he entered his protest against themeasure : ** These persons' said he, (meaningthe judges), " will thus become dependentupon the continued favour of the legislativeassembly, for the reward of their labours andservices; the administration, within the provinceof Lower Canada, can no longer be deemedindependent ; and his Majesty's subjects willhave justice administered to them by judges,and will be governed by officers situated asabove described." The event has justified hisgrace's expectations, and disappointed thoseof the committee. This unconditional surrenderMas made on the full understanding that acivil list would be granted, and the administrationof justice permanently provided for : —the former they refused. They had now gotthe officers of government at their mercy, andwere determined to keep them so; and theOF CANADA. 291judges they made independent of the Crown,but dependent upon them for their annualallowance, depriving the government of thepower of removing them, except upon impeachment,and reserving the right themselves toremove them at pleasure, by withdrawing theirsalaries. Having succeeded in this, they nowdemanded the rents of the real estate, belongingto the King, in Canada, and this too they arepromised, when they shall vote the civil list, —one of the resolutions introduced by LordJohn Russell, being, " That it is expedient toplace at the disposal of the legislature the netproceeds of the hereditary ,territorial, and casualrevenues of the Crown, arising within the province,in case the said legislature shall see fitto grant a civil list, for defraying the necessarycharges of the administration of justice, andfor the maintenance and unavoidable expenseof certain of the principal officers of the civilgovernment of the province." The great errorthat has been committed in these unconditionalsurrenders of the revenue of the Crown, is inattempting to keep up an analogy, that doesnot exist, to the practice in England. Thecommittee lost sight of the important distinctionthat Canada is a colony, and that whatu2292 THE BUBBLESmight be very right and proper here, wouldbe neither right nor expedient there. Theofficers of government are not merely the officersof Canada, but the officers of Great Britain,and, by giving the legislature a controul overthem, they surrender the imperial power overthe province. They should be removeable,not when the legislature, like the committee ofparliament, is " prepared to say" so, but whenit is "prepared to prove" that they ought to bebut their salaries should be beyond the controulof the local assembly. This position istoo obvious, and has received too much painfulcorroboration, in recent events, to require anyfurther comment.Lastly. — they required the management ofthe waste lands to be given up to them Theobject of this extraordinary claim, now for thefirst time put forward ni the history of coloniesnation, was for the avowed purpose of controllingemigration from Great Britain, which theyhad already impeded by a capitation tax, by refusingto establish an efficient quarantine, or togive aid to the improvement of the harbour ofMontreal; by endeavouring to alarm settlers onthe score of insecurity of title, and in anattempt to ruin the banks.OF CANADA. 293In Mr. Papineau's celebrated pamphlet, towhich I have previously alluded, he says, " theprotection, or, to speak more plainly, Englishsovereignty over Canada, brought other evils inits train. A swarm of Britons hastened to theshores of the new colony, to avail themselves ofits advantages to improve their own condition**History affords so many proofs of the license usedby a people when flushed with victory, that thisgentleman's surprise at the English taking theliberty of settling on the waste lauds of a colony,which they had so gallantly conquered, affordsa pleasing proof that the natural simplicity of theCanadian character was not yet wholly destroyedby the study of politics. " That, however,"he continued, ** was not sufficient for their cupidity,they established themselves in owr cities,and made themselves masters of all the trade, aswellforeignas domestic." " For many years theytook but a small share in our political affairs.The (elections remained free from their intriguesbecause they could have had no chance ofpractising any amongst a population ninetimes more numerous than themselves. Butwithin these five or six years they go aboutboldly " To preventthis evil, which was growing in magnitude294 THE BUBBLESevery year, "of their interesting themselvesin the political affairs of the province' in proportionto their numbers, they demanded thecontrol of the wild lands, and, reverting toabstract principles, started this new doctrine:That in any new discovered or newly occupiedcountry the land belongs to the governmentof the nation taking possession of it, andthat settlers in it, so long as they retain thecharacter only of emigrants from the mothercountry, can claim no more than whathas been granted to them as individuals ;but that when a distinct boundary has beenj assigned to them, and they come to be incorporatedinto a body politic, with a power oflegislation for their internal affairs, the territorywithin their boundary becomes, as a matter ofright, the property of the body politic, or of theinhabitants, and is to be disposed of accordingto rules framed by their local legislature, andno longer by that of the parent state."On this point the commissioners reported asfollows : —This proposition rests, as we understand it,entirely upon abstract grounds, and we believethat we are authorized in saying that it neverhas been entertained by Great Britain or anyOF CANADA. 295other colonizing power. That the ungrantedlands in any colony remain the property of theCrown has, on the contrary, we believe, beenthe universally received doctrine in GreatBritain, and although the constitutional actdoes not expressly assert a right of which itsframers probably never contemplated a doubt,the lands of the province are mentioned in the36th clause as being thereafter to be grantedby his Majesty and his successors. While,therefore, we are quite ready to admit, that inthe disposal of the ungranted lands the interestsof the first settlers ought never to be lost sightof, and also that the wishes of the local legislatureshould be consulted, provided they aremade known to his Majesty in a constitutionalmanner, we cannot recognize in any way theabstract principle set up for it in opposition,not merely to the general laws and analogiespf the British empire, but to the clear meaningof the Act by which alone the body preferringthe claim has its existence. It must, we apprehend,be the main object in every schemeof colonization, that the parent state shouldhave the right to establish her own people onsuch terms as she may think fit in the countrycolonized ; and at present perhaps her North2?S^ ?H:£ 3«3e^J»At m^rvj i a^ <fA^/tk^^ ^trt went wJkaaiAt io Ens-unabk »ifr /jdhnFr «ai. We i iii, their;Mi#^e tint Eftgfaiwi will O QMBM t to a doctrinethat fill ^o to plsKir «t tfce dkcretioo of anylo Ih^JkOxmz the terms on vidi cmi^fantsfrom$ ker ^ir«e5k are to be received into herHenTf iHjwerer. the goTcnmiciit again ViewediU Hiixieis Um jnatifV their wishes as £ir as ittiaji \tf0MhUt : and in their undeviating omit serf*/'orirriliation, although they could not grant thewho; AttmanA^ endeavoured to meet them halfHay ley n^filyin^ that they had no objection toitt UsfcinUiinre prescribing the rule of for ihrr CVoh n lands, bat their applicationfright bif confined to the executive. Such areili; d^frnand^ \« which were then made, and areHtfll put forward by the leaders of the Canadianl^rty ; fernando, which it is evident amount toa rrlaitri by oris fort of her Majesty's subjects,to an independent controul of the colony.OF CANADA. 297Letter XIAs the assembly bad separated with a declarationthat they would never vote a civil list,until all their requests were granted, it wasnecessary for parliament to interfere, andLord John Russell proposed and carried certainresolutions, of which the substance is asfollow s :Istly. That in the existing state of LowerCanada, it is unadvisable to make the legislativecouncil elective, but that it is expedientto adopt measures for securing to that branchof the legislature a greater degree of publicconfidence.** 2dly. That while it is expedient to improvethe composition of the executive council,it is unadvisable to subject it to the responsibilitydemanded by the house of assembly.3dly. That the legal title of the BritishAmerican Land Company to the land theyhold unde their charter, and an act of theimperial parliament, ought to be maintainedinviolate.298 THE BUBBLES4thly. That as soon as the legislatureshall make provisions by law for discharginglands from feudal dues and services, and forremoving any doubts as to the incidents of thetenure of land, in free and common soccage,it is expedient to repeal the Canada TenuresAct, and the Canada Trade Act, so far as thelatter relates to the tenures of land in this province,saving, nevertheless, to all persons therights vested in them under or in virtue ofthose Acts.5thly. That, for defraying the arrears due,on account of the established and customarycharges of the administration of justice, and ofthe civil government of the province, it is expedient,that, after applying for that purposesuch balance as should, on the 10th day ofApril last, be in the hands of the receiver-general,arising from the hereditary, territorial,and casual revenues of the Crown, the governorof the province be empowered to issue, out ofany other monies in the hands of the receiver-general,such further sums as shall be necessaryto effect the payment of such arrears andcharges up to the 10th of April last.6thly. That it is expedient to place at thedisposal of the legislature the net proceeds ofOF CANADA. 299the hereditary, territorial, and casual revenuesof the Crown, arising within the provincein case the said legislature shall see fit togrant a civil list for defraying the necessarycharges of the administration of justice, and forthe maintenance and unavoidable expenses ofcertain of the principal officers of the civilgovernment of the province ; and, lastly,That it is expedient that the legislaturesof Lower and Upper Canada respectively, beauthorized to make provision for the joint regulationand adjustment of questions respectingtheir trade and commerce, and of other questionswherein they have a common interest."Whether the spirit of concession had not beenheretofore carried too far, and whether the publicaffairs of Canada ought to have been suffered(even for the amiable and praiseworthy objectof endeavouring, if possible, to satisfy the dominantparty in the house), ever to have arrivedat this crisis, are questions upon which I haveno desire, on this occasion, to enter, beingforeign to my object, which is to show you thatthe French-Canadians have no claim to sympathy'* as our oppressed and enslaved brethren."But that these resolutions were indispensable,that they were not resorted to tillr300 THE BUBBLESthey were necessary, and that parliament wasjustified in this exercise of its supreme authority,no unprejudiced and right-thinking man candoubt. A colony is a dependent province, andGreat Britain is an independent metropolitanstate. The controlling power must obviouslybe greater than the power controlled. Thepower, therefore, of a colony being limited, ifit assumes to pass those limits, it is no longerdependent but independent. It is not only theright but the duty of Parliament, to restrainwithin their constitutional limits, provinciallegislatures, in the same manner as it is the rightof the colonists to exercise those powers constitutionally,and their duty not to attempt toexceed those limits. Wheen one branch of alegislature resolves that it will never performits functions until a co-ordinate branch, derivingits authority from the same source as itself, isdestroyed, it exceeds its due bounds, or ratherlanguishes the exercise of all constitutionalpower. In the pamphlet already alluded to,Mr. Papineau says, " The constitution hasceased to exist of right, and in fact can nolonger be maintained but by force." Here,then, was a case for the legitimate interferenceof Parliament, an interference which no re-OF CANADA. 301fleeting colonist will ever object to, else therewould be no appeal but to the sword whenevera designing demagogue should unfortunatelyobtain a majority of obstructive members in theassembly ; but these resolutions were said to beaviolation of the declaratory act of 1778, andan unconstitutional mode of levying taxeson the Canadians, and appropriating theirmoney without their consent ?^ It is not material to the argument to mention,it is a singular fact, that the revenue happensbut not to have been raised by people of Frenchorigin, and that therefore as far as they areconcerned, their money has not been appropriatedwithout their consent. The question isoften asked by the Upper Canadians, on. whatdoes a French inhabitant pay duty ?* Is it, theysay, on woollen stuffs of his own manufacture ?Is it on wooden shoes, the produce of his forest ?Is it on tobacco, the produce of his own fields?Is it on sugar, the juice of his own maplegroves ? Is it on wine which he never tastes ?Is it on books which he cannot read ; or onpostage of letters he cannot write ? Or is it onspirits distilled from his own grain ? But thisis not to the purpose, it was money that theyhad a right to dispose of themselves if they had• See letters of Garaillus.302 THE BUBBLESthought proper to do so, and must so far bewhiskered the reTenue c^ the whole public.These resolutions imposed no taxes, theymerely applied towards the discharge of salariesof the citA offices of the government, certainmonies already accumulated under existinglaws, in the hands of the treasury, to enablethe executive to carry on the government. Thatit was applied without their consent to thispurpose, is true, noi because th did not consentto vote supplies (and it is most material toofasenre this distinction), but because they hadrefused to discharge amy of their duties as anossemMyj or im amy wumuer to co-operate withthe other branches ; and had themselves by thissuicidal act suspended the constitution andthrown the whole country into anarchy andconfusion. It was a case fully within the limitationprescribed by Burke :For my part," says that great man, " Ilook upon the rights stated in that act exactlyin the manner in which I viewed them onits very first proposition, and which I haveoften taken the liberty, with great humility,to lay before you. I look, I say, on theimperial rights of Great Britain, and theprivileges which the colonists ought to enjoyOF CANADA. 303under these rights, to be just the most reconcilablethings in the world. The parliament ofGreat Britain sits at the head of her extensiveempire in two capacities ; one as the locallegislature of this island, providing for allthings at home, immediately, and by no otherinstrument than the executive power. Theother, and I think her nobler capacity, is whatI call her imperial character ; in which, as fromthe throne of heaven, she superintends all theseveral inferior legislatures, and guides andcontrols them all without annihilating any. Asall these provincial legislatures are only co-ordinateto each other, they ought all to be subordinateto her ; else they can neither preservemutual peace, nor hope for mutual justice, noreffectually afford mutual assistance. It is necessaryto coerce the negligent, to restrain the violent,and to aid the weak and deficient, by theover-ruling plenitude of her power. But inorder to enable Parliament to answer all theseends of provident and beneficent superintendence,her powers must be boundless. The gentlemenwho think the powers of Parliamentlimited, may please themselves to talk of requisitions.But suppose the requisitions are notobeyed? What! shall there be no reserved304 THE BUBBLESpower in the empire to supply a deficiencywhich may weaken, divide, and dissipate thewhole ?** This is what I meant when I have said, atvarious times, that I consider the power of taxingin Parlement as an instrument of empire,and not as a means of supply."Such, sir, is my idea of the condition ofthe British empire, as distinguished ftsifm theconstitution of Britain ; and on thes groundsI think subordination and liberty may be sufficientlyreconciled through the whole; whetherto serve a refining specialist or a factious demagogue,I know not ; but enough surely for theease and happiness of man''But, although the right of Parliament to interfere,and its intention to do so, were thusasserted, there was still so strong a repugnancefelt by Government to exercise the power, thatthey desired Lord Gosport to call the assemblytogether again, and give those misguided menanother opportunity of reconsidering their conduct.They met as summoned, but again refusedall supplies which had now been withheldfor five years, and again declined to exerciseany legislative functions. There was now nopower to make new laws, no means of payingOF Canada. 305those who administered the existing ones, noappropriation for the public service in any department; schools were neglected, roads unrepaired,bridges dilapidated, jails unprovidedfor, temporary laws expired or expiring, andconfusion and disorganization every where;and yet we are gravely told Parliament oughtnot to have interfered ! that it was one of thedearest and most sacred rights of the coloniststo produce this extraordinary state of things,and that they ought not to be interrupted in theenjoyment of what had cost them so much timeand trouble to bring about.If this opinion were founded on conscientiousscruples, it would deserve our respect ; but itis the liberality of accomplices; and theymay well be generous who replenish their coffersby plunder. We must not be surprisedtherefore to find among those who invest theCanadians with this novel power, men whooffer to mercenaries the pillage of the church,and who, loaded with the spoils of vestedrights, which they have violently torn fromtheir lawful owners, kindly bestow this stolenone upon comrades engaged in the same unholycause as themselves. They are accomplishedand dextrous men, and knowing theX306 THE BUBBLESnumerous covers of law, resort to its shelter,and boldly call upon the real owners to makeout their case, and prove their property. It isdifficult to decide whether the amiable advocatesof this intelligible doctrine are best entitledto our pity or our contempt.Those persons who had always espousedtheir cause in England, seem to have fully penetratedtheir object. " I do not marvel at it,"said my Lord Brougham ; " to me it is nosurprise — / expected it'' Men of sanguinetemperament are apt to expect confidentlywhat they desire ardently. That he wishedthem to be independent, he made no secret.Whatever we may think of his lordship, as astatesman for entertaining such a patrioticwish, we cannot but admire the unflinchingfriendship that induced him, through goodreport and evil report, to adhere to the causehe had determined to advocate. That theymight not feel discouraged by partial reverses,he held out the language of prcnnise to themthat the day was not far distant when they couldhope to realise the object of their wishes* Bedeprecated our thinking too harshly of themfor their vain attempt. " Where," he continued,** in what country— from what people did theyOF CANADA. 307learn the lesson ? of whom but ourselves, theEnglish people ? We it is that have set theexample to our American brethren ; let us bewarehow we blame them too harshly for forlowing it." Not content with interceding fortheir pardon, he solicited, as a boon for them,what they had failed in an attempt to seize asplunder. ^^ I hold these colonies," he said;** as worth nothing ; the only interest we havein the matter concerns the manner in which ^separation, sooner or later inevitable, shall takeplace. Is it not, then, full time we shouldmake up our minds to a separation so beneficialto all parties. These, my lords, are not opinionsto which I have lately come; they are thegrowth of many a long year, and the fruit ofmuch attention given to the subject." Theeffect of this language upon the loyal populartion of the provinces it is not easy to conceive*At no time could such a doctrine be beardwith indifference, but during a period of unusualexcitement it was too mischievous not tdawaken a general indignation. On the mindof the Americans if has had a powerful effectin speculating upon the result of an activesympathy on their part.Disaffection having now succeeded in proxy308 THE BUBBLESduring anarchy and bloodshed, assumed theshape of insurrection, the natural result of somany years of agitation. The tragical eventsof this sad revolt are too recent and too impressiveto be forgotten, and the recital wouldbe a« painful as it is unnecessary. Anxious,however, as I am not to dwell on the mournfulpicture which it presents, justice requires thatI should pause and pay the tribute of my respectto the pious, amiable, and loyal Catholic clergyof Canada. They have preserved a large portionof their flock from contamination, and we aremainly indebted to their strenuous exertionsthat the rebellion has not been more generaland more successful. They have learned frompainful experience, what ecclesiastics have everfound under similar circumstances, that treasonalways calls in infidelity to its aid ; that thereis a natural alliance between the assailants ofthe throne and the altar, and that they who refuseto render tribute to Caesar are seldomknown to preserve, for any length of time,** the fear of God before their eyes." Thehistory of this Canadian revolt is filled withinstruction to the people of England. It teachesthem the just value of the patriotism of thosewho are the intemperate advocates of extremeOF CANADA. 309opinions ; it shows that courage in debate maysometimes evaporate in the field, and thatthose who lead others rashly into danger arenot unfrequently the first to desert them baselyin the hour of need. It exhibits in bold reliefthe disastrous effects of incessant agitation, anddemonstrates that the natural result of continuedconcession to popular clamour is togradually weaken the powers of government,until society resolves itself into its originalelements. These truths are too distinctlymarked to require to be retouched. He whoruns may read, but he that would carry awaythe moral must pause and consider. It iswritten in the blood and suffering of the colonists,and prudence suggests the propriety oftheir availing themselves of the painful experienceof others, instead of purchasing it bythe severe and painful process of personal experience.The successful advocacy here of similaropinions must necessarily produce the likeresults, aggravated by the increased power otnumbers, and the greater value of the plunder.I have seen enough of England to admire it,of its institutions to respect it, of the characterof its people to love it, and of the blessingsconferred byjts limited monarchy, to know310 TH£ BUBBLEShow to estimate the enviable lot of those whohave the good fortune to inhabit it.O fortunatus nimium tm si bona corinthshould feel indeed that kindness could awakenno emotion, and hospitality no gratitude, if,after having received as an obscure provincialauthor, the most flattering indulgence, a£( a colonist,the most hearty welcome, and a strangerthe most considerate attentions, I did not expresswarmly what I feel deeply. My knowledgeof its constitution preceded that of itspeople ; and if my studies have led me to admireits theory, personal observation of itepractical effect has confirmed and increasedthat favourable impression. It is a noble andadmirable structure ! Est perpetua.Before 1 quit the subject of this rebellionI must allude to the mitigating circumstancesthat attended it. Excited by every stimulantthat parliamentary declamation could apply,or British sympathy suggest, or American republicanismoffer— encouraged at home, aidedfrom abroad, and nowhere opposed or threatened,is it to be wondered at that the prospectof plunder and impunity seduced these misguidedpeople from their allegiance, or that thecontagion should spread from Lower to UpperOF CANADA. 311Canada. When such a man as Hume irasknown to be a supporter of the government,can we wonder if ignorant men, three thousandmiles off, supposed he was expressing the sentimentsof that government, when he said,'* my wish would be to set the Canadass and thewhole of British North America, free to governthemselves, as the United States do, by theirown representatives, and to cultivate a gOodconnection with the mother country for theirmutual interest. Until that takes place, neitherthe Canadass nor Great Britain will derivethose advantages which they ought to have froma different and more economical managementof their resources." Or when confidentiallycommunicating to his friend, Mckenzie, a mandevoted to revolutionary doctrines, he boldlyasserted, " Your triumphant election on thelath, and ejection from the assembly on the17th, must hasten that crisis which is fiatst approachingin the affairs of the Canadass, andwhich will terminate in freedom and independencefrom the baneful domination of the mothercountry, and the tyrannical conduct of asmall and despicable faction in the colony."The proceedings between 1 772and 1782, in America, ought not to be THE BUBBLESgotten, and to the honour of the Americans,and for the interests of the civilized world, lettheir conduct and their result be ever in view''could they mistake the import of the termbaneful domination or despise the advice sojudiciously given by the representative of ametropolitan county. Knowing little of Bath,but its reputation of being the resort of wealthand fashion, was it unnatural for them to inferthat the member for that town spoke the sentimentsof a powerful and influential class,when he said, " One resource, and one resourcealone, remains : to be a free people you mustresist the British parliament," When the workingmen's societies, patronised by practical andpowerful men, held similar language, was it agreat stretch for the credulity of thos poorpeople to believe, that accession of Canada wouldimmediately follow a demonstration of revolt.Their case is, indeed, one that commands ourpity rather than our resentment; but what shallwe say of those who went still further than theircouncillors, and pursued the wicked course ofadvising an armed resistance to the government,of exciting them to sedition, and evokingthe evil passions of the human heart, to insurrectionand slaughter. The receiver is moreOF CANADA. 313Criminal than the thief, and the seducer morevile than his victim. The exile and the prisoner,the houseless settler, and his starvingsuffering family, the smouldering villages, thespirits of the dead, and the voice of the dying,call aloud for vengeance on the authors of allthese accumulated aggravated evils. He whoknew the facility of man to fall into error, andthe miseries entailed upon us by guilt, has mercifullytaught us to offer our daily prayer thatwe may not be led into temptation ; and forthe credit of our common nature, be it spoken,so few have been the instances where menhave incited to crime, when they were not toprofit by the offence, that no provision is madeagainst the sin of holding out temptation toothers. It was not to be supposed that wickednesscould exist without reward, or crime withoutan object. Unfortunate victims of feilsefriends, deluded objects of cold unfeeling advice,you deserved the lenity that has beenextended to you ; it would have been unfair,indeed, to have visited upon you, the mere instrumentsof others, the punishment due to theauthors of your folly and your guilt.Such were the feelings entertained throughoutthe adjoining colonies, but. here a different THE BUBBLESgage was hdd. They were pitied, not becausethey were misguided, but because they were unsuccessful.Indignation was expressed, in nomeasured terms, not against the tempter or thetempted, but the gallant and loyal militia whosuppressed them, and their vigilant, able, andintelligent governor. My Lord Brougham wasloud and vehement in his invectives, denouncingthese brave and devoted men ^ as an undisciplinedand insubordinate rabble," and the presidinggenius, whose penetration discovered, andwhose foresight provided the means of crushingthis rebellion, as a person planting snares, withthe base purpose of catching the unwary. Thathis lordship, the advocate and eulogist of arepublic, should grieve over the vain attemptof others to establish it in Canada, is not to bewondered at ; but that he whose physical courageno man doubts, and whose moral courageis so great as to enable him to stand forth boldly,unaided and alone, among his peers, the opponentand assailant of all parties, could feelno sympathy for those brave men who, in thedeadly conflict of war, rushed forth amid thestorms of their inclement winter, in supportof their laws, their religion, and their homes;prepared to conquer or to die in their defence,OF Canada. 315that he could find no terms of approbation, nofigures of speech, no not on word of praise, forthose heroic men ; that he could see nothingpeculiar in their case, who had to contend withviolators of law within, and violators of treatieswithout the province, and scorn and contumelyhere, and who, braving privation, the climate,and the enemy, rallied round the standardof their country with an enthusiasm, of whichhistory can scarcely find a parallel — thathe could discern no worth in loyalty, andno merit in those " who fear God and honourthe king'' is, indeed, a fruitful source ofastonishment. How is it? Is this a characteristicof democracy? Does it indeedharden the heart and deaden all the glowing-impulsesof our nature ; or is it that philosophyis cold and speculative, regulating the passions,and subduing and chastening the imagination.Or may it be that unused to panegyric, hislordship feels and knows his power of sarcasm,and prefers the path in which he excells allcontemporaries, to one in which unequal powersforbid the hope of pre-eminence. Whatever itmay be, for his own sake, for the sake of thenoble house of which he is a member, and ofthe country of which his eloquence is at once316 THE BUBBLESthe pride and the boast, it is deeply to be deploredthat h^ should have adopted a coursethat, unfortunately, confers but little honouron the qualities of his head ; and, it is to befeared, still less on the feelings of his heart.This rebellion had scarcely been put down,when my Lord Durham was appointed, withextraordinary powers, to complete the pacification.On this part of the history of Canada itis needless to dwell. It has proved a failure :not from a deficiency of power, but from a deficiencyof conduct in the dictator. Instead ofassembling around him a council of the mostinfluential and best-informed men in the colony,according to the evident spirit of the act and hisinstructions, he thought proper to appoint tothat responsible situation, officers attached tohis household, or perfect strangers, with the magnanimousview, as he informs us, of assumingthe whole responsibility of his own measures.As might naturally be expected, owing to hishaving neglected to obtain the best professionaladvice at his command in the colony, andacting on his own view of the case, his first stepwas illegal. Now, by assuming the wholeresponsibility, we were given to understandthat, having full confidence in his own CANADA. 317ment as well as his own integrity, he was disposedto monopolize the whole honour of success,at the hazard of incurring the wholecensure of failure. The praise or the blamewas to be exclusively his own. It was thedecision of a confident and vain man. Hisnext act was indicative of a weak and petulantmind. Instead of being willing to bear thewhole responsibility, as he announced, heshewed that he was unwilling or unable tobear any. As soon as Parliament felt itselfcalled upon to pronounce the illegality of hismeasures, and stepped in to rescue him fromthe consequences of his precipitate conduct, herelinquished his government, not in the usualand proper form, by tendering his resignation,and waiting until his successor should be appointed,but by instantly leaving the colony.It is difficult to conceive of a public servantcommitting an offence more serious in its nature,and more pernicious in its example than thusabandoning his post without leave ; and it wasincumbent on the government to have vindicatedthe honour of the Crown, by ordering the captainof the Inconstant to return immediately toQuebec with his lordship, and to deliver to himwithin his government, the acceptance of his318 THE BUBBLES.resignation. It would have taught the misguidedpeople of Canadass to respect, if theycould not love, the even-handed justice thatcould visit with punishment the disobedience ofa governor-general as well as that of a peasant ;and they would have seen in the return of thone and the exile of the other, a practical illustrationof the only equality that honest andsensible men ever desire to behold — " the equalityof all in the eye of the law." The moraleffect of such a measure, combining vigour withimpartiality would have gone far towards tranquillizingCanada, and would have enabled hislordship, when he next addressed the people ofEngland, to have pointed to it as a proof thathis mission, however it might have affectedhimself, had terminated in a manner that wasuseful to the colony and honourable to thegovernment.Of the ill-advised and ill-timed manifestoit is unnecessary for me to speak ; its effectsare but too visible in a new revolt, to whichits unguarded language gave too much encouragement.Nor shall 1 enter upon the seriouscharges he has brought against that augustbody, of which he has the honour to be a member,of legislating, where Canada is concerned.OF CANADA. 319^'sin ignorance and indifference." To shake theconfidence of the colonists in the justice andintegrity of that high tribunal, to which theyhave to look as a last resource, was indeed unkindto them, unworthy of himself, and injuriousto the honour of the house he has assailed.He who advocates democratic institutions willsoon find the effect of his theory influencinghis own conduct, and though he may commencein the assertion of principles, he is aptto end in the expression of feeling. The naturaltendency of such opinions is to level alldistinctions. Although we have great causetherefore for regret, we have none for surprise,in this attempt to measure his noble colleaguesby so humble a standard. I am willing, however,to do his lordship the justice to believe,that when the irritation that caused this ebullitionof feeling shall subside, he will himselfregret, as deeply as every right-thinking mannow does, that he should have judged thatassembly in temper and pique ; and that hewill feel he has afforded some room for ill-natureto suggest, that although he had a right,if he thought proper, in the exercise of a laudablediffidence, to have appropriated thoseattributes to himself, he was not justified in320 TU£ BUBBLESextending an indiscriminate application of themto others. That many of the measures heproposed for the benefit of Canada were good,it would be uncharitable to doubt ; but as noneof them have been matured, it would be presumptuousto say so. That others, however,were of a dangerous nature, we have reason toknow. The evils to be reaped from this missionhave not yet ripened for us to gather ; butthe seed is sown, and it is to be feared takenroot too extensively. What could be more injudiciousthan to send to the contented andhappy colonies of Nova Scotia and NewBrunswick, and ask for deputies, to listen tocrude and undigested schemes for their futuregovernment, or to give their own visionaryplans in exchange for his ? What more cruelthan to unsettle men's minds as to the form oftheir government, and make the stability oftheir institutions a matter of doubt ? Whatmore pernicious than to open a political bazaarat Quebec for the collection and exhibition ofimaginary grievances? In the Lower Provinceswe are contented and happy. We needno reforms but what we can effect ourselves ;but we are alarmed at changes which we neverasked, and do not require. The federativeOF CANADA. 321union proposed by his lordship has opened awide field for speculation, directed men'sminds to theoretical change, afforded a themefor restless young demagogues to agitate upon,and led us to believe that our constitution isin danger of being subverted. Most peoplethink, and all reflecting men knovi^, that itwould ripen the colonies into premature independencein less than ten years ; and who, Iwould ask, that is attached to the mothercountry, and desirous to live under a monarchicalform of government, can contemplate ascheme pregnant with so much danger, withoutfeelings of dismay ? Who would continue tolive in New Brunswick, if at every disturbancein Canada, the governor-general is to proposeto new model their form of government ? Whowould consent that that united and loyal colonyshould have its peace and happiness jeopardizedby any union with the disaffected andtroublesome French Canadians, or will approveof the political quackery that wouldcompel Nova Scotia to swallow a nauseousmedicine, for the purpose of effecting a cure inCanada? The danger arising from such visionaryschemes as have lately been unfoldedto the colonies, is passed for the present, and IY322 THE BUBBLESheartily rejoice that it is, but it is to be hopedthat powers co-extensive with the Lower Provinces,may never again be entrusted to anyman. In this country there is a general andvery natural repugnance manifested to give upthe bodies of deceased friends for experimentsfor the benefit of science. It is difficult toimagine how so sensitive a nation could consentthat their colonists should be consideredof less value, and be delivered alive into thehands of the operator, for the advancement ofpolitics.In Paris, I heard with horror that a lecturerhad illustrated his theory by applying his dissectingknife to the limbs of a living animal. Ishuddered at the recital of such atrocious cruelty;but little did I dream that, at that verytime, a kind and merciful Providence was graciouslyaverting a similar fate from our ownspecies on the other side of the water.All British America has been agitated duringthe past summer, by substantial fears, ormocked by unreal hopes, and ambition hasnow reached where sedition failed to penetrate.The absurd and impracticable scheme of colonialrepresentation in Parliament, althoughdisgusting, from its rank properties, to CANADA. 323cate palates was well suited to the rapaciousappetites of provincial sycophants. The baitwas well selected, and soon attracted the longingregard of a shoal of political sharks. Theself-denying tenets of the sour sectarian havenot been proof against the temptation. Hisnostrils have been too powerful for his conscience,and scenting the strong odour of thissavoury appendage from afar, he has hurried tothe surface to regale himself with its flavour.The canting hypocrite has offered his aspirationsfor the conversion of Parliament to suchliberal views ; and the profligate demagogue ofthe village has expressed a hope, that a deficiencyof morals may be compensated by anabundance of zeal. They have been lulled tosleep by its soporific effect, and have dreamedof this ladder, as did Jacob of old, and of theascent it offered to high places. The woolsackand the ermine — the treasury and the peerageappear within their grasp, and they invokeblessings on the man who promises so much,and who hints at his power to do even more.If I did not feel too indignant at all this, I toomight weep over the scene of folly and of weakness,and would mingle my tears of sorrow withthose that pride has shed, and blot out all traceof it for ever.The adTocatfeof the ballot box and extendedfioflrrage k not the man to govern a cokmy.While yoa haire been speculative upon thetheory we hare been watching the experiment.When the lower orders talk oi these thugs, weknow what they mean ; their language is intelligible,and their object not to be mistaken ;bat when a nobleman advocates democraticinstitutions, we give him full credit for thebenevolence of his intentions, but we doubtthe sanity of his mind. Keep such men athome, where there is so much of rank, intelligence,and wealth to counterbalance them. Herethey serve to amuse and gratify agitators, andmake useful chairmen of popular assemblies, bypreserving a propriety of conduct and a decencyof language, where violence and outrage mightotherwise prevail. But send them not amongus, where their rank dazzles, their patronageallures, and their principles seduce the ignorantand unwary. If we trespass upon your rightsof sovereignty, repress us ; but while you maintainyour own privileges, respect the inviolabilityof ours. When we ask in the LowerProvinces for a federative union, it will be timeenough to discuss its propriety; but in themean time spare us the infliction of what to usOF CANADA, 325is SO incomprehensible and so repugnant — aradical dictator and a democratic despot.I have already far exceeded the limits I baddesigned to conBne myself to, and must, therefore,draw to a close. 1 have now shown you,that after the conquest of Canada, that countrywas governed by English laws ; that the royalproclamation invited British subjects to removethere ; and promised them the protection andenjoyment of those laws ; and that in violationof that promise, in order to conciliate theFrench,their legal code was substituted for our own :that an injudicious division of the provincewas made, whereby the French were separatedfrom the great body of English subjects, inconsequenceof which Canada became a Gallicand not a British colony. That they have beenkept a distinctive people by those means, andby permitting the language of the country andthe recording language of their parliament tobe French ; that they have always had an overwhelmingmajority of members of their ownorigin in the legislature, who have been distinguishedby an anti-commercial and anti-Britishfeeling; that this feeling has been graduallygrowing with the growth of the country, untilthey were in a condition to dictate terms to THE BUBBLESvehement; that this feeling was manifested by themanner in which they have constantly resistedlocal assessments, and made conunerce to bearevery provincial expenditure-in the way theyneutralized the electoral privileges of the votersof British origin, — in the continuance of theoppressive tenure of the feudal law, — in taxingemigrants from the mother country, and themonly, — in their attempts to wrest the crownland from government, — in their attack on theLand Company, and the introduction of settlersby them, — in their opposition to a systemof registry, — in their mode of temporary legislation,— in their refusal to vote supplies, andin the whole tenour of their debates and votes.I have shown you that the policy of everygovernment, whether Tory or Whig, has beenconciliatory (a fatal policy, 1 admit, and onethat naturally admits and invites demands),and that every reasonable change required (withmany very unreasonable ones) has been concededto them ; that they are a people exemptfrom taxes, in possession of their own laws,language, and religion, and of every blessingcivil, political, and religious; in short, thatCanada is the most favoured colony of GreatBritain, and that the demands they now makeare inconsistent with colonial dependence.OF CANADA. 327This statement 1 offer in refutation of myLord Durham's assertion of misgovernment,used in its invidious sense, or as explained at themeeting at Carlton Hill, that they are " ouroppressed and enslaved brethren ;" and in proofof my own position that the evils now existingare the natural consequences of the Quebec andconstitutional acts, had not the result of tyrannyand oppression. The review which I have justconcluded, indicates the remedy too plainly torender it at all necessary for me to offer a prescription.If, however, you can entertain anydoubt upon the subject, you will at least besatisfied that the cure is not to be effected byconcession. Of this all men, I think, must nowbe convinced. Since the termination of thelate abortive attempt at colonial government,one of my Lord Durham's official coadjutorshas publicly proclaimed that all his preconceivedopinions on the subject of Canada wereerroneous. This was a worJi of supererogation.He might have spared himself the trouble ofthe announcement, and the pain of a recantation.All those who were at the trouble of inquiringinto the nature of his views were alreadyconvinced of his error. His lordship also hasinformed the good people of Davenport that he■■poRiBt domes od the oilierBide of tke vater . Had hk mission been merelydeigned for his ova iostnictioii, the public,while they admittEd the neceaoty that existedSat it, would hare appended his seal in sucha osefal and necessary parent : bat as it wasundertaken at no inconsiderate expense to thenation, they hare reason to legreC that this re-marfcaUe illumination was €lefened until themoment oi his return. What the extent ofthese reemt lerelaticMis may be, we are notinformed, but we may be permitted to hopethat he has learned this important truth, thathe who undertakes the benevolent office ofcalming the excited passions of others, shouldfirst learn to gotten his own. That there areserious difficulties in the way of the pacificationof Canada there can be no doubt, but greaterdifficulties have been overcome by Van Am-burgh,who exhibits every night for the edificationof government and the amusement ofCockneys, animals, whose natures are more ferocious,and antipathies more powerful thanthose of the English and French, living in thesame cage in the utmost harmony ; and whatis still more important, enjoying the most unrestrainedfreedom of action within their CANADA. 329signed limits, and yet making no resistance tothe salutary controul of an external power.Justum et menaces propositi virumNon civium ardor brava jubentium^Non vultus instants tyrannyMente quatit solids.But let me not be misunderstood by the natureof this allusion. It must not be supposedthat the assembly, because they have done somuch that is objectionable, were always wrongin what they required, or the legislative council,because it is such a loyal and respectablebody, were always right in what they refused.This was far from being the case. Many of thedemands of the Canadians were reasonable andjust, and many of the changes they desired,were for the benefit of the country ; but, unfortunately,the violence of their language, andthe unconstitutional and arbitrary acts to whichthey resorted, in the attainment of those objects,left no room to doubt that they were morebent upon having a grievance than seeking redress; and that they would rather have provokeda refusal than obtained a concession.On the other hand, the council, like most similarbodies, has always contained some men whowere selEsh in disposition and ultra in opinions.330 THE BUBBLESand whose conduct was calculated to irritatethe opposite party, and to do more mischiefthan if they had openly espoused their causeand adopted their principles. But whether theassembly was right or wrong m what it required,or the council justified or not in itsopposition, the former has succeeded in all itsdemands.The subject has now assumed a new aspect.Pretensions have been put forth that involvethe question of independence, and Great Britainmust now decide whether she is to i^ainthe province or not. It is a crisis in the historyof this country which other nations regardwith intense interest. The fate of Canada willdetermine that of all the other colonies. Theretreat of the soldiers will invite the incursionsof the barbarians, and the withdrawal of thelegions, like those of Rome, from the distantparts of the empire, will show that England,*As a colonist it would be unpardonable in me not to acknowledgein adequate terms the obligation we are under to the chairmanof the finance committee for the important discoveries he hasrecently made in colonial matters. Other men may rival him inindustry, but for masterly and statesman-like views he is without acompetitor. It is singular that the egregious error Great Britainhas heretofore committed in considering her foreign possessions ofgreat value should never have been detected before, and that ourforefathers should have had so little knowledge of political economyCANADA. 331conscious of her present weakness and pastglories, is contracting her limits and concentratingher energies, to meet, as becomes herroy as to return as sources of wealth, and power, what it noW appearshave always been productive of a fearful annual loss. Itwould seem that the surface of Great Britain, instead of being toosmall for her population, is too extensive, and that, instead of carryingon her immense colonial trade herself, she might be sparedthe trouble by transforming the colonists into foreigners, and permittingothers to do that drudgery for her. It is tait that thesame error has been committed by the owners of timber-trees, inpermitting the absurd arrangement of nature, with respect to thelimbs to continue unreformed, that they would be much more vigorousif the branches, with their prodigious expenditure on theleaves, were all lopped off, (for it is a well-known fact that thetrunk supplies the branches with sap, and not the branches thtrunk,) and that the stem would be larger, stronger, and betterwithout such useless and expensive appendages. Truly this is theage of wonders, but this discovery of the worthy chairman is themost wonderful one of modern times, although, strange to say, itis by no means appreciated as it deserves to be It would be unfair,as well as ungenerous, to detract from his merit, by sayingthat he borrowed the idea from agriculture but it must be admittedthat there is a wonderful coincidence between his principleand that of the ditcher. A drain, it is weil known, is lengthenedby being cut at both ends. Now he appears to have applied thisprinciple to England, and infers most justly that the more she isreduced in size, the greater will be her circumference. Havingproved this most satisfactorily, he advances some most important,but startling propositions, namely, that the smaller your property,the less you have to defend; the fewer markets you can command,the more will be open to you ; the more dependant you are uponforeigners for sale or supply, the more certain you are^ofnever wanting either; and others of a similar nature. His accuracyin figures is truly astonishing, and is only to be equalled bythe truth of the principles they evolve. Then comes the importantquestion, ** If England has grown so great, so rich, and so powersTHE BUBBLES OF CANADA.character, the destiny that awaits all humangreatness.ful, in spite of all these expensive possessions, how much greater,richer, and more powerful would she be without them." Everytrue lover of his country must rejoice to see that its real interestsare so well understood, and so ably supported** Nil desperanduni,auspice Teucro,"THE END.Printed bj J. L. Cox and Sons, 75, Great Qntca Street,Lincoln*i-Tno Field.