POEMS.ALNWICK CASTLE,WITH OTHERPOEMSNew YORK:GEORGE DEARBORN, PUBLISHER,No. 38 GOLD STREET.MD Cc XXXVI.LIBRARYUNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIADAVIS[Entered according to the Act of Congress of the United States of America, December9, 1835, by George Dearborn, in the Clerk's Office of the Southern District ofNew-york.]Snatched & ADAMS,PRINTERS,38 Gold Street.POEMS.ALNWICK CASTLE. 1HOME of the Percy's high-born race,Home of their beautiful and brave,Alike their birth and burial place,Their cradle, and their grave !Still sternly o'er the castle gateTheir house's Lion stands in state,As in his proud departed hours ;And warriors frown in stone on high,And feudal banners "flout the sky"Above his princely towers.10 ALNWICK CASTLE.A gentle hill its side inclines,Lovely in England's fadeless green,To meet the quiet stream which windsThrough this romantic sceneAs silently and sweetly still,As when, at evening, on that hill,While summer's wind blew soft and low,Seated by gallant Hotspur's side,His Katherine was a happy bride,A thousand years ago.Gaze on the Abbey's ruined pile :Does not the succouring Ivy, keepingHer watch around it, seem to smile,As o'er a loved one sleeping ?One solitary turret grayStill tells, in melancholy glory,The legend of the Cheviot day,The Percy's proudest border story.That day its roof was triumph's arch ;Then rang, from aisle to pictured dome,The light step of the soldier's march,The music of the trump and drum ;ALNWICK CASTLE. 11And babe, and sire, the old, the young,And the monk's hymn, and minstrel's song,And woman's pure kiss, sweet and long,Welcomed her warrior home./Wild roses by the Abbey towersAre gay in their young bud and bloom :They were born of a race of funeral flowersThat garlanded, in long-gone hours,A Templar's knightly tomb.He died, the sword in his mailed hand,On the holiest spot of the Blessed Land,Where the Cross was damped with his dying breath ;When blood ran free as festal wine,And the sainted air of PalestineWas thick with the darts of deathsWise with the lore of centuries,What tales, if there be " tongues in trees,"Those giant oaks could tell,Of beings born and buried here ;Tales of the peasant and the peer,Tales of the bridal and the bier,12 ALNWICK CASTLE.The welcome and farewell,Since on their boughs the startled birdFirst, in her twilight slumbers, heardThe Norman's curfew-bell.I wandered through the lofty hallsTrod by the Percy of old fame,And traced upon the chapel wallsEach high, heroic name,From him 2 who once his standard setWhere now, o'er mosque and minaret,Glitter the Sultan's crescent moons ;To him who, when a younger son, 3Fought for King George at Lexington,A Major of Dragoons.That last half stanza it has dashedFrom my warm lip the sparkling cup ;The light that o'er my eye-beam flashed,The power that bore my spirit upAbove this bank-note world is gone ;And Fenwick's but a market town,ALNWICK CASTLE. 13And this, alas ! its market day,And beasts and borderers throng the way ;Oxen, and bleating lambs in lots,Northumbrian boors, and plaided Scots,Men in the coal and cattle line ;From Teviot's bard and hero land,From royal Berwick's beach of sand,From Woollen, Worketh, Hexham, andNewcastle-upon-Tyne,These are not the romantic timesSo beautiful in Spenser's rhymes,So dazzling to the dreaming boy :Ours are the days of fact, not fable,Of Knights, but not of the Round Table,Of Bailie Jarvis, not Rob Roy:'Tis what " our President," Munro,Has called " the era of good feeling : "The Highlander, the bitterest foeTo modern laws, has felt their blow,Consented to be taxed, and vote,And put on pantaloons and coat, )And leave off cattle-stealing :14 ALNWICK CASTLE.Lord Stafford mines for coal and salt,The Duke of Norfolk deals in malt,The Douglas in red herrings ;And noble name, and cultured land,Palace, and park, and vassal bandAre powerless to the notes of handOf Rothschild, or the Bearings.The age of bargaining, said Burke,Has come : to-day the turbaned Turk,(Sleep, Richard of the lion heart !Sleep on, nor from your garments start,)Is England's friend and fast ally;The Moslem tramples on the Greek,And on the Cross and altar stone,And Christendom looks tamely on,And hears the Christian maiden shriek,And sees the Christian father die ;And not a sabre blow is givenFor Greece and fame, for faith and heaven,By Europe's craven chivalry.ALNWICK CASTLE. 15You'll ask if yet the Percy livesIn the armed pomp of feudal state ?The present representativesOf Hotspur and his " gentle Kate,"Are some half-dozen serving men,In the drab coat of William Penn ;A chambermaid, whose lip and eye,And cheek, and brown hair, bright and curling,Spoke nature's [aristocracy;And one, half groom half seneschal,Who bowed me through court, bower, and hall,From donjon-keep to turret wall,For ten-and-sixpence sterling.MARCO BOZZARISJAT midnight, in his guarded tent,The Turk was dreaming of the hourWhen Greece, her knee in suppliance bent,Should tremble at his power :In dreams, through camp and court, he boreThe trophies of a conqueror ;In dreams his song of triumph heard ;Then wore his monarch's signet ring :Then pressed that monarch's throne, a king ;As wild his thoughts, and gay of wing,As Eden's garden bird.At midnight, in the forest shades,Bozzaris ranged his Suite band,True as the steel of their tried blades,Heroes in heart and hand.MARCO Buzzards. 17There had the Persian's thousands stood,There had the glad earth drunk their bloodOn old Plataea's day ;And now there breathed that haunted airThe sons of sires who conquered there,With arm to strike, and soul to dare,As quick, as far as they.An hour passed on the Turk awoke ;That bright dream was his last ;He woke to hear his sentries shriek,"To arms ! they come ! the Greek! the Greek!"He woke to die midst flame, and smoke,And shout, and groan, and sabre stroke,And death shots falling thick and fastAs lightnings from the mountain cloud ;And heard, with voice as trumpet loud,Bozzaris cheer his band :Strike till the last armed foe expires ;Strike for your altars and your fires ;Strike for the green graves of your sires ;God and your native land ! "18 MARCO Buzzards.They fought like brave men, long and well;They piled that ground with Moslem slain ;They conquered but Bozzaris fell,Bleeding at every vein.His few surviving comrades sawHis smile when rang their proud hurrah,And the red field was won ;Then saw in death his eyelids closeCalmly, as to a night's repose,Like flowers at set of sun.4t, *Come to the bridal chamber, Death !Come to the mother's, when she feels,For the first time, her first-born's breath ;Come when the blessed sealsThat close the pestilence are broke,And crowded cities wail its stroke ;Come in consumption's ghastly form,The earthquake shock, the ocean storm ;Come when the heart beats high and warm,With banquet-song, and dance, and wine ;MARCO Buzzards. 19And thou art terrible the tear,The groan, the knell, the pall, the bier ;And all we know, or dream, or fearOf agony, are thine.But to the hero, when his swordHas won the battle for the free,Thy voice sounds like a prophet's word ;And in its hollow tones are heardThe thanks of millions yet to be.Come, when his task of fame is wroughtCome, with her laurel-leaf, blood-boughtCome in her crowning hour and thenThy sunken eye's unearthly lightTo him is welcome as the sightOf sky and stars to prisoned men :Thy grasp is welcome as the handOf brother in a foreign land ;Thy summons welcome as the cryThat told the Indian isles were nigh20 MARCO Buzzards.To the world-seeking Genoese,When the land wind, from woods of palm,And orange groves, and fields of balm,Blew o'er the Hadrian seas.Bozzaris ! with the storied braveGreece nurtured in her glory's time,Rest thee there is no prouder grave,Even in her own proud clime.She wore no funeral weeds for thee,Nor bade the dark hearse wave its plume,Like torn branch from death's leafless tree,In sorrow's pomp and pageantry,The heartless luxury of the tomb :But she remembers thee as oneLong loved, and for a season gone ;For thee her poet's lyre is wreathed,Her marble wrought, her music breathed ;For thee she rings the birth-day bells ;Of thee her babes' first lisping tells :For thine her evening prayer is saidAt palace couch, and cottage bed ;MARCO Buzzards. 21Her soldier, closing with the foe,Gives for thy sake a deadlier blow ;His plighted maiden, when she fearsFor him, the joy of her young years,Thinks of thy fate, and checks her tears :And she, the mother of thy boys,Though in her eye and faded cheekIs read the grief she will not speak,The memory of her buried joys,And even she who gave thee birth,Will, by their pilgrim-circled hearth,Talk of thy doom without a sigh :For thou art Freedom's now, and Fame's ;One of the few, the immortal names,That were not born to die.BURNS.TO A ROSE, BROUGHT FROM NEAR Galloway KIRK, INAYRSHIRE, IN THE AUTUMN OF 1822.WILD ROSE of Alloway ! my thanks :Thou 'minds me of that autumn noonWhen first we met upon " the banksAnd braes o' bonny Noon."Like thine, beneath the thorn-tree's bough,My sunny hour was glad and brief,We 've crossed the winter sea, and thouArt withered, flower and leaf.BURNS. 23And will not thy death-doom be mine,The doom of all things wrought of clay,And withered my life's leaf like thine,Wild rose of Alloway ?Not so his memory, for whose sakeMy bosom bore thee far and long,His who a humbler flower could makeImmortal as his song,The memory of Burns a nameThat calls, when brimmed her festal cup,A nation's glory, and her shame,In silent sadness up.A nation's glory be the restForgot she 's canonized his mind ;And it is joy to speak the bestWe may of human kind.24 BURNS.I 've stood beside the cottage bedWhere the Bard-peasant first drew breath ;A straw-thatched roof above his head,A straw-wrought couch beneath.And I have stood beside the pile,His monument that tells to HeavenThe homage of earth's proudest isleTo that Bard-peasant given !Bid thy thoughts hover o'er that spot,Boy-Minstrel, in thy dreaming hour ;And know, however low his lot,A Poet's pride and power.The pride that lifted Burns from earth,The power that gave a child of songAscendancy o'er rank and birth,The rich, the brave, the strong ;BURNS. 25And if despondency weigh downThy spirit's fluttering pinions then,Despair thy name is written onThe roll of common men.There have been loftier themes than his,And longer scrolls, and louder lyres,And lays lit up with Poesy'sPurer and holier fires :Yet read the names that know not death ;Few nobler ones than Burns are there ;And few have won a greener wreathThan that which binds his hair.His is that language of the heart,In which the answering heart would speak,Thought, word, that bids the warm tear start,Or the smile light the cheek ;26 BURNS.And his that music, to whose toneThe common pulse of man keeps time,In cot or castle's mirth or moan,In cold or sunny clime.And who hath heard his song, nor kneltBefore its spell with willing knee,And listened, and believed, and feltThe Poet's masteryO'er the mind's sea, in calm and storm,O'er the heart's sunshine, and its showers,O'er Passion's moments, bright and warm,O'er Reason's dark, cold hours ;On fields where brave men " die or do,"In halls where rings the banquet's mirth,Where mourners weep, where lovers woo,From throne to cottage hearth ?BURNS. 27What sweet tears dim the eyes unshed,What wild vows falter on the tongue,When " Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled,"Or " Auld Lang Syne " is sung !Pure hopes, that lift the soul above,Come with his Cotter's hymn of praise,And dreams of youth, and truth, and love,With " Logan's" banks and braes./ And when he breathes his master-layOf Alloway's witch-haunted wall,All passions in our frames of clayCome thronging at his call.Imagination's world of air,And our own world, its gloom and glee,Wit, pathos, poetry, are there,And death's sublimity.28 BURNS.And Burns though brief the race he ran,Though rough and dark the path he trod,Lived died in form and soul a Man,The image of his God.Though care, and pain, and want, and woe,With wounds that only death could heal,Tortures the poor alone can know,The proud alone can feel ;He kept his honesty and truth,His independent tongue and pen,And moved, in manhood, as in youth,Pride of his fellow men.Strong sense, deep feeling, passions strong,A hate of tyrant and of knave,A love of right, a scorn of wrong,Of coward, and of slave ;BURNS.A kind, true heart, a spirit high,That could not fear, and would not bow,Were written in his manly eye,And on his manly brow.Praise to the bard ! his words are driven,Like flower-seeds by the far winds sown,Wherever, beneath the sky of lea%, m^^jar <fc /+** #&: *The birds of fame have flown.Praise to the man ! a nation stoodBeside his coffin with wet eyes,Her brave, her beautiful, her good,As when a loved one dies.And still, as on his funeral day,Men stand his cold earth-couch around,With the mute homage that we payTo consecrated ground.30 BURNS.And consecrated ground it is,The last, the hallowed home of oneWho lives upon all memories,Though with the buried gone.Such graves as his are pilgrim-shrines,Shrines to no code or creed confinedDelphian vales, the Palestine,The Meccas of the mind. /Sages, with wisdom's garland wreathed,Crowned kings, and mitred priests of power,And warriors with their bright swords sheathed,The mightiest of the hour ;And lowlier names, whose humble homeIs lit by Fortune's dimmer star,Are there o'er wave and mountain come,From countries near and far ;BURNS. 31Pilgrims whose wandering feet have prestThe Switzer's snow, the Arab's sand,Or trod the piled leaves of the West,My own green forest-land.All ask the cottage of his birth,Gaze on the scenes he loved and sung,And gather feelings not of earthHis fields and streams among.They linger by the Noon's low trees,And pastoral With, and wooded Ayr,And round thy sepulchres, Dumfries !The Poet's toiub is there.But what to them the sculptor's art,His funeral columns, wreaths, and urns ?Wear they not graven on the heartThe name of Robert Burns ?WYOMING.Dites si la Nature n'a pas fait ce beau pays pour une Julie, pour une Claiic, ctpour un St. Preux, mais ne les y cherchez pas."ROUSSEAU.I.THOU com'st, in beauty, on my gaze at last,On Susquehanna's side, fair Wyoming!"Image of many a dream, in hours long past,When life was in its bud and blossoming,And waters, gushing from the fountain springOf pure enthusiast thought, dimmed my young eyes,As by the poet borne, on unseen wing,I breathed, in fancy, 'neath thy cloudless skies,The summer's air, and heard her echoed harmonies.WYOMING. 33II.I then but dreamed : thou art before me now,In life, a vision of the brain no more.I've stood upon the wooded mountain's brow,That beetles high thy lovely valley o'er ;And now, where winds thy river's greenest shore,Within a bower of sycamores am laid ;And winds, as soft and sweet as ever boreThe fragrance of wild flowers through sun and shade,Are singing in the trees, whose low boughs pressmy head.III.Nature hath made thee lovelier than the powerEven of Campbell's pen hath pictured: heHad woven, had he gazed one sunny hourUpon thy smiling vale, its sceneryWith more of truth, and made each rock and treeKnown like old friends, and greeted from afar :And there are tales of sad reality,In the dark legends of thy border war,With woes of deeper tint than his own Gertrude's are.34 WYOMING.IV.But where are they, the beings of the mind,The bard's creations, moulded not of clay,Hearts to strange bliss and suffering assignedYoung Gertrude, Albert, Landgrave whereare they?We need not ask. The people of to-dayAppear good, honest, quiet men enough,And hospitable too for ready pay,With manners like their roads, a little rough,And hands whose grasp is warm and welcoming,tho' tough.V.Judge Hallenbach, who keeps the toll-bridge gate,And the town records, is the Albert nowOf Wyoming : like him, in church and state,Her doric column ; and upon his browThe thin hairs, white with seventy winters' snow,Look patriarchal. Landgrave 'twere in vainTo point out here, unless in yon scare-crow,That stands full-uniformed upon the plain,To frighten flocks of crows and blackbirds from thegrain.WYOMING. 35VI.For he would look particularly drollIn his " Iberian boot" and " Spanish plume,"And be the wonder of each Christian soulAs of the birds that scare-crow and his broom.But Gertrude, in her loveliness and bloom,Hath many a model here, for Woman's eye,In court or cottage, wheresoever her homeHath a heart-spell too holy and too highTo be o'er-praised even by her worshipper Poesy.VII.There's one in the next field of sweet sixteenSinging and summoning thoughts of beauty bornIn heaven with her jacket of light green,Love-darting eyes, and tresses like the morn,"Without a shoe or stocking, hoeing corn.Whether, like Gertrude, she oft wanders there,With Shakspeare's volume in her bosom borne,I think is doubtful. Of the poet-playerThe maiden knows no more than Cobbett or Voltaire.36 WYOMING.VIII.There is a woman, widowed, gray, and old,Who tells you where the foot of Battle steptUpon their day of massacre. She toldIts tale, and pointed to the spot, and wept,Whereon her father and five brothers sleptShroudless, the bright-dreamed slumbers of thebrave,When all the land a funeral mourning kept.And there, wild laurels planted on the graveBy Nature's hand, in air their pale red blossoms wave.IX.And on the margin of yon orchard hillAre marks where time-worn battlements havebeen,And in the tall grass traces linger stillOf " arrowy frieze and wedged ravelin."Five hundred of her brave that Valley greenTrod on the morn in soldier-spirit gay;But twenty lived to tell the noon-day sceneAnd where are now the twenty ? Passed away.Has Death no triumph-hours, save on the battle-day?ON THE DEATH OFJOSEPH RODMAN DRAKE,OF New YORK, SEPT. 1820.The good die first,And they, whose hearts are dry as summer dust,Burn to the socket."WORDSWORTH.GREEN be the turf above thee,Friend of my better days !None knew thee but to love thee,Nor named thee but to praise.38 ON THE DEATH OF J. RODMAN DRAKE,Tears fell, when thou wert dying,From eyes unused to weep,And long, where thou art lying,Will tears the cold turf steep.When hearts, whose truth was proven,Like thine, are laid in earth,There should a wreath be wovenTo tell the world their worth,And I, who woke each morrowTo clasp thy hand in mine,Who shared thy joy and sorrow,Whose weal and woe were thine ;It should be mine to braid itAround thy faded brow,But I've in vain essayed it,And feel I cannot now.ON THE DEATH OF J. RODMAN DRAKE. 39While memory bids me weep thee,Nor thoughts nor words are free,The grief is fixed too deeplyThat mourns a man like thee.TWILIGHT.THERE is an evening twilight of the heart,When its wild passion-waves are lulled to rest,And the eye see's life's fairy scenes depart,As fades the day-beam in the rosy west.'Tis with a nameless feeling of regretWe gaze upon them as they melt away,And fondly would we bid them linger yet,But Hope is round us with her angel lay,Hailing afar some happier moonlight hour ;Dear are her whispers still, though lost their earlypower.TWILIGHT. 41In youth the cheek was crimsoned with her glow;Her smile was loveliest then; her matin songWas heaven's own music, and the note of woeWas all unheard her sunny bowers among.Life's little world of bliss was newly born ;We knew not, cared not, it was born to die,Flushed with the cool breeze and the dews of morn,With dancing heart we gazed on the pure sky,And mocked the passing clouds that dimmed its blue,Like our own sorrows then as fleeting and as few.And manhood felt her sway too, on the eye,Half realised, her early dreams burst bright,Her promised bower of happiness seemed nigh,Its days of joy, its vigils of delight;And though at times might lower the thunder storm,And the red lightnings threaten, still the airWas balmy with her breath, and her loved form,The rainbow of the heart, was hovering there.'Tis in life's noontide she is nearest seen,Her wreath the summer flower, her robe of summergreen.42 TWILIGHT.But though less dazzling in her twilight dress,There's more of heaven's pure beam about her now ;That angel-smile of tranquil loveliness,Which the heart worships, glowing on her brow;That smile shall brighten the dim evening starThat points our destined tomb, nor e'er departTill the faint light of life is fled afar,And hushed the last deep beating of the heart;The meteor-bearer of our parting breath,A moon-beam in the midnight cloud of death.PSALM Xxxvii.By the rivers of Babylon."WE sat us down and wept,Where Babel's waters slept,And we thought of home and Zion as a long-gone,happy dream ;We hung our harps in airOn the willow boughs, which there,Gloomy as round a sepulchre, were drooping o'erthe stream.44 PSALM Xxxvii.The foes, whose chain we wore,Were with us on that shore,Exulting in our tears that told the bitterness of woe.Sing us," they cried aloud,Ye, once so high and proud,"The songs sang in Zion ere we laid her glory low."And shall the harp of heavenTo Judah's monarch givenBe touched by captive fingers, or grace a fetteredhand?No ! sooner be my tongueMute, powerless, and unstrung,Than its words of holy music make glad a strangerland.May this right hand, whose skillCan wake the harp at will,And bid the listeners' joys or griefs in light ordarkness come,Forget its godlike power,If for one brief, dark hour,My heart forgets Jerusalem, fallen city of my home !Psalm Xxxvii, 45Daughter of Babylon !Blest be that chosen one,Whom God shall send to smite thee when there isnone to save ;He from the mother's breast,Shall pluck the babe at rest,And lay it in the sleep of death beside its father'sgrave.THE world is bright before thee,Its summer flowers are thine,Its calm blue sky is o'er thee,Thy bosom Pleasure's shrine ;And thine the sunbeam givenTo Nature's morning hour,Pure, warm, as when from heavenIt burst on Eden's bower.-TO * * * *. 47There is a song of sorrow,The death-dirge of the gay,That tells, ere dawn of morrow,These charms may melt away,That sun's bright beam be shaded,That sky be blue no more,The summer flowers be faded,And youth's warm promise o'er.Believe it not though lonelyThy evening home may be ;Though Beauty's bark can onlyFloat on a summer sea ;Though Time thy bloom is stealing,There 's still beyond his artThe wild-flower wreath of feeling,The sunbeam of the heart.THE FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS,SARATOGA,STRANGERS ! your eyes are on that valley fixedIntently, as we gaze on vacancy,When the mind's wings o'er spreadThe spirit-world of dreams.True, 'tis a scene of loveliness the brightGreen dwelling of the summer's first-born Hours,Whose wakened leaf and budAre welcoming the morn.FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS. 49And morn returns the welcome, sun and cloudSmile on the green earth from their home in heaven,Even as a mother smilesAbove her cradled boy,And wreath their light and shade o'er plain andmountain ,O'er sleepless seas of grass whose waves are flowers,The rivers' golden shores,The forests of dark pines.The song of the wild bird is on the wind,The hum of the wild bee, the music wildOf waves upon the bank,Of leaves upon the bough.*But all is song and beauty in the land,Beneath her skies of June ; then journey on,A thousand scenes like thisWill greet you ere the eve.50 FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS,Ye linger yet ye see not, hear not nowThe sunny smile, the music of to-day,Your thoughts are wandering upFar up the stream of tune ;And boyhood's lore and fireside listened talesAre rushing on your memories, as ye breatheThat valley's storied name,FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS.Strangers no more, a kindred "pride of place,"Pride in the gift of country and of nameSpeaks in your eye and stepYe tread your native land.And your high thoughts are on her glory's day,The solemn sabbath of the week of battle,Whose tempests bowed to earthHer foeman's banner here.FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS. 51The forest leaves lay scattered cold and dead,Upon the withered grass that autumn morn,When, with as withered heartsAnd hopes as dead and cold,A gallant army formed their last arrayUpon that field, in silence and deep gloom,And at their conqueror's feetLaid their war-weapons down.Sullen and stern, disarmed but not dishonoured ;Brave men, but brave in vain, they yielded thereThe soldier's trial taskIs not alone "to die."Honour to chivalry ! the conqueror's breathStains not the ermine of his foeman's fame,Nor mocks his captive's doomThe bitterest cup of war.52 FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS.But be that bitterest cup the doom of allWhose swords are lightning flashes in the cloudOf the Invader's wrath,Threatening a gallant land.His armies' trumpet-tones wake not aloneHer slumbering echoes ; from a thousand hillsHer answering voices shout,And her bells ring to arms !Then danger hovers o'er the Invader's march,On raven wings, hushing the song of fame,And glory's hues of beautyFade from the cheek of death.A foe is heard in every rustling leaf,A fortress seen in every rock and tree,The eagle eye of artIs dim and powerless then,FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS. 53And war becomes a people's joy, the drumMan's merriest music, and the field of deathHis couch of happy dreams,After life's harvest home.He battles heart and arm, his own blue skyAbove him, and his own green land around,Land of his father's grave,His blessing and his prayers,Land where he learnt to lisp a mother's name,The first beloved in life, the last forgot,Land of his frolic youth,Land of his bridal eve,Land of his children, vain your columned strengthInvaders ! vain your battles' steel and fire !Choose ye the morrow's doom,A prison or a grave.54 FIELD OF THE GROUNDED ARMS.And such were Saratoga's victors suchThe Yeomen-Brave, whose deeds and death havegivenA glory to her skies,A music to her name.In honourable life her fields they trod,In honourable death they sleep below ;Their sons' proud feelings hereTheir noblest monuments.RED JACKET.A CHIEF OF THE INDIAN TRIBES, THE TUSCARORAS.ON LOOKING AT HIS PORTRAIT BY WEIR.COOPER, whose name is with his country's woven,First in her files, her PIONEER of mindA wanderer now in other climes, has provenHis love for the young land he left behind ; 6And throned her in the senate hall of nations,Robed like the deluge rainbow, heaven-wrought,Magnificent as his own mind's creations,And beautiful as its green world of thought ;56 RED JACKET.And faithful to the Act of Congress, quotedAs law authority, it passed nem. con.He writes that we are, as ourselves have voted,The most enlightened people ever known.That all our week is happy as a SundayIn Paris, full of song and dance and laugh ;And that, from Orleans to the Bay of Fundy,There's not a bailiff, or an epitaph.And furthermore in fifty years, or sooner,We shall export our poetry and wine ;And our brave fleet, eight frigates and a schooner,Will sweep the seas from Semble to the Line.If he were with me, King of Tuscarora !Gazing, as I, upon thy portrait now,In all its medalled, fringed, and beaded glory,Its eye's dark beauty, and its thoughtful browRED JACKET. 57JifefcIts brow, half martial, and half diplomatic,Its eye, soaring like an eagle's wings ;Well might he boast that we, the Democratic,Outrival Europe, even in our Kings !For thou wast monarch born. Tradition's pagesTell not the planting of thy parent tree,But that the forest tribes have bent for agesTo thee, and to thy sires, the subject knee.Thy name is princely, if no poet's magicCould make RED JACKET grace an English rhyme,Though some one with a genius for the tragicHath introduced it in a pantomime,Yet it is music in the language spokenOf thine own land ; and on her herald roll ;As bravely fought for, and as proud a tokenAs Coeur de Lion's, of a warrior's soul.58 RED JACKET.Thy garb-though Austria's bosom-star would frightenThat medal pale, as diamonds the dark mine,And George the Fourth wore, at his court at Brighton,A more becoming evening dress than thine ;Yet 'tis a brave one, scorning wind and weather,And fitted for thy couch, on field and flood,A Rob Roy's tartan for the Highland heather,Or forest green for England's Robin Hood.Is strength a monarch's merit, like a whale's ?Thou art as tall, as sinewy, and as strongAs earth's first kings, the Argo's gallant sailors,Heroes in history, and gods in song.Is beauty ? Thine has with thy youth departed ;But the love-legends of thy manhood's years,And she who perished, young and broken hearted,Are but I rhyme for smiles and not for tears.RED JACKET. 59Is eloquence ? Her spell is thine that reachesThe heart, and makes the wisest head its sport;And there's one rare, strange virtue in thy speeches,The secret of their mastery, they are short.The monarch mind, the mystery of commanding,The birth-hour gift, the art Napoleon,Of winning, fettering, moulding, wielding, bandingThe hearts of millions till they move as one ;Thou hast it. At thy bidding men have crowdedThe road to death as to a festival ;And minstrels, at their sepulchres, have shroudedWith banner-folds of glory the dark pall.Who will believe ? Not I for in deceivingLies the dear charm of life's delightful dream ;I cannot spare the luxury of believingThat all things beautiful are what they seem.60 RED JACKET.Who will believe that, with a smile whose blessingWould, like the Patriarch's, sooth a dying hour,With voice as low, as gentle, and caressing,As e'er won maiden's lip in moonlit bower ;With look, like patient Job's, eschewing evil ;With motions graceful, as a bird's in air ;Thou art, in sober truth, the veriest devilThat e'er clenched fingers in a captive's hair !That in thy breast there springs a poison fountain,Deadlier than that where bathes the Upas tree ;And in thy wrath, a nursing cat-o'-mountainIs calm as her babe's sleep, compared with thee !And underneath that face, like summer ocean's,Its lip as moveless, and its cheek as clear,Slumbers a whirlwind of the heart's emotions,Love, hatred, pride, hope, sorrow, all save fear.RED JACKET. 61Love for thy land, as if she were thy daughter,Her pipe in peace, her tomahawk in wars ;Hatred of missionaries and cold water ;Pride in thy rifle-trophies and thy scars ;Hope that thy wrongs, may be by the Great SpiritRemembered and revenged, when thou art gone ;Sorrow that none are left thee to inheritThy name, thy fame, thy passions, and thy throne !LOVE.The imperial votress passed onIn maiden meditation, fancy free.Midsummer Nights Dream,Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again ?BENEDICT, in Much Ado about Nothing.I.WHEN the tree of Love is budding first,Ere yet its leaves are green,Ere yet, by shower and sunbeam nurstIts infant life has been ;The wild bee's slightest touch might wringThe buds from off the tree,As the gentle dip of the swallow's wingBreaks the bubbles on the sea.LOVE. 63II.But when its open leaves have foundA home in the free air,Pluck them, and there remains a woundThat ever rankles there.The blight of hope and happinessIs felt when fond ones part,And the bitter tear that follows isThe life-blood of the heart.III.When the flame of love is kindled first,'Tis the fire-fly's light at even,'Tis dim as the wandering stars that burstIn the blue of the summer heaven.A breath can bid it burn no more,Or if, at times, its beamsCome on the memory, they pass o'erLike shadows in our dreams.64 LOVE.IV.But when that flame has blazed intoA being and a power,And smiled in scorn upon the dewThat fell in its first warm hour,'Tis the flame that curls round the martyr's head,Whose task is to destroy ;'Tis the lamp on the altars of the dead,Whose light but darkens joy !V.Then crush, even in their hour of birth,The infant buds of Love,And tread hi glowing fire to earth,Ere 'tis dark in clouds above ;Cherish no more a cypress treeTo shade thy future years,Nor nurse a heart-flame that may beQuenched only with thy tears.A SKETCH.HER Leghorn hat was of the bright gold tintThe setting sunbeams give to autumn clouds ;The ribband that encircled it as blueAs spots of sky upon a moonless night,When stars are keeping revelry in heaven ;A single ringlet of her clustering hairFell gracefully beneath her hat, in curlsAs dark as down upon the raven's wing ;The kerchief, partly o'er her shoulders flung,And partly waving in the wind, was wovenOf every colour the first rainbow wore,When it came smiling in its hues of beauty,A promise from on high to a lost world.66 A SKETCH.Her robe seemed of the snow just fallen to earth,Pure from its home in the far winter clouds,As white, as stainless ; and around her waist,(You might have spanned it with your thumb andfinger,)A girdle of the hue of Indian pearlsWas twined, resembling the faint line of waterThat follows the swift bark o'er quiet seas.Her face I saw not but her shape her form,Was one of those with which creating bardsPeople a world of their own fashioning,Forms for the heart to love and cherish ever,The visiting angels of our twilight dreams.Her foot was loveliest of remembered things,Small as a fairy's on a moonlit leafListening the wind-harp's song, and watching byThe wild-thyme pillow of her sleeping queen,When proud Titania shuns her Oberon.But 'twas that foot which broke the spell alas !Its stocking had a deep, deep tinge of blue,I turned away in sadness, and passed on.DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.the only blissOf Paradise that has survived the fall.COWPER.I."BESIDE the nuptial curtain bright"The Bard of Eden sings,"Young Love his constant lamp will light,And wave his purple wings."But rain-drops from the clouds of careMay bid that lamp be dim,And the boy Love will pout and swear'Tis then no place for him.68 DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.II.So mused the lovely Mrs. Dash ;'Tis wrong to mention names ;When for her surly husband's cashShe urged hi vain her claims.I want a little money, dear,"For Vandervoort and Landing,Their bill, which now has run a year,To-morrow mean to hand in."III."More?" cried the husband, half asleep,You'll drive me to despair ; "The lady was too proud to weep,And too polite to swear.She bit her lip for very spite,He felt a storm was brewing,And dreamed of nothing else all nightBut brokers, banks, and ruin.DOMESTIC HAPPINESS. 69IV.He thought her pretty once, but dreamsHave sure a wondrous power,For to his eye the lady seemsQuite altered since that hourAnd Love, who on their bridal eve,Had promised long to stay,Forgot his promise took French leaveAnd bore his lamp away.MAGDALEN.I.A SWORD, whose blade has ne'er been wetWith blood, except of freedom's foes ;That hope which, though its sun be set,Still with a starlight beauty glows ;A heart that worshipp'd in RomanceThe Spirit of the buried Time,And dreams of knight, and steed, and lance,And lady-love, and minstrel-rhyme ;These had been, and I deemed would beMy joy, whate'er my destiny.MAGDALEN. 71II.Born in a camp, its watch-fires brightAlone illumed my cradle-bed ;And I had borne with wild delightMy banner where Bolivar led,Ere manhood's hue was on my cheek,Or manhood's pride was on my brow.Its folds are furled the war-bird's beakIs thirsty on the Andes now ;I longed, like her, for other skiesClouded by Glory's sacrifice.III.In Greece, the brave heart's Holy Land,Its soldier-song the bugle sings ;And I had buckled on my brand,And waited but the sea wind's wings,To bear me where, or lost or wonHer battle, in its frown or smile,Men live with those of Marathon,Or die with those of Scio's isle ;And find in Valour's tent or tomb,In life or death, a glorious home.72 MAGDALEN.IV.I could have left but yesterdayThe scene of my boy-years behind,And floated on my careless wayWherever willed the breathing wind.I could have bade adieu to aughtI Ve sought, or met, or welcomed here,Without an hour of shaded thought,A sigh, a murmur, or a tear.Such was I yesterday, but thenI had not known thee, Magdalen.V.To-day there is a change within me,There is a weight upon my brow,And Fame, whose whispers once could win meFrom all I loved, is powerless now.There ever is a form, a faceOf maiden beauty in my dreams,Speeding before me, like the raceTo ocean of the mountain streamsWith dancing hair, and laughing eyes,That seem to mock me as it flies.MAGDALEN. 73VI.My sword it slumbers in its sheath ;My hopes their starry light is gone ;My heart the fabled clock of deathBeats with the same low, lingering tone :And this, the land of Magdalen,Seems now the only spot on earthWhere skies are blue and flowers are green ;And here I 'd build my household hearth,And breathe my song of joy, and twineA lovely being's name with mine.VII.In vain ! in vain ! the sail is spread ;To sea ! to sea ! my task is there ;But when among the unturned deadThey lay me, and the ocean airBrings tidings of my day of doom,May'st thou be then, as now thou art,The load-star of a happy home ;In smile and voice, in eye and heartThe same as thou hast ever been,The loved, the lovely Magdalen.FROM THE ITALIAN.EYES with the same blue witchery as thoseOf Psyche, which caught Love in his own wiles ;Lips of the breath and hue of the red rose,That move but with kind words, and sweetest smiles ;A power of motion and of look, whose artThrows, silently, around the wildest heartThe net it would not break ; a form which viesWith that the Grecian imaged in his mind,And gazed upon in dreams, and sighed to findHis breathing marble could not realize.Know ye this picture ? There is one aloneCan call its penciled lineaments her own.She whom, at morning, when the summer airWanders, delighted, o'er her face of flowers,And lingers in the ringlets of her hair,We deem the Hebe of Jove's banquet hours ;FROM THE ITALIAN. 75She who, at evening, when her fingers pressThe harp, and wake its harmonies divine,Seems sweetest-voiced and loveliest of the Nine,The minstrel of the bowers of happiness.She whom the Graces nurtured at her birth,The sea-born Goddess, and the Huntress maid,Beings whose beauty is not of the earth,Came from their myrtle home, and forest shade,Blending immortal joy with mortal mirth :And Dean said, " Fair sister, be she mineIn her heart's purity, in beauty thine."The smiling infant listened, and obeyed.WOMAN.WRITTEN IN THE ALBUM OF AN UNKNOWN LADY.LADY, although we have not met,And may not meet, beneath the sky ;And whether thine are eyes of jet,Gray, or dark blue, or violet,Or hazel heaven knows, not I ;Whether around thy cheek of roseA maiden's glowing locks are curled,And to some thousand kneeling beaux,Thy frown is cold as winter's snows,Thy smile is worth a world ;WOMAN. 77^s. NOr whether, past youth's joyous strife,The calm of thought is on thy brow,And thou art in thy noon of life,Loving, and loved, a happy wife,And happier mother now,I know not but whate'er thou art,Whoe'er thou art, were mine the spell,To call Fate's joys, or blunt his dart,There should not be one hand or heartBut served or wished thee well.For thou art Woman with that wordLife's dearest hopes and memories come,Truth, Beauty, Love in her adored,And earth's lost Paradise restoredIn the green bower of home.What is man's love ? His vows are brokeEven while his parting kiss is warm,But woman's love all change will mock,And, like the ivy round the oak,Cling closest in the storm.78 WOMAN.And well the Poet at her shrineMay bend, and worship while he woods ;To him she is a thing divine,The inspiration of his line,His loved one, and his Muse.If to his song the echo ringsOf Fame 'tis Woman's voice he hears ;If ever from his lyre's proud stringsFlow sounds, like rush of angel wings,'Tis that she listens while he sings,With blended smiles and tears :Smiles, tears, whose blest and blessing power,Like sun and dew o'er summer's tree,Alone keeps green through Time's long hour,That frailer thing than leaf or flower,A Poet's immortality.1824.A POET'S DAUGHTER.FOR THE ALBUM OF MISS * # #, AT THE REQUEST OFHER FATHER.A LADY asks the Minstrel's rhyme."A Lady asks ? There was a timeWhen, musical as play-bell's chimeTo wearied boy,That sound would summon dreams sublimeOf pride and joy.80 A POET'S DAUGHTER..*But now the spell hath lost its sway,Life's first-born fancies first decay,Gone are the plumes and pennon's gayOf young Romance ;There linger but her ruins gray,And broken lance.'Tis a new world no more to maid,Warrior or bard, is homage paid ;The bay-tree's, laurel's, myrtle's shade,Men's thoughts resign ;Heaven placed us here to vote and trade,Twin tasks divine !Tis youth, 'tis beauty asks, the green"And growing leaves of seventeenAre round her ; and, half hid, half seen,"A violet flower,"Nursed by the virtues she hath been"From childhood's hour."A POET'S DAUGHTER. 81Blind passion's picture, yet for thisWe woo the life-long bridal kiss,And blend our every hope of blissWith her's we love ;Unmindful of the serpent's hissIn Eden's grove.Beauty the fading rainbow's pride,Youth 'twas the charm of her who diedAt dawn, and by her coffin's sideA grand sire stands,Age-strengthened, like the oak storm-triedOf mountain lands.Youth's coffin hush the tale it tells,Be silent, memory's funeral bells !Lone in one heart, her home, it dwellsUntold till death,And where the grave-mound greenly swellsO'er buried faith.A POET'S DAUGHTER.But what if her's are rank and power,Armies her train, a throne her bower,A kingdom's gold her marriage dower,Broad seas and lands ?What if from bannered hall and towerA queen commands ? "A queen ? Earth's regal moons have set.Where perished Marie Antoinette ?Where's Bordeaux's mother? Where the jet-blackHadrian dame ?And Lusitania's coronet?And Angouleme ?Empires to-day are upside down,The castle kneels before the town,The monarch fears a printer's frown,A brickbat's range ;Give me, in preference to a crown,Five shillings change.A POET'S DAUGHTER. 83"But her who asks, though first amongThe good, the beautiful, the young,The birthright of a spell more strongThan these have brought her ;She is your kinswoman in song,A Poet's daughter."A Poet's daughter? Could I claimThe consanguinity of fame,Veins of my intellectual frame !Your blood would glowProudly to sing that gentlest nameOf aught below.A Poet's daughter dearer wordLip hath not spoke nor listener heard,Fit theme for song of bee and birdFrom morn till even,And wind-harp by the breathing stirredOf star-lit heaven.84 A POET'S DAUGHTER.My spirit's wings are weak, the firePoetic comes but to expire,Her name needs not my humble lyreTo bid it live ;She hath already from her sireAll bard can give.1831.CONNECTICUT.FROM AN UNPUBLISHED POEMThe woods in which we had dwelt pleasantly rustled their green leaves in the song, andour streams were there with the sound of all their waters."MONTROSE.still her gray rocks tower above the seaThat crouches at their feet, a conquered wave ;'Tis a rough land of earth, and stone, and tree,Where breathes no castled lord or cabined slave ;Where thoughts, and tongues, and hands, are boldand free,And friends will find a welcome, foes a grave ;And where none kneel, save when to heaven theypray,Nor even then, unless in their own way.86 CONNECTICUT.Theirs is a pure republic, wild, yet strong,A " fierce democracies," where all are trueTo what themselves have voted right or wrong-andto their laws denominated blue ;(If red, they might to Draco's code belong ;)A vestal state, which power could not subdue,Nor promise win like her own eagle's nest,Sacred the San Marino of the west.A justice of the peace, for the time being,They bow to, but may turn him out next year ;They reverence their priest, but disagreeingIn price or creed, dismiss him without fear ;They have a natural talent for foreseeingAnd knowing all things ; and should Park appearFrom his long tour in Africa, to showThe Niger's source, they 'd meet him with weknow.CONNECTICUT. 87They love their land, because it is their own,And scorn to give aught other reason why ;Would shake hands with a king upon his throne,And think it kindness to his majesty ;A stubborn race, fearing and flattering none.Such are they nurtured, such they live and die :All but a few apostates, who are meddlingWith merchandise, pounds, shillings, pence andpeddling ;Or wandering through the southern countries,teachingThe A. B. C. from Webster's spelling-book;Gallant and godly, making love and preaching,And gaining, by what they call " hook and crook,"And what the moralists call overreaching,A decent living. The Virginians lookUpon them with as favourable eyesAs Gabriel on the devil in paradise.88 CONNECTICUT.But these are but their outcasts. View them nearAt home, where all their worth and pride is placed ;And there their hospitable fires burn clear,And there the lowliest farm-house hearth is gracedWith manly hearts, in piety sincere,Faithful in love, in honour stern and chaste,In friendship warm and true, in danger brave,Beloved in life, and sainted in the grave.And minds have there been nurtured, whose controlIs felt even in their nation's destiny ;Men who swayed senates with a statesman's soul,And looked on armies with a leader's eye ;Names that adorn and dignify the scroll,Whose leaves contain their country's history,And tales of love and war listen to one,Of the Green-Mountaineer the Stark of Bennington.CONNECTICUT. 89When on that field his band the Hessians fought,Briefly he spoke before the fight beganSoldiers ! those German gentlemen are boughtFor four pounds eight and seven pence per man,By England's king -a bargain, as is thought.Are we worth more ? Let 's prove it now we canFor we must beat them, boys, ere set of sun,OR MARY STARR'S A WIDOW." It was done.Her's are not Tempe's nor Arcadia's spring,Nor the long summer of Cathay an vales,The vines, the flowers, the air, the skies, that flingSuch wild enchantment o'er Boccaccio's talesOf Florence and the Arno yet the wingOf life's best angel, Health, is on her galesThrough sun and snow and in the autumn timeEarth has no purer and no lovelier clime.90 CONNECTICUT.Her clear, warm heaven at noon, the mist thatshroudsHer twilight hills, her cool and starry eves,The glorious splendour of her sunset clouds,The rainbow beauty of her forest leaves,Come o'er the eye, in solitude and crowds,Where'er his web of song her poet weaves ;And his mind's brightest vision but displaysThe autumn scenery of his boyhood's days.And when you dream of woman, and her love ;Her truth, her tenderness, her gentle power ;The maiden, listening in the moonlight grove,The mother smiling in her infant's bower ;Forms, features, worshipped while we breathe ormove,Be by some spirit of your dreaming hourBorne, like Lorenzo's chapel, through the airTo the green land I sing, then wake, you'll findthem there.MUSIC.TO A BOY OF FOUR YEARS OLD, ON HEARING HIM PLAYON THE HARP.SWEET boy ! before thy lips can learnIn speech thy wishes to make known,Are " thoughts that breathe and words that burn"Heard in thy music's tone.Were Genius tasked to prove the might,The magic of her hidden spell,She well might name thee with delightAs her own miracle.92 MUSIC.Who that hath heard, from summer trees,The sweet wild song of summer birds,When morning to the far-off breezeWhispers her bidding words ;Or listened to the bird of night,The minstrel of the star-light hours,Companion of the fire-fly's flight,Cool dews, and closed flowers ;But deemed that spirits of the airHad left their native homes in heaven,And that the music warbled thereTo earth awhile was given ?For with that music came the thoughtThat life's young purity was theirs,And love, all artless, and untaught,Breathed in their woodland airs.MUSIC. 93And when, sweet boy ! thy baby fingersWake sounds of heaven's own harmony,How welcome is the thought that lingersUpon thy lyre and thee !It calls up visions of past days,When life was infancy and songTo us*, and old remembered lays,Unheard, unheeded long ;Revive in joy or grief within us,Like lost friends wakened from their sleep,With all their early power to win usAlike to smile or weep.And when we gaze upon that face,Blooming in innocence and truth,And mark its dimpled artlessness,Its beauty and its youth ;94 MUSIC.We think of better worlds than this,Of other beings pure as thou,Who breathe, on winds of Paradise,Music as thine is now.And know the only emblem meetOf that pure Faith the heart adoresTo be a child like thee, whose feetAre strangers on Life's shores.ON THE DEATH OFLIEUT. WILLIAM HOWARD ALLEN, 8OF THE AMERICAN NAVY.HE hath been mourned as brave men mourn thebrave,And wept as nations weep their cherished dead,With bitter, but proud tears, and o'er his headThe eternal flowers whose root is in the grave,The flowers of Fame, are beautiful and green ;And by his grave's side pilgrim feet have been,And blessings, pure as men to martyrs give,Have there been breathed by those he died to save.96 ON THE DEATH OF LIEUT. ALLEN.pride of his country's banded chivalry, /His fame their hope, his name their battle cry ;He lived as mothers wish their sons to live,He died as fathers wish their sons to die./If on the grief-worn cheek the hues of bliss,Which fade when all we love is in the tomb,Could ever know on earth a second bloom,The memory of a gallant death like hisWould call them into being but the few,Who as their friend, their brother, or their son,His kind warm heart and gentle spirit knew,Had long lived, hoped, and feared for him alone ;His voice their morning music, and his eyeThe only starlight of their evening sky,Till even the sun of happiness seemed dim,And life's best joys were sorrows but with him ;And when the burning bullet in his breast,He dropped, like summer fruit from off the bough,There was one heart that knew and loved him bestIt was a mother's and is broken now.f^ ft V<<&~^^fe *&iArNOTES.(1) P. 9. ALNWICK CASTLE, Northumberlandshire, a seat of theDuke of Northumberland. Written in October, 1822.From him who once his standard set. Page 12.(2) One of the ancestors of the Percy family was an Emperor of Constantinople.Fought for King George at Lexington. Page 12.(3) The late Duke. He commanded a detachment of the Britisharmy, in the affair at Lexington and Concord, in 1775.From royal Berwick's beach of sand. Page 13.Berwick was formerly a Principality. Richard II. was styled " Kingof England, France and Ireland, and Berwick-upon-tweed."(4) P. 16. MARCO Buzzards, one of the best and bravest of the modernGreek Chieftains. He fell in a night attack upon the TurkishCamp at Laspi, the site of the ancient Plataea, August 20, 1823, andexpired in the moment of victory.98 NOTES.(5) P. 32. WYOMING. The allusions in the following stanzas canbe understood by those only who have read Campbell's beautiful poem,GERTRUDE OF WYOMING : " but who has not read it.(6) P. 55. "RED JACKET" appeared originally in 1828, soon afterthe publication of Mr. Cooper's " NOTIONS OF THE AMERICANS."(7) P. 70. MAGDALEN. Written in 1823, fora love-stricken youngofficer on his way to Greece. The reader will have the kindness topresume that he died there.(8) P. 95. Lieut. ALLEN. He commanded the U. S. Sloop of WarAlligator, and was mortally wounded on the 9th of Nov. 1822, in anaction with pirates, near Matanzas, in the Island of Cuba. His mother,a few hours after hearing of his death, died literally of a brokenheart.INDEXProbFenwick Castle . 9Marco Bozzaris 16Burns 22Wyoming 32On the Death of Joseph Roman Drake 37Twilight 40Psalm Xxxvii 43To * * * * 46The Field of the Grounded Arms 48Red Jacket 55Love 62A Sketch 65Domestic Happiness 67Magdalen 70From the Italian . . 72Woman 76A Poet's Daughter . .79Connecticut 85Music 91On the Death of Lieut. Allen 95