MEMOIRSOPTHE MUSICAL DRAMA.BY GEORGE HOGARTH,AUTHOR OFMUSICAL HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, AND CRITICISM.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,Put)li6iD«" in ordinary to peer fiHa\t6tv.1838.LONDON:PRINTED BY IBOTSON AND PALMER,SAVOY STREET.PREFACE.The bullion of the following pages has called themMemoir's, not a History, of the Musical Drama ;because, though he has endeavoured to give a connected,and (he hopes) tolerably comprehensiveview of the progress of the Opera, yet he has notdeemed it advisable to treat the subject with thatdegree of severity, in regard to form and substance,which " the dignity of History" might have required.While he has attempted to trace the origin ofthe combination of music with theatrical exhibitionsin those countries of Europe which possess a nationalopera ; to show how the progress of theopera in one of these countries acted on its progressin the others; to give an account of the principalVI PREFACE.works, belonging to this branch of the drama, whichhave appeared in these various countries, and of themanner in which the production of these workscontributed to the advancement of the art ; and totake a critical view of the qualities and merits ofthe most distinguished poets, musicians, and performersbelonging; to the Lyrical stage ; he has interwoventhese particulars with many details,anecdotes, and circumstances connected with theopera, calculated to throw light on the lives andcharacters of eminent individuals, as well as toafford glimpses of the state of society and mannersin different ages and countries.The method followed by the author will beseen at a glance from the table of contents. Hewill only observe, that, in these Memoirs of thepast, he has not entered into details respecting thepresent state of the musical drama, or into criticalobservations on the merits of contemporaries whosenames do not yet belong to musical history.The arrangement of such a work as the presentmust to a certain extent be arbitrary. Wherehistory descends in parallel streams, the narrativemust of course follow them in succession, passingfrom the one to the other, in such a manner as tokeep contemporary occurrences as near to eachPREFACE. VUother as possible. Particular points frequentlypresent themselves at which the narrative may beconveniently broken off; but in many instancesthis must be done, simply because one branch ofthe history seems to be getting too much in advanceof the others. In such instances no twowriters would proceed in the same way ; and nowaythat can be adopted will prevent a hereindegree of inconvenience which must arise from thenature of the subject.CONTENTSOF THE FIRST VOLUME.CHAPTER I,Origin of the musical drama— Mysteries, moralities, and masquesAllegorical and mythological entertainments in Italyduring the fifteenth century — Interment— Invention of recitative— Earliest Italian operas — Monteverde's use of instruments— First public performances at Rome — At Venice —Scroll-pieces — Italian singers of the seventeenth centuryPage 1CHAPTER II.The musical drama in France — Mysteries — Queen of NavarreItalian opera brought into France — Italian companies inParis — Isabella Andreini — Lull — Opera-ballets — Quinault —Fontenelle — La Fontaine — LuUi's music — French singers —French musical drama till the time of Rameau . 32CHAPTER IlThe musical drama in England — Music in old English plays —Masques in the reigns of Henry VIII. and Queen ElizabethPlays performed by the singing-boys of the churches —Masques by the gentlemen of the Inns of Court— Ben Jonson'sMasques for the court of James I. — Manners of thatcourt — Alfonso Ferabosco — Nicoloo Laniere . . 59CONTENTS,CHAPTER IV.Time of Charles I. — Shirley's masque, The Triumph ofPeace — Prynne's Histrio-mastix — Milton's Comus — HenryLawes . - . . .88CHAPTER V.The Commonwealth — Sir William Davenant's entertainments —His musical pieces — First female performers — Theatreestablished after the Restoration — Matthew Lock — PsycheMacbeth — Duchess of Mazarin . .110CHAPTER VI.Dryden — " The State of Innocence — Albion and AlbansPurcell — Dido and ^neas — Purcell's instrumentalmusic — The Tempest 133CHAPTER VII.King Arthur — The LidianQueen — Tyrannic Love . 160CHAPTER VIII.The Prophetess — Bonduca — Don Quixote — Purcell's songs invarious plays — His death and character — Principal dramaticsingers in his time — Dryden's Secular Masque — Eccles —Jeremy Collier's attack on the stage . .181CHAPTER IX.Degeneracy of the Italian opera at the commencement of thelast century — Marcello's satire, II Teatro alia mode — Principalcomposers of that period — Scarlatti— Caldara — Lotti —Vivaldi — Improvements effected by them — Dramatic poets —Apostolo Zeno — Metastasio — His appearance an era in theItalian opera . . . .212CONTENTS. XICHAPTER X.The early musical drama in Germany — German operas — Introductionof the Italian opera — German composers of theseventeenth century — Mattheson — Keiser — Arrival of . . . . . 232CHAPTER XI.The Italian Opera introduced into England — Battista Draghi —Arrival of Italian singers — Margherita de I'Epine — Mi's.Torts — Musical factions — Opera of Arsinoe — Camilla —Rosamond — Addison and Clayton — Nicolini — Pyrrhus andDemetrius — The Tatler — Leveridge — Almahide — Hydaspes—The Spectator . . . .239CHAPTER XII.Arrival of Handel in England — Rinaldo — Addison's opinionsrespecting the Italian opera, and observations on them 271CHAPTER XIII.Life of Metastasio . . . .293CHAPTER XIV.Writings of Metastasio 323CHAPTER XV.Goldoni . . . . .349CHAPTER XVI.State of the Italian opera in the earlier part of the 18th centuryGreat composers — Leo — Vinci — Sarro — Corpora — Rinaldodi Capua — Pergolesi — Haste — Domenico Scarlatti — Feo —Galuppi — Terradellas — Perez — Logroscino . .361XII CONTENTS.CHAPTER XVII.Great Italian singers during the above period — Tesi — Austin—Cuzzoni — Farinelli — Senesino . . . 406CHAPTER XVIII.CafFarelli — Gizziello — Carestini — Guarducci — Durastanti —Guadagni — Mingotti — Gabrielle — Want of tenor and basssingers 434LIST OF PORTRAITS.VOL. I.MADAME MARASIGNOR FARINELLIto face Titlep. 416VOL. ILDR. ARNEANASTASIA ROBINSONMRS. WellingtonMADAME Catalans .MRS. CROUCHCHARLES DIBDINto face Titlep. 8184368436440MEMOIRSMUSICAL DRAMACHAPTER I.Origin of the musical drama— Mysteries, moralities, and masquesAllegorical and mythological entertainments in Italyduring the fifteenth century — Interment — Invention of recitative— Earliest Italian operas — Monteverde's use of instruments— First public performances at Rome — At Venice —Scroll-pieces — Italian singers of the seventeenth century.We shall not attempt, as many writers have done,to go back to the days of the Greeks and Romansin search of the origin of the Musical Drama.In the ancient tragedy, it appears, the declamationof the actor was accompanied by certain musical^ instruments which regulated the tones of his voice ;and the stage was occupied by a Chorus consistingof a number of persons, who, though not actuallyVOL. I. B2 ORIGIN OF THE DRAMA.engaged in the action of the piece, were interestedin it, and mingled their reflections or exclamationswith the dialogue of the drama. In the modernopera the characters speak in recitative, and thereis a chorus ; and hence it is inferred that the modernopera has sprung from the ancient tragedy. It isprobable that the idea of recitative was suggestedto its inventors by what they had read of themusical declamation of the ancient tragedies ; andthe chorus of an Italian opera is very analogous,in its functions and connexion with the drama, tothe chorus of the Greeks. But the one cannot besaid to have been derived from the other : for, beforethe invention of the opera, the knowledge ofthe mode of performing the ancient tragedy hadbeen irrecoverably lost by the lapse of a longseries of ages.The modern theatre, of every description, maybetraced to those dramatic entertainments whichseem to have been common in the darkest periodsof the middle ages. Mankind has a natural propensityto mimicry and the representation offeigned characters. Children begin to act as soonas they can speak ; and there is hardly any tribethat is without some notion of inventing and performingplays. When Europe was immersed inignorance, those fictitious representations calledMysteries and Moralities were the favourite pastimeof all sorts of people. As learning and civilisationadvanced, these uncouth entertainments gainedORIGIN OF THE OPERA. 3some degree of refinement and regularity, andacquired something of the form of those ancientdramatic pieces which now came to be known andstudied. In this way the modern drama, thoughoriginating in the middle ages, may be consideredas having received its polish and cultivation fromthe models of classical antiquity.It was thus that the opera, as well as the otherbranches of the drama, took its rise. Songs,choruses, and dances, were introduced into the rudeexhibitions we have mentioned, and, indeed, continuedto form a part of all dramatic representationsdown to a comparatively recent period. Theunion of dialogue and action with music, dancing,and pageantry, produced that species of entertainmentknown by the name of the Masque, which enjoyedits greatest favour in the sixteenth and seventeenthcenturies, and was the immediate forerunnerof the opera.This has been the progress of the Musical Dramain all those countries where it now flourishes : butit was in Italy that it first assumed a distinct form.In that country, the Mystery, or religious tragedy,gradually assumed the shape of the Oratorio, orsacred musical drama ; and the Masque, or secularplay, intermixed with music and spectacle, wasconverted into the regular opera. The oratorio, aswell as the opera, of other countries, were derivedfrom those of Italy.When the religious dramas, divested of their proB 24 ORATORIOS.vanities and grossness, were introduced into thechurch, and distinguished by the name of Oratorios,they were no longer acted, as they had formerlybeen. The poem was generally in a dramatic form,and, in the performance, each part was allotted toa different singer : but the piece was merely sungand recited, without action, or any of the adjunctsof theatrical representation. Such is the shapewhich the oratorio has ever since retained. Manyoratorios have not a vestige of the dramatic form,even in the structure of the poem, or the compositionof the music. The greatest of Handel's oratorios,for instance, The Messiah, and Israel inEgypt, with many others which might be mentioned,are not dramatic in any sense of the word.The oratorio, therefore, is improperly classed underthe head of the Musical Drama. It belongs to thechurch, not to the theatre ; and a musical drama,on a sacred subject, adapted for theatrical representation(such as Rossini's well-known Most inJEgitto) is not an oratorio, but an opera.The very term, oratorio, applied to these performancesof sacred music, shows that they wereconnected with the service of the church. Theword, derived from the Latin " oratories," meansa chapel containing an altar, where the devout canoffer up their prayers. The Italian writers agreein ascribing the origin of the oratorio to SanFiLippo Neri, who founded the congregation ofthe oratory at Rome, in the year 1540. This wasORATORIOS. 5an order, or establishment of priests, which graduallyspread itself all over Italy. It was their practiceto render the service of the church as agreeableas possible, in order to attract young peoplethither, and draw them away from stage-plays andother profane amusements. For this purpose theybegan-by the introduction of canticles, and spiritualsongs and choruses ; and afterwards, toincrease the attraction, scripture stories and incidentswere formed into dramatic poems, writtenin dialogue, and set to music by the best composersof the time. These productions were recitedand sung, with the accompaniment of instruments,before and after the sermon ; so that the attentionof the congregation was thus (it was presumed)secured to the religious instructions of the preacher.These pieces were founded on the story of the goodSamaritan, the trials of Job, the prodigal son, theannunciation of the Blessed Virgin, and other subjectscalculated to excite the feelings or the imaginationof the auditory.* They speedily acquiredAn English traveller gives the following account of theseperformances at Bologna, in 1720. " They have in theirchurches a diverting piece of devotion, which they call anoratorio. It is a musical drama of two acts, after the mannerof the stage-operas, with recitativo between the songs. Thesubject is either a scripture story, or a story of some of theirsaints ; generally the last. Between the acts there is a sermon ;so timed (I suppose) to secure such of the audience as mightbe apt to leave the preacher in the lurch, if they were not tohave some music to sweeten their mouths with at last. The6 ORATORIOS.great popularity ; and oratorios became common inthe principal churches throughout Italy, whereindeed they are regularly performed to this day.In Italy the performance of oratorios is still confinedto the churches. In this and other countries,they are also performed in public halls, concertrooms, and even theatres : but in no case, noteven when the poem is in a dramatic form, isthere the slightest approach to dramatic representation.In the sketch, therefore, which we are about togive of the progress of the Musical Drama, we shallnot include the oratorio ; considering it as beingwhole is introduced with a performance somewhat unusual, aDiscourse (as they term it) spoken by a little boy. We heardtwo of them. The first was about six years old, who mountedthe rostrum with a stately gravity, and, after having saluted theaudience, cocked his hat, (for they are covered upon such occasionsin the churches) and, with a solemn wave of the hand,pronounced, silenzio ! before he began his discourse. Thelatter could not be above four years old, both by his size andspeech, for he could but just speak plain ; him they dressed upin the habit of a priest, and the little creature performed to amiracle. The subject of the discourse is taken from the occasionof their meeting. The former was upon the eve of AllSouls : charity to our friends in purgatory was the topic. Thelatter was on the night of the grand procession on account ofthe plague, which was then at Marseilles : of that, repentanceand humiliation was the subject. They teach these little orators,not only the emphasis and accent, but the proper actionlikewise, which they perform extremely well." — Wright's Observationsin travelling through France, Italy, t^c.OLD ENTERTAINMENTS. 7neither comprehended in our subject nor at allconnected with it.The oldest of those entertainments which ripenedinto the Italian musical drama, belong to the fifteenthcentury. They were not performed inpublic theatres, but in the halls of the great, bywhom they were given for the amusement of distinguishedguests. Thus we have a description ofan entertainment given in 1480, by BergontioBotta, a nobleman of Lombardy, when he wasvisited by the Duke of Milan and his newly-marriedspouse, Isabella of Arragon, grand-daughter ofFerdinand, king of Naples. To these illustriousguests he gave a magnificent supper, accompaniedwith an exhibition in which the rudiments of theopera may be plainly discerned.The play, as it may be called, was begun byJason bringing in the golden fleece, with which hecovered the supper-table. Then Mercury madehis appearance, and sang the stratagems by whichhe had contrived to steal from Apollo, who kept theflocks of Admetus, king of Thessaly, a fat calf forthis banquet. Diana brought Action changed intoa stag ; and, after having explained to the companyher cause of quarrel with him, told him that,notwithstanding his misdeed, she would do him thegrace of having him served up at a feast given to anymph so fair and chaste as the royal Isabella.Orpheus, who still mourned the loss of his Eurydice,having heard, even amidst the wilds of the8 OLD ENTERTAINMENTS.Appetites, of the fame of these nuptials, camewith his lyre, to sing the praises of the illustriouspair ; and, having drawn a great many birdsaround him by the sweetness of his strains, hegallantly offered them to the princess. Atlantabrought the head of the Calydonian boar ; confessingthat she yielded to this stranger nymph theglory of being adored by all the Grecian youth.The rest of the boar was brought in by Theseus anda band of hunters. Iris appeared on her chariotdrawn by peacocks, and made one of them beserved up with its splendid tail displayed. Hebepresented the nectar of the gods. Apicius camefrom the Elysian fields to increase the delicacy ofthe feast by his refinements in the gastronomic art.A party of Arcadian shepherds served up a cheesemade by the hands of Pan himself. Vertumnusand Pomona presented the finest fruits ; and allsorts of salt and fresh-water fish were brought inby the gods of the sea and the rivers of Lombardy.All these acts of service were accompanied bymusical recitations ; and, when this prologue wasfinished, the guests sat down to the feast so classicallyserved up. The repast was followed by anotherexhibition, approaching more nearly to a regular drama.Orpheus commenced it, by introducing Hymen,followed by a group of Cupids. The three Graces,hand in hand, formed the second scene. They werefollowed by Conjugal Fidelity, dressed in white, whooffered her services to the princess; and, at the sameALLEGORICAL PIECES. 9time, Mercury brought down from heaven Fame, accompaniedby Virgil and Livy. After them cameSemiramis, with Helen, Medea, and Cleopatra ;and these having begun to sing their wanton loves,were driven away by Conjugal Faith, who forbadethem to sully the purity of so sacred an union bythe Recital of their improprieties. She then letloose upon them a band of Cupids, who pursuedthem with lighted torches, and set fire to the gauzeveils which covered them. Then appeared Lucretia,Penelope, Thomyris Queen of Scythia, Judith,and Portia, who, having rendered themselves famousby the purity of their lives, came to presentto the young duchess the palm of chastity whichthe world had bestowed upon them. Last of all,Silenus, half drunk, and riding on his ass, concludedthe piece by singing humorous verses.An ingenious allegorical piece called La VeritasRaging, was represented at Venice about thistime, but on what occasion we are not informed.The first scene represented a doctor and an apothecary,rejoicing that the ills of the world weretheir good, and that the earth covered their misdoings.Truth, abused and pelted by a band ofadvocates, attorneys, and suitors, appears in a sadplight, and begs the assistance of the doctor and hiscompanion ; — but they make their escape as soonas they find that the name of the applicant isTruth. A cavalier offers to defend her, but leavesher as soon as she tells him her name. A soldier10 ALLEGORICAL PIECES.next abandons her, because she begins to laugh athis boasting speeches. The first part of the piecewas ended by a rustic dance of villagers. In thesecond part, a merchant appears, congratulatinghimself, that, in order to get rich, he has only tobreak two or three times, and settle as often withhis creditors. In the next scene another merchantwishes to get rid of his conscience as a troublesomeand unmarketable commodity. Truth offers to buy,but he will have nothing to do with her as a purchaser.She meets with similar repulses fromladies of various classes : but at last the DramaticMuse consents to receive her on condition that sheshall appear on the stage under an agreeable disguise; for which purpose she furnishes her with amask, and teaches her the art of changing hervoice and manner. The conclusion is the singingand dancing of the comedians, expressive of theirjoy at the admission of Truth, thus disguised, intotheir company.These specimens of the rude dramatic attemptsof the Italians, are instances of the love of allegorywhich seems to have prevailed, in other countries aswell as Italy, in those early ages, when Poetry, afterher revival, was yet in her second childhood. Thesubjects of these dramatic pieces, however, werenot always allegorical. Some of them were classical,and very like those of a much later period.Perhaps the Orfeo of the celebrated poet andscholar Position, maybe regarded as the lineal pro-theORFEO OF Position. 11geiiitor of the Italian opera. It is to be found inthe Parasol Italian ; and is a drama in five acts,founded on the ancient tale of Orpheus and Eurydice.The subject of the first act is the love ofAristaeus, a Thracian shepherd, for Eurydice, thewife of Orpheus, who, endeavouring to escape fromhim', is stung by a serpent, and dies. The shepherdsings his love and her cruelty, in a pastoralstrain of great beauty. The second act consists ofthe lamentations of Aristaeus, accompanied by achorus of Dryads, for the death of Eurydice. Inthe third act, Orpheus appears, singing in Latinheroic verse the exploits of Hercules. A Dryadtells him the sorrowful tale of Eurydice's death ;and a satyr follows him to see whether the mountainsare moved by his song. The fourth act containsthe descent of Orpheus into the infernalregions, his recovery of Eurydice, and her finalloss. In the fifth act, the Thracian women, enragedat his inconsolable grief and resolution neverto love another, fall upon him and tear him to pieces.This drama, which is very short, seems intended tohave been wholly sung, the poetry being of a lyricalkind and finely adapted to the purposes ofmusic. It must have been written towards the endof the fifteenth century, as Position, who is celebratedas one of the revivers of learning, died in1494, at the age of forty.During the sixteenth century, the Italian dramabecame gradually more and more regular in its12 IXTERMEZZI.form. In the infancy of the Italian stage, musicseems to have been employed in all dramaticpieces. When the dialogue was declaimed, orspoken, choruses were introduced, who sang theprologue and epilogue, and also verses between theacts. Bv degrees, the musical drama came to beseparated from tragedy and comedy; the prologuesand epilogues being no longer sung, but merelydeclaimed, as well as the dialogue ; and, in thesepieces, the choruses began to be laid aside. Butmusical Interment, or Interludes, were introducedbetween the acts ; and these, though interruptedby the action of the principal piece, were frequentlyregular dramas themselves ; so that a tragedy orcomedy, with its interludes, were, in truth, twodistinct pieces performed in alternate acts. Theintermezzi were composed expressly for the drama,along with which they were to be performed, andhad some affinity to their style or subject. Theywere sometimes considered of importance enoughto be separately published : of which we have aninstance, in one of them published at Bologna, in1623, under the title of " Dafne Converse inLaura : Interment post in musica da OctavoVernizzi, Organist di San Petronius, per L'Amo-rosa Innocent, Tragicomedy Pastorale, in Bologna,1623.'"" By this time music had acquireda dramatic importance which it did not possess avery short time before ; for, in a Discourse on DramaticRepresentation, by Angelo lugegueri. pub-recitative.13wished in 1598, that writer speaks of music as aminor consideration. "I now come to music,"he says, "the third and last part of dramaticrepresentation, which, in comedies and pastoralswithout choruses, may be used at pleasure, ininterludes between the "acts, to afford some reliefto the mind, fatigued by the attention bestowedupon the fable'* At last, these intermezzi, whichwhere really independent of the pieces to which theywere originally joined, were performed by themselves,and received the name of Operas ; thoughoperas of a light and comic character continuedlong afterwards, to go by the name of Interment.The invention of Recitative, from which the existenceof the Italian opera may properly be dated,took place in the end of the sixteenth century-thehonour of this invention is ascribed to twopersons ; Jacopo Peri, of Florence, and EmilioDEL Cavaliere, of Rome. In the same year, 1597,Peri produced the opera of Dafne, and Emilio delCavaliere the oratorio, Del Anima e del Corps ;and both of these pieces, too, w-ere published in thesame year, 1600. The invention is claimed byboth composers, and it seems impossible now todetermine which of them has the preferable claim.They both speak of it as an attempt to revive whatwas imagined to be the musical declamation of theGreeks and Romans. It is next to impossible thattwo persons should have separately constructed,on so slight a foundation, a musical language so14 AIRS.entirely new. One of them must have borrowedit from the other ; and it is to be regretted that itcannot be known to whom we are indebted for aninvention which forms so remarkable an era inthe history of music*The introduction of airs for a single voice seemsalso to have taken place at this time. The musicemployed in the drama had previously consistedof compositions in many parts, full of elaborateharmonical contrivances, but destitute of grace,rhythm, or melody. Vicenza Galilei is said tohave been the first musician who composed melodiesfor a single voice ; having (according to Doni)thus set to music Dante's famous scene of CountUgolino, which he himself sang very sweetly, tothe accompaniment of a viol. He was imitatedby GiuLio Cacclsi, a celebrated Roman singer,who composed a great number of airs, which heBumeV; with some hesitation, decides in favour of Cavaliere,but on grounds which appear insufficient. He says, (vol.iv. p. 87.) that " Cavaliere seems better entitled to the inventionof narrative music than the Florentine composer, by thevery dates of the two dramas, which form an era in the historyof the opera or oratorio ; Fannia e il Corps, the first sacreddrama or oratorio, in which recitative was used, having been performedin the oratory of the church of Santa Maria della Vorticella,at Rome, in February, 1600 ; and Euridice, the first seculardrama, or opera, at Florence, in December of the same year."But the first opera performed at Florence was not £entice,but Dafne, which, as we have mentioned above, was performed in1597 ; and this fact is stated burney himself, vol. iv. p. 18.Euridice was produced by Peri, after Dafne.Cavalier. 15taught to his numerous scholars, and created ataste for a new and elegant steele of singing, previouslyunknown in Italy. Caccini is said to haveassisted Peri in the composition of his operas.Cavaliere's oratorio seems to have received thistitle because it was performed in church. It isnot on a scriptural subject, but is a moral allegoricaldrama, such as were common at that time.The characters are Time, Pleasure, the Body, theWorld, Human Life, &c. ; from which an idea mayeasily be formed of the nature of the subject. Itwas represented in action, on a stage erected inthe church of La Vorticella, at Rome, with scenery,decorations, and dances. The orchestra was placedbehind the scenes, and consisted of an instrumentcalled a lira copia, or double l3^re, (conjecturedto be a viol da gamba,) a harpsichord, a largeguitar, and two flutes alV antics. The dances wereperformed to the music of the choruses, and thedirections respecting them sound very odd, consideringthe place of representation. "The performance,"says the author, " may be finished withor without a dance. If without, the last chorusmay' be doubled in all its parts, vocal and instrumental; but if a dance is preferred, a verse beginningthus, ' Chiostri altissimi e stellar,' is to besung, accompanied sedately' and reverentially by thedance. Then shall succeed other grave steps andfigures of the solemn kind. During the ritornels*The instrumental passages between the stanzas of the chorus.f16 RINUCCINI.the four principal dancers are to perform a ballet,enlivened with capers and entrechats, without singing.This is to be repeated after each stanza,always varying the steps of the dance ; and thefour principal dancers may sometimes use the galliard,sometimes the canary, and sometimes thecoranto step, which will do very well in the rigorsSuch was the way in which even the oratorioappears to have been performed in its infancy ;till, in the progress of decorum, acting and dancingwere excluded from the church and confined tothe theatre.Peri's opera ofDafne was performed in the houseof Signor Corse, a distinguished Florentine dilettante.The applause which it received inducedRiNUCCiNi, the poet and the composer, to bring outin succession two other operas, Euridice andAriadne. Euridice was the first opera which wasperformed in public. It formed part of the entertainmentsgiven at Florence, on the occasion ofthe marriage of Mary of Medicis to Henry IV. ofFrance, in the year 1600 ; and the poem and musicwhere published separately the same year. Dr.Burney found a copy of the music in the library ofthe Marchese Rinuccini, (a descendant of the authorof the poem,) at Florence. He says that the musicwas printed in score, and barred, two very uncommoncircumstances at the time of its publication ;that the recitative seemed to have been not only themodel of subsequent composers of early ItalianMontevideo. 17operas, but of the French operas of Lull ; but thatthough the word aria sometimes occurred, it wasdifficult to distinguish air from recitative. Theorchestra, as at the performance of Cavali ore'soratorio, was placed behind the scenes, and consistedof the same instruments.Claudio Monteverde, whose name is celebratedin musical history as one of the greatest discoverersin the then unknown regions of harmony, composedthe opera of Orfeo, for the court of Mantua,in 1607. It was printed at Venice in 1615. Theboldness of this composer's genius is observable inthe great improvement of the orchestra. The numberand variety of instruments are greatly increased,and the voices are not indiscriminately accompaniedby the whole band ; but the music performed bythe several singers is accompanied by instrumentsof various kinds, specially assigned to each character.Thus, the Genius of Music, who speaks theprologue, is accompanied by two gravicemhani, probablymisprinted for clavicembali, or harpsichords ;Orpheus by two contraband di viola, or bass-viols ;Eurydice by ten viole di brazzo, or tenor viols ; achorus of nymphs and shepherds by an arpa copia,or harp with double strings ; Hope by two violinniccolo alia Frances, a phrase which supports theclaim of the French to the invention of the violin ;Proserpina by three bassi da gamba, an instrumentwhich has given place to the violoncello ; and Plutob}^ four trombones. The overture is a very shortVOL. I. c18 Montevideo.prelude in harmony of five parts, for a trumpetand other instruments, which is directed to beplayed three times before the rising of the curtain.Then the prologue is delivered in recitative ; itspurport being to explain the argument of the pieceand bespeak the attention of the audience. Theopera begins by a speech in recitative by a shepherd,followed by a chorus in five parts, accompaniedby all the instruments. Other choruses aredirected to be accompanied in different ways — byguitars, violins, and flutes. There are no airs for asingle voice, but recitatives, choruses, trios, andduets make up the piece, which concludes with adance to a tune called a morea, probably anoriginal Moorish air. It is a lively strain, with awell-marked but peculiar rhythm, four timesrepeated, and ingeniously carried into differentmajor and minor keys.*Monteverde's management of his orchestra, inthe very infancy of this branch of the art, is worthyof particular notice ; as he appears to have anticipatedthe principle of instrumentation which has beensince adopted by the greatest dramatic composers,though it is now too much disregarded. In an Italianopera of the modern school, every instrument in theband is kept constantly at work, from the overtureto the finale. The most tender and pathetic air orduet is accompanied, as well as a joyous or martialFor specimens of the music of this and other primitiveItalian operas, see the Histories of Burney and Hawkins.QUAGLIATI. 19chorus, by violins, tenors, violoncellos, double-basses,flutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons, horns, trumpets,trombones, and drums. What can be moreabsurd than this ? The variety and effect of theorchestra are destroyed by such an indiscriminateand unmeaning use of all its resources. It was notthus that Gluck and Mozart, the models of dramaticinstrumentation, employed the powers of the orchestra.Look into the opera scores of these greatmasters, and we shall hardly find the two scenes,or two movements, accompanied in the same manner.The different kinds of instruments are usedin every variety of combination, so as to produce anendless diversity of effect, and to allow the unitedstrength of the orchestra, when called into action, toproduce its full impression on the audience. Thatsystem required learning, skill, and delicacy ; themethod now in vogue is a mere cloak for ignorance.The following account of the first public performanceof dramatic music, at Rome, is given byPietro della Villa, an agreeable musical writer ofthat time. " My master, Quagliati, was an excellentmaestro de capella, who introduced a newspecies of music into the churches of Rome, notonly in compositions for a single voice, but for two,three, four, and very often more voices in chorus,singing together. And the music of my cart, ormoveable stage, composed by the same Quagliati,and performed in masks through the streets ofRome during the Carnival of 1606, was the firstc220 OPERAS AT VENICE.dramatic action, or representation in music, whichhad ever been heard in that city. Though no morethan five voices, or five instruments, were employed,the number which an ambulating cart could contain,yet these afforded great variety : as, besidethe dialogue of single voices, sometimes two, orthree, or all the five, sang together, which had anexcellent effect. The music of this piece, as maybeseen in the copies of it which were afterwardsprinted, though dramatic, was not all in simplerecitative, which would have been tiresome, butornamented with beautiful passages, and movementsin measure, without deviating, however, fromthe true theatrical style ; on which account itpleased extremely, as was manifest from theprodigious concourse of people it drew after it,who, instead of being tired, heard it five or sixtimes over. There were even some who continuedto follow our cart to ten or a dozen different placeswhere it stopped, and never quitted us so long asv/e remained in the street, which was from fouro'clock in the afternoon till after midnight."The first public performance of musical pieces inaregular theatre, took place at Venice, in 1637,when the opera of Andromeda, written by Bene-dittoFerrari, and composed by Francesco Ma-nelly,was brought upon the stage, in the theatreof Santo Cassino, in a splendid manner, at theexpense of the poet, who, for that purpose, collecteda company of the best singers in Italy ; a remark-operasAT VENICE. 21able instance of spirit and enterprise, In the followingyear, La Saga Fulminated, by the samepoet and composer, was performed in the samemanner, and at the expense of the former. Between1641 and 1649, there were upwards of thirtydifferent operas performed in the several theatresof Venice, the composers of which were Monteverde,Manilla, C avail i, Sacra, Ferrari, Fonte, Marazzoli,and Rosetta.The most celebrated opera of that period was theOrontes of Marc' Antonio Cesti, which was firstperformed at Venice in 1649, and appears to havekept possession of the stage, in various cities, for"nearly forty years. The music of these early operasis almost all lost, as very few of them were printed ;but Dr. Burney gives a scene from this opera ofOrontes, which was found in the niusic-book of thecelebrated painter, Salvator Rosa, in his own handwriting.This scene, when compared with thespecimens of Peri or Monteverde, exhibits a strikingimprovement in dramatic music. The air,which is in E minor, and in the time of three minims,is flowing, expressive, and modern in its effect,from the free use of the diminished seventh both inthe melody and harmony. The recitative is parlante,and divested of the formal closes used by theolder composers: indeed it differs ver^^^ little from therecitative of the present da3\ And the concluding airin D major, is bold and spirited, with a firm movingbass very much in the manner of Handel. OfCesti little more is known, than that he was Terence.mitted into the Pope's chapel as a tenor singer in1660, and produced several other operas, which hadgreat success. He composed a great number ofcantatas, many of which are still extant. Cavalrywas at this period a prolific composer of operas, themost celebrated of which are Gibson and JErismena.From what remains of his music, it seems to havebeen inferior to that of Cesti.Venice appears to have taken the lead among allthe cities of Italy, in respect to the musical drama.Between 1637-when Andromeda was produced, and1700, we are told by Riccoboni, that three hundredand fifty operas were performed there. Operas weregenerally represented daily, and in six differenttheatres, all open at once. There was no publicopera-house at Rome until 1671, nor at Bologna till1680. In that year we have an account of the performanceof the opera oi Terence, composed by French, at Padua, in a style of splendourwhich reduces to insignificance the utmost achievementsof scenic display, even in the present age ofspectacle. In this opera ^of the poetical or musicalqualities of which there is no record; there were chorusesof a hundred virgins and a hundred soldiers; ahundred horsemen in steel armour, a hundred performerson trumpets, cornets, sackbut, drums,flutes, and other instruments, on horseback and onfoot ; two lions led by two Turks, and two elephantsled by two others ; Terence's triumphal car drawnby four horses, and six other cars with spoils andprisoners drawn by twelve horses. Among theInterment OF HELL. 23scenes ill the first act, was a vast plain with two triumphalarches ; another with pavilions and tents ;a square, prepared for the entrance of the triumphalprocession, and a forest for the chace. In thesecond act there were the royal apartments of Be-venice'stemple of vengeance ; a spacious court,with a view of the prison, and a covered way, along*which passed a train of carriages. In the thirdact there were, the royal dressing-room, magnificentlyfurnished ; stables containing a hundredlive horses ; a portico adorned with tapestry; and asuperb palace seen in perspective. In the course ofthe piece there were representations of hunting theboar, the stag, and the bear. And to conclude thewhole, an enormous globe descended from the sky,which divided itself into lesser globes, suspendedin the air, on which were seen allegorical figuresof Fame, Honour, Nobility, Virtue, and Glory. Wefind many descriptions of exhibitions of this kind,chiefly at Venice, but none of them seem to haverivalled the splendour of Terence.The most curious account that we have met withof one of these exhibitions is given in a note by theEnglish translator of the Abbe Raguenet's Paralleledes Italiens et des Francois, en ce qui regarde la Musiqueet les Opera, published in 1 704. It was theInterment (or Interlude) of Hell, in the opera ofNerone Infante, performed in the Capranica theatreat Rome. " At the sound of a horrid symphony,consisting of horns, great serpents, and regale.24 Interment OF HELL.part of the floor of the stage opened and discovereda scene underneath, representing several cavernsfull of infernal spirits, that flew about in a prodigiousnumber, discharging fire and smoke at theirmouths and nostrils. At some distance, too, therewere seen a great number of damned spirits sufferingunder their various torments ; and on anotherside was discovered the river Lethe with Charon'sboat, on board of which was Mercury, Charon,and the soul of one who had died for love. Upontheir landing a prodigious monster appeared, whosemouth opening, to the great horror of the spectators,covered the front wings and the remainingpart of the stage. Within his jaws there appeareda throne composed of fire, and a number of monstrousserpents, on which Pluto sat, with a crownof fire on his head, and habited in other royal ornamentsof the same nature. The singer who performedthis part was one of those deep basseswhich,in the author's opinion, are so rarely found in Italy.After Cupid had demanded justice of Pluto uponthose old women who, in the preceding intercede,had cut his wings for making Agrippina, Nero'smother, in love, and several other passages belongingto this intercede, the mouth of the monsterclosed ; at which instant Cupid, endeavouring tofly off", was arrested by a little devil, who seized onhis foot ; upon which Cupid, giving himself a littleturn, shot the devil with one of his darts ; whereuponthe devil was transformed into a curlingintp:rmezzo of hell. 25smoke, that disappeared by degrees, and Cupidescaped. After this the great monster, expandinghis wings, began to move very slowly towards theaudience ; under his body appeared great multitudesof devils, who formed themselves into a ballet,and plunged one after the other into the opening ofthe flavor before mentioned ; out of which a prodigiousquantity of fire and smoke was discharged.After this, the great monster being got as far as themusic-room,* and while all the spectators were intentupon what was doing, and began to fear hewould come into the pit, he was in an instant transformedinto an innumerable multitude of broadwhite butterflies, which flew all into the pit, andso low that some of them touched the hats of severalof the spectators ; at which some seemed diverted,and others were not a little terrified, till by degreesthe'' lodged themselves on different parts of thetheatre, and at length disappeared. During thiscircumstance, which sufficiently employed the eyesof the spectators, the stage Meas refitted, and thescene changed into a beautiful garden, with whichthe third act began. This representation was soextraordinary in its nature, so exactly performed,and so universally admired and applauded, thatgreat numbers of foreigners came to Rome onpurpose to behold it, and confessed, when they hadseen it, that it far exceeded the expectations fameThe orchestra.26 SCROLL-PIECES.had given them of it. And it must be confessed, itgave the spectators a more perfect instructive ideaof hell than it is possible for the most artful flowing-fancyto delineate. So that the author was notmistaken when he said that these sort of entertainmentsare no less instructive (!) than agreeable."Towards the end of the seventeenth century aspecies of entertainment was introduced a,t Venice,which was for a short time in great vogue. It consistedof little dramas, in which the actors appearedon the stage without speaking. Scrolls descendedfrom the roof upon their heads in succession, inwhich were written, in large letters, verses of songs,the airs of which were played by the orchestra,while the words were sung by the spectators ; theperformers on the stage, meanwhile, carrying onthe action in dumb show. The spectators found itvery amusing to sing, in this manner, the dialogueof the piece, but soon began, doubtless, to think itsomewhat childish; for the " scroll-pieces" did notlong remain in fashion. Sometimes pieces wereperformed, in which the characters were representedby wooden or wax figures on the stage,while the singers remained invisible behind thescenes. Some of the operas of Pistocchi (one ofthe most celebrated composers and singers of thatday) were performed in this manner.Our countryman Evelyn, in his Diary, givessome notices of the state of music at Venice in themiddle of the seventeenth century. In 1645, heEvelyn's diary. 27says, " This night, having with my Lord Brucetaken our places before we went to the opera, wherecomedies and other plays are represented in recitativemusic by the most excellent musicians, vocaland instrumental, with variety of scenes paintedand contrived with no lesse art of perspective, andmachines for flying in the aire, and other wonderfulmotions ; taken together it is one of the mostmagnificent and expensive diversions the wit ofman can invent. The history was Hercules india;the scenes changed thirteen times. The famousvoices, Anna Rencia, a Roman, and reputed thebest treble of women ; but there was an eunuch whoin my opinion surpassed her ; also a Genoese thatsung an incomparable base. They held us by theeyes and ears till two in the morning." Aftergiving a description of the pastimes during the carnivalof 1646, he says, " The comedians have liberty,and the operas are open ; witty pasquin arethrown about, and the mountebanks have theirstages at every corner. The diversion which chieflytook me up was three noble operas, where wereexcellent voices and music, the most celebrated ofwhich was the famous Anna Rencia, whom weinvited to a fish dinner after four dales in Lent,when the}?^ had given over at the theatre. Accompaniedwith an eunuch whom she brought with her,she entertained us with rare music, both of themsinging to an harpsichord. It growing late, agentleman of Venice came for her to show her the28 ITALIAN SINGERS.galleys now ready to style for Candia. This entertainmentproduced a second, given us by theEnglish consul of the merchants, inviting us to hishouse, when he had the Genoese, the most celebratedbase in Italy, who was one of the late operaband. This diversion held us so late at night that,conveying a gentlewoman who had supped withus to her gondola at the usual place of landing, wewere shot at by two carbines from out another gon-^dole, in which was a noble Venetian and his courtezanunwilling to be disturbed, which made us runand fetch other weapons, not knowing what thematter was, till we were informed of the danger wemight run by pursuing it further."The Italian singers, from the very infancy of themusical drama, attained that superiority over thoseof other countries which they have always preserved.Delia Valle, who wrote in 1640, commemorates anumber of vocal performers, of both sexes, whoflourished during his time. " Who," he says,can hear without rapture Signora Leonora her own accompaniment on the arch-lute, whichshe touches in so fanciful and masterly a manner ?And who will venture to say which is the better performer,she or her sister Caterina? Nor is thereany one who, like me, has seen and heard SignoraAdrian, their mother, when, in her youth, shesailed in a felucca, near the Pausilippan grotto, withher golden harp in her hand, but must confess thatin our times these shores have been inhabited byLEONORA Baron. 29sirens who are not only beautiful and tuneful, butgood and virtuous'' Among other eminent femalesingers of that day he mentions Francesca Caccini,the daughter of the composer Giulio Caccini, whohad been for many years the admiration of Florence,not only for her talents in singing and composition,but for her Latin and Italian poetry. Not lessfamous was Caterina Martinet, who died at theage of eighteen, to the general regret of Italy. Asplendid monument to her memory was erected bythe Duke of Mantua, in the church of the carmelitein that city, with the fine inscription, " Nomenmundo, Neo vivat anima." Among the principalmale singers were Pistocchi, already mentioned,and Francesco Grossi, called Syface, from hisexcellent performance of the character of Syphax.This singer was killed, when on a journey, in aquarrel with his postilion.Leonora Baronii, of Mantua, was the most celebratedsinger of that period. She is not onlyspoken of in the above enthusiastic language byDelia Valle, but is described by Bayle, in his dictionary,as having been one of the finest singers inthe world. A whole volume of poems was publishedin her praise with this title, " Applausepoetic alle glories della Signora Leonora Baronii ;"and, among the Latin poems of Milton, there areno fewer than three entitled, " Ad LeonoraRoniEe canentem." Milton frequented the musicalentertainments of the Cardinal Bartering ; and it30 LEONORA Baron.was there, no doubt, that he heard this lady sing.The following fine eulogy on Leonora Baronii iscontained in a discourse on the music of theItalians, written by !Mr. jNIaugars (an ecclesiastic,and a musician of extraordinary attainments,) andquoted by Bayle, under the article Baronii. " LeonoraBaronii is endowed with fine parts ; she understandsmusic perfectly well, and even composes, whichmakes her mistress of what she sings, and gives herthe most exact pronunciation, and just expressionof the sense of her words. She does not pretend tobeauty, neither is she disagreeable, or a coquette.She sings with a bold and generous modesty, andan agreeable gravity ; her voice reaches a largecompass of notes, and is true, full, and harmonious;she softens and raises it without straining or makinggrimaces. Her raptures and sighs are free fromwantonness ; her looks have nothing impudent, nordoes she, in her gestures, overstep a virgin modesty.In passing from one key to another sheshows sometimes the divisions of the enharmonicand chromatic kind with so much art and sweetness,that everybody is ravished with that fine anddifficult method of singing;. She has no need ofany person to assist her with a theorbo or viol, oneof which is necessary to make her singing complete,for she herself plays perfectly well on boththose instruments. In short, I have had the goodfortune to hear her several times sing above thirtydifferent airs, with second and third stanzas com-LEONORA Baron. 31posed by herself. I must not forget to tell you,that one day she did me the particular favour tosing with her mother and sister. Her motherplayed upon the lute, her sister upon the harp, andherself upon the theorbo.* This concert, composedof three fine voices, and of three different instruments,so powerfully transported my senses,and threw me into such raptures, that I forgot thatI was mortal, and thought myself already amongthe angels, enjoying the felicity of the blessed."The lute and the theorbo are now obsolete instruments.The lute resembled the modern guitar, and was played upon inthe same way : but was larger and much more sonorous. Thetheorbo was in the form of a large lute, from which it differedin having eight bass or thick strings, twice as long as those ofthe lute. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries thelute was the favourite chamber instrument throughout Europe ;and in the beginning of dramatic music the recitatives wereaccompanied by the theorbo (also called the arch-lute) beforethe harpsichord was used for that purpose. Indeed, the theorbo,from the length of its strings, produced such soft and sustainedtones, that it was preferred, by many, to the harpsichord, as anaccompaniment. There vv^as a theorbo in the orchestra of ourItalian Opera till the end of Handel's management.CHAPTER 11.The musical drama in France — Mysteries — Queen of NavarreItalian opera brought into France — Italian companies inParis — Isabella Andreini— Lull — Opera-ballets — Quinault — •Fontenelle — La Fontaine — Lull's music — French singers —French musical drama till the time of Rameau.In France, as in Italy, the regular musical dramawas preceded by mysteries, masques, and otherexhibitions, performed in the churches on solemnreligious festivals, or in the palaces of princes, forthe amusement of their visitors and guests. Manyof these are described by French writers ; but theyare so similar to those which have been alreadymentioned as prevailing in Italy, that it is unnecessaryto enter into any details respecting them.Music generally made a part of them, as well asaction, machinery, and dancing. Fontenelle, inhis Histoire du Theatre Francis, gives a particularaccount of the mystery of The Passion, written bythe bishop of Angers, about the middle of thefifteenth century. "This piece," he says, "wasa kind of opera; for, after the baptism of ourQUEEN OF NAVARRE. 33Saviour, God the Father speaks ; and it is recommendedthat his words should be pronounced veryaudibly and* distinctly, and at once, with threevoices, treble, counter-tenor, and bass, all well intune, and that the whole scene should be sung inharmony." In a sacred drama, performed on ahigh festival of the Church, and listened to withreverence by a devout assembly, words, supposedto be uttered by the Supreme Being, might bedelivered without indecorum ; and this manner ofharmonizing them for a plurality of voices indicatedmuch grandeur of conception on the part ofthe musician. Every musical tone is a harmoniouscombination of simple sounds ; and, by furthermaking the divine voice a harmonious combinationof musical tones, an effect of superhumanmajesty and beauty would be imparted to it. Toproduce this impression, it must have been necessarytoday aside all the contrivances of figure andimitation, and to make the harmony consist ofplain counterpoint, every syllable being utteredby all the voices at once.*The celebrated Marguerite de Valois, queen ofNavarre, composed mysteries and moralities, whichwere represented by the ladies of her court.This expedient has been used by the Chevalier Neukomm,in his Oratorio of Mount Sinai, in which the commandmentsare delivered from the holy mountain, in canto sermo of fourchoral parts, accompanied by trombones, all in plain counterpoint.The effect is grand and awful.VOL. I. D34 QUEEN OF NAVARRE.Several of her dramatic pieces are contained in thecollection of her works, published in 1547, underthe punning title of Marguerites de la Margueritedes Princesses, tri-illustre Reine de Navarre.They consist of four ' mysteries, a comedy, anda farce. 'as to the mysteries," says a Frenchcritic, " if they contain ridiculous things, it is thefault of the age and the species of composition.The mysteries were the tragedies of those days.The Italians had not yet taught us to composedramas of a more regular and interesting kind.The ancient Greek tragedies were not yet translated; and in this infancy of our theatre, therewere none of these pieces in which we find moretalent, delicacy, and nature, than in those of thisprincess. They are of moderate length, and arenot loaded with the multiplicity of characters usualin the mysteries of the preceding age. The fourpieces, The Nativity, The Adoration of the Kings,The Massacre of the Innocents, and The Flight intoEgypt, are connected with each other, and theaction of each piece may be supposed to havetaken place within twenty-four hours, the time prescribedby the law of the unities. If it were stillthe custom to perform pieces of this kind, we couldnot do better than translate into modern Frenchthe mysteries of the queen of Navarre."The French writers admit that they owe theestablishment of the opera to the Italians. ,who went to France in the suite of MaryITALIAN PERFORMERS. 35of Medicis, on her marriage with Henry IV. firstintroduced Italian music into that country. Thefirst Italian company of performers appeared inParis, in 1577. They attracted such multitudes,(says an old writer,) that the four best preachersin Paris had not such numerous assemblies whenthey preached. The ecclesiastics made loud complaints; and in a few weeks the parliament orderedthe theatre to be closed. The company obtainedletters-patent from the king, authorizing theirestablishment ; but the parliament refused to ratifythese letters. By an express order of the king,however, they resumed their performances ; butthe troubles of the kingdom obliged them to leaveit and return to Italy. When Henry IV. returnedfrom his expedition to Savoy, he brought anotherItalian company, who remained at Paris only fortwo years. Their principal actress was IsabellaAndreini, a member of the academy of the Intentat Florence. This lady was no less remarkable forher virtue and her literary attainments, than forher talents on the stage. Her manners and conversationgave additional charms to her beauty ;and the regret caused by her departure fromFrance is commemorated by the verses of severalof the poets of that day.Another Italian company was brought to Paris,by Cardinal Mazarin, during the minority ofLouis XIV. in the year 1645. The first operawhich they performed was La Pinta Piazza, anD 236 Lull.opera by Giulio Strozzi. But Italian operas seem tohave been little encouraged at that time. Frenchpieces called ballets, though they appear to havehad words, as well as dancing and music, were thefavourite amusement of the court ; and it was incomposing the music of these pieces, that Lullfirst brought his talents into notice.This celebrated musician, the son of a Tuscanpeasant, was born in 1633. Having shown a dispositionfor music, he received some instructionsin the rudiments of the art, from a priest. TheChevalier de Guise, when on his travels in Italy,had been requested by Mademoiselle de Montpelier,a niece of Louis XIV. to procure for her ahandsome Italian boy, as a page ; and, happeningto see young Lull, at Florence, he chose him forthat purpose, on account of his wit and vivacity,and his skill in playing on the guitar. The lady,however, not liking his appearance, for he was farfrom handsome, sent him into her kitchen, wherehe was made a sous-marmiton, or under-scullion.At this time he was ten years old.In his leisure hours, he used to be constantlyscraping on a wretched violin which he had contrivedto pick up ; and some person of taste, who happenedto hear him, having told the princess that hehad a great talent for music, she had him regularlytaught to play upon the violin. He was soonadmitted into the king's band, and so much distinguishedhimself as a musician, that he wasLULLI. 37placed at its head, and employed to compose themusic of the court ballets, in which the king andother great personages used to dance. One ofthese pieces was Alcidiane, performed in 1658, inwhich his majesty himself was one of the dancers.The performance not being ready to begin at theproper time, the king sent message after messageto Lull, to tell him to make haste. At last hesent to say he was weary of waiting, and desiredthat the piece should begin immediately. Themessenger told Lull that the king was out of allpatience and in a violent passion : but the musician,wholly intent on his preparations, said coolly,His majesty can wait'' The king laughed at theanswer, and quietly waited till Lull was ready.The composer preserved during his life this plainand blunt humour, and used a freedom of speechwhich frequently annoyed the courtiers, but neverseems to have offended the king himself, whosefavour for Lull was uninterrupted.In 1660, the celebrated Pierre Corneille producedhis tragedy of Andromeda, a sort of opera,containing splendid machinery, dancing, and music.It was performed before the court, and receivedwith great applause. Pegasus was represented bya real horse, a thing which had never before beenseen on the stage in France. /\ singular methodwas taken to make the horse exhibit the properdegree of martial ardour. He was subjected to asevere fast, and, when he was brought upon the38 QUINAULT.Stage, a mail; placed opposite to him, out ofsight of the audience, was winnowing oats. Thehungry animal neighed, pawed the ground, curvetted,and acted his part with such " good discretion,"that he contributed greatly to the successof the piece.These opera-ballets continued to be the entertainmentof the court for a few years longer, till theregular French opera derived its being from thecelebrated Quinault.Philip Quinault was born at Paris in 1636 ;but we have no account of his family. His geniusfor poetry displayed itself at an early age ; and,before he was twenty years old, he had writtenseveral comedies, which were performed with success.His friends, however, having wisely advisedhim not to trust to poetry for a livelihood, he placedhimself under an eminent advocate, and made himselfcapable, in a few years, of exercising that profession.One day this advocate desired him toconduct one of his clients, a gentleman of someconsequence, to the house of the judge who was toreport to the court, according to the French modeof procedure, the merits of a cause in which hewas engaged. The judge not being at home, andnot being expected till late, Quinault proposed tothe gentleman to go to the theatre and see a newcomedy, promising to get him a good place. Theplay that evening was a new piece of Quinault's,called U Amant Indiscret. No sooner did the youngQUINAULT 39author appear in the theatre, than he was surroundedby people of the highest quality, who congratulatedhim on the merit of his comedy, which,they said, they had come to see for the third orfourth time. The gentleman was surprised ; stillmore so when he saw an excellent comedy performedamidst the applause of the pit and boxes ; and mostof all, when, having returned to the judge, heheard Quinault explain the points of his case withthe utmost clearness, and support his cause by suchsolid reasons, that the difficulties started by thejudge were entirely removed.He continued, for many years, to produce a seriesof. dramatic pieces, chiefly tragedies, which werewell received by the public ; but some of themwere severely attacked by the critics, especiallyBoileau, who for some unexplained reason, seemsto have taken a violent dislike to him ; for, thoughQuinault's pieces were sufficiently open to criticismin various respects, yet Boileau's abuse of them wasimmoderate and indiscriminate. Boileau was muchcensured, even in his own time, for this conduct ;and it is now universally admitted that he didQuinault great injustice. His famous couplet,Si je pense exprimer un auteur sans default,La Raison dit Virgil, et la rime Quinault,"as well as hisLor de Virgil, et le clinquant du Tasse,"are quoted now only as instances of the sacrifice oftruth to point and antithesis.40 QUINAULT.It was not, however, till Quinault became associatedwith Lull in the composition of operas thathe produced those pieces which have rendered hisname illustrious. The first of their joint productionswas Les Fetes de V Amour et de Bacchus,performed in 1672. This was a mere pastoralballet. But their first regular opera, Cadmus etHeroine, was performed in the public theatre of thePalais Royal in April 1673, having been previouslyrepresented with great success in the private court-theatre.In this piece he introduced some burlesquescenes, which were considered unsuitable tothe style of the lyrical drama; it then being, inFrance, appropriated entirely to mythological andheroic subjects. He was accused of having imitatedthe Italians, who mixed buffoonery with their mostserious subjects ; a poor resource, said the critics,which was worse than even monotony and baldness.Quinault, influenced by these strictures, did notadmit anv comic characters or incidents into hissubsequent operas.Lull, finding that Quinault had so great a talentfor lyrical poetry, proposed that they should enterinto an engagement, that Quinault should write anopera every year, for which Lull should pay him fourthousand livres. This engagement was accordinglyentered into ; and the music (we believe) of allQuinault's operas was composed by Lull.Quinault, notwithstanding his reputation as apoet, did not abandon the profession of the law.QUINAULT. 41He married the rich widow of a merchant, andafterwards purchased the office of an auditor of thechamber of accounts, the duties of which he performedtill his death. He died on 29th November1688. It is said that, during his last illness, hewas extremely penitent, on account of the voluptuoustendency of various parts of his writings.During the lifetime of Lull and Quinault, themusic of the one was the best that had ever beenheard in France, while the other appeared in an ageof great dramatic writers. It is well observed byLa Harpe, that Quinault's great mistake and misfortunewere the calling his pieces musical tragediesinstead of operas. Had it not been for this, hewould not have been looked upon as an unsuccessfulrival of Racine, or have offended classical criticswith the little resemblance those pieces had to thedramas of the ancients, or the regular tragedies ofthe moderns. But the reputation of Lull has fallenin proportion as that of Quinault has risen. Voltaire,in his Siecle de Louis Quatorze, first publishedin 1749, said : " Quinault was celebrated forhis beautiful lyric poetry, and the gentleness withwhich he opposed the unjust satires of Boileau. Hispoetry was greatly superior to the music of Lull.It will always be read ; and Lull, except in a fewof his recitatives, can no longer be borne. However,it was long believed that Quinault entirelyowed his favour to Lull. Time appreciates allthings."42 QUINAULT.Quinault's dramatic works are well known to thereaders of French poetry. All his lyrical dramasare full of beauties; but Atys, Phaeton, Isis, andArmide, have been considered as the best. Atys,which was produced in 1676, was the finest operathat had yetappeared,andhadanastonishingsuccess.On the day of its first performance, the doors wereforced, at ten o'clock in the morning, by personswho wished to secure places, and, before mid-day,the theatre was completely crowded. It did notdisappoint the expectations of the public ; thoughit affords several specimens of that " morale lubrique"so justly censured by Boileau ;* as in theselines of a duet,II faut souvent, pour etre heureux,Qu'il en conte un peu innocence."The king having asked Madame de Maintenonwhich was her favourite opera, she said it was Atys.Ah," said the gallant monarch, " Atys is a happyman." It was at a performance of this opera thatBoileau said to the bookkeeper, " Put me in a placewhere I shall not be able to hear the words ; I likeLull's music very much, but have a sovereign contemptfor Quinault's verses." Notwithstanding thedislike of the Aristarchus of the age, however, Discontinuedto please the public, and for a long timekept possession of the theatre." Et tous ces lieux communs de morale lubrique,Que Lull rechaufFa des sons de sa musique."QUINAULT. 43Armide was produced in 1686, and was the lastof Quinault's works. It is said that LuUi insistedon his writing the last act five times over ; andthat for this reason he conceived a dislike to writingfor the stage. Others ascribe to devotion his resolutionto abandon dramatic composition. This operawas^at first coldly received, the music not havingpleased so much as usual. Lull, who was so passionatelyfond of his own compositions, that (as hehimself confessed) he would have killed any onewho said they were bad, had it performed for hisown gratification, he himself forming the wholeaudience. This odd circumstance having been reportedto the king, he thought that the opera couldnot be bad if Lull himself had so good an opinionof it. Having, therefore, ordered it to be performedbefore him, he was charmed with it ; and thenboth the court and the public changed their opinionof its merits. Nothing can be finer than the subjectof this opera, affording, as it does, ample scope forimpassioned poetry, striking situations, and theaccessories of beautiful scenery and stage decorations.On this account it has often been chosen bydramatists, but none of them appear to have treatedit so happily as Quinault. The last scene in thesecond act, consisting of the soliloquy of Armada,when she is about to stab Rinaldo in his sleep, andis prevented by the sudden influence of a passion ofwhich she is as yet unconscious, is exquisitelybeautiful. The fourth act is comparatively feeble ;44 FONTEN'ELLE.but the fifth (which, unlike the operas of the presentdavy is terminated by a soliloquy of the heroine, isfull of magnificent poetry. It was by this nobleproduction that Quinault terminated his brilliantcareer : and he had the uncommon felicity ofmaking his last work his masterpiece, Armide wasafterwards reset by Rameau ; and, more recently,by Gluck, with whose music it is still performed inFrance and Germany.During the time that Lull was employed incomposing the music of Quinault's operas, heappears to have set only two others, Psyche andBellerophon, both by Fontenelle, the first ofwhich was performed in 1678, and the second in1679. The are both to be found in the works ofthat author. Psyche is an elegant poem, in whichthe rise and progress of the tender passion, in avouno; and innocent heart, are represented withmuch sweetness and delicacy. It is remarkablethat the scene in which the impending fate ofPsyche (condemned by the oracle to be sacrificed inorder to stop the ravages of a monstrous serpent)is lamented by her rustic companions, is written inItalian — '* Deh. piangete al piano mio" — and<iuno- by two women and a man.* Bellerophon was» This opera appears to have been in great favour with thepublic. The author himself, in one of his " Lettres Galantes,"speaks of it, in the person of a lady describing the impressionits performance had made on a young girl whom she had takento the opera the evening before. The passage is so full of thatFONTENELLE. 45performed in 1679, and was meant as a complimentto Louis XIV. on his having given peace to Europe.lightness and grace of expression for which Fontenelle was soremarkable, that it cannot fail to be read with pleasure. " ce que c'est que Opera au sortir d'un couvent.Quelle difference de Harmonise des religieuses a celle-la I enfinquelle passage de I'unde ces deux mondes a Autre ! On jouaitPsyche; je vous assure que Mademoiselle de V etait Psycheraeme, eleven comme elle dans un sejour enchante,aussi surprise,aussi charmed qu'elle. Pour moi, au lieu de regarder laPsyche du theatre je ne regard que celle de notre loge, quicertainement la represented mieux, outre qu'elle etait bien plusjolie ; et si jamais ete 1' Amour, j'aurais depute le Zephyr a cellepour me I'amener, et j'aurais envoy Autre chez ses parents.A Garret de mort de Psyche, et a toute cette pompe funera quile suit, la demoiselle pleura acres s'etre longtemps contrainte.L'honneur apparemment avait beaucoup combattu dans sa petiteane ; mais enfin l'honneur, qui n'est pas accoutume a etre le plusfort, cede, et le mouchoir fut nonce de larmes. Comme toutcet endroit-la est long, elle voulut seen aller, ou se cacher aufond de la loge, parce qu'elle s'imaginait que toute Reassembledavait les yeux sur elle, et quelle etait dishonored pour jamais.Nous eames bien de la peine a la rassurer; et tandis qu'onchantait le ' Deh, pianyete al piano mio,' que tous les instrumentsde Orchestra tiraient de longs soupirs, et que les flutestoussaint mille sanglots, d'etat des eclat de rire dans notreloge que nous ne portions retenir, et qui nous eussent a bonfaire passer pour fous. Je lui reproche qu'elle etait bien sensible,et elle me repentant que ce d'etat que de la pitied ; maisquand les scenes de Psyche et de 1' Amour vinrent, de bonne foielle ne le fut pas moins ; et il d'etat plus question de pitied. Unair de joie douce et vive etait peint dans son visage ; et vousjugez bien que sa beauty n'y pertain pas ; et enfin, pressed parleplaisir qu'elle repentant, il fallait qu'elle se soulageat par un46 LULLI.Chilli's last opera was Acis et Galatea, written by aforgotten poet of the name of Campistron.*' Itwas performed in 1687.soupir, peutetre la premiere de sa vie, et sans doute d'un tropgrand prix pour etre donne a une fiction. J'etudiai tous lesmovements que la nature produisit en elle ; je lui vis faire,pendant toute cette piece, qui est assez varied, coram un petitcours de sentiment, et je e'en connais guerre dont son coeur n'aitfait I'epreuve dans les trois heures que nous fumes la. Je vous]e grants pour etre d'une assez bonne trempe, et je ne desesperepas que dans peu nous crayons autres nouvelles a vous en donner.Au sortir de la, nous la menaces souper chez madame votresoeur, Le repas fut des plus propres, et la compagnie fortagreable, cependant elle rev toujours. Elle ne d'etat pointencore remise de toutes les petites agitations qu'elle avait ; la musique remplissait encore ses oreilles. Psyche etr Amour n'etaient point sortis de son esprit. Nous la priviesbien de ne pas trouver mauvais de se voir servie de laquaisque ne ressemblaient guerre a des Zephyr ; et le soir que jela rameau masques dans sa chambre, je lui dis que si jene la laisse pas dans ce moment — la au milieu d'une troupe deNymphes, du moins je lui pouvais promettre qu 'elle habiteraittoute la nuit dans le palais enchante, et qu'elle serait Psycheplus de vingt fois. Elle m'avoua le lendemain qu'elle Avait ete ;rais elle ne voulut point m'avouer qu'elle eut vu un grand jeuneAmour bien fait, qui lui eut dit les plus tendres choses dumonde. Cependant quel moyen d'etre Psyche sans Clamour ?Je vous laisse a juger si cela est possible."Campistron wrote an opera called Achille et Polyxena,which was set to music by Colasse, and performed in 1668. Itsfailure produced the following pungent epigram : —Entre Campistron et ColasseGrand debate au Parnasse,Sur ce que opera n'a pas un sort heureux ;LULLI. 47Lull, in the course of his musical career, Iliadbecome so great a favourite of the king, that hismajesty had granted him letters of nobility : a sortof distinction somewhat similar to that of being-knightedin this country. Somebody, by way ofmortifying Lull, told him that it was lucky for himthatched king had exempted him from the necessityof obtaining his nobility in the common way, byhaving first been appointed one of his majesty'ssecretaries — an appointment which he could nothave got, as the king's secretaries would not havereceived him into their body. Lull was piqued atthis, but said nothing for some time. In 1681,Moliere's Bourgeois Gentilhomme, containing a burlesqueTurkish interlude, with music composed b}'-Lull, was performed before the court at St. Germain.Lull himself played the part of the Mufti,which he acted and sang to the admiration anddelight of the audience. The king, dio had beenexcessively amused, paid Lull many complimentson his performance. Lull seized the opportunity :Please jour majesty" he said, "I have beenanxious for the honour of being one of your secretaries,but I understand they would not receive me."Not receive you?' said Louis, " upon my wordit would be doing them a great deal of honour.De son mauvais success nul ne se croit coupable,L'un dit que la musique est plate et miserable,L'autre, que la conduite et les vers sont afFreux ;Mais le grand Apollon, toujours juge equitable,Trouve qu'ils ont raison tous deux."48 LULLI.Go and talk to the chancellor about it." Lullwent immediately to M. le Teller ; and the reportspread that the musician was going to be made aroyal secretary. There was a great commotion,and loud complaints among the people in office thata player and buffoon should be admitted into theirhonourable fraternity. Even M. Louis, theminister, taxed Lull with his impudence, which, hesaid, by no means became a man who had no otherrecommendation but that of making people laugh.Why, what the devil'' cried Lull, " you woulddo as much, if you were able !" The king's will,however, was expressed in a way which silencedall opposition, and Lull got the appointment. Onthe day of his reception, he gave a grand dinner tothe official gentlemen whom he had joined. Litheevening his guests went to the theatre, whenhis Triomphe de V Amour was performed, and it wasamusing to see, seated on the benches nearest thestage, two or three rows of grave personages, inblack cloaks and big wigs, listening, with seriousfaces, to the minuets and gavots of their new colleaguethe musician. M. de Louis himself soonlaid aside his ill-humour ; and next time he metLull in the midst of a crowd of courtiers at Versailles,he called out to him laughingly, " Good day,brother !" Lull, besides being a distinguishedartist, was wealthy, and of irreproachable character:and, as the post was one which it was customary togive as a sinecure, and a mere mark of honour, itDEATH OF LULLI. 49is impossible to think that, in his case, it was improperlybestowed.The king having had a dangerous illness in 1686,LuUi composed a Te Deem on his recovery, whichwas performed in the church of the Feuillans, onthe 8th of January, 1687. In beating the timewith a cane, he struck his toe so severely that thehurt, probably from a bad habit of body, caused amortification. In place of having the part amputated,which might have saved him, he listened tothe promises of some quacks who undertook tocure him without this expedient ; and the Princes deVendee, who had a great regard for him, offeredthem four thousand pistoles if they cured him, andlodged the money in the hands of a banker. Butall their attempts were vain ; and his case becameevidently hopeless. His confessor refused to give himabsolution, unless he burned his opera of Achilleet Polyxena, which he was then preparing for thestage. He consented, and the manuscript wascommitted to the flames. Some days afterwards,when he seemed a little better, one of the youngprinces came to see him. " What, Baptiste," criedthe prince, '' have you been such a fool as to burnyour opera ?" — " Hush, my lord," whispered Lull,"I have got a copy of it." It is said, however,that in his last moments he showed sincere penitenceand a strong sense of religion. He died on the22nd March, 1687, in the 54th year of his age. Hewas plain in his appearance and rough in his man-vol.I. E50 FONTENELLE.news, but honest and good-natured. His greatestfailing was his fondness for wine and money. Heleft a fortune of 630,000 livres, an enormous sumin those days. He married the daughter of MichaelLambert, an eminent musician, by whom hehad three sons and three daughters, whom he leftin possession of sufficient wealth and powerfulfriends. Two of his sons were also musicians.They composed, in conjunction, the music to theopera of Zephyr et Flore, performed in 1688 ; also,two other operas, called Rome et Alcide.Between the death of LuUi and the end of thecentury, several operas were composed by Colasse,a musician of small reputation. One of these wasThetis et Pelee, written by Fontenelle, and performedin 1690 with little success. In the year1750, M. auvergne undertook to compose newmusic to this opera, and informed Fontenelle of hisintention. " You do me a great deal of honour*'said the veteran poet, " but it is sixty years sincethis opera was performed, and nobody told me thenthat its failure was the fault of the musician." M.auvergne persisted in his design ; and the opera,with his new music, was very favourably received.When it was performed, Fontenelle sat in the samebox in which he had been at its first representation,sixty years before, after having dined with twofriends with whom he had also dined on the days ofthat first representation. He died in 1757, havingreached within a month of a hundred years of age.LA FONTAINE. 51Colasse also composed the music of Astree, atragic opera, written by La Fontaine, and producedin 1691. A characteristic anecdote is related of thiscelebrated poet. At the first performance of thispiece, he was sitting in a box behind some ladieswho did not know him. They heard him constantlysaying to himself, "wretched! detestable!trash !" until at length one of them, weary of hisrepeated murmurs, said to him, " O, sir, the pieceis by no means bad — the author is a man of genius,thefamousM.de la Fontaine." — " Well, ladies'' saidhe, very coolly, " the piece is not worth a farthing,and this M. de la Fontaine whom you talk of is ablockhead — he tells you so himself." At the endof the first act he went away, and, going into anadjoining coffee-house, sat down in a corner andfell fast asleep. A gentleman of his acquaintancecoming in, and seeing him, exclaimed, " What, M.delaFontaine here! should he not be atthe first representationof his opera?" — "I am just comefrom it," said La Fontaine, rousing himself andyawning. " I sat out the first act, but was so completelysick of it that I could not stay any longer.Really, the Parisians have a wonderful stock ofpatience !'*About this time was performed an opera ballet,called Arethusa written by Dance, and composedby Camera, one of Lull's imitators. It had notmuch success : and as the author and composer,seeing it likely to fail, were considering how theyE 252 Lull's MUSIC.could support it by rendering' it more attractive,I know but one way," said a friend who heardtheir conversation, — "you must lengthen thedances and shorten the ladies' petticoats."Lull was the only French dramatic composer ofany reputation, prior to the end of the seventeenthcentury. He may properly be called a Frenchdramatic composer, notwithstanding his Italianbirth : for, having spent his life in France, from thetime he was ten years old, it is impossible to imaginethat his taste or style could have been affected bythe fleeting musical impressions he had received inhis childhood. Voltaire, who wrote with equal confidence,if not with equal knowledge, upon all subjects,has some criticisms on Lull 's music, whichmaybe considered not so much his own opinions asthose which he was accustomed to hear. " It maybeobserved," he says, " that when Lull, the truefather of French music, came into France, the dramaticmusic of Italy was of the same grave, noble,and simple kind as that which we still admire inthe recitatives of Lull. And nothing can moreresemble these recitatives than Luigi's famousmotet, composed and universally admired in Italyabout the same time; Sunt breves mundi rose. However,the poetry of Quinault animated the music,more than the music of Lull animated the words.The genius of two such men, with great acting, wasnecessary to form such an exhibition, in some partso^ Atys, Arinide, 3,nd Ho land, as neither antiquity norLull's MUSIC. 53any contemporary people ever knew. The airs arenot equal to the recitatives of these great scenes.They are short simple tunes, more in the style ofour Noels (Christmas Carols) and Venetian ballads,than opera songs. But such was the taste ofthe times. And the more artless the music, themore easily it was remembered." These remarksset out with the evident absurdity that Lull hadformed his style of French recitative on the dramaticmusic of Italy when he left that country at tenyears old. Voltaire finds a resemblance betweenLull's recitatives and a motet of an Italian composerof that day : but the motet was a hymn, oranthem, for the church, in harmony of many parts,and had no sort of affinity to dramatic music. Itis true that Lull's recitative, which is a sort ofdrawling psalmody, tolerable to no ears but those ofFrenchmen, may have some resemblance to churchmusic ; but it certainly is as unlike as possible tothe speaking recitative of Cavalry or Cesti. As toLull's airs, so much undervalued in comparisonwith his recitatives, any musician of the presentday, who makes this comparison, will form an oppositeopinion. They are short and simple, but wehave found some of them exceedingly smooth,flowing, natural, and more agreeable to moderntaste than the airs of Rameau, the idol of theFrench at the time when Voltaire wrote these strictures.54 FRENCH SINGERS.Lull contributed greatly to the improvement ofinstrumental music. He appears to have been theinventor of the overture to dramatic pieces, andwas so successful in this species of composition,that even Handel, in his opera-overtures, took himfor his model. He also increased the power of theorchestra by making use of kettle-drums and side-drumsin the accompaniments of his choruses.Our opinion of LuUi's genius must be enhancedby considering the wretched state of vocal and instrumentalperformance in his time. When he wasplaced at the head of the king's band, they couldplay nothing but what they had learned by heart ;and it must have been by great exertion that hemade them capable of executing the overtures andaccompaniments of his operas. His vocal performerswere equally unformed and ignorant ; andhe not only taught them to sing and to act, butwas even obliged to give lessons to the dancers. Hewas the only instructor of the celebrated La Rochois,who was the prima donna in most of his pieces ;and his other singers must have been equally ignorant,as they could have received no previous educationin an art which he may be said, in so far asregards France, to have called into existence.Among the singers of that period, who are mentionedby French writers, there are none whosenames are worthy of being preserved on account oftheir talents. One of them, however, La Maupin,LA Alpin. 55the successor of La Rochois, may be noticed on accountof her wild and lawless character, and thestrangeness of her adventures. She was born in1673, and married at a very early age, but soon ranawa}?^ with a fencing-master, from whom she learnedthe use of the small sword. After remaining forsome time at Marseilles, where she narrowly escapedthe punishment of being burnt alive forsetting fire to a convent, she went to Paris, appearedon the opera stage at the age of two-and-twenty,and was for a considerable time the reigning favouriteof the day. Having on some occasion beenaffronted by Dumeni, a singer, she put on maleattire, watched for him in the Place des Victoires,insisted on his drawing his sword and fighting her,and, on his refusing, caned him and took his watchand snuff-box. Next day, Dumeni having boastedin the opera-house that he had defended himselfagainst three men who had attempted to rob him,she told the whole story, and produced his watchand snuff-box in proof of her having chastised himas a coward. Thevenard, another singer of note,was nearly treated in the same manner, and had noother way of escaping, but by publicly beggingher pardon, after hiding himself in the PalaisRoyal for three weeks. At a ball given by Monsieur,the brother of Louis XIV., she appeared inmen's clothes, and, having behaved impertinentlyto a lady, was called out by three of her friends.5G FRENCH OPERA.Instead of avoiding the combat, by discovering hersex, she drew her sword and killed all the three ;and then, returning very coolly to the ball-room,told the story to Monsieur, who obtained herpardon. After some other adventures, she wentto Brussels, where she became mistress of theElector of Bavaria. This prince, having quittedher for the countess of Arcos, sent her by that lady'shusband a purse of 40,000 livres, with an order toquit Brussels. But this singular heroine threw thepurse at the count's head, telling him it was a recompenceworthy of such a contemptible scoundrelas himself. She afterwards returned to the Parisianstage, which she left in 1705. The conclusion ofsuch a life is not the least extraordinary part of it.She became at last very devout ; and, having recalledher husband, from whom she had been long-separated,lived with him in a pious manner tillher death, in 1707, at the age of thirty-four. Suchis the history of this woman, given b}^ Abode andother writers; and, strange as it is, there seems noreason for doubting its truth.Addison gives a lively description of the Frenchopera at the beginning of the eighteenth century.The music of the French," he says,* "is indeedvery properly adapted to their pronunciation andaccent, as their whole opera wonderfully favoursthe genius of such a gay airy people. The chorusSpectator, No. 29.FRENCH OPERA. 57in which that opera abounds, gives the parterre frequentopportunities of joining in concert with thestage. This inclination of the audience to singalong with the actors, so prevails with them, thatI have sometimes known the performer on the stagedo no more, in a celebrated song, than the clerkof SL parish church, who serves only to raise thepsalm, and is afterwards drowned in the music ofthe congregation. Every actor that comes on thestage is a beau. The queens and heroines are sopainted that they appear as ruddy and cherry-cheekedas milkmaids. The shepherds are all embroidered,and acquit themselves in a ball betterthan our English dancing-masters. I have seen acouple of rivers appear in red stockings ; andAlpheus, instead of having his head covered withsedge and bulrushes, making love in a fair full-bottomedperiwig and a plume of feathers ; butwith a voice so full of shakes and quavers, that Ishould have thought the murmurs of a countrybrook the much more agreeable music. I rememberthe last opera I saw in that merry nation wasthe rape of Proserpine, where Pluto, to make themore tempting figure, puts himself in a Frenchequipage, and hrmg^ Ascalaplms along with him ashis valet de chambre. This is what we call folly andimpertinence ; but what the French look upon asgay and polite."The French musical drama continued in the state58 FRENCH OPERA.which has now been described till nearly the middleof the last century. The stage was supplied withthe productions of LuUi, and his imitators, Colasse,Camera, Detaches, and others ; till a new erawas created by the appearance of the operas ofRameau.CHAPTER III.The musical drama in England — Music in old English plays —Masques in the reigns of Henry VIII. and Queen ElizabethPlays performed by the singing-boys of the churches —Masques by the gentlemen of the Inns of Court — Ben Jonson'sMasques for the court of James I. — Manners of thatcourt — Alfonso Ferabosco — Nicoloo Laniere.The modern drama, in England, as in other countries,may be traced to the Mysteries, or spiritualrepresentations, of the middle ages. The historyof these pastimes of our forefathers, in which theycombined devotion with amusement, is exceedinglycurious and interesting, and has occupied the pensof many eminent writers : but the most comprehensiveand entertaining account which has beengiven of them, is contained in Mr. Collier's valuableHistory of the English Theatre. Mr. Collierobjects to the appellation Mysteries, as applied tothese old English religious shows, on the groundthat it was not given to them in their own times ;and he, therefore, substitutes the term Miracle-plays.But we are not convinced of the necessityof kissing a name which they have long received,60 OLD PLAYS.in common with those of Italy, France, Germany,Spain, and by every writer who has had occasion tospeak of them.Music, which was always a part of those ancientexhibitions, continued to be introduced into themore regular dramas which succeeded them.Down to the seventeenth century, and including aconsiderable portion of it, there are few of ourtragedies and comedies in which there is not vocalor instrumental music. In Gammer Gurton^s Needle,the first English regular comedy, written in theyear 1551, there is a song (the well-known Bacchanalianditty, " I cannot eat but little meats") andan instance of the use of music between the acts ;for, at the end of the second act, one of the characters,leaving the stage, says to the musicians,Into the town will I, my friends to visit there,And hi ther straight again to see th' end of this were.In the meantime, fellows, pipe up your sidles.I say, take them,And let your friends hear touch mirth as ye can makethem."In the tragedy of Gorhoduc, or Ferre and Porewritten by Lord Bucklers, in 156], there aredirections for exhibitions of dumb-show beforeeach act ; the first being accompanied by the musicof violins, the second by the music of cornets, thethird by the music of flutes, the fourth by themusic of hautboys, and the last by drums and fifes.In addition to the above, Dr. Burney mentionsDAMON AND Pythias. 61the tragi-comedy of King Cambyses, in which musicwas performed at a banquet, and the tragedy ofJocasta in which each act was concluded by achorus, (though it is by no means clear that thesechoruses were sung,) as instances of the introductionof music in old English plays. Bat he hasoverlooked a much more remarkable instance,namely, the comedy of Damon and Pythias, byRichard Edwards. This may almost be called amusical drama, in the modern sense of the phrase.The author was not only a poet, but a musician ;and, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign,was appointed one of the gentlemen, and master ofthe children, of the chapel royal. The play isreally amusing, from its rudeness of construction,ludicrous absurdities, and the exceeding homelinessof We language in which all the characters expressthemselves. The scene, of course, lies at the courtdionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse, where Damonand Pythias, two Grecian gentlemen, make theirappearance, with each a servant, Will, and Jack.There is Snap, a tipStaff ; Gronno, the hangman ;and a sort of clown, called Grimme. Carisophus,a parasite, accuses Damon to the tant ; and, bywayof completing the happy denouement, receivespoetical justice by being kicked off the stage bythe king's privy councillor. The famous debatebefore the tyrant, in which each of the friendscontends that he ought to die for the other, isconducted after this fashion ;G2 DAMON AND PYTHIAS.*' Pythias. Let me have no wrong. as non stances the case,Damon ought not to die, but Pythias :By misadventure, not by his nell. his house is past ; therefore I,Because he came not at his just time, ought justly to die :So was my promise, so was thy promise, O kynge ;All this courte can bear neatness of the things.Damon. Not so, O mightie kynge, to justice it is contrarie.That for another man's fault the innocent should die :Ne yet is my time plainly expired, it is not fully noneOf this my day appointed, by all the clocks in the towne.Pythias. Believe no clock, the house is past by the sonne.'Damon closes the debate, by addressing thehangman ; —Come, Gronno, do thine office now ; why is thy colour sodead?My neck is so short, thou wilt never have honestie in strikingoff this head."Honestie here means honour, or credit. Theauthor borrowed this speech from Hales accountof Sir Thomas ]More's execution. " Also the hangmankneeled down to him, asking him forgivenessof his death, (as the manner is,) to whom he said,I forgive thee, but I promise thee thou shalt neverhave honestie of the striking off my head, myneck is so short''This hangman is a merry fellow, and, like Scott'sPetit Andre, very kind to his patients.Diotiisitis. Gronno, despoil hj-m, and eke dispatch himquickly.Gronno. It shall be done : since you came into this place,I might have stroke off seven heads in this space.DAMON AND PYTHIAS. 63By'r lady, here are good garments ; these are myne by therode,It is an evyll winde that blowed no man good.Now, Pythias, kneels down, ask me blessing like a pretty boy,And, with a trice, thy head from thy shoulders I will convoy."In this piece, ^ unlike any other plays of suchantiquity, the actors are also singers. When Damonis carried to prison, his friend laments hisfate in the following scena.Pythias. Ah ! woful Pythias ! site now I am aloneWhat way shall I first begin to make my none ?What words shall I finde apt for my complaints ?Damon, my friend, my joy, my life is in peril, of force I mustnow faint.But, oh musicke I as in joyful tunes thy merry notes I didborrow,So now lend mee thy yernful tunes, to utter my sorrow.Here Pythias sings, and the regales f 7j/oyAwake, ye woful wights,That long have wept in woe :Among other pieces of pedantry, the characters are muchgiven to quoting Latin : and, in one place, Jack addressesGrimme, in French, " Je bois a vous, mon compagnon ;" towhich Grimme replies, " J'ai vous pledge, petit Sawney'' Theannotator of the second edition of Dudley's Old Plays, says,I know not what is meant by Zaicne." The meaning is quiteplain ; Grimme calls Jack ^^ petit Jean."t The regale was an instrument in common use in England,in the sixteenth century. It seems to have been a small organ,though its nature and powers are not distinctly known. Alter,in his Italian and English dictionary, says, ^^ Regale, sort distromento simile all' organ, ma minor."64 DAMON AND PYTHIAS.Resign to me your plaintes and tears,My hapless hap to show.My woe no tongue can tell,Ne pen can well describe :O what a death is this to heare !Damon my friend must die.The loss of worldly wealthManne's wisdom may restore,And physic hath provided, too,A salve for every sore :But my true friend once lostNo arte can well supplie ;Then, what a death is this to heare !Damon my friend must die.My mouthe refuse the footeThat should my limbes sustain !Let sorrow since into my brest.And ransacked every veine :You furies all at onceOn me your torments trie :Why should I live, since that I heareDamon my friend must die !Gripe me, ye greedy griefs,And present plagues of death ;You sisters three, with cruel hands.With speed come stop my breath ;Shrine me in clay alive.Some good man stop mine eye ;O death, come now, seeing I heareDamon my friend must die''When Pythias, as Damon's hostage, is carriedto prison, " the regales play a mourning song."When, on Damon's failure to return at the appointedSHAKSPEARE. 65time, his friend is about to suffer death, Tubules,the benevolent councillor, enters and sings a songof lamentation for his fate, each stanza of whichhas a burden sung by "the Muses," in chorus;though we are not informed how the Muses camethere. There is also a comic trio, sung by Jack,Will, and Grimme ; and the whole concludes witha regular ^/za^e, or song in honour of the queen,(before whom the play was performed by the childrenof her chapel,) ending thus ;Long may she governed in honour and wealth,Voyde of all sickness, in most perfect health ;Which health to prolonged, as true friends require,God graunt she may have her own heart's desire :Which friends will defend with most stedfast faith,The Lord graunt her such friends, most noble queene Elizabeth."The author of this play was, no doubt, also thecomposer of the music. He died, according to SirJohn Hawkins, on the 31st of October, 1566.Shakspeare, who was evidently a passionatelover of music, has introduced it in a number ofhis plays. The Tempest, even in its original form,may almost be considered a musical drama. Besides"Come unto these yellow sands," "Full fathomfive thy father lies," " Where the bee sucks'* andother songs, it contains a Masque with music, presentedby the spirits of the enchanted island. Thsame is the case with As you like it, in which thereare the fine sylvan glees, " Under the green-woodtree," " What shall he have that kill'd the deer'F66 MASQUES.and " It was a lover and his lass ;"" the exquisitesong, "Blow, blow thou winter wind;" and themusic in the last scene. Many of his other playscontain beautiful lyrical pieces ; and the passagesdescriptive of the charms of music, and its effects,are innumerable. This admixture of music is tobe found in the plays of Jonson, Beaumont andFletcher, Shirley, Dryden, and other dramatistsof the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and didnot cease till the musical drama acquired a separateand independent existence. The masques, whichbecame the favourite amusements of the court inthe sixteenth century, were the precursors of theopera in England ; and (in the words of Burney)belong to the chain of dramas which completed theunion of poetry and music on our stage. It wasby a gradual progress that the masque ripened intothe musical drama; and there are several stepsbetween the pageants exhibited before Henry theEighth and Queen Elizabeth, (and in which thesesovereigns themselves were frequently actors,) andthe Comus of Milton.The masque held a principal place among thepolite amusements of the reign of Henry VIII.It was composed chiefly of music, dancing, and adisplay of grotesque characters like a modern masquerade.One of these shows, in 1530, may bementioned as a specimen. It was contrived bythe king, to surprise Cardinal Wolsey, while hewas giving a splendid banquet, at his palace ofMASQUES. 67Whitehall ; and Shakspeare has introduced it intohis play of Henry VIII. The account given of itby Holinshed, the old chronicler, from whomShakspeare borrowed his incidents, is, that at night,the king, in a mask, and attended by twelve othermaskers in strange dresses, privately landed atWhitehall stairs. On their landing, several smallpieces of cannon were fired. The cardinal, who waspresiding at his banquet, in the midst of a splendidcompany, was (or affected to be — for there wasprobably some collusion in the case,) alarmed atthis unusual noise, and desired Lord Sands, whowas one of the guests, to see what was the matter.Lord Sands returned, and said that thirteen foreignnoblemen of distinction were just arrived, havingbeen attracted by the report of the cardinal's banquet,and of the beautiful ladies who graced it.The cardinal ordered them to be ushered into thebanqueting room, to which they were conducted,attended by torch-bearers, and to the music ofdrums and fifes. After having received refreshments,they requested permission to dance withthe ladies, whom they kissed, and to play withthem at mum-chance, (a game at hazard,) producingat the same time a great golden cup, filledwith crowns. Having played for some time withthe ladies, they designedly lost all that remainedin the cup to the cardinal, who began to hint hissuspicions as to the real quality of one of hisguests. On this, one of the maskers said, " Iff268 MASQUES.your grace can point him out, be will readily discoverhimself." The cardinal pointed, by real orfeigned mistake, to Sir Edward Nevil ; at whichthe king laughed ; and pulling off his own mask,and Sir Edward's, convinced the cardinal that hehad guessed wrong. The king and his companionsthen retired to another apartment to change theirattire ; and in the mean time a fresh banquet ofthe most magnificent kind was served up, to whichthe king sat down with the rest of the company.The royal joke, of course, was the occasion of muchmirth and jesting; and the night was spent indancing, dice-playing, and other amusements.Shakspeare makes this entertainment the occasionon which Henry first saw and was smitten withthe charms of the unfortunate Ann Boleyn. Anothermasque of the same period has something-likethe representation of an action. In the hallof the palace at Greenwich, a castle was reared,with two towers, gates, and battlements; and onthe front was inscribed, Le fortress dangereux.From the windows, looked out six ladies, clothedin russet satin, " laid all over with leaves of gold,and every one knit with laces of blew silk and gold,on their heads coifs and caps all of golde." Thenthe king entered the hall with five knights in embroideredgarments. They assaulted the castle ;and the six ladies, finding them to be champions ofredoubtable valour, having demanded a parley,yielded up their fortress, and came down andchorister's plays. 69danced with the besiegers. The ladies then ledthe knights into the castle, which vanished andthe spectators retired.The singing-boys of the monasteries and churchesappear, from an early period, to have been employedin dramatic representations. These were at first onreligious subjects, and performed on the great festivalsof the church. So early as the year 1378,the scholars or choristers of St. Paul's cathedral,in London, petitioned Richard II. to prohibitcertain ignorant and inexperienced persons fromacting The History of the Old Testament, to thegreat prejudice of the clergy of the church, whohad put themselves to considerable expense inpreparing for a public representation of that playat the ensuing Christmas. In the year 1554, whenthe princess Elizabeth resided at Hatfield House,she was visited by Queen Mary. After mass, theywere entertained with a grand exhibition of bearbaiting," with which," says the chronicler, " theirhighnesses were right well content;" and, aftersupper, a play was presented by the children ofPaul's. After the play, and the next morning, oneof the boys sang to the princess, while she " plaidat the virginal." Strype describes a magnificententertainment given to Queen Elizabeth, in 1559,by the Earl of Arundel, at the antient palace ofNonsuch, in Sorry. "There the queen had agreat entertainment, with banquets, especially onSunday night, made by the said earl; together70 INNS OF COURT.with a masque, and the warlike sounds of drums,and flutes, and all kind of musick, till midnight.On Monday was a great supper made for her ;and at night was a play by the children of Paul's,and their musick-master, Sebastian. After that, acostly banquet, accompanied with drums andflutes. This entertainment lasted till three in themorning ; and the earl presented her majesty acupboard of plate." In the year 1562, when thesociety of parish-clerks in London celebrated oneof their annual feasts, after morning service inGuildhall chapel, they retired to their hall, whereafterdinner, " a goodly play" was performed bythe choristers of Westminster Abbey, " with waits,and regale, and singing." The children of thechapel-royal were also famous actors, and wereformed into a company of players, by Queen Elizabeth.All Lily's plays, and many of Shakspeare'sand Jonson's, were originally performed by thesejuvenile actors, and it seems probable, that thetitle given by Jonson to one of his comedies, calledCynthia's Revels, was an allusion to this establishmentof Queen Elizabeth, one of whose romanticnames was Cynthia.*The gentlemen of the Inns of Court, in thosedays, were much given to dramatic representations.John Roos, a student of Gray's Inn, and after-themusical comedy of " Damon and Pythias," which hasbeen already described, was performed before the queen, by thechildren of her chapel.INNS OF COURT. 71wards a serjeant-at-law, wrote a comedy which wasacted in the hall of the society, at Christmas, 1527.It gave such offence to Cardinal Wolsey, probablyfrom its containing reflections on the pomp andarrogance of the clergy, that the author was degradedand imprisoned. In 1561, the tragedy ofFerre and Porrex was performed before QueenElizabeth, at Whitehall, by the gentlemen of theInner Temple. Decker, in his satire againstJonson, accuses him of having stolen jokes fromthe Christmas plays of the Templar. " You shallswear not to bombast out a new play with the oldlining of testes stone from the Temple-revels."In the year 1613, the Society of Lincoln's Inn presenteda masque at Whitehall, before James I., inhonour of the marriage of the Princess Elizabethwith the Elector Palatine ; and, on the same occasion,was performed " The Masque of Gray's InnGentlemen, and the Inner Temple'' by Beaumontand Fletcher.Some of these masques, presented by the membersof these learned societies, were written bymen of genius, and contain beautiful poetry.Among these may be mentioned, " The InnerTemple Masque," on the story of Circe and Ulysses,written by William Browne, a student of thatsociety, about the year 1620.* In this piece thereBrowne's works were published in 1772 ; and some additionalspecimens of his poetry have been given to the world by72 INNS OF COURT.is the following fine song, which Circe sings as acharm to drive away sleep from Ulysses, who isdiscovered reposing under a tree.Son of Erebus and Night,Hie away and aim thy flight,Where consort none other fowlThan the bat and sullen owl :Where, upon the limber grass,Poppy and anaxagoras.With like simples not a few.Hang for ever drops of dew :Where flows Lethe, without coil.Softly like a stream of oil.Hie thee thither, gentle Sleep IWith this Greek no longer keep.Thrice I charge thee by my wand.Thrice with moly from my hand.Do 1 touch Ulysses' eyes.And with th' iaspis. Then arise,Sagest Greek !"Wanton remarks, that this song brings to mindsome favourite touches in Milton's Comus ; and isof opinion that a masque, thus recently exhibitedon the story of Circe, and which there is everyreason to think had acquired some popularity,probably suggested to Milton the idea of a masqueon a similar subject. " It would be superfluous,"Wanton adds, " to point out minutely the absolutesimilarity of the two characters : they both deal inSir Egerton Bridges. He does not appear to have gained thereputation which he deserves.MASQUES. 73incantations, conducted by the same mode of operation,and producing effects exactly parallel."The masques, which formed the favourite amusementof the court during the reigns of James andCharles the First, were almost all composed by BenJonson, and are a delightful portion of his works.They have suffered much less from the injuries oftime than his regular dramas, especially his comedies,which are founded, not so much on the permanentvarieties of human character, as on theobsolete manners and peculiarities or humours ofhis own age, and are full, moreover, of allusionswhich all the labours of antiquarian research havenot succeeded in rendering intelligible. Jonsonlyrical productions seem to belong to another anda later age. The style differs from that of the presentday in little more than its richness of classicalimagery ; a richness which has exposed thepoet, though unjustly, to the charge of pedantry.His garb is magnificent, but not cumbrous ; itsgorgeous ornaments are tasteful and well disposed ;and he wears it lightly and gracefully. Nothingcan be more flowing and harmonious than thepoetry of these pieces, both in the spoken dialoguesand the songs ; and their lofty sentiments, andpurity of thought, although written for the entertainmentof a court, the manners of which wereanything but pure, give an exalted idea of the characterof their author.These masques were professed imitations of the74 • MASQUES.newly-created Italian opera of that day. In someof them the dialogue is directed to be delivered*' in stilo recitative :" and the music, being theproduction of Italian composers, was of course inthe Italian style. They resembled the Italianopera, too, in being founded on mythological subjects,and in being performed with great splendourof scenery and decoration. At this time all attemptsto heighten the illusion of the stage byscenic display were confined to the expensive entertainmentsof the court. Queen Anne, the consortof James the First, took great delight in theseperformances, in which she herself, with her children,and the nobles and ladies of the court, tooka part, figuring in the pageants and dancing in theballets. Modern writers have characterised thesecourt pastimes as pedantic and tasteless, pompousand operose. Surely, however, so permanent arelish for a kind of entertainment which employedthe highest powers of one of our greatest poets, indicatedconsiderable refinement of taste, if not ofmanners ; and the opinion of Gifford* is at leastas near the truth, notwithstanding the characteristicasperity with which it is expressed. " It musthave been a very graceful and splendid entertainment: and, with due respect be it spoken, nearlyas worthy of the nobility as the private masquerades,&c. which, with such advantage to goodSee note on the masque, " Pleasure reconciled to Virtue,"in GifFord's edition of Jonson.MANNERS OF THE COURT. 75manners, have been substituted for it. It is withpeculiar modesty that we, who cannot eke out anevening's entertainment without the introductionof gamblers, hired buffoons, and voluntary jack-puddings,declaim on the ' pedantry and wretchedtaste' of James and his court."But whatever may be said in defence of thetaste of a court which was addicted to this speciesof amusement, nothing can be said in favour of itsmanners. Sir John Harrington, in his JVugceAntique, gives an account of a scene which tookplace at the performance of one of these masques,during the visit of Christian IV. of Denmark tothis country, so extraordinary as to be almost incredible,were it not for the character of the relater.One day," he says, " a great feast was held,and after dinner, the representation of Solomon hisTemple, and the coming of the Queen of Sheba,was made, (or, as I may better say,) was meant tohave been made before their majesties, by deviceof the Earl of Salisbury and others. But, alas ! asall earthly things do fail to poor mortals in enjoyment,so did prove our presentment hereof. Theladie, who did play the Queen's part, did carrymost precious gifts to both their majesties ; but,forgetting the steps arising to the canopy, oversether caskets into his Danish majestie's lap, and fellat his feet, though I rather think it was in his face.Much was the hurry and confusion ; clothes andnapkins were at hand to make all clean. His76 MANNERS OF THE COURT.majesty then got up, and Mould dance with thequeen of Sheba, but he fell down, and humbledhimself before her, and was carried to an innerchamber, and laid upon a bed of state, whichwas not a little defiled with the presents of theQueen, which had been bestowed on his garments;such as wine, cream, jelly, beverage, cakes, spices,and other o;ood matters. The entertainment andshow went forward, and most of the presenterswent backward, or fell down ; wine did so occupytheir upper chambers Now did appear, in richdresses, Hope, Faith, and Charity : Hope did essayto speak, but wine rendered her endeavours sofeeble that she withdrew, and hoped the king wouldexcuse her brevity : Faith was then left all alone,for I am certain she was not joined with goodworks, and left the court in a staggering condition.Charity came to the king's feet, and seemed tocover the multitude of sins her sisters had committed; in some sort she made obeisance, andbrought gifts, but said she would return homeagain, as there was no gift which heaven had notalready given his majesty. She then returned toHope and Faith, who were both sick in the lowerhall. Next came Victory, in bright armour, andpresented a rich sword to the king, (who did notaccept it, but put it by with his hand,) and by astrange medley of versification did endeavour tomake suit to the king. But Victory did not triumphlong ; for, after much lamentable utterance.jonson's masques. 77she was led away like a silly captive, and laid tosleep on the outer steps of the ante-chamber.Now did Peace make entry, and strove to get foremostto the king ; but I grieve to tell how greatwa-hath she did discover unto those of her attendants,and, much contrary to her semblance, most rudely.made war with her olive-branch, and laid on thepates of those who did oppose her coming. I havemuch marvelled at these strange pageantries ; andthey do bring to my remembrance what part of thissort in our queen's days, of which I was sometimea humble presenter and assistant, but I ne'er didsee such lack of good order, discretion, and sobriety,as I have now done. I have passed muchtime in seeing the royal sports of hunting andhawking, where the manners were such as mademe devise the beasts were pursuing the sober creation,and not man in quest of exercise and food. Iwill now, in good sooth, declare to you, who willnot blab, that the gunpowder fright is got out of allour heads, and we are going on hereabout as if thedevil was contriving every man should blow uphimself by wild riot, excess, and devastation oftime and temperance."Jonson's masques, extending over a period ofthirty years, are numerous. The first of them wasperformed in 1605, on the occasion of the marriageof Sir Philip Herbert and the Lady Susan Vere.It was called The Masque of Blackness, from thequeen and a bevy of her ladies personating twelve78 Jonson MASQUES.Ethiopian nymphs, daughters of the Niger, whocame to England in search of a wash to whitentheir complexions. It did not escape the lash of thewits of the time. Sir Dudley Carlton gives a ludicrousdescription of the exhibition. " At night wehad the queen's mask in the banquetting-house, orrather her pageant. There was a great engine atthe lower end of the room, which had motion, andin it were the images of sea horses with otherterrible fishes, which were ridden by Moors. Theindecorum was, that there was all fish and no water.At the further end was a great shell in the form ofa scallop, wherein were four seats ; on the lowestsat the queen with my lady Bedford; on the restwere placed the ladies Suffolk, Derby, Rich, OffingAnn Herbert, Susan Herbert, Elizabeth Howard,Walsingham, and Devil. Their appearancewas rich, but too light and courtezan-like for suchgreat ones. Instead of vizards, their faces andarms up to the elbows were painted black, whichwas disguise sufficient, for they were hard to beknown : but it became them nothing so well astheir red and white ; and you cannot imagine amore ugly sight than a troop of lean-checked Moors.The Spanish and Venetian ambassadors were bothpresent, and sat by the king in state. The Spanishambassador took out the queen, and forgot not tokiss her hand, though there was danger it mighthave left a mark on his lips." The conclusion ofthe revel is characteristic of the age. " The night'sjonson's masques. 79work was concluded with a banquet in the greatchamber, which was so furiously assaulted, thatdown went tables and tresses before one bit wastouched'*One of the prettiest of these pieces, called TheMasque of Hymen, was performed at the ill-starrednuptials of Robert Earl of Essex, and the ladyFrances Howard, daughter of the Earl of Suffolk.This couple were mere children ; the bridegroom inhis fourteenth, and the bride in her thirteenth year.Essex was sent abroad on his travels ; and his wife,in his absence, entered into a guilty intrigue withRobert Carr, Viscount Rochester, the celebratedfavourite of James. After Essex's return, shefound means to obtain a scandalous divorce, andimmediately married her paramour, who was atthe same time made Earl of Somerset. Sir ThomasOverture, who had endeavoured to prevent thisunion, was poisoned in the tower by creatures of theEarl and Countess ; and though they, as well astheir agents, were tried and condemned for thisatrocious deed, yet the lives of the principal criminals,for some unaccountable reason, were sparedby the king. They lived for many years shunnedby every one, and adding to the wretchedness oftheir existence the bitterness of a mutual hatred,so intense and implacable, that, though dwellingin the same house, they were never seen to exchangea single word. Before her disgraceful second marriage,this lady appears to have been a frequentJONSON S MASQUES.performer in the court entertainments. This secondmarriage was favoured by James, still under the influenceof his minion, and a splendid masque wasperformed in celebration of it ; but this masque wasnot written by Jonson.The Hue and Cry after Cupid was performed atthe Lord Viscount Haddington's marriage at court,on the Shrove-Tuesday, at night, 1608. This LordHaddington was the Sir John Ramsay who hadsaved the king's life, by stabbing the Earl of Gowrie,when he and his brother made their memorable assaulton the king, at Perth, in the year 1600. Thispiece contains some fine lyrics. The following song,sung by the three Graces, may be taken as a specimenof Jonson's musical numbers.\st Grace. Beauties, have you seen this toy,Called Love, a little boy,Almost naked, wanton, blind ;Cruel now, and then as kind ?If he be among ye, say ;He is Venus' runaway.2)1(1 Grace. She that will but now discoverWhere the winged wag doth hover,Shall to-night receive a kiss,How, or where, herself would wish :But, who brings him to his mother,Shall have that kiss, and another.3rcl Grace. He hath marks about him plenty ;You shall know him among twenty.All his body is a fire,And his breath a flame entire,JONSON S MASQUES.That being shot, like lightning, in.Wounds the heart, but not the skin.4tk Grace, At his sight, the sun hath turbid,Neptune in the waters burn'd ;Hell hath felt a greater heat ;Jove himself forsook his seat :From the centre of the skyAre his trophies rear'd on high.2nd Grace. Wings he hath, which though ye clip,He will leap from lip to lip.Over liver, lights, and heart.But not stay in any part ;And if chance his arrow misses.He will shoot himself, in kisses.3rd Grace. He doth bear a golden bow,And a quiver, hanging low,Full of arrows that outbraveDean's shafts ; where, if he haveAny head more sharp than other',With that first he strikes his mother.\st Grace. Still the fairest are his fuel,When his days are to be cruel,Lovers' hearts are all his food,And his baths their warmest blood .Nought but wounds his hand doth seasonAnd he hates none like to Reason.2nd Grace. Trust him not ; his words, though sweet.Seldom with his heart do meet.All his practice is deceit ;Every gift it is a bait ;Not a kiss but poison bears ,And most treason in his tears. ~3rd Grace. Idle minutes are his reign ;Then, the struggler makes his gain,82 jonson's masques.By presenting maids with toys,J^nd would have ye think them joys ;'Tis the ambition of the elf,To have all childish as himself.1,$^ Grace. If by these ye please to know him,Beauties, be not nice, but show him.2}id Grace. Though ye had a will to hide him ;Now, we hope, ye'll not abide him.3rd Grace. Since you hear his falser play ;And that he's Venus' runaway."Another of these masques, The Masque of Queens,was performed on the occasion of Prince Henrybeing created Prince of Wales, in 1610. It exhibitedtwelve ladies seated on thrones in the form ofa pyramid, eleven of whom represented the likenumber of queens, of different times and countries,who had been illustrious for great qualities andvirtues ; and the twelfth was Queen Anne herself,who appeared in her own character, and under thepoetical name of Bel-anna, seated at the summit ofthe pyramid, a place assigned her by the unanimousvoice of her sister queens, as combining in herselfall the qualities for which they severally had beendistinguished. As a contrast to this picture ofTrue Fame, there was an anti-masque of twelvewomen, appearing as witches, and representingIgnorance, Suspicion, Credulity, and other allegoricalpersonages, the opposites to good Fame.This piece of diablerie so strongly excited the imaginationof the young prince, that he desiredJonson, when the piece was published, to add notesjonson's masques. 83to it, explaining the sources from which all hisspells, incantations, and magical ceremonies, hadbeen derived : and these notes form a learned andcurious treatise on witchcraft. The scenes of thewitches have given rise to a good deal of controversyamong the critics. By some it is contendedthat they were written in imitation, or rivalry, ofShakspeare : while, by others, this accusation isdenied, and Jonson's originality strenuously defended.The general resemblance of these scenesto those in Macbeth is indeed very strong ; thoughit may have arisen without plagiarism on eitherhand.In this masque, as in Macbeth, there is a principalhag, to whom the others give an account oftheir doings in her absence. Here are some ofthem.1*^ Hftg. I have been all day looking afterA raven feeding upon a quarter ;And, soon as she turned her beak to the south,I snatch'd the morsel out of her mouth.3c? Hag. I last night lay all aloneOn the ground, to hear the mandrake groan,And pluck'd him up, though he gre^^ full low ;And, as I had done, the cock did crow.Hath Hag. And I have been choosing out this skull,From charnel houses that were full ;From private grots, and public pits ;And frighted a sexton out of his wits.th Hag. A murderer, yonder, was hung in chains,The sun and the wind had shrunk his veins ;G 284 jonson's masques.I bit ofFa sinew ; I clipped his hair ;I brought off his rags that danc'd in the air.9th Hag. And I have been plucking, plants among,Hemlock, henbane, adder's tongue,Night-shade, moon-wort, hubbard's bane ;And twice, by the dogs, was like to be ta'en.1 Nth Hag. I, from the jaws of a gardener's bitch.Did snatch these bones, and then leap'd the ditch :Yet back I went to the house again,Kill'd the black cat, and here's the brain.11^^ Hag. I went to the toad breeds under the wall,I charm'd him out, and he came at my call ;I scratch'd out the eyes of the owl before ;I tore the bat's wing : what would you have more ?Dame (the chief hag.) Yes, I have brought, to help our vows.Horned poppy, cypress boughs.The fig-tree wild that grows on tombs.And juice that from the larch-tree comes,The basilisk's blood, and the viper's skin ;And now our orgies let us begin."The incantations conclude thus :About, about, and about,Till the mist arise, and the lights fly out,The images neither be seen nor felt ;The woollen burn, and the waxen melt :Sprinkle your liquors upon the ground,And into the air ; around, around.Around, around,Around, around.Till a music sound.And the pace be found,To which we may dance,And our charms advance."FERABOSCO. 85"At which," says the stage direction, "with astrange and sudden music, they fall into a magicaldance, full of preposterous change and gesticulation.In the heat of their dance, on a sudden was heardthe sound of loud music as if many instrumentshad made one blast ; with which not only the hags.themselves, but the hell into which they ran, quitevanished, and the whole face of the scene altered,scarce suffering the memory of such a thing : butinthe place of it appeared a glorious and magnificentbuilding, figuring the House of Fame, in thetop of which were discovered the twelve masquers,sitting upon a throne triumphal, erected in theform of a pyramid, and circled with all store oflight." These masquers were the one real andeleven fictitious queens, already mentioned. Oneof them was the Countess of Essex, then the prideand boast of the English court, and shining in allthe brightness of youth, loveliness, and at least apparentinnocence. In this latter part of the piece,some fine songs and choruses are introduced. Theauthor says that " the music is the work andhonour of my excellent friend Alfonso Ferabosco,''and he also commemorates the talents of " thatmost excellent tenor voice, and exact singer, hermajesty's servant. Master Jo. Allen," by whom oneof them was sung.Alfonso Ferabosco, the composer of the musicin the greater number of Jonson's masques, wasEnglish by birth, but Italian by parentage and edu-86 FERABOSCO.cation. His father, of the same name, was aneminent madrigals, and appears to have been asuperior musician, Ferabosco the younger, however,was for a long time the most fashionable composerof his day, for the stage and the chamber.The encomiast verses, by Ben Jonson and others,prefixed to a book of Ayres, published by him in1609, show the opinion entertained of his merits —an opinion of which he himself largely partook ;as appears from his dedication to Prince Henrys,written in a quaint style of self satisfaction. " Icould now," he says, " with solemn industry ofmany in epistles, enforce all that hath been said inpraise of the faculty of musique, and make thatcommend the work : but I desire more, the workshould commend the faculty : and therefore sufferthese few arises to owe their grace rather to yourHighness judgment, than any other testimonies. Iam not made of much speech ; only I know themworthy of my name ; and therein I took pains tomake them worthy of yours." The modern ear,however, will take no pleasure in these ayres, or inany other specimens of this composer's music whichare still extant. They are sufficiently regular inmodulation and harmony ; but the airs are stiff,laboured, and unmeaning ; and the accent andrhythm of the poetry are quite disregarded. Wecannot imagine Jonson's beautiful and flowing measuresunited with such dull and insipid sounds, andlistened to with delight by a courtly and elegantLantern. 87audience. But no better melody was then knownin England ; and the most refined taste will rarelytranscend the highest standard of existing excellence.Another of Jonson's musical coadjutors wasNicol Laniere, also an Italian. He was a painterand engraver, as well as a musician ; but his greatestexcellence was in music. He etched a considerablenumber of plates for a drawing-book ; wasan able connoisseur in pictures ; and possessedthe picture-dealing art of giving modern picturesan air of antiquity, and passing off copiesfor originals. From the directions given in theprinted copies, in Jonson's works, as to the mannerof performing some of the masques which Laniereset to music, it is evident that, having newly arrivedfrom Italy, he followed the Italian mode of the day ;setting the dialogues hi stilo recitativo, and interminglingthem with airs for single voices, and choruses.Indeed, the masques of Ben Jonson, as setby Ferabosco and Laniere, bore a much closer resemblanceto the regular Italian opera than thepieces called operas which prevailed on the Englishstage during the greater part of the last century.Specimens of Laniere's music are to be found inPlatform's collections. As might be expected, hisrecitatives are better than his airs ,■ and are superiorto those of any English composer of that day.CHAPTER IV.Time of Charles I. — Shirley's masque, The Triumph ofPeace — Prynne's Histrio-mastix — Milton's Comus — HenryLawes.In the early part of the reign of Charles theFirst, masques remained in undiminished favour atcourt. They suited the gay disposition of hisQueen, Henrietta Maria, and the love of dramaticamusements which she brought with her from thecourt of France. She was frequently a principalperformer in the masques, which continued to bewritten chiefly by Ben Jonson. A great number ofmasques are mentioned as having been representedat court during the first years of Charles's reign,some of which were performed by the queen, andothers by the gentlemen of the Inns of Court.The most remarkable of the masques given bythese gentlemen was one which was performed in1633, before Charles and his court, as a testimonyof loyalty to the king on his return from Scotland,after terminating for the time the discontents ofthat kingdom. It was written by Shirley, andTRIUMPH OF PEACE. 89entitled The Triumph of Peace. The circumstancesconnected with its performance are minutelydetailed by Lord Commissioner White-lock,in a manuscript autobiography, written byhim for the use of his children.* This masque hadanother object beside that of being an expressionpf love and duty to their majesties. " Some," saysWhitelock, "held it the more seasonable, becausethis action would manifest the difference of theiropinion from Mr. Prynne's new learning, and serveto confute his Histrio-mastix against interludes."Of this celebrated book, which had been publishedthe preceding year, we shall presently give someaccount.A committee of members of the four societieswas appointed to manage the business ; and White-lockhimself, being an amateur, was intrusted withthe charge of the musical department. He madechoice of Simon Ives, a musician of considerablemerit, and the celebrated Henry Lawes, to composethe music of the masque, and to conduct its performance,under himself. " I also made choice,"he says, "of four of the most excellent of thequeen's chapel, M. La Ware, M. Dual, M. Robert,and M. Mari, with divers others of foreignnations, who were most eminent in their art, not inthe least neglecting my own countrymen whoseknowledge of music rendered them useful in thisThis account, here abridged, is quoted at full length byBurney, vol.iii. p. 369.90 TRIUMPH OF PEACE.action, to bear their parts in the musicke, which Iresolved, if I could, to have so performed, as mightexcell any that ever before this time had been inEngland. Herein I kept my purpose, causing themeetings of all the musitians to be frequent at myhouse in Salisbury Court ; and there I have hadtogether matt one time, of English, French, Italian,German, and other masters of musicke, fourtylutes, besides other instruments, and voices of themost excellent kind in consort."The masque was performed on Candlemas night,the persons engaged in it having proceeded, inprocession, from Ely-house in Lowborn, to Whitehall.This procession is minutely described, andmust have been a magnificent affair. The actors inthe masque were sixteen in number, four gentlemenof each Inn, who were drawn in four chariotsand six. There were " one hundred gentlemen ofthe Innes of Court in very rich cloathes, five andtwenty chosen out of each house, of the most properand handsome young gentlemen of the societies.Every one of them was gallantly mounted,on the best horses, and with the best furniture thatthe king's stable and the stables of all the nobilityin towne could afford, and they were forward onthis occasion to lend them. The richness of theapparel and furniture, glittering by the light of themultitude of torches attending them, with the motionand stirring of the mettled horses, and themany and various gay liveries of their servants,TRIUMPH OF PEACE. 91butt especially the personal beauty and gallantry ofthe handsome young gentlemen, made the mostglorious and splendid show that ever was beheld inEngland."This gallant array was followed by a series ofanti-masques, or burlesque processions of beggarsmounted on the most sorry jades that could be procured,men on horseback imitating the notes ofbirds, and disguised in the shapes of animals, withother devices of a ludicrous and satirical kind. Inone of them " rode a fellow upon a little horsewith a great bit in his mouth and upon the man'shead was a bit with headstall and reins, fastened,and signified a projector, that none in the kingdommight ride their horses but with such bits as theyshould buy of him. Another projector, who beggeda patent of monopoly to feed capons with carrots;and several other projectors, were in like mannerpersonated, which pleased the spectators themore, because by it an information was covertlygiven to the king of the unfitness and ridiculousnessof these projects, against the law ; andthe attorney Noy, who had most knowledge ofthem, had a great hand in this anti-masque of theprojectors."When the procession arrived at Whitehall,through streets crowded with spectators, "the kingand queen stood at a window, looking straight forwardinto the street, to see the masque come by,and being delighted with the noble bravery of it,92 TRIUMPH OF PEACE.they sent to the marshall to desire that the wholeshow might fetch a thine about the Tilt-yard, thattheir majesties might have a double view of them ;which was done accordingly, and then they alightedat Whitehall-gate, and were conducted to severalrooms and places prepared for them.The king and queen and all their noble trainbeing come in, the masque began, and was incomparablyperformed, in the dancing, speeches, musicke,and scenes ; the dances, figures, properties, thevoices, instruments, songs, airs, composure, thewords and actions, were all of them exact, nonefailed in their parts, and the scenes were mostcurious and costly. The queen did the honour tosome of the masquers to dance with them herselfe,and to judge them as good dancers as ever she saw,and the great ladies were very free and civil indancing with all the masquers as they were takenout by them. Thus, they continued in their sportsuntil it was almost morning, and then, the king andqueen retiring, the masquers and Innes of Courtgentlemen were brought to a stately banquet, andafter that was dispersed, every one departed to hisown quarters."The queen was so delighted with this show, thatit was repeated at Merchant Tailors' hall, where abanquet was given to their majesties by the lordmayor. 'this," says Whitelock, "gave greatcontentment to their majesty es, and no less to thecitizens, especially those of the younger sort, and ofTRIUMPH OF PEACE. 93the female sexe, and it was to the great honour andno less charge of the lord mayor and freemen."After these dream es past," he continues, "andthese pompes vanished, all men were satisfied bythe committee justly and bountifully. For themusicke, which was particularly committed to myeharo-e, T o-ave to Mr. Ives and to Mr. Lawes 100/.apiece for their rewards; for the four French gentlemen,the queen's servants, I thought that a handsomeand liberal gratifying of them would bemade known to the queen, their mistress, and welltaken by her. 1 therefore invited them one morningto a collation matt St. Dunstan's taverne, in the greatroom, the oracle of Apollo, where each of them hadhis plate laid for him, covered, and the napkin byit ; and when they opened their plates they foundin each of them forty pieces of gold, of their master'scone, for the first dish, and they had cause tobe much pleased with this surprise. The rest ofthe musitians had rewards answerable to their partsand qualities ; and the whole charge of themusicke came to about one thousand pounds. Theclothes of the horsemen reckoned one with anotherat los. a suit, matt the least, amounted to 10,000/.The charges of all the rest of the masque, whichwere borne by the societies, were accounted to beabove twenty thousand pounds"*In Whitelock's account there is a trait of simple vanity toocharacteristic to be omitted. " I was conversant with the musicians,and so willing to gain their favour, especially at this time,94 HISTRIO-MASTIX.The book by William Prynne, which is alludedto by Whitelock, and the effects of which were attemptedto be counteracted by the exhibition ofthe above masque, had been published in the precedingyear, 1632. It is entitled " Histrio-mastix,the Player's Scourge, or Actor's Tragedie, in whichit is pretended to be evidenced, that stage-places(the very pompes of the divell, which we renouncedin baptisme, if we believe the fathers) are sinful,heathenish, lewd, ungodly spectacles, and mostpernicious corruptions ; condemned in all ages asintolerable mischiefs to churches, to republics, tothe manners, minds, and soulesof men. And thatthe profession of play-poets, of stage-players, togetherwith the penning, acting, and frequenting ofthat I composed an aire myself, iclth the assistance of Mr. Ives,and called it JJliitelock's Cora?ito ; which being cried up, wasfirst played obliquely, by the Blackftyar's musicke, who werethen esteemed the best of common musitians in London. WheneverI came to that house (as I sometimes did in those days,though not often) to see a play, the musitians would presentlyplay WJiitelock's Coranto, and it was so often called for that theywould have it played twice or three times in an afternoon. Thequeen hearing it, would not be persuaded that it was made by anEnglishman, because she said it was fuller of life and spirit thanthe English airs use to be ; butt she honored the Coranto and themaker of it with her raajestye's royal commendation. It grewto that request, that all the common musitians in this towne, andall over the kingdom, got the composition of it, and played itobliquely in all places, for above thirtie years after." Ultite-lock's Coranto has been preserved from oblivion by being insertedin the histories of both Hawkins and Burney.HISTRIO-MASTIX. 95stage-places, are unlawful, infamous, and misbecomingChristians. All pretences to the contrarie arehere likewise fully answered, and the unlawfulnessof acting or beholding academical interludesbriefly discussed, besides sundry other particularsconcerning dancing, dicing, health-drinking, &c.''This ample title gives a very good'summar}?^ of thecontents of the book, which is directed not onlyagainst plays performed in public theatres, but alsoagainst " academical interludes" or the masquesand other entertainments, then so much in fashion,presented b}^ the students of the Inns of Court.Prynne is a bitter enemy of music, and inveighsagainst its use, not only in connexion with dramaticentertainments, but in all circumstances whatever,excepting in psalm-singing. He affirms that oneunlawful concomitant of stage-plays is amorous,obscene, lascivious, lust-provoking songs andpoems ; which, he says, were once so odious inour church, that in the articles to be inquired of invisitations, set forth in the first year of Queen Elizabeth'sreign, churchwardens were enjoined toinquire " whether any minstrels or any other personsdid use to sing or say any songs or ditties thatbe vile and unclean." He maintains, on the authorityof Clemens Alexandrine, " that cymbals anddulcimers are instruments of fraud ; that pipes andflutes are to be abandoned from a sober feast ;and that chromatic harmonies are to be leftto impudent malapertness in wine, to whorish96 HISTRIO-MASTIX.musick crowned with flowers." And upon thesesolid and rational grounds he inveighs with the utmostviolence against all pastimes in which musichas any share.This book, however absurd and ridiculous itscontents may now appear, was, at the time of itspublication, looked upon in a very different light.It spoke the sentiments of the Puritans, a great andincreasing body, who held in abomination all thoseamusements against which it was levelled. Bythem, therefore, it was received with great approbation,while it excited the indignation and alarmof the court-party, who held it to be a satire againsttheir majesties themselves, as being fond of thesepastimes. The queen was supposed to be especiallyaimed at, because she frequently acted a part in themasques which were performed at court ; and thephrase in the table of contents, " Women actorsnotorious whores," was considered an innuendoagainst her majesty. Prynne, therefore, who wasa barrister of Lincoln's Inn, was indicted in thecourt of Star-chamber, that memorable instrumentof arbitrary power, for a libel.The enormity of Prynne's offence, in the eyes ofthe court, was heightened by the manner in whichhe had attacked the hierarchy, and the ceremoniesand innovations in religious worship lately introducedby Laud. " The music of the churches," hehad said in his characteristic style, '' is not thenoise of men, but a bleating of brute beasts ; chow97sisters bellow the tenor as if it were oxen ; bark acounterpart as if it were a kennel of dogs ; roarout a treble as if it were a sort of bulls ; and gruntout a bass as it were a number of hogs." He saidthat Christmas, as it was kept, was the devil'sChristmas; and endeavoured, to persuade men toaffect the name of Puritan, as if our Saviour himselfhad been of that persuasion.These accumulated provocations may account for,though they cannot justify, the spirit of hatred andrevenge by which the judges were actuated, andthe excessive severity, or rather barbarity, of thepunishment inflicted on the unfortunate culprit.It is a strange thing," said the Lord Chief Justice,what this man taketh upon him ; he is not likethose powder-traitors, they would have blown usail up at once ; this throweth all down at once tohell together, and delivered them over to Satan.I beseech your lordships to give me leave. ' Stage-plays,'&c. saith he, ' none are gainers and honouredby them but the devil and hell ; and whenthey have taken their wills in lust there, their soulsgo to eternal torment hereafter;' and this must betheend of this monster's horrible sentence. Hesaith, ' So many as are in playhouses are so manyunclean spirits ;' and that ' play-haunters are littlebetter than incarnate devils.' He doth not onlycondemn all play-writers, but all protectors of themand all beholding of them : and dancing at playsand singing at plays they are all damned, and thatVOL. I. H98 HISTRIO-MASTIX.no less than to hell. I beseech your lordships togive me leave, but in a word, to read to you whathe writes of dancing, &c. ' It is the devil's profession; and he that entered into a dance enteredinto a devilish profession ; and so many paces in adance, so many paces to hell.' This is what heconceive of dancing. ' The woman that singerin the dance is the prioress of the devil, and thosethat answer are clerks, and the beholders are theparishioners, and the music are bells, and thefiddlers are the minstrels of the devil.' I said itwas a seditious libel ; this point of sedition is theonly thing that troubles me, and it is that which Ishall offer to your lordships ; for I do know it, thegood opinion, heart, will, and affections of theking's people and subjects are the king's greatesttreasure." The Earl of Dorset said, " Mr. Prynne,I do declare you to be a schism-maker in the church,a sedition-monger in the commonwealth, a wolf insheep's clothing ; in a word, ' omnium valoremnequissimus.' I shall fine him 10,000/., which ismore than he is worth, yet less than he deserve ;I will not set him at liberty no more than a plaguedman or a mad dog, who, though he cannot bite, hewill foam ; he is so far from being a sociable soulthat lie is not a rational soul ; he is fit to live indens with such beasts of prey as wolves and tigerslike himself. Therefore I do condemn him to perpetualimprisonment as those monsters that are nolonger to live among men, nor to see light. NowMilton's comus. 99for corporal punishment, my lords ; whether shouldI burn him in the forehead or slit him in the nose ?He that was guilty of murder was marked in aplace where he might be seen, as Cain was. Ishould be loth he should escape with his ears, forhe may get a periwig, which he now so much inveighsagainst, and so hide them, or force his conscienceto make use of his unlovely love-locks onboth sides. Therefore I would have him brandedin the forehead, slit in the nose, and his ears cropttoo. My Lords, I now come to this ordure ; I cangive no better term to it, to burn it, as it is commonin other countries, or otherwise we shall bury Mr.Prynne and suffer his ghost to walk. I shall thereforeconcur in the burning of the book ; but letthere be a proclamation made, that whoever shallkeep any of the books in his hands and not bringthem to some public magistrate to be burnt in thefire, let them fall under the sentence of this court."These brutal suggestions were not entirely adopted :but Prynne was sentenced to be put on the pilloryin two places, Westminster and Cheapside; to loseboth his ears, one in each place ; to pay 5,000/. fineto the king ; and to be imprisoned during life : andthis sentence was executed.Milton's Masque of Comus, one of the brightestgems of English poetry, was written for the Earl ofBridgewater, at whose mansion it was first performedin 1634. The story of the piece was foundedon an incident which had occurred to the earsH 2100 HENRY LA WES.children. When he resided at Ludlow Castle, inShropshire, his two sons, Lord Bracelet and Mr.Egerton, and his daughter Lady Alice Egerton,were benighted in passing through a neighbouringforest, and the young lady for some time could notbe found. This adventure excited Milton's imagination,and gave rise to the masque, which was representedon Michaelmas-eve for the amusement ofthe family and the nobility and gentry of the neighbourhood.The two brothers were performed by theEarl's sons, and his daughter was the Lady. LadyAlice Egerton, who was then a girl of thirteen,afterwards became lady Vaughan and Carbury,and was distinguished for her talents and accomplishments.Henry Lawes, the celebrated composer of themusic in this masque, taught music in the family ofLord Bridgewater, and Lady Alice Egerton was hispupil. His first book of " Ayres and Dialogues,"published in 1653, is dedicated to her, and LadyHerbert of Carbury, her sister. Lawes himselfacted the part of the attendant spirit. In 1637Lawes published the poem of Comus ; but the musicdoes not appear to have ever been printed. It appears,however, from a manuscript in Lawes' ownhandwriting, mentioned by Hawkins and Burney,that the two songs, " Sweet Echo" and " Sabinafair," together with three other passages in thepoem — " Back, shepherds, back," " To the oceannow I fly' and " Now my task is smoothly done,"HENRY LAWES. 101were probably the whole of the original music ;and that the rest of the poetry was simply declaimed.If we were to judge of the genius of HenryLawes from the specimen given of it by Hawkinsand Burney, the song, " Sweet Echo," in thismasque, our opinion certainly would be very unfavourable.The lyrical beauty of the words doesnot seem to have inspired the composer. His musichas neither the accent and emphasis of recitative,nor the rhythmical flow of air. It is a sort of stiffand constrained chant, destitute of melody, and,except in the passage —Where the love-lorn nightingaleNightly to thee her sad song mourned well,"where there is a glimmering of feeling at thewords " sad song," — it is equally destitute ofexpression.Though we agree with Burney in his strictureson this composition, yet we think he has led theworld to entertain an erroneous opinion of Lawes'character as a musician. " I have examined, " hesays, " with care and candour all the works I canfind of this composer, which are still very numerous,and am obliged to own myself unable, by their excellence,to account for the great reputation he acquired,and the numerous panegyrics bestowed onhim by the greatest poets and musicians of histime." " But bad as the music of Lawes appearsto us," he says in another place, " it seems to havebeen sincerely admired b}^ his contemporaries in102 HENRY LAWES.general." And he adds, that " most of the productionsof this celebrated musician are languidand insipid, and equally devoid of learning andgenius."If such was Lawes' musical character, the fact,that no musician ever enjoyed, in a greater degree,the admiration of his contemporaries, is singularand unaccountable. Burney says, " his temperand conversation must certainly have endearedhim to his acquaintance, and rendered them partialto his productions." This is true — Lawes was bothesteemed and beloved ; but this was not sufficientto render his music the admiration of the mostaccomplished, refined, and distinguished people ofhis time ; and, in particular, to draw the mostenthusiastic eulogies from Milton, whose exquisitetaste had been cultivated by a residence among thepoets and musicians of Italy. In Comus there areseveral beautiful allusions to Lawes. The attendantspirit, a character represented by Lawes himself,says,But I must put ofFThese my sky robes, spun out of Iris' woof",And take the weeds and likeness of a swainThat to the service of this house belongs,Who, with his soft pipe and smooth-ditties song,Well knows to still the wild winds when they roar.And hush the waving woods."He is thus alluded to by the Elder Brother'HENRY LAWES. 103Thyrsus, whose artful strains have oft delay'dThe huddling brook to hear his madrigal,Andsweeten'd every musk-rose of the dale."And also in this passage —He lov'd me well, and oft would beg me sing,Which, when I did, he on the tender grassWould sit and hearken e'en to extasy''Such warmth of expression must surely have be eninspired by strains different from such as are describedby Burney.Lawes has also been praised by Waller. Thefirst book of his Ayres and Dialogues containsencomiast verses by that poet, by Edward andJohn Phillips, the nephews of Milton, and others.Fenton, the editor of Waller's works, says, that'* the best poets of Lawes' time were ambitious ofhaving their verses set to music by this admirableartist." Indeed, he not only composed music forthe verses of almost every eminent poet of his time,but of many young noblemen and gentlemen, whoappear to have become song-writers from the pleasureof having him to clothe their verses in a musicalgarb. In his different collections there aresongs written by Thomas Earl of Winchester, WilliamEarl of Pembroke, John Earl of Bristol, LordBroghill, Thomas Carey, son of the Earl of Monmouth,Henry Noel, son of Lord Camden, SirCharles Lucas, and Carew Raleigh, son of SirWalter Raleigh. Many of the songs of these amateurpoets possess great merit : and Lawes' three104 HENRY LAWES.books of Ayres and Dialogues contain a body ofelegant and spirited lyric poetry which deserves tobe better known.This, too, in some degree, is the case with themusic contained in these, and other collections, inwhich Lawes' compositions are to be found.Burney says he has examined these collectionswith care and candour. If so, his sweeping condemnationof the author is surprising ; for we willventure to say that few musicians will examinethem carefully without finding the task a veryagreeable one. The trifling specimens he hasgiven (vol. iii. p. 397) are by no means fair ones ;and the songs of which he has mentioned the titles,are far from being the best he could have pointedout. We have not only found many airs which"appear to be at least equal to any that had as yetbeen produced by English composers, but some,which are in themselves so graceful and flowing,and so happily united to elegant poetry, that theywould require only the addition of a modernaccompaniment, and the assistance of modern singing,to gratify the public, even at the present day.Among these we may mention " Careless of loveand free from fears," and " Why shouldst thouswear I am forsworn ?" both which are as smoothand melodious as if they had been composed yesterday." Gaze not on swans in whose softbreasts' would be a very pleasing song, but for adefect in the rhythm of the air ; which, however,HENRY LAWES. 105arises from an evident oversight, and is easily corrected." Dearest, do not delay me," and "LovelyChloris, though thine eyes," are exceedinglypretty: the latter is very like Arne's "Waterparted from the sea." — " Little love serves my turn,"in six-four time, is in a gay, dancing measure,and quite modern in its effect. " Chloris, yourselfyou so excel," a song by Waller, is a fine specimenof the concert so fashionable in the amorouspoetry of that age. It is addressed to a lady, onher singing; some of the author's verses.Chloris, yourself you so excel,When you vouchsafe to breathe my thought,That, like a spirit, with this spellOf mine own teaching I am caught.The eagle's fate and mine is one,That, on the shaft that made him die,Espy'd a feather of his own,Wherewith he wont to soar so high.Had Echo with so sweet a graceNarcissus' loud complaints return'd,Not for reflection of his face.But of his voice, the boy had mourn'd.'We do not find, it is true, in the works ofLawes, the lofty conceptions of Purcell, nor thosetender strokes of art" by which that unrivalledmusician reached the inmost recesses of the soul.But Lawes was gifted with imagination, taste, andfeeling ; and deserves a much higher place among106 HENRY LAWES.English composers than that which Burney andother critics have thought proper to assign him.Of Lawes' personal history not much is known.He was admitted a gentleman of the Chapel Royalin 1625 ; and afterwards was appointed one of thepublic and private musicians of Charles I., withwhom he was in great favour. Besides Comus, hisprincipal dramatic production, he composed themusic to several of the masques performed atcourt. On the fall of the monarchy, and the consequentabolition of the king's musical establishments,Laves was deprived of his situations, andsupported himself by teaching ladies to sing ; andhis subsistence derived from this source was probablyscanty enough. In those days the fine artswere not, as now, supported by the patronage ofthe public. Wealth was little diffused, and taste andrefinement still less. During the tranquil part ofthe reign of Charles I., it would appear that musiciansmust have subsisted chiefly by means of theroyal household and chapel establishments, themunificence of the sovereign, and the patronageand employment of the great. There was no occupationfor musicians in the families of the middleclasses ; nor were there concerts, or any publicamusement, except the theatres, which employedbut few hands, and those of an inferior order, themusical drama not yet having been introducedinto public theatres. When the monarchy wasoverthrown, the abolition of every musical esta-henryLA WES. 107banishment, the prohibition of every entertainmentof which music formed a part, and the prevalenceof those opinions which discourage the use ofmusic, even as a private amusement, must havereduced Lawes and his tuneful brethren to dependon the very limited patronage which the higherclasses were still enabled to afford them. Lawes,accordingly, in the preface to the first book of hisAyres, published in 1653, says, " Now we live inso sullen an age, that our profession itself hath lostits encouragement."In 1655, Lawes published his second book, and,in 1658, his third book of Ayres and Dialogues.There are some passages in his prefaces to thesecollections, which show, that the complaints madeby English musicians, of the preference given toforeign music, merely because it is foreign, are oflong standing. " Wise men have observed," hesays, in the preface to his first book, " our generationso giddy, that whatsoever is native (be itever so excellent) must lose its taste, because themselveshave lost theirs. For my part, I profess(and such as know me can bear me witness) I desireto render every man his due, whether strangersor natives. I acknowledge the Italians the greatestmasters of music, but yet not all. And (withoutdepressing the honour of other countries,) I maysay our own nation hath had, and yet hath, asable musicians as any in Europe ; and many now108 HENRY LA WES.living (whose names I forbear) are excellent both forthe voice and instruments. I never loved to set orsing words I do not understand. But this presentgeneration is so sated with what is native, thatnothing takes their care but what is sung in a languagewhich (commonly) they understand as littleas they do the music. And to make them a littlesensible of the ridiculous humour, I took a table orindex of old Italian songs, (for one, two, and threevoices,) and this index (which read together made astrange medley of nonsense) I set to a varied airand gave out that it came from Italy, whereby ithath passed for a rare Italian song." — This ingenioushoax on his contemporaries is inserted as thelast song in the book. — In the preface to the secondbook, he says, " There are knowing persons, whohave been long bred in those worthily admired partsof Europe, who ascribe more to us than we to ourselves;and able musicians returning from travel dowonder to see us so thirsty after foreigners. Forthey can tell us (if we knew it not) that music is thesame in England as in Italy ; the concords and discords,the passions, spirits, majesty, and humours,are all the same they are in England ; their mannerof composing is sufficiently known to us, theirbest compositions being brought over hither by thosewho are able enough to choose. But we must nothere expect to find music at the highest, when allarts and sciences are at so low an ebb. As for my-henryLAWES. 109self, although I have lost my fortunes with my master(of blessed memory) I am not so low to bow forasubsistence to the follies of this age, and to humoursuch as will seem to understand our art betterthan we that have spent our lives in it."At the Restoration Lawes recovered his place in-the Chapel Royal, and composed the coronationanthem for Charles II. He died in 166*2, and wasburied in Westminster Abbey.noCHAPTER V.The Commonwealth — Sir William Davenant's entertainments—His musical pieces — First female performances —Theatreestablished after the Restoration — Matthew Lock — PsycheMacbeth — Duchess of Mazarin.In the year 1 647 rigorous ordinances were issuedby the parliament against stage-plays, and all entertainmentsconsisting of music and dancing, bywhich not only the actors in such entertainments,but all such as should be present at them, were subjectedto severe punishment by fine and imprisonment.There was thus a complete cessation ofdramatic performances for about ten years.In 1656, Sir William Davenant obtained permissionto open a kind of theatre at Rutland-house, inCharterhouse-square, for the exhibition of what hecalled " an Entertainment in Declamation andMusic, after the manner of the ancients." AnthonyWood, imagining that this permission was to performItalian operas, says : " Though Oliver Cromwellhad now prohibited all other theatrical representIllnations, he allowed of this, because, being in anunknown language, it could not corrupt the moralsof the people." Sir William Davenant's Entertainmentwas wholly in the English language, nor wasit an opera, though he calls it so. He seems tohave intended it as the means of overcoming theexisting prejudices against dramatic representations,and of predisposing the public to receive favourablya series of exhibitions of this kind, which he had itin contemplation to give ; and it appears to haveanswered his purpose, for it was immediately followedby a succession of dramatic performances,which Davenant continued till his death.This " Entertainment after the manner of theancients" is worthy of notice, as giving us somecurious views of the opinions and manners of thatage."After a flourish of music," say the stage directions," the Prologue enters," and addresses theaudience in verse, designating the forthcomingentertainment as an opera. We are then told thata consort of instrumental musick, adapted to thesullen disposition of Diogenes, being heard awhile,the curtains are suddenly opened, and, in twogilded nostra, appear Diogenes the cynick andAristophanes the poet, who declaim against and forpublique entertainments by moral representations."The arguments used by these orators show us whatwere the notions entertained at that period, in regardto dramatic entertainments. The following1 12 Covenant.are such parts of them as relate to the musicaldrama.Diogenes thus argues against the opera : —Would you meet to enjoy the pleasure of musick? 'Tis a deceitful art, whose operations lead tothe evil of extreams, making the melancholy tobecome mad, and the merry to grow fantastical.Our city's ancient stamp, the owl (which bears nopart in the merry quires of the woods) denotes thewisdom, not the mirth of Athens. I would have thepeople of Athens, from the mason to the merchant,look as grave and thoughtful as rich mourners.They should all seem priests in the temples, philosophersin their houses, and statesmen in the streets.Then we should not need to be at the expense ofpublic magistrates ; but every man would be freelyforward to rule another, and in time grow to such aheight and ability in government, as we should bydegrees banish the whole city ; and that ostracismwere happy preferment ; for the rest of the worldwould soon invite us to rule them.Does not the extasie of music transportus beyond the regions of reason ? changing thesober designs of discretion into the very wildness ofdreams, urging sober minds to aim at the impossiblesuccesses of Love ; and enkindling in the activethe destructive ambitions of war ? Does it not turnthe heads of the young till they grow so giddy as ifthey walked on pinnacles ; and often divert the feetof the aged from a funeral to a wedding ? And con-covenant.113side (my malicious friends of Athens) how youwould look if you should see me, at the meer provocationof a fiddle, lead out a matron to dance atthe marriage of an old philosopher's widow ?Would you be delighted with scenes ? which is,to be entertained with the deception of motion andtransposition of lights; where, whilst you think yousee a great battel, you are sure to get nothing bythe victory. You gaze at imaginary woods andmeadows, where you can neither fell nor nowe.On seas where you have no ships, and on riverswhere you catch no fish. But you may find it moreprofitable to retire to your houses, and there studyhow to gain by deceiving others, than to meet intheatres, where you must pay for suffering yourselvesto be deceived. This, Athenians, concernsyour profit ; which is a word you understand betterthan all the grammarians in Greece. And thoughthe ways towards profit are somewhat dark, yet youneed no light from me, which made me presume toleave my lantern at home."Aristophanes, in his reply, thus answers the aboveparts of his adversary's discourse."He proceeds next against the ornaments of apublic opera, musick and scenes. But how can heavoid the traducing of music, who hath always adiscord within himself, and which seems so loud,too, as if it would, a mile off, untune the harmonioussoul of Plato. Musick doth not heightenVOL. I. I14 Covenant.melancholy into madness, but rather unites andrecollects a broken and scattered minde ; giving itsudden strength to resist the evils it hath long andstrongly bred. Neither doth it make the merryseem fantastical, but only to such as are enviouslysad at the pleasure of others. If it doth warm theambitious when they are young, 'tis but as cordialswarm the blood, to make it evaporate the evilhumour. If it awake hope in the aged, (wherehope is fallen asleep and would take rest,) we maytherefore say, (since hope is the vital heat of theminde,) that it prolongs life when it would slothfullyexpire. Nor need Diogenes suspect that it maymake his bones ake by seducing him to a dance ;for he can only lift up his feet to a dismal discord,or dance to a consort of groaners or gathers ofteeth.*' He is offended at scenes in the opera, as at theuseless visions of imagination. Is it not the safestand shortest way to understanding, when you arebrought to see vast seas and provinces, fleets, armies,and forts, without the hazards of a voyage, or painsof a long march? Nor is that deception where weareprepared and consent to be deceived. Nor isthere much loss in that deception where we gainsome variety of experience by a short journey ofthe sight. When he gives you advice not to layouttime in prospect of woods and meadows whichyou can never possess, he may as well shut up hisCovenant. 115own little window (which is the.lmiighole of histub) and still remain in the dark, because the lightcan only show him that which he can neither purchasenor beg."Having; thus turned into ridicule the ascetic doctrinesof the Puritans on this subject, the author.winds up this part of the entertainment with a song,concluding thus : —"Can age e'er do them harmWho cheerfully grow old ?Mirth keeps their hearts still warm ;Fools think themselves safe in sorrow and cold.CJiorus.~\ Then let the sour cynic live coopt ;Let him quake in his threadbare cloak,Till he find his old tub unhoopt,His staff and his lantern broke."The song being ended," continues the stage-directions," a consort of instrumental musick,after the French composition, being heard awhile,the curtains are suddenly opened, and in the nostraappear sitting a Parisian and a Londoner, in thelivery robes of both cities, who declaim concerningthe pre-eminence of London and Paris."These declamations being ended, the curtainswere suddenly closed, and the company entertainedby vocal and instrumental music, with a satiricalsong against the French, giving the palm to ourown metropolis. Then there is an epilogue : andafter a flourish of loud music," the curtain isclosed, and the entertainments ended.At the end of the piece, there is a note, stating, thatI 2116 COMPOSERS."the vocal and instrumental music was composedby Doctor Charles Coleman, Captain Henry Cook,Mr. Henry Lawes, and Mr. George Hudson."These were among the most eminent musicians ofthe time. Henry Cook was educated in the chapelroyal, during the reign of Charles the First ; butat the commencement of the civil war he enteredthe army, in which he obtained a captain's commission.After the restoration, the loyalty andability of this musical soldier recommended himto the notice of Charles the Second, by idiom hewas appointed master of the children of the chapel-royal.The specimens of his music which remain,are of little merit. He was the musical instructorof Humphreys Blow, and Wise ; and is said b}^Anthony Wood to have died of grief, in the year1672, in consequence of his talents and reputationhaving been eclipsed by those of his pupil, Humphrey.Coleman and Hudson were gentlemen ofthe private music of Charles the First. No fartherparticulars of their lives are recorded.Davenant's " Entertainment after the manner ofthe Ancients," was immediately succeeded by TheSiege of Rhodes, which was performed at RutlandHouse, in 1656. Pope says, that "this was thefirst opera sung in England ;"' and Langbaine, inhis Account of the English Dramatic Poets, saysthat The Siege of Rhodes, and some other playsof Sir William Davenant, in the times of the civilwears, were acted in stilo recitativo. Burney dis-covenant.117putes this ; " I can find no proof," lie says, " thatit was sung in recitative, either in the dedicationto Lord Clarendon, in the folio edition of 1673, orthe body of the drama." But we find conclusiveevidence on this point. Gibber says, that " SirW. Davenant opened a theatre in Lincoln's InnFields, in 1662, where he produced The Siege ofRhodes, with unprecedented splendour." A secondpart was then added to it, which we find in Dave-nant's works. Evelyn, in his Diary, says ; " 1662,Jan. 9. I saw acted ' the Second Part of the Siegeof Rhodes'" " In this," he continues, "acted thefair and famous comedian, called Roxelana, fromthe part she performed ; and I think it was thelast, she being taken to be the Earl of Oxford'sMiss (as at this time they began to call lewdwomen.* It was in recitative music."Davenant's next piece was The cruelty of theSpaniards in Peru, which was produced in 1658.The scenes and decorations of this drama, (accordingto Downes, in his Roscius Ajiglicanus,) werethe first that were introduced on a public stage inEngland. Evelyn thus speaks of this piece ;This actress was Mrs. Davenport. Lord Oxford, not havingsucceeded in his attempts to seduce her, had recourse to thestratagem of a sham marriage, by a pretended clergyman. Whenshe discovered this infamous deception, she threw herself at theking's feet, to demand justice. Charles was not the sovereignfrom whom justice was to be obtained in a case like this ; butLord Oxford allowed her an annuity of £300.118 DAVEXAXT."5 May, 1659. I went to visit my brother inLondon, and next day to see a new Opera afterthe Italian way in recitative miisiq, and scenes,much inferior to the Italian composure and magnificence: but it was prodigious, that, in a time ofsuch publique consternation, such a vanity shouldbe kept up or permitted. I being engaged withcompany, could not decently resist the going to seeit, though my heart smote me for it." The consternationhere alluded to, was occasioned by therecent death of Cromwell. We learn somethingof the taste of that age, in regard to spectacle, froma scene in this piece, which is thus described in thestage directions : " A doleful pain, (a slow andgrave piece of music, so called from its resemblingthe motion of the peacock,) is played to preparethe change of the scene, which represents a darkprison at a great distance ; and farther to the ^-iew,are discerned racks and other engines of torture,with which the Spaniards are tormenting the nativesand English mariners, who may be supposed to belately landed there to discover the coast. TwoSpaniards are likewise discovered sitting in theircloaks, and appearing more solemn in ruin's, withrapiers and daggers by their sides ; the one turninga spit, while the other is basting an Indian prince,who is roasted at an artificial fire."The testimony of Evelyn, who, as we havealready seen, was acquainted with the state of theopera in Italy, is decisive of the fact that theseCovenant. 119dramas of Davenant's were operas after the Italianway, and in recitative, however inferior they mayhave been to the Italian operas which he had seen,in respect to the composition of the music, and themagnificence of the representation. It is evident,too, that Davenant understood what were the peculiarfeatures of the musical drama. In his piece,called The Playhouse to Let, a musician, whopresents himself as a tenant for the playhouse, beingasked what use he intended to make of it, answers,I would have introduced heroine story in stilorecitativo :" and, upon being desired to explainhimself further, he says, " Recitative musick isnot composed of matter so familiar as may servefor every low occasion of discourse. In tragedy,the language of the stage is raised above the commondialect, our passions rising with the heightof verse ; and vocal musick adds new wings to allthe flights of poetry." No musical critic of ourown day could more justly express the characterand office of recitative.Davenant's pieces, though they contributedgreatly to the progress of the musical drama inEngland, have little poetical merit. Of theirmusic there seem to be no remains. It was inthese pieces that female performers first appearedon the stage. It has been said that there were noactresses on the English stage before the Restoration; and that the celebrated Mrs. Betterton wasthe first. It is true that the first formal licence120 THEATRES.for their appearance was contained in the patentgranted to Sir William Davenant, immediatelyafter the Restoration ; but it appears to have beenpreviously tolerated, for a Mrs. Coleman representedlanthe, in the first part of The Siege ofRhodes, in 1656.After the Restoration, two theatres were establishedin London by royal licence ; the one wasthe King's theatre, in Drury-lane, and the other theDukes, (which was Davenant's theatre,) in .Gibber says, that, in the contestbetween the two companies for public favour, thatof the King had the advantage ; and that, therefore," Sir William Davenant, master of the Duke'scompany, to make head against their success, wasforced to add spectacle and music to action, and tointroduce a new species of plays, since called dramaticoperas, of which kind were The Tempest,Psyche, Chace, and others, all set off with the mostexpensive decorations of scenes and habits, withthe best voices and dancers." This, however, isincorrect ; for none of the above plays were performedunder the management of Sir WilliamDavenant, or even in his lifetime. Sir Williamdied in 1668. The Tempest, made into an operaby Shadwell, and set to music by Matthew Lock,was first performed in 1673. In the same year appearedthe opera of Psyche, also written by Shadwelland set to music by Lock and Battista Draghi ;in 1674, Macbeth was brought out, as altered byTHEATRES. 121Davenant ; and in 1676 was produced the operaof Circe, written by Dr. Charles Davenant, SirWilliam's son, with music by John Banister. Thesepieces were got up at an enormous expense, inmusic, dancing, machinery, scenes, and decorations,in order to rival the performances of the Frenchstage ; and some of the most eminent Parisiandancers were brought over to perform in them. Butat length, in 1682 (according to Gibber) the dukescompany not being able to support itself separately,united with the king's, and both were incorporatedunder the title of the King's Company ofComedians.After the Restoration, the theatres, which in thetime] of James I. were no less than seventeen innumber, were reduced to the two which have beenmentioned. But their diminution in number wascompensated by their increased magnitude andsplendour. The old playhouses were either a largeroom in some noted tavern, or a slight building inagarden or open space behind it. The pit wasunlooked ; and the spectators either stood, or werebadly accommodated with benches. There werehardly any attempts at scenery or decorations ; andthe music consisted of a few violins, hautboys, andflutes, on which vulgar tunes were played in unison,and in a wretched manner. But the two houseserected after the Restoration were truly and emphaticallystyled theatres, as being constructed so as toaccommodate a large public assembly, adorned with1-22 LOCK.painting and sculpture, provided with a properstage, and with scenes and machinery, to gratifythe eye and produce theatrical illusion. A regularband of musicians was placed in the orchestra, who,between the acts, performed pieces of music composedfor that purpose, and called act-tunes ; andalso accompanied the vocal music sung on the stage,and played the music of the dances. Music thusbecame attached to the theatres, which, from thistime, became the principal nurseries of musicians,both composers and performers. The most favouritemusic was that which was heard in the dramaticpieces of the day ; and to sing and play the songs,dances, and act-tunes of the theatres became ageneral amusement in fashionable society.Matthew Lock, the composer of Psyche andMacbeth, was born at Exeter, and brought up as achorister in the cathedral of that city. We have noparticulars of his life earlier than the year 1657,when he published a work called " a small consortof three parts, for viols or violins." He was employedto compose the music for the public entry ofCharles II. at the Restoration, and was soon afterwardsappointed composer in ordinary to the king.Some of his compositions appear in the second partof Platform's continuation of Hilton's collection,entitled Catch that Catch can ; and, among others,his three-part glee, "Ne'er trouble thyself abouttimes or their turning," a simple and pleasingproduction. In the latter part of his life he becameLOCK. 123a Roman Catholic, and was appointed organist toQueen Catherine of Portugal, the consort of CharlesII., who was permitted the exercise of her religion,and had a chapel with a regular establishment.Lock died in 1687.The music of the opera of Psyche was printed in1675, under the following title: " The EnglishOpera, or the vocal music in Psyche, with the instrumentaltherein intermixed. To which is adjoined,the instrumental music in the Tempest. ByMatthew Lock, composer in ordinary to his majesty,and organist to the queen." Prefixed to it there isa preface of some length, written in a rough andvigorous style, and strongly characteristic of theirascible disposition which Lock is said to have possessed.On this account, and as it throws somelight on the state of dramatic music at that time, itis worthy of quotation.That poetry and music, the chief manifestedof harmonical fancy, should produce such discordanteffects in many, is more to be pitied thanwondered at ; it being become a kind of fashionablewit to peck and carp at other men's conceptions,how mean soever their own are. Expecting, therefore,to fall under the lash of some soft-headed orhard-hearted composer (for there are too manybetter at finding of faults than mending them,) Ishall endeavour to remove those few blocks whichperhaps they may take occasion to stumble atThe first may be the title, opera. To this I124 LOCK.must answer, that the word is borrowed of theItalians, who by it distinguish their comedies fromtheir operas ; those, a short plot being laid, thecomedians, according to their different themes given,speak and act extempore ; but these, after muchconsideration, industry and pains for splendid scenesand machines to illustrate the grand design, withart are composed in such kinds of music as thesubject requires ; and accordingly performed. Proportionableto which are these compositions (thereader being referred to the book of the whole workfor the particular excellences,) their nature for themost part being soft, easy, and as far as my abilitycould reach, agreeable to the design of the author :for in them you have from ballad to single air,counterpoint, recitative, fugue, canon, and chromaticmusic ; which variety (without vanity be itsaid) was never in court or theatre till now presentedin this nation : though I must confess there has beensomething done (and more by me than any other)of this kind, and therefore it may justly wear thetitle, though all the tragedy be not in music ; forthe author prudently considered, that, though Italywas and is the great academy of the world for thatscience, England is not ; and therefore mixt it withinterlocutors, as more proper to our genius.Another may be, The extreme compass of someof the parts. To which the idols of their own imaginationmay be pleased (if possible) to know, thathe who composes for voices, not considering theirLOCK. 125extent, is like a botching sault, who, being obligedto make habits for men, cuts them out for children.I suppose it needs no explication.The next may be, The extravagances in someparts of the composition, wherein (as among slendergrammarians) they may think fixt rules are broken :but they maybe satisfied, that whatever appears soisonly by way of transition from time or half-timeconcords, and covered by extreme parts ; or to suspendthe ear and judgment, for satisfying both inthe cadence.Then, against the performance, I'hey sing outof tune. To which with modesty it may be answered,He or she that is without fault may cast thefirst stone; and for those seldom defects, the majorpart of the vocal performers being ignorant ofmusic, their excellencies when they do well, whichgenerally are so, rather ought to be admired thantheir accidental mistakes upbraided,The next (and I hope the last) is, or may be,Why, after so long exposed, is it now printed ?First, to manifest my duty to several personsof honour, who expected it.Secondly, to satisfy those lovers and understandsof music, whose business or distance preventedtheir seeing and hearing it.Thirdly, that those for whom it was composed(though perchance ignorant of the quality) by thequantity may be convinced, the composing andteaching it was not in a dream ; and, consequently,126 LOCK.that if the expense they have been at do not answertheir big expectation, the fault's their own, notmine.'' Finally (by way of caution) to prevent whatdifferences may happen between them and whoeverthey may have occasion to employ for the future,that on either side there be no dependence on goodwords or generosity'*In conformity with the views contained in thispreface, Lock adopted the method, which has beengenerally adhered to in later times, of having thechief part of the dialogue delivered in ordinaryspeech, intermixing it with songs and choruses. Inthe songs for single voices, the melody is a sort ofcompound of recitative and air, with frequentchanges of measure, in the style of LuUi, whichwas fashionable at the court of Charles 11. , andwhich Lock probably found it necessary to imitate.We find in them many traits of genius. There isone scene, in particular, " a rocky desart full ofdreadful caves and cliffs," in which " two despairingmen and two despairing women enter, ^^ and singthe torments of unhappy love : where there arebold and striking musical phrases, expressing passionin a manner worthy of Purcell. The choruses aregenerally superior to the songs. They are morefree and rhythmical in movement, and contain agreat deal of good, solid, and pure harmony. Oneof them, a chorus of devils and furies, at the beginningof the fifth act, in six real parts (two trebles,LOCK. 127counter tenor, tenor, and two basses) is admirable.These choruses, in short, appear to us to havemuch more merit than has been generally ascribedto them, and to be by no means unworthy, (as theyhave been said to be) of the author of the music inMacbeth.The music composed by Lock for this tragedy,which appeared only a year after the Tempest andPsyche, is of such transcendant excellence, that itsbeauties have suffered no decay at the distance ofmore than a century and a half, and it promises topartake of the immortality of the great work withwhich it is associated. Its superiority to Lock'sprevious works, and the circumstance of its nothaving been published with his name in his owntime, have given rise to doubts of his claim to itsauthorship ; but we cannot discover any goodfoundation for them. Lock is named as the composerof this music by contemporaries, and particularlyby Downes, the author of the Roscius Anglican,who, from his own personal knowledge,gives a minute account of the proceedings of theDuke's theatre during the period in question.The music in Macbeth is a pure emanation ofgenius. The author seems to have been inspiredby his subject, and to havebeen freed, by the forceof his imagination, from the trammels of imitation,and adherence to the style of his day. In themusic of every period there is always a body ofconventional forms and phrases which become, as it128 LOCK.were, the common property of contemporary composers; and from the use of which, the period towhich a composition belongs may in general bepretty accurately assigned. In the music of Macbeththere is little of this. The melody, unlikethat of the time, is flowing, and highly rhythmical,while it is full of energy and expression. Theharmony is rich and grateful, free from elaborateintricacy or petty details, and thrown into massesof astonishing breadth and grandeur. The sort ofrecitative, or rather aria parlante of the openingdialogue, " Speak, sister, speak," is different fromanything we have met with, either in ancient ormodern music ; and yet it is so simple and naturalthat one can hardly imagine the words uttered inany other accents. What genius there is in thechorus, " We should rejoice !'* There is a characterof demoniacal joy about it that would be absolutelyappalling, if such pains were not taken, in ourtheatres, to mar the effect of this fine music, by thepreposterous absurdity of the spectacle.* There arepassages, too, of great elegance and beauty ; butthe music is always characteristic. The air, forinstance, " Let's have a dance upon the heath," isexquisitely graceful ; and yet there is a touch in itof gloomy melancholy, in perfect keeping with theunearthly scene. The music in Macbeth, in short,was not only a stupendous effort of genius, con-thisis no longer the case at Covent Garden, under themanagement of Mr Macready.DUCHESS OF MAZARIN. 129sidering- the state of music in England when it waswritten, but is, to this day, one of the noblest andmost beautiful works that ever has been producedby an English musician.The fashionable taste in music, at this period,was much influenced by the residence, in London,of the celebrated Hortensia Mankind, Duchess ofMazarin. This lady, though an Italian by birth,had resided, from her infancy, at the Frenchcourt, and was the object of universal admirationfrom her beauty and wit. Charles the Second,when at Paris, before his restoration, was smittenwith her charms, and endeavoured to obtain her inmarriage : but her politic uncle. Cardinal Mazarin,not foreseeing the prosperous change in the fortunesof the British prince, refused his consent.She was afterwards married to the Duke de laMeilleraie, from whom, in a few years, she separated,leaving him possessed of the immense fortune,twenty millions of livres, (near a million sterling,)which the cardinal had left her. In the year1675, she came to England, in consequence of theintrigues of a party at the English court, who weredesirous to get rid of the Duchess of Portsmouth,and hoped that the revival of the king's passion forhis " old love" might destroy the ascendancy ofthe reigning favourite. As soon as she arrived,the king gave her a pension of 4,000Z. a year ; butshe neglected her game, and even engaged inanother amour ; a piece of imprudence quite un-vol.I. K130 DUCHESS OF MAZARIN.expected on the part of so thorough-paced an mt?^-gate, but which defeated the object for which shecame to England.This lady, who, to the fascinations of extraordinarywit and beauty, joined a total destitution ofevery religious and moral principle, was certainlyone of the most dangerous women of her time, andcontributed, in no small degree, to the corruptionof manners which then prevailed among the Englisharistocracy. Even her worldly uncle, CardinalMazarin, was shocked with her open disregardof the duties of religion. He one day told herand her sister, Madame de Bouillon, that these hadneither piety nor honour; adding, " at least, ifyou will not hear mass for God's sake, do it for theworld's." The well-known poet, St. Evremond,who appears to have been concerned in the intriguesconnected with her coming to England, residedwith her at Chelsea, and gives an account ofher manner of living there. She had a sort ofassembly at her house, which was frequented bythe principal nobility, and persons distinguishedfor their wit and talents ; and where the amusementsconsisted of conversation, in which subjectsof religion and philosophy, as well as of literatureand the fine arts, were discussed with the utmostfreedom ; deep play ; and musical entertainments.Among other novelties, the game of basset wasintroduced ; the bank being kept by a French adventurerof the name of Marin, who shared with theDUCHESS OF MAZARIN. 131duchess in the profits of the establishment. TheEarl of Godolphin told Sir Robert Walpole, thathe had played at the duchess of Mazarin's, andthat, in consideration of her poverty, it was customaryto leave a guinea under the cloth upon thetable.^ The musical entertainments at the house of theduchess were chiefly dramatic, and are celebratedfor their magnificence. The singers were theprincipal female performers from the theatres, andthe instrumental band consisted of the most eminentmasters of the time. Sir John Hawkins says,It is supposed that the design of introducing theItalian opera into England was first concerted inthis assembly." We can see no grounds for thissupposition. There is no appearance of any attempthaving been made by the duchess of Mazarin,or the aristocratic members of her musicalcoterie, to introduce the Italian opera. Nor is itat all likely that there should. If not born, shewas educated, a Frenchwoman, and derived all heropinions and tastes from the court of Louis XIV.,where she never could have acquired a predilectionfor Italian music. Had she entertained anysuch design, moreover, her first step towards theintroduction of the Italian opera would have beento make her own dramatic entertainments of thatdescription. But the music at her concerts wasFrench, and under the direction of Paisible, aFrench musician of considerable eminence. ItK 2132 DUCHESS OF Mazarin.seems evident, therefore, that the duchess of Mazarin,by her entertainments, so much frequented bythe world of fashion, contributed to foster and preservethe taste for French music which prevailedduring the whole of Charles the Second's reign,and gave way, not to the influence of Italian music,but to the native genius of Purcell.CHAPTER VI.Dry den — " The State of Innocence — Albion and AlbansPurcell — Dido and eneas — Purcell's instrumentalmusic — The Tempest.About this time Dryden turned his attention tothe musical drama. In 1678 he published hisplay, called The State of Innocence and Fall ofMan, which he formally denominated an opera.This, however, is an improper designation ; for thepiece contains no lyrical poetry, the music employedin it being entirely instrumental. It wasnever performed, nor can we suppose that it wasever intended for actual representation. Suchscenes as the following could not be exhibited onthe stage.Scene I. represents a chaos, or a confusedmass of matter ; the stage is almost wholly dark :a symphony of warlike music is heard for sometime; then from the heavens (which are opened)fall the rebellious angels, wheeling in air, andseeming transfixed with thunderbolts. The bottom134 STATE OF INNOCENCE.of the stage, being opened, receives the angels,who fall out of sight. Tunes of victory are played'and an hymn sung ; angels discovered above,brandishing their swords ; the music ceasing, andthe heavens being closed, the scene shifts, and on asudden represents hell ; part of the scene is a lakeof brimstone, or rolling fire ; the earth of a burntcolour ; the fallen angels appear on the lake, lyingprostrate : a tune of horror and lamentation isheard." Lucifer, raising himself on the burninglake, begins the piece by exclaiming, —'« Is this the seat our conqueror has given ?And this the dilate we must change for heaven ?"Other devils rise in succession ; and an infernalcouncil is held; like that in the opening of theParadise Lost.Adam and Eve are afterwards introduced, " asjust created." The manners and conversation ofthe primeval pair, as represented by Dryden,exhibit marks of the false and corrupted taste ofthe age. There is a want of the purity and simplicityin the sentiments and images, which are sobeautifully preserved by Milton ; and Eve especially,at the very outset, evinces no inconsiderableshare of vanity, coquetry, and love of rule,from which the " general mother" of the fair sexmust surely have been wholly free in the " state ofinnocence." She enters, wondering at herself —STATE OF INNOCENCE. 135Like myself I see nothing: from each treeThe feather'd kind peep down to look on me ;And beasts, with up-cast eyes, forsake their shade,And gaze, as if I were to be obey'd.Sure I am something which they wish to be,And cannot ; I myself am proud of me."How quick-sighted to the general admiration sheexcites; and what naivete in " I myself am proudofmeT In the same spirit is her apprehensionthat, when she grants her lover's suit, she will loseher much-loved sovereignty ; and her fears of hisinfidelity have almost the effect of burlesque.It is difficult to imagine what could have inducedDryden to think of this production. In his prefacehe gives some reasons for " publishing an operawhich was never acted." Many incorrect copies,he says, had got abroad, full of errors and absurdities,so that he was obliged to publish, in self-defence.He confesses his obligations to Milton,and acknowledges the inferiority of his " meanproduction" to the sublime work of that poet.Knowing, perhaps, that Milton had taken the ideaof the Paradise Lost from an Italian mystery, andthat he had intended at first to give his poem adramatic form, Dryden may have thought of accomplishingthe design which Milton had abandoned.It is said by Aubrey, that Dryden madea personal application to Milton for permission tomake the attempt ; and that the old poet answered136 ALBION AND Albania,with indifference, " Aye, you may tag my versesif you will"*Dryden's first opera, that was actually represented,was Albion and Albanius, which was performedat the Duke's Theatre, in 1685. This piecewas nearly finished in the lifetime of Charles II.,though not performed till after his death. It hada political object, to favour the interest of thecourt ; and was an allegorical representation of therestoration of the Stuart family to the throne, andthe king's recent victory over his Whig opponents.It contains the leading incidents in the life ofCharles II. ; the Restoration, and return of theking and the Duke of York, under the names ofAlbion and Albanius ; and the popish plot, hatchedby a council of fiends, who send Democracy andZeal, with Dr. Titus Gates in their train, to propagateit on earth. The return of the Make of Yorkand his beautiful princess, and the rejoicing inheaven and earth on the king's attaining completepower, were the intended termination of theThe Italian Mystery which suggested to Milton the subjectof the Paradise Lost, is the Adamo of Adreini, in Whichthe sacred subject, as usual with those productions, is unintentionallyburlesqued. The drama opens with a grand chorusof angels, who sing thus ; —Let the rainbow be the fiddle-stick of the fiddle of heaven,Let the spheres be the strings, and the stars the musicalnotes ;Let the new-born breezes make the pauses and sharps,And let Time be careful to beat the measure."ALBION AND ALBANIUS. 137drama : but, in consequence of the death of Charles,the conclusion was changed to the apotheosis ofAlbion, and the succession of Albanius to the uncontrolleddominion over a willing people.It may easily be imagined that a piece of thispolitical character, produced at a time when thenation was almost ripe for the revolution whichtook place within three years afterwards, could notbe very congenial to the public feeling. It wasbrought upon the stage with great splendour, butwas coldly received. Its death-blow was the newsof Monmouth's invasion, which reached London onSaturday the 13th of June, 1685, during its performanceforth sixth time : the audience broke upin confusion, and it was never repeated.This piece, notwithstanding its unhappy subject,is full of Dryden's characteristic vigour of thoughtand expression ; and the lyrical poetry, in particular,is beautifully sweet and flowing. The prefaceis excellent. Though Dryden could not havebeen conversant with the Italian opera, yet theacuteness of his mind enabled him to form a clearconception of the musical drama, and to give rulesfor its composition and performance which, in manyrespects, are of permanent and universal application."An opera," he says, "is a poetical tale orfiction, represented by vocal and instrumentalmusic, adorned with scenes, machines, and dancing.The supposed persons of this musical drama are138 ALBION AND Alexius.generally supernatural, as gods and goddesses, andheroes, which at least are descended from them,and are in due time to be adopted into their number.The subject, therefore, being extended beyondthe limits of human nature, admits of that sort ofmarvellous and surprising conduct which is rejectedin other plays. Human impossibilities are to bereceived as they are in faith ; because, when godsare introduced, a supreme power is to be understood,and second causes are out of doors ; yet proprietyis to be observed even here. Phoebus mustforetel. Mercury must charm with his caduceus,and Juno must reconcile the quarrels of the marriagebed : to conclude, they must all act accordingto their distinct and peculiar characters. If thepersons represented were to speak upon the stage,it Avould follow, of necessity, that the expressionsshould be lofty, figurative, and majestical : but thenature of an opera denies the frequent use of thesepoetical ornaments ; for vocal music, though itoften admits a loftiness of sound, yet always exactsan harmonious sweetness ; or, to distinguish vetmore justly, the recitative part of the opera requiresa more masculine beauty of expression andsound. The other, which, for want of a properEnglish word, I must call the longish part, mustabound in the softness and variety of numbers ; itsprincipal intention being to please the hearing,rather than to gratify the understanding. As thefirst inventors of any art or science, provided theyALBION AND ALBANIUS. 139have brought it to perfection, are, in reason, togive laws to it ; so, whosoever undertakes the writingof an opera, is obliged to imitate the Italians,who have not only invented but perfected this sortof dramatic musical entertainment. We knowthat, for some centuries, the knowledge of musichas flourished principally in Italy, the mother oflearning and of arts ; that poetry and paintinghave been there restored, and so cultivated byItalian masters, that all Europe has been enrichedout of their treasury.It is almost needless to speak anything of thatnoble language in which the musical drama wasfirst invented and performed. All who are conversantin the Italian cannot but observe that it isthe softest, the sweetest, the most harmonious, notonly of any modern tongue, but even beyond anyof the learned. It seems indeed to have been inventedfor the sake of poetry and music : thevowels are so abounding in all words, especiallyin terminations of them, that, excepting in somefew monosyllables, the whole language ends inthem. Then the pronunciation is so manly and sosonorous, that their very speaking has more musicin it than Dutch poetry and song. It has withalderived so much copiousness and eloquence fromthe Greek and Latin, in the composition of wordsand the formation of them, that if, after all, wemust call it barbarous, it is the most beautiful andlearned of any barbarian in modern tongues ; and140 ALBION AND ALBANIUS.we may at least as justly praise it as Pyrrhus didthe Roman discipline and martial order, that itwas of barbarians, (for so the Greeks called allother nations,) but had in it nothing of barbarity.This language has, in a manner, been refined andpurified from the Gothic ever since the days ofDante, which is above four hundred years ago : andthe French, who now cast a longing eye to their country,are not less ambitious to possess their elegancein poetry and music ; in both which they labour atimpossibilities. It is true, indeed, they have reformedtheir tongue, and brought both their proseand poetry to a standard ; the sweetness, as wellas the purity, is much improved, by throwing off"the unnecessary consonants, which made theirspelling tedious and their pronunciation harsh ; butafter all, as nothing can be improved beyond itsown species, or farther than its original nature willallow — as an ill voice, though ever so thoroughlyinstructed in the rules of music, can be neverbrought to sing harmoniously, nor many an honestcritic ever arrive to be a good poet ; so neither canthe natural harshness of the French, or their perpetualill accent, be ever refined into perfect harmonylike the Italian. The English has yet morenatural disadvantages than the French; our originalTeutonic, consisting mostly in monosyllables, andthese encumbered with consonants, cannot possiblybe freed from those inconveniencies. The rest ofour words, which are derived from the Latin chiefly,ALBION AND ALBANIUS. 141and the French, with some small sprinklings ofGreek, Italian, and Spanish, are some relief inpoetry, and help us to soften our uncouth numbers; which, together with our English genius, incomparablybeyond the trifling of the French, inthe nobler parts of verse, will justly give us thepre-eminence. But, on the other hand, the effeminacyof our pronunciation (a defect common tousand the Danes) and our scarcity of femalerhymes, have left the advantage of musical compositionfor songs, though not for recitative, to ourneighbours."When Dryden, in this fine passage, speaks of theItalian Opera as being in its subject confined in agreat measure to the persons and incidents of theancient mythology, he gives an exact descriptionof it as it then existed : though the range of theItalian opei^a sera is now co-extensive with that oftragedy. But when he speaks of the compositionof the different kinds of poetry which belong tothe musical drama, his principles are applicable toall countries and all times. The Italian lano;uaofehas never received a nobler or juster eulogy : butwhen he describes the English as being inferior tothe French in respect to euphony and fitness forlyrical purposes, he delivers an opinion in whichfew of his countrymen, in our days, will acquiesce.It is difficult to understand what is meant by theeffeminacy of pronunciation which he describes asbeing prevalent in his time. Whatever it was, it142 ALBION AND Albans.seems to have been some fashion which has passedaway : for there is nothing in the modern pronunciationof English, as the language is plainly andunaffectedly spoken in the pulpit or the senate, atthe bar, on the stage, or in good society, that canbe characterised as effeminate. As a musical language,though the English, like all other languages,must yield to the Italian in smoothness, clearness,and facility of utterance, yet, in all these particulars,it is unquestionably superior to the French.But when Dryden wrote the opera to which thispreface was prefixed, the Gallomania raged at theEnglish court ; and Dryden, as the poet of thecourt, doubtless found it convenient to flatter thefashionable taste, of which the king himself wasthe principal votary.That Dryden was desirous to court the favourof Charles, by yielding to his French prepossessions,is evident from his employing Grabut, a Frenchman,to compose the music of Albi aid Albanius,though he could not have been ignorant of theinfinitely superior merit of his countryman Purcell,whose transcendent genius had already broke outin all its splendour. This Grabut was an obscuremusician, whose name is not to be found in theFrench annals of the art. He appears to havecome to England with Cambert, a musician ofsome eminence, who, about the year 1672, wasmade master of the king's band. Grabut composedthe music to a translation of Cambert's FrenchALBION AND ALBANIUS. 143opera of Ariadne ; or, more probably, only adaptedCambert's original music to the English words.This piece, which was performed with little success,in 1674, seems to have been the only work ofGrabut's prior to Albion and Albanius : but he wasin favour at court, and was consequently employedby Dry den.The poet, however, appears to have thought thatthis step required some justification. In the preface,from which we have already quoted, he informsthe public, that the opera had been rehearsed severaltimes in presence of the king, " who had publiclydeclared, more than once, that the compositionsand choruses were more just, and more beautiful,than any he had heard in England." Drydenthen praises Grabut very warmly ; and adds ; —"This I say, not to flatter him, but to do himright : because, among some English musicians,and their scholars, who are sure to judge after them,the imputation of being a Frenchman is enough tomake a party who maliciously endeavour to decryhim. But the knowledge of Latin and Italianpoets, both which he possesses, besides his skill inmusic, and his being acquainted with all the performancesof the French operas, adding to thesethe good sense to which he is born, have raised himto a degree above any man who shall pretend to behis rival on our stage. When any of our countrymenexcel him, I shall be glad, for the sake of OldEngland, to be shown my error : in the meantime,144 ALBION AND ALBANIUS.let virtue be commended, though in the person of astranger." This passage gave great and generaldissatisfaction. The original offence of giving thepreference to an obscure and worthless musicianwas aggravated by the injurious and disparagingmanner in which, to exalt his character, the Englishmusicians, including the already illustrious Purcell,were treated. The consequence was, that Drydenwas exposed, not only to serious attacks, but tosquibs and lampoons of the most severe and poignantdescription.The following is the conclusion of the scene inwhich the Popish Plot is hatched by a pandemoniumcouncil of fiends and infernal deities. The descriptionof the notorious Dr. Titus Gates could hardlybe paralleled in strength of invective. WhenZelota is about to be dismissed on her errand to stirup evil against the king, she says : —"You've all forgotTo forge a plotIn seeming care of Albion's life ;Inspire the crowdWith clamours loud,To involve his brother and his wife.Alecto. Take, of a thousand souls at thy command,The basest, blackest of the Stygian band,One that will swear to all they can invent,So thoroughly damn'd that he ne'er can repent :One, often sent to earthAnd still at every birthHe took a deeper stain :One, that in Adam's time was Cain ;ALBION And ALBANIUS. 145One, that was burnt in Sodom's flame,For crimes even here too black to name :One, who through every flame of ill has run :One, who in Naboth's days was Belial's son :One, who has gain'd a body fit fir sin :Where all his crimesOf former timesLie crowded in a skin.Pluto. Take him,Make himWhat you please ;For he can beA rogue with ease,One for mighty mischief born ;He can swear and be forsworn.Pinto and Alecto. Take him, make him, what you please,For he can be a rogue with ease.*Pluto. Let us laugh, let us laugh, let us laugh at our woes,The wretch that is damned hath nothing to lose.Ye Furies, advanceWith the ghosts in a dance :'Tis a jubilee when the world is in trouble ;When the people rebelWe frolic in hell ;But when the king falls, the pleasure is double.[.4 single entry of a devil, followed by an entry of twelve devils.]Chorus. Let us laugh, let us laugh, let us laugh, at our woes.The wretch that is damned hath nothing to lose."In the preface to Albion and Lanius, Drydensays that this opera " was only intended as aOates was alive at this time, and lived many years afterwards.He shook off, in some degree, the load of infamy whichhad overwhelmed him ; regained some footing in society ; andwas rewarded for his virtues, by King William, with a pension of400/. a year !VOL. I. L146 PURCELL.prologue to a play of the nature of The Tempest;which is a tragedy' mixed with opera, or a dramawritten in blank verse, adorned with scenes,machines, songs, and dances ; so that the fable ofit is all spoken and acted by the best of the comedians; the other part of the entertainment to beperformed by the same singers and dancers who areintroduced in the present opera." The only pieceat all answering this description, subsequently producedby him, was King Arthur, which seems,therefore, to have been the tragedy here alluded to,though it did not make its appearance till the year1691, six years afterwards.During this interval, Dryden seems to have notonly acquired a proper sense of the merits of Purcell,but to have entered into friendly intercoursewith him. Before taking a review of their jointlabours, it may be proper to give a slight sketch ofthe previous career of this illustrious musician.Henry Purcell was born in the year 1658. Hisfather, Henry Purcell, was a musician, and one ofthe gentlemen of the Chapel Royal at the restorationof Charles H. Some of his compositions,which are still extant, indicate a respectable degreeof talent and knowledge of his art. He died in1664, when his son was only six years old. It isnot ascertained from whom young Purcell receivedhis first instructions in music ; but it was most probablyfrom Captain Cooks' who was then master ofSee ante, page 116.PURCELL. 147the children of the Chapel Royal. He afterwardsreceived lessons from Dr. Blow ; a circumstance inthe life of that eminent musician which was consideredof so much importance, that, in the inscriptionon his tomb, it is mentioned that he wasMaster to the famous Mr. Henry Purcell."His genius showed itself at a very early age.While he was yet a singing boy in the king'schapel, he composed several anthems, which aresung to this day. This is, perhaps, one of themost remarkable instances of precocity that hasbeen recorded; for the anthem, demanding a knowledgeof the laws of counterpoint which, in general,can be obtained only bj^ long and severe study,seems to be in an especial manner beyond the reachof a juvenile composer. To have produced, therefore,pieces of this kind, which, for nearly twocenturies, have kept their place among the standardworks of our ecclesiastical musicians, indicated aninborn creative power, which, unless to a kindredspirit, is wholly inconceivable.At the age of eighteen, Purcell received thehonourable appointment of organist of WestminsterAbbey ; and in his twenty-fourth year he waschosen to be one of the three organists of theChapel Royal. By this time he had composedmany of those anthems which are consideredas being among the noblest specimens of ourcathedral music. Notwithstanding, however, hisecclesiastical situations and employments, he veryL 2148 DIDO AND .ENEAS.early turned his attention to dramatic music, vvliicliseems to have been especially congenial to hisinclination as well as his genius. Tom Brown, inhis letters from the Dead to the Living, notices thisbent of PurcelPs mind. In a letter from Dr. Blowto Purcell, he makes the writer say, that persons oftheir profession are equally attracted by the churchand the playhouse, so that they are, like Mahomet'scoffin, suspended between heaven and earth.*His first essay in theatrical music was made whenhe was nineteen. Josiah Priest, a celebrated teacherof dancing, who had long been the composer of thecourt ballets, and had consequently acquired a tastefor the stage, wished to get up a private dramaticperformance by his pupils. He accordingly got Tateto write a little opera, called Dido and ^neas, andprevailed on Purcell to compose the music for it.The piece was represented by some of the young-ladieswho attended Priest's school, before a selectaudience of their relatives and friends, with greatapplause. The music, in particular, was found tobe beautiful ; and, as it is extant, we are enabled toknow that this opinion of it was perfectly just.Dido and ^neas is a wonderful work, consideringthe youth of the composer. As a whole,it is deficient in the finish and mellowness whichcharacterise the productions of his riper years.But, from beginning to end, it sparkles with genius,This joke, by the way, is an anachronism ; for Blow survivedPurcell.DIDO AND .ENEAS. 149and contains beauties which even he himself hasnot surpassed. He was happy in his subject, whichwas treated by Mr. Priest with good dramaticeffect. The piece opens with the arrival of aeneasat Carthage, and ends with the death of Dido,after her desertion by her faithless lover. Dido'srecitative, in which, after she has been listeningto eneas's story, she expresses her admiration ofher guest, affords instances of that false expression,produced by seizing upon particular words, whichis so common among composers, but is rarely to befound in Purcell's later works. Dido says,Whence could so much virtue spring ?What storms, what battles, did he sing !Anchises' valour, mix'd with Venus' charms ;How soft in peace, and yet how fierce in arms !"One unmingled sentiment of pleasure and admirationpervades this passage : yet, when Dido comesto the word " soft" she falls upon it by a chromaticsemitone, and repeats it twice with a languishingoppoggiatura ; and in an instant afterwards breaksout into a boisterous roulade upon the word "fierce."The word " storms," too, gives occasion for a littlemusical mimicry. Another fault of a similar kindoccurs in the scene where Dido and^neas are overtakenby the storm. Dido exclaims,The skies are clouded ; hark how thunderRends the mountain rocks asunder !"According to the approved principles of musicalpainting, the war of the elements should have been150 DIDO AND eneas,depicted by the tumultuous sounds of the orchestra,the voice using the simple accents of exclamation.But, instead of this, Dido sets about mimicking thethunder, by rolling out that word in a long, rattlingroulade. These things should be marked, in theworks of the greatest masters, as beacons to beavoided ; as students are fully as apt to copy thefaults as the beauties of their models.The fault in the first passage above quoted isredeemed by the true and beautiful expression givento the phrase immediately following, where Didosays, " But ah ! I fear I pity him too much !" andby the lovely chorus,Fear no danger to ensue,The hero loves as well as you ; "sung, to re-assure her, by Anna and her otherattendants. Its graceful tranquillity is perfectlydelicious. The chorus " To the hills and the vales,to the rocks and the mountains," is 'redolent ofspring," and full of the most delightful freshness.But, to our feeling, the flow of the melody ischecked, and its beauty impaired, by a single crudenote — the By?a^ suddenly introduced (the key beingG major) at the words " cool shady fountains;" anunnecessary and unsuccessful attempt at musicalexpression where it is not wanted.The introduction of a malignant sorceress, bywhose machinations Aeneas is made to abandon hismistress, gives occasion for a great deal of admirablemusic. The invocation by the sorceress, andDIDO AND eneas. 151the choral responses and wild laughter of the infernalspirits, are striking and unearthly, and wouldhave as powerful an effect as anything in the Frei-shuts. The little duet in this scene, between two ofthe witches, "But ere we this perform," in free canon,is remarkable for its ingenuity of contrivance, andpass flow of melody : and the full chorus whichfollows, and concludes the scene, has the broadsimplicity of Matthew Lock.The second act is full of beauties. In the scenein which the lovers and their attendants, whilehunting, are overtaken by the storm, the chorusHaste, haste, to the town," by the intricate movementof the parts, paints the confusion and agitationof the party. A chorus of eneas's sailors,preparing to weigh anchor, is of a bold and somewhatcomic character. We are again introducedto the infernal conclave, whose chorus of demoniacalexultation at Dido's approaching fate, is one of themost powerful of Purcell's compositions. The impassioneddialogue between the lovers, as they areabout to part, is a beautiful specimen of true Englishrecitative, in which the accents and inflexionsof the language are made subservient to the purposesof musical expression. The last words of thequeen are formed into a little air, "When I amlaid in earth," which sounds like the dying murmursof a broken heart. The melody is constructedon a ground bass ; a form of composition now obso-152 PURCELL.let, as imposing needless restrictions on the musician.Yet sometimes, as in the present instance, itis a source of beauty. The recurrence, over andoveraffair, of the same few melancholy notes in thebass, strikes sadly on the ear, and deepens theexpression of the song. The piece concludes witha soft mournful chorus.This beautiful opera, which was produced in1677, immediately attracted the attention of themanagers of the theatres, and led to Purcell's beinoreno;ao;ed in writing for the stage.The musical drama not having yet a separateexistence, it was still customary to introduce musicinto both tragedy and comedy. Most of the playsof that time had overtures and pieces to be performedbetween the acts, composed expressly forthem ; and incidental songs, not sung by the personagesof the drama, but by singers introduced, asit were, for their entertainment. From this time,these overtures, act-tunes, and songs, were frequentlycomposed by Purcell. In this manner, heembellished, as it may be called, the play o^ Abe-labor,which appeared in 1677; Telamon of Athens,(altered fi'om Shakspeare by Shadwell) in 1678;Lee's Theodosius, or the Force of Love, in 1680 ; andother pieces which shall be afterwards mentioned.A collection of these instrumental pieces waspublished, in 1697, after Parcels death, by hiswidow, under the title of " A Collection of Ayres,PURCELL. 153composed for the Theatre, and ou other occasions,by the late Mr. Henry Purcell." They are in fourparts, for two violins, tenor and bass ; and are sopleasing, that they were used in the theatres till themiddle of the last century, when the progress oforchestral music necessarily caused them to be laid.aside.In 1683, he published twelve sonatas for twoviolins and a bass, with a preface containing thefollowing interesting passage, in which he admitshis obligations to the Italian composers. 'theauthor has faithfully endeavoured a just imitationof the most famed Italian masters, principallyto bring the seriousness and gravity of that sort ofmusic into vogue and reputation among our countrymen,whose humour it is time now should beginto loathe the levity and balladry of our neighbours.The' attempt he confesses to be bold and daring;there being pens and artists of more eminent abilities,much better qualified for the employment thanhis or himself, which he well hopes these his weakendeavours will in due time provoke and inflameto a more accurate undertaking. He is notashamed to own his unskilfulness in the Italianlanguage, but that is the unhappiness of his education,which cannot justly be counted his fault; however,he thinks he may warrantably affirm, that heis not mistaken in the power of the Italian notes,or elegancy of their compositions." This workwas so well received, that he soon afterwards PURCELL.wished another set, containing ten sonatas, one ofwhich, from its peculiar excellence, acquired thename of the Golden Sonata.These sonatas, or trios, evidently belong to thesame school as those of Corelli. The trios of thegreat Italian composer were published in the sameyear, and could not have served as a model toPurcell, who, in acknowledging his obligation tothe most famed Italian masters" in this speciesof composition, must have alluded to Corelli andHassan, the latter of whom was Corelli's master.Purcell's sonatas, in some respects, are even superiorto those of the great Italian composer ; — forthey contain movements which, in depth of learningand ingenuity of harmonical combination,without the least appearance of labour or restraint,surpass anything to be found in the works ofCorelli : but Corelli had the advantage of being agreat violinist, while Purcell, who was not only noperformer himself, but probably had never heard agreat performer, had no means, except the perusalof Italian scores, of forming an idea of the geniusand powers of the instrument. This disadvantageprevented Purcell from striking out new and effectiveviolin passages, and produced mechanical awkwardnesswhich a master of the instrument wouldhave avoided : but it did not disable him from exhibitingtaste and fancy ; and every admirer of theworks of Corelli will take pleasure in these sonatasof Purcell.*' THE TEMPEST. 155Dryden, who had done Purcell injustice, afterwardsbecame his warm friend and one of hisgreatest admirers. After the death of Charles II. thepoet must have found himself freed from the trammelsimposed on him by the vitiated taste of thatmonarch and his court, and a personal intercourse^ between Dryden and Purcell arose from the circumstanceof Purcell's having been the musicalinstructor of Lady Elizabeth Howard, the poet'swife. When the play of The Tempest was revivedin 1690, Purcell was employed to compose newmusic for it.The Tempest had been altered from Shakspeareby Davenant and Dryden, and represented atDavenant's theatre in 1667. In the preface, whichis written by Dryden, he says, " Sir WilliamDavenant did me the honour to join me with himin the alteration of this play :" but what shareDryden had in the alterations does not appear.They appear to have been chiefly made by Davenant; though they bear many marks of Dryden 'shand. The play, as thus altered, was published inthe year 1670.Shakspeare's play underwent these alterationsfor the purpose, chiefly, of affording room for scenicdecoration and music. But this might have beendone without the interpolation of so much inferiormatter, and the introduction of those characterswhich destroy the majestic simplicity of the originsTHE TEMPEST.nal design. The idea of contrasting Shakspeare'soriginal character of a woman who has never seena man, with a man who has never seen a woman,is puerile in itself, and, in its execution, wantingin refinement and purity. That which, in Miranda,is charming innocence and simplicity, becomes unmanlysilliness in the counterpart; and the characterof Deronda, the sister given to Miranda, isnot only unnecessary, but indelicate. The play,thus metamorphosed, cannot be read (for it is nownever represented) without disgust ; and it is surprising,that Dryden (who, in the prologue to thisvery piece, has paid so noble a tribute to the geniusof Shakspeare) could have lent his sanction tosuch an act of sacrilege.When the music came to be composed by Purcell,several additions were made to the lyrical portion,which are not in the edition of the play publishedin 1670 ; and, in other parts, the words are considerablyaltered.The music of The Tempest consists almost entirelyof the songs and choruses of the aerial inhabitantsof Prospero's enchanted island, describedby the poet as beingfull of noises,Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight, and hurt not."The strange and wild character of these unearthlystrains is beautifully supported, and the listenerTHE TEMPEST. 157partakes of the feeling of the bewildered Ferdinand,when, amazed at the invisible chorus which remindshim of his drowned father, he exclaims,This is no mortal business, nor no soundThat the earth owes !"The scene of the spirits deputed to bewilder theconspirators contains the song, "Arise, ye subterraneanwinds ;" a powerful composition, in whichrolling divisions, finely adapted to a bass voice, areused with happy imitative effect. In this song,however, Purcell has fallen into the very commonerror of giving to particular words an expression atvariance with the general tone of the poetry. Thespirit is commanding the winds toDrive these wretches to that part o' the isle,Where nature never yet did smile ;Cause fogs and damps, whirlwinds and earthquakes there ;There let them howl, and languish in despair."On the word "howl," the singer howls on onenote for two bars. This is a piece of musical mimicry,inconsistent with the gravity of the style ;but it is not so bad as the next passage, in which,on the word "languish," the singer languishes,for three bars, through a drawling descent of semitones.Though the spirit desires that the wretcheswhom he is commissioned to punish may languishin despair, there is no reason that he should assumea languishing air in saying so. Nothing can bemore exquisite than the fairy lightness of Ariel's158 THE TEMPEST.little song, " Come unto these yellow sands," withits wild and simple burden. The masque, or pageant,presented by Prosperous spirits at the end ofthe play, is made a vehicle for some charmingmusic. The recitative and air, for a bass (orrather baritone) voice in the character of Neptune,aeolus, you must appear," is in a grand and dignifiedstyle. In the following air, " Come down,my blusterers," solus blusters through many longdivisions ; but the passage,To your prisons below,Down you must go''is remarkable for the very impressive utterancegiven to these words. The soprano air, " Halcyondays," sung by Amphitrite, is perfectly delicious.In this air it is impossible to overlook the beauty ofthe accompaniments. The charming passages givento the oboes, and the graceful motion of all the instrumentalparts, show how much Purcell was inadvance of his age, in this as well as other branchesof his art. The chorus, " The Needs and Tritonsshall sing and shall play," is beautiful; and thefamous duet and chorus, "No stars again shallhurt you," a piece of rich and resonant harmony,forms a brilliant conclusion to the whole. There isa song for Caliban, " The owl is abroad, the batand the toad," which one might suppose Weber tohave imagined.Some parts of this mlisic may still occasionallybe heard at concerts ; but it is long since the pieceTHE TEMPEST. 159to which it belongs has been performed. We canhardly, hovvever^> imagine a more delightful theatricalentertainment than Shakspeare's beautifulplay, unpolluted by Davenant's trash, with themusic of Purcell : and we hope yet to see TheTempest, in this form, restored to its place on thestage.CHAPTER VII.King Arthur — The Indian Queen — Tyrannic Love.The revival of The Tempest, with Purcell's music,in 1690, was followed by the appearance of KingArthur in 1691. This piece was written byDryden, and the music in it composed by Purcell.It was brought out in a splendid manner, and hadgreat success.King Arthur is a tale of love, war, and enchantment;its incidents are fantastic, but ingenious andentertaining. The story consists of the love ofArthur, the ancient British king, for Emmeline,the daughter of a tributary prince ; her abductionby his rival Oswald, a heathen king of Kent ; herrecovery from his hands, and union with her lover.The evil designs of Oswald are favoured by Esmond,a Saxon magician, and his subservient evil spirits ;while they are thwarted by Merlin, the famous enchanter,and the beneficent spirits under his command.The spirits are taken from the Rosicrucianphilosophy ; Grimbald, the malignant fiend, beinga gnome, or spirit of earth, while his adversary's,KING ARTHUR. IGlPhilidel, is a sylph, or spirit of air. This machineryis well managed. There is a wild grandeur inthe evil nature of Grimbald ; and the character ofPhilidel, — an angel, who, though fallen, is not lost,but feels repentance and hopes for pardon, — is originaland beautiful. The blindness of Emmelineadds interest to her innocent simplicity, and givesrise to many pretty and fanciful passages.In the first scene, Arthur and Canon, Emmeline'sfather, are engaged in discourse. Sheenters.Em. O father, father, I am sure you're here,Because I see your voice.Arthh. No ; thou mistakes thy hearing for thy sight :He's gone, my Emmeline ;And I but stay to gaze on those fair eyes,Which cannot view the conquests they have made.Oh starlike night, dark only to thyself,But full of glory, as those lamps of heaven.That see not, when they shine !Em. What is this heaven, and stars, and night, and day,To which you thus compare my eyes and me ?I understand you when you say you love ;For, when my father clasps my hand in his,That's cold, and I can feel it hard and wrinkled ;But when you grasp it, then I sigh and pant.And something smarts and tickles at my heart.Arthh. Oh artless love, where the soul moves the tongue.And only nature speaks what nature thinks !Had she but eyes !Em. Just now you said I had :I see them ; I have two.Arthh. But neither see.VOL. I. M162 KING ARTHUR.Em. I'm sure they hear you, then :What can your eyes do more ?Arthh, They see your beauties.Em. Do not I see ? You have a face like mine —Two hands, and two round, pretty, rising breasts,That heave like mine.Arthh. But you describe a woman ;Nor is it sight, but touching with your hands.Em. Then 'tis my hand that sees, and that's all one, — -For is not seeing, touching with your eyes ?Arthh. No ; for I see at distance, when I touch not.Em. If you can see so far, and yet not touch,I fear you see my naked legs and feetQuite through my clothes. Pray do not see so well.Arthh, Fear not, sweet innocence ;I view the lovely features of your face,Your lips' carnation, your dark-shaded eyebrows.Black eyes and snow-white forehead ; all the coloursThat make your beauty, and produce my love.Em. Nay, then, you do not love on equal terms ; —I love you dearly without all these helps ;I cannot see your lips' carnation,Your shaded eyebrows, nor your milk-white eyes.Arthh. You still mistake.Em. Indeed I thought you had a nose and eyes,And such a face as mine : have not men faces ?Arthh. Oh, none like yours, so excellently fair.Em. Then would I had no face, for I would beJust such a one as you.Arthh. Alas ! 'tis vain to instruct your innocence ;You have no notion of light or colours.Trumpet sounds within.Em. Why, is not that a trumpet ?Arthh. Yes.Em. I knew it,And I can tell you how the sound on't looks ;It looks as if it had an angry fighting face.KING ARTHUR. 163Arthh. 'Tis now indeed a sharp unpleasant sound,Because it calls me hence from her I love,To meet ten thousand foes.Em. How do so many men e'er come to meet ?This devil trumpet vexes them, and thenThey feel about for one another's faces ;And so they meet and kill.Ari. I'll tell you all when we have gain'd the field.One kiss of your fair hand the pledge of conquest,And so a short farewell. exit.Em. My heart and vows go with him to the fight.May every foe be that which they call blind,And none of all their swords have eyes to find him !But lead me nearer to the trumpet's face ;For that bi'ave sound upholds my fainting heart ;And, while I hear, methinks 1 fight my part."The scene in which Emmeline recovers her sightby means of Philidel, is calculated to produce acharming effect on the stage ; but we must turn tothe musical parts of the drama.The scene in the first act, of the great sacrificeoffered by the Saxons before their battle with theBritons, is full of barbarous grandeur. It openswith the songs of the priests, accompanying thesacrifice of three milk-white steeds to Woden, Thor,and Freya. The choral shout, " We have sacrificed!" at the end of each recitation by a singlevoice, is magnificent. The men who have devotedthemselves as voluntary victims, are addressed bythe priests, —Brave souls, to be renown'd in story ;Honour prizing, death despising,Fame acquiring by expiring, —Die, and reap the fruit of glory !"M 2164 KING ARTHUR.This chorus opens with a short but energeticfugato, and passes into a dark and gloomy strain.After a pause, a single voice sings, to a bold andlively air —I call you allTo Woden's hall,Your temples roundWith ivy bound,In goblets crown'dAnd plenteous bowls of burnish'd gold.Where ye shall laugh,And dance, and quaffThe juice that makes the Britons bold."And the victims respond, in joyous chorus,To Woden's hall,All, all, all, all ;Where in plenteous bowls of burnish'd goldWe shall laugh.And dance, and quaffThe juice that makes the Britons bold''The battle-song of the Britons, " Come if youdare," is a noble burst of martial ardour, to whichthe musician has given full expression. The choralpart, written in plain counterpoint, may be conceivedto be a whole army's shouts of defiance and ofvictory.Arthur being left alone in pursuit of the flyingfoe, Grimbald, the malignant spirit, accosts him indisguise, and attempts to lead him astray, whilePhilidel, interposing, warns him of the deceit. Philidel'ssong, with the chorus of her attendant spirits," Hither, hither, this way bend," is exquisitelyKING ARTHUR. 165light and delicate. Grimbald's air, " Let not amoon-born elf mislead ye," has the plain simplicityof his assumed character, and is at the same timesmooth and beautiful. The dramatic effect of thisscene is admirable.The celebrated frost-scene, so well-known to theadmirers of Purcell, is a sort of masque, exhibitedby the magician Esmond to Emmeline, after she hasrecovered her sight, for the purpose of inducingher to listen to his addresses. The poetry andmusic are equally beautiful.Emmeline. I freeze, as if his impious art had fixedMy feet to earth.Osmo?id. But love shall thaw ye.I'll show his force in countries cak'd with ice,Where the pale pole-star in the north of heavenSits high, and on the frosty winter broods, —Yet there love reigns : For proof, this magic wandShall change the mildness of sweet Britain's climeTo Iceland, and the farthest Thule's frost,Where the proud god, disdaining winter's bounds,O'erleaps the fences of eternal snow.And with his warmth supplies the distant sun.Esmond strikes the ground tvith his watid ; the scenechanges to a prospect of winter in frozen countries.Cupid descends.Cupid sings. What ho, thou genius of the clime, what ho !Ly'st thou asleep beneath those hills of snow ?Stretch out thy lazy limbs ; awake, awake,And winter from thy furry mantle shake.Genius arises.Genius. What power art thou, who from belowHast made me rise unwillingly and slow.From beds of everlasting snow ?166 KING ARTHUR.See'st thou how stiff and wondrous old,Far unfit to bear the bitter cold ?I can scarcely move, or draw my breath ;Let me, let me freeze again to death.Cupid. Thou doting fool, forbear, forbear ;What, dost thou dream of freezing here ?At Love's appearing, all the sky clearing,The stormy winds their fury spare :Winter subduing, and spring renewing,My beams create a more glorious year.Thou doting fool, forbear, forbear.What, dost thou dream of freezing here ?Genius. Great Love, I know thee now ;Eldest of the gods art thou :Heaven and earth by thee were made ;Human natureIs thy creature,Every where thou art obey'd.Cupid. No part of my dominion shall be waste ;To spread my sway, and sing my praise,Even here I will a people raise,Of kind embracing lovers, and embrac'd.Cupid waves his wand, upon ivhich the scene opens, and discoversa prospect of ice and snow to the end of the stage.Sitiffcrs and dancers, men and loosen, appear.Man. See, see, we assemble,Thy revels to hold ;Though quivering with cold.We chatter and tremble.Cupid. 'Tis I, 'tis I, 'tis I, that have warm'd ye ;In spite of cold weather,I've brought you together ;tis I, tis I, 'tis I, that have arm'd ye.Chorus. 'Tis Love, 'tis Love, 'tis Love, that has warm'd us ;In spite of cold weatherHe brought us together :'Tis Love, 'tis Love, 'tis Love that has arm'd us.KING ARTHUR. 167Cupid. Sound a parley, ye fair, and surrender !Set yourselves and your lovers at ease ;He's a grateful offenderWho pleasure dare seize ;But the whining pretenderIs sure to displease.11.Since the fruit of desire is possessing,'Tis unmanly to sigh and complain ;When we kneel for redressingWe move your disdain :live was made for a blessing,And not for a pain.A dance ; after ivhich the singers and dancers depart.Emmeline. I could be pleas'd with any one but thee.Who entertain'd my sight with such gay shows,As men and women moving here and there,That, coursing one another in their steps,Have made their feet a tune."Cupids invocation, " What, ho ! thou genius ofthis isle," is called a recitative, though it is moreproperly an aria parlante. The boundaries betweenrecitative and air were not exactly defined in Purcell'stime. His recitatives often have the protractedtones, the rhythmical movement, the divisions, embellishments,and regular closes, which are nowconsidered as belonging entirely to the air. A fewbars of symphony form a picturesque introductionto the appearance of the genius ; there is somethingfreezing in the sounds he utters, as, with a low andtrembling voice, he rises, " unwillingly and slow,"168 KING ARTHUR.through an octave of semitones ; and equally expressiveis the descending octave with which hemurmurs, " Let me freeze again to death," as ifunable longer to suffer the pain of utterance. Theinfluence of love, in gradually warming his breast,is finely expressed ; and the chorus of the inhabitantsof the regions of frost, " *Tis love that haswarmed us," is full of life and spirit. The constructionof this effective chorus is simple in theextreme ; but it is that simplicity of which thehighest genius only is capable.We now come to the romantic scene of Arthur'stemptations and dangers in the enchanted grove.It is borrowed from the Jerusalem Delivered — thesame source from which Wieland derived the similarscene in Oberon, which has been introduced inthe opera composed by Weber, Arthur, before enteringthe scene of his trials, has been warnedthat he has many perils to encounter ; but those hemeets with are not such as he has prepared himselffor.Arthur (looking.) No danger yet : 1 see no walls of fire,No city of the fiends, with forms obscene,To grin from far on flaming battlements.This is indeed the grove I should destroy ;But where's the horror ? sure the prophet err'd. —Hark I music, and the warbling notes of birds !Hell entertains me like some welcome guest.More wonders yet ! yet all delightful too :A silver current to forbid my passage,And yet, to invite me, stands a golden bridge :Soft music.KING ARTHUR. 169Perhaps a trap for my unwary feet,To sink and whelm me underneath the waves,With fire or water let him wage his war,Or all the elements at once, I'll on.[As he is going to the bridge, txvo Syrens arise from thewater. They show themselves to the tvaist and sing.1st Syren. O pass not on, but stay,And waste the joyous dayWith us in gentle play ;Unbend to love, unbend thee :O lay thy sword aside,And other arms provide ;For other wars attend thee.And sweeter to be tried.Chorus. For other wars, &c.Both sing. Two daughters of this aged stream are we ;And both our sea-green locks have comb'd for thee :Come bathe with us an hour or two,Come naked in, for we are so ;What danger from a naked foe ?Come bathe with us, come bathe, and shareWhat pleasures in the floods appear.We'll beat the waters till they bound.And circle round, around, around,And circle round, around.Arthur. A lazy pleasure trickles through my veins !Here could I stay, and well be cozen'd here.But honour calls ; — is honour in such haste ?Can it not bait at such a pleasing inn ?No, for the more I look, the more I long.Farewell, ye fair illusions ! I must leave ye.While I have power to say that I must leave ye.Farewell ! with half my soul 1 stagger off.How dear this flying victory has cost,When, if I stay to struggle, I am lost !\ As he is going forward, Nymphs and Sylvan comeout from behind the trees. A bass and two treblessing the following song to a minuet.170 KING ARTHUR.Dance with a song, all with branches i?i their hands.Song. How happy the lover,How easy his chain,How pleasing his pain,How sweet to discoverHe sighs not in vain.For love every creatureIs form'd by his nature ;No joys are aboveThe pleasures of love.The dance continues, with the same measure played alone.H.In vain are our graces.In vain are your eyes.If love you despise ;When age furrows faces'Tis time to be wise.Then use the short blessing,That flies in possessing :No joys are aboveThe pleasures of love.Arthur. And what are the fantastic fairy joysTo love like mine? false joys, false welcomes all.Begone, ye sylvan trippers of the green ;Fly after night, and overtake the moon.The dancers, singers, and Syrens vanish."The duet in this scene, " Two daughters of anaged stream are we' is one of the very happiestefforts of Purcell's genius. In imagining it, he atonce leaped over the space of a century and a half,and anticipated all the grace, refinement, andexpression, which a long line of his successors,down to the present day, have been able to bestowupon melody. This song of the Syrens is indeedKING ARTHUR. 171enchanting ; and realises any idea that can beformed of such bewitching accents as might shakethe constancy of a hero. Not only, too, is it fascinatingto every one who is capable of being movedby sweet sounds, but it is full of exquisite beautiesas a work of art. How beautifully chosen are thegliding intervals in which the invitation, " Come,come," is breathed out, and reiterated so gently !and how persuasive the diminished fifth withwhich the highest voice urges the remonstrance,What danger from a naked foe !" If we look tothe combination of the two parts, we find ingeniouscontrivances, which, though charming to the ear,give no idea whatever of art or labour. The passage," We'll beat the waters till they bound,"appears to the listener highly descriptive ; but itis, moreover, a canon in the unison very curiouslyinterwoven, till it breaks into a free imitation betweenthe parts, and the fine undulating strainwhich continues to the end. This charming duetwants nothing but the rich orchestral colouring ofMozart; which Purcell would assuredly have givento it, had he possessed the means which the progressof instrumental music placed in the hands ofthe modern composer.The drama concludes with a masque, or pageant,represented by Pan, Needs, Venus, aeolus, andother mythological personages, and consisting ofsongs and dances, for the purpose of exhibiting toKing Author the future prosperity and greatness17t^ INDIAN QUEEN.of his country. The following song, sung by Venus,is a good specimen of Dryden's smooth lyricalmeasures. It is united to one of Purcell's sweetestmelodies.Fairest isle, all isles excelling,Seat of pleasures and of loves ;Venus here will choose her dwelling,And forsake her Cyprian groves-cupid,from his favourite nation,Care and envy will remove;Jealousy, that poisons passion,And despair, that dies for love.Gentle murmurs, sweet complaining,Sighs, that blow the fire of love ;Soft repulses, kind disdaining,Shall be all the pains you prove ;Every swain shall pay his duty,Grateful every nymph shall prove ;And as these excel in beauty,Those shall be renown'd for love."Ki7ig Arthur has been adapted to the modernstage, under the title of Arthur and Emmeline. Inthis shape it has frequently been performed at differenttimes, and was last revived at the Englishopera-house, with great success, in 1827. Theincreasing taste for Purcell's music will probablybring about the permanent revival of this elegantand pleasing drama.The Indian Queeti was written partly by SirRobert Howard, Dryden's brother-in-law, andpartly by Dryden himself. It is in rhyme, accord-indianQUEEN. 173ing to the fashion of the day ; and the versification,as well as the characters, bear evident marks ofDryden's hand. The plot is extravagant enough ;arising not only out of a war between Mexico andPeru, for which history affords no warrant, but acontest between the lawful sovereign of Mexico andan usurper. Montezuma, the Peruvian general,who, after having nearly completed the conquestof Mexico, demands, as a reward, the hand of theInca's daughter, and, because he is refused, transfershis own prowess, and, consequently, victory,to the Mexican side, has a resemblance to the morecelebrated and strongly-drawn Almanzor ; andZempoalla, the usurping Mexican queen, has agreat deal of the indomitable pride which Drydenoften makes an attribute of his female characters.This play was acted in 1664, and received withgreat applause. In its original form there is verylittle music ; and we are not informed by whom itwas composed. There is an instrumental Symphony,introducing the prologue ; a song, or chorus, sungby aerial spirits, in the incantation scene in thethird act ; and a short song, or chorus, in the sceneof the sacrifice which opens the fifth act. Thepassages in the incantation scene which are set tomusic by Purcell, seem to have been at first merelyspoken ; and the additional lyrical poetry was probablyintroduced for the purpose of being set byPurcell after Dryden became aware of his unrivalledgenius.174 INDIAN QUEEN.- In the scene of the Mexican sacrifice, the chorusof priests is a grand composition. The movementin F minor, " All dismal sounds thus on theseofferings wait," is a most masterly piece of counterpoint,equally remarkable for the simplicity of itseffect, and the deep gloom of its expression. Inthe incantation scene, where the magician Cameroninvokes the infernal powers to reveal to Zempoallaher future destiny, Cameron's recitative and air,Ye twice ten hundred deities," is a striking instanceof the power of musical sounds to illustratepoetical conceptions. After the dismal objects bywhich the God of Dreams is conjured to arise fromhis sleeping mansion, and open his unwilling eyes,how exquisitely smooth and tranquil is the strainthat follows ! —While bubbling springs their music keep,That use to lull thee in thy sleep."The appearance of the God of Dreams is heraldedby a sweet symphony for oboes ; and the air whichhe sings has a free and flowing oboe accompaniment.Indeed the whole instrumental parts in the musicof this play show an astonishing command of thelimited resources which the composer had at hisdisposal, and enable us to imagine the uses hewould have made of a complete and various orchestra.This play, too, contains the ballad, " Iattempt from Love's sickness to fly in vain," one ofthe most beautiful pieces of tender and expressiveTYRANNIC LOVE. 175melody that ever flowed from the mind of a musician.Of this song, Dr. Burney says, that " thoughit has been many years dead, it would soon berecalled into existence and fashion by the voice ofsome favourite singer, who should think it worthanimation." This has been done in our day, byMr. Hobbs, who has made the song his own by hisexquisite manner of singing it.Dryden's Tyrannic Love was first acted in 1668,and, printed in 1670. We are not informed whowas the author of the music originally performed :but other music was afterwards composed byPurcell.This play is in many respects very characteristicof its author. It contains a great deal of tumidlanguage and exaggerated sentiment, mixed withmuch grandeur and elevation of thought. Thecharacter of St. Catherine is too perfect, and toomuch raised above humanity, to excite interest. Wecannot feel emotions of terror or pity, from anythingthat can happen to a person who knows thatshe is under the immediate protection of heaven, isin communication with beings of a higher world,and is indifferent about everything that can befalher in this.The introduction of magic, and of the astralspirits, who have little to do with the story of thepiece, was probably contrived for the sake of musicand scenery. Dryden, in his preface, thus justifieshis use of this machinery. " As for what I have176 TYRANNIC LOVE.said of astral or aerial spirits, it is no invention ofmine, but taken from those who have written onthat subject. Whether there are such beings ornot, it concerns not me. It is sufficient for mypurpose that many have believed the affirmative ;and that these heroic representations, which are ofthe same nature with the epic, are not limited,but with the extremest bounds of what is credible."The duet " Hark, my Hamilcar"* which hasbeen rendered famous by Purcell's music, is sungby two spirits, Nakar and Damilcar, who havebeen evoked by the magician Nigrinus, to aid thedesigns of the emperor against the honour of thechristian saint. Of these spirits the enchantergives the following imaginative description.An earthly fiend by compact me obeys ;But him to light intents I must not raise.Some astral firms I must invoke by prayer,Framed all of purest atoms of the air ;Not in their natures simply good or ill.But most subservient to bad spirits' will.Nakar of these does lead the mighty band,For eighty legions move at his command ;Gentle to all, but, far above the rest,Mild Nakar loves his soft Damilcar best.In airy chariots they together ride.And sip the dew as through the clouds they glide :These are the spirits which in love have power."In the copies of the music, this name is always turned intoDaridcar.TYRANNIC LOVE. 177Nigrinus uses incantations, which are prettyclosely imitated from Macbeth. Nakar and Damilcardescend in clouds, and sing.Nakar. Hark, vay Damilcar, we are called below !Damilcar. Let us go, let us go !Go to relieve the careOf longing lovers in despair !Nakar. Merry, merry, merry, we sail from the east,Half tippled at a rainbow feast.Dam. In the bright moonshine while winds whistle loud,Tiny, tiny, tiny, we mount and we fly,All rocking along in a downy white cloud :And lest our leap from the sky should prove too far.We slide on the back of a new-falling star.Kakar. And drop from aboveIn a jelly of love !Dam. But now the sun's down, and the elements red.The spirits of fire against us make head !Nakar. They muster, they muster, like gnats in the air ;Alas ! I must leave thee, my fair ;And to my light-horsemen repair.Dam. O stay, for you need not to fear them to-night :The wind is for us, and blows full in their sight :And o'er the wide ocean we fight !Like leaves in the autumn our foes will fall down.And hiss in the water,Both. And hiss in the water, and drown !Dam. Now mortals that spyHow we tilt in the sky.With wonder will gaze,And fear such events as will ne'er come to pass.Nakar. Stay you to perform what the men will have done.Dam. Then call me again when the battle is won.Both. So ready and quick is a spirit of airTo pity the lover, and succour the fair.That, silent and swift, the little soft godVOL. I. N178 TYRANNIC LOVE.Is here with a wish, and is gone with a nod.\ The clouds jmrt ; Nakar Flies ?//>, and Damilcardown."This extravagant rhapsody is abundantly opento ridicule, and did not escape the lash of Buckingham,who has given the following whimsicalparody of it in the Rehearsal.The two right kings of Brentford descend in the clouds, singing,in white garments ; and threejiddlers sitting before them,in green.Hayes. Now, because the two right kings descend fromabove, I make em sing to the tune and style of our modernspirits.\st King. Haste, brother king, we are sent from above.'ind King. Let us move, let us move ;Move to remove the fateOf Brentford's long united state.\st King. Terra, tan tara, full east and by south.2nd King. We sail with thunder in our mouth,In scorching noon-day, whilst the traveller stays,Busy, busy, busy, we bustle alongMounted upon warm Phoebus his rays,Through the heavenly throngHasting to thoseWho will feed us at night with a pig's petty-toes.\st King. And we'll fall with our pateIn an olio of hate.and King. But now supper's done, the servitors try,Like soldiers, to storm a whole half-moon pie.\st King. They gather, they gather hot custard in spoons,But, alas, I must leave these half-moons,And repair to my trusty dragoons."ind King. O stay, for you need not as yet go astray ;The tide, like a friend, has brought ships in our way,And on their high ropes we will play :TYRANNIC LOVE. * 179Like maggots in filberts, we'll snug in our shell,We'll frisk in our shell,We'll fire in our shell,And farewell.string. But the ladies have all inclination to dance,And the green frogs croak out a corantoof France.Bayes. Is not that pretty, now ? The fiddlers are all m green.Smith. Ay, but they play no coranto.Johnson. No, but they play a tune that's a great deal better.Bayes. No coranto, quotha ! That's a good one, with all myheart. Come, sing on.2nd King. Now mortals that hearHow we tilt and career.With wonder will fearThe event of such things as shall never appear.list King. Stay you to fulfil what the gods have decreed.'2nd King. Then call me to help you, if there shall be need.Xst King. So firmly resolv'd is a true Brentford kingTo save the distressed, and help to 'em bring.That ere a full pot of good ale you can swallow,He's here with a whoop, and gone with a hollow.\ Bayes fillips his finger, and sings after them,Bayes. He's here with a whoop, and gone with a hollow.This, sir, you must know, I thought once to have brought inwith a conjuror.Johnson. Ay, that wovild have been better.Bayes. No, faith, not when you consider it: for thus 'tismore compendious, and does the thing every whit as well.Smith. Thing ! what thing ?Bayes. Why, bring them down again into the throne, sir ;what would you have ?Smith. Well, but methinks the sense of this song is notvery plain.Bayes. Plain ? why, did you ever hear any people in cloudsspeak plain ? They must be all for flight of fancy, at its fullrange, without the least check or control upon it. Whenonce you tie up spirits and people in clouds to speak plain, youspoil all.n2180 TYRANNIC LOVE.Smith, {aside.) Bless me, what a monster's this !The too kings light out of the clouds, and step into the throne.\st King. Come, now to serious counsel we'll advance.2nd King. I do agree, but first let's have a dance."Purcell, however, in the above duet, has redeemedthe absurdity of Dryden's verses by thebeauty of his own music. It is airy, animated,and tender ; and has so much meaning in itself,that the listener forgets that the words are merenonsense.There is another pretty song in this piece. St.Catherine is discovered asleep on a couch, whileimages of love and pleasure are exhibited to her,in a dream, by the enchanter's spirits. The songis, " Ah, how sweet it is to love !" sung by Damilcar.Its expression is soft and voluptuous ;though it is injured by an unmeaning reiterationof the word " all" half a dozen times, and a stiffdivision at the close.It was for this play Dryden wrote the epilogue socelebrated for its whimsical beginning. It wasspoken by Nell Glynn, who, being left as deadon the stage, and about to be carried off, startedup, exclaiming,Hold, are you mad ? you damn'd confounded dog !I am to rise and speak the epilogue."CHAPTER VIII.The Prophetess — Bondiica — Don Quixote — Purcell's songs invarious plays — His death aod character — Principal dramaticsingers in his time — Dryden's Secular Masque — Eccles —Jeremy Collier's attack on the stage;The Prophetess, or the History of Dioclesian, byBeaumont and Fletcher, was revived, with alterationsand additions, " after the manner of anopera," by Betterton, and performed in 1690, withmusic by Purcell. The music was published byPurcell in 1691, with a dedication to the Duke ofSomerset, in which he says, " Music is yet but inits nonage, a forward child, which gives hope ofwhat it may be hereafter in England, when themasters of it shall find more encouragement. 'Tisnow learning Italian, which is its best master, andstudying a little of the French air, to give it somewhatmore of gaiety and fashion."Dioclesian, as a drama, does not hold a highplace among the works of its authors ; and Better-ton'sadditions, " after the manner of an opera,"are little better than doggrel. The music, though182 Diocletian.it has many and great beauties, seems more unequalthan that of any of Purcell's dramatic pieceswhich have been already mentioned. The air ofthe ballad, " What shall I do to show how muchI love her?" is charming, and well known from itsunion with the song, " Virgins are like the fairflower," in the Beggar s Opera. The duet, " Tellme why, my charming fair," contains many fineand characteristic ideas ; but it is diffuse, and ramblesthrough too many keys, and the melody isdeformed by stiff and antiquated graces. Thesame observations are applicable to the duet,"Oh the sweet delights of love," and the airWhen first I saw the bright Aurelian's eyes."The song, '' Since the toils and hazards of war'sat an end," (such is the poet's grammar,) is embellishedwith a showy accompaniment for two flutes,and would be excellent, but for the long formaldivisions through which a single syllable is frequentlydragged for several bars together. Intruth (and it is a rare thing in Purcell's music) theair and words are not at all suited to each othereven in their general expression ; the words being-meantto be joyous, while the melody, let it besung ever so briskly, is essentially sad. " Makeroom for the great god of wine," is a bacchanalianglee, which has served as a model for many suchcompositions in later times. " Sound, Fame, thybrazen trumpet," is a spirited trumpet-song; butConduct. 183its style has become antiquated. " Let the soldiersrejoice'* is an animated and martial songand chorus.Dioclesian was again revived at Covent Gardenabout the middle of the last century, but does notseem to have been performed since that time ; andit is not probable that it will be again brought onthe stage.Among the last of Purcell's works was the musicin Bonduca, another tragedy of Beaumont andFletcher's, made into an opera by Betterton, in thesame manner as Dioclesian. Neither the onenor the other of these pieces seems particularly calculatedfor being turned into a musical drama ;and, in the one as well as the other, the musicis introduced merely as belonging to shows orpageants, without being at all interwoven with thetexture of the piece. Bonduca has some powerfuland pathetic scenes, but not much general merit ;and it is quite unfit for the modern stage. Thesubject, however, seems to have roused Purcell'spatriotic feelings; for none of his compositions breathea nobler or loftier spirit.The chorus, " Hear us, great Rugwith, hearour prayers," sung by the British priests before thebattle with the Romans, is a supplication fullof the most sublime pathos. What grandeurthere is in the few notes sung by a single voice —Descend in chariots of ethereal flame,And touch the altars you defend !"184 Conduct.and how earnest and imploring the accents in whichthe whole choir join in the prayer,O save us !O save our nation and our name !"The instrumental symphony which introduces thischorus is a fine piece of solemn harmony, the effectof which could derive no addition from any modernimprovements.The solo for a bass voice, " Hear, ye gods ofBritain !" which is called an air, is a mixture ofrecitative and aria parlante or declamatory air.It is a model of the perfect adaptation of sound tosense. The notes not only aid the clear elocutionof the words, but heighten their emphasis and expression.The accompaniments for the stringedinstruments are beautifully wrought, and containsome harmony which in Purcell's time must havebeen quite new, and is still singularly bold andpowerful.The air for a treble voice, " O lead me to somepeaceful gloom," has all the freedom and grace ofthe finest modern melody, and is beautifully inaccordance with the sentiment of the words. Inone place, however, the author has been led astrayby a word which has often proved an igriis fatuusto composers. In the passage,Where the shrill trumpets never sound,But one eternal hush goes round,"the singer breaks out into a loud and dashing pas-donQUIXOTE. 185sage, in imitation of the sound of a trumpet ; althoughthe whole song is an aspiration after peace,repose, and silence. Even where the trumpet isintroduced, it is negatively, in expressing a wishfor some peaceful gloom, where its sound maynever be heard.* The " eternal hush," in thesucceeding line, is exquisitely expressed.The chorus ; "To arms, to arms ! your ensignsstraight display," is one of the most inspiring martialstrains that ever was heard. The concludingduet and chorus, " Britons, strike home," haslong taken its place among the warlike nationalsongs of England.The music in Bonduca was composed in 1695,the last year of Purcell's life ; and the piece wasbrought out in the following year, after his death.Durfey's three parts of Don Quixote, which arethree consecutive plays, were brought out, the firstin 1694, and the last in 1696.')' For these playsA whimsical proof of the prevalence of this error was givenin the setting of Sir Walter Scott's famous song of " CountyGu}'." Many composers essayed it ; and most of them, whenthey came to the words,The lark, his lay that trill'd all day,Sits hush'd, his partner by,"set about imitating the trill of a lark, either by the voice or theaccompaniment ; forgetting that the lay of the lark (like thetrumpet in Purcell's song) is mentioned negatively, and for thepurpose of intimating that it is hushed.f Thomas (familiarly called Tom) D'Urfey was a native of186 DON QUIXOTE.Purcell produced the finest of all his dramaticcompositions, the two songs, " Let the dreadfulengines," and " From rosy bowers."Devonshire, and bred to the profession of the law, which a loveof idleness and pleasure led him to abandon. He took to writingfor the stage, and produced a considerable number of playsand operas, several of which were very popular. He producedalso a great many songs, and other fugitive pieces, which arecontained in the well-known collection published by him in theyear 1719, under the title of Wit and Mirth, or Pills to PurgeMelancholy.D'Urfey was a man of gay and convivial, if not dissolutehabits He was very popular among the licentious Londonsociety of Charles the Second's time, and a great favourite ofthat monarch himself. That his character, however, was notdepraved, appears from the great kindness with which he ismentioned by some of the most respectable writers of his time,especially Addison, who gives a very pleasing description of himin the sixty-seventh number of the Guardian. Addison theretells his female readers that his old friend and contemporaryhad often made their grandmothers merry, and that his sonnetshad perhaps lulled asleep many a toast among the ladiesthen living, when she lay in her cradle. The paper, which waswritten for the purpose of recommending a play to be performedfor D'Urfey 's benefit, concludes with this character of him :As my friend, after the manner of the old Lyrics, accompanieshis works with his own voice, he has been the delight ofthe most polite companies and conversations from the beginningof King Charles the Second's reign to the present time. Manyan honest gentleman has got a reputation in his country bypretending to have been in company with Tom D'Urfey.I might here mention several other merits in my friend, ashis enriching our language with a multitude of rhymes, andbringing words together that, without his good offices, wouldDON QUIXOTE. 187Let the dreadful engines," is a soliloquy ofCardenio, while he is wandering among the wildsof the Sierra Morea. It is a wonderful picture ofevery variety of human passion — love, hatred,tender melancholy, fury, and despair — raging withunrestrained violence, as in rapid succession theychase each other through the mind of a maniac.Except some other works of Purcell himself, thereis nothing in music like it, or comparable to it. Inthe play it forms an entire scene. Cardenio rushesdistractedly upon the stage, and, after giving ventin this monologue to his frenzy, disappears amongnever have been acquainted with one another so long as it hadbeen a tongue. But I must not omit that my old friend anglesfor a trout the best of any man in England. May-flies comein late this season, or 1 myself should before dove have had atrout of his hooking.After what I have said, and much more that I might sayon this subject, I question not but the world will think that myold friend ought not to pass the remainder of his life in a cagelike a singing-bird, but enjoy all that Pindarick liberty whichis suitable to a man of his genius. He has made the worldmerry, and I hope they will make him easy so long as he staysamong us. This I will take upon me to say, they cannot do akindness to a more diverting companion, or a more cheerful,honest, and good-natured man."From this and other passages it appears that D'Urfey, as isgenerally the case with persons of his disposition and habits,was in necessitous circumstances in his old age. He died tenyears afterwards, in 1723. There is a great deal of wit andhumour in his plays and poems ; but his writings are pollutedby grossness and indecency.188 DON QUIXOTE.the rocks and thickets of his haunt. Delivered bya performer (if there was any such) capable of conceivingand expressed it, this scene must have beenappalling, heart-rending, overpowering to a degreebeyond anything which our experience of dramaticmusic has led us even to imagine. It is to belamented that this astonishing composition cannever again be heard in this manner, as the playfor which it was written has long disappeared foreverfrom the stage : and every one has felt howmuch the music of the theatre is chilled and enfeebledby being transferred to the concert-room.But it is there that we must now be content to hearit, and many other of Purcell's dramatic compositions: and, even under this disadvantage, theyare calculated to afford more delight than anyother music of which the English school canboast.From rosy bowers" was the song of the swan.It was," says the Orpheus Britaiinicus, " the lastsong the author set, being in his sickness." It isthe passionate raving of a girl crazed with love,and thus forms the counterpart to the song of Car-denis.It wants the fierce and terrible features ofthat song, but is equally fantastical, and has acharming feminine air throughout, even in itswildest flights and most violent bursts of passion.This song, unlike that of Cardenio, is not injuredby its separation from the play for which it wascomposed. It belongs to the character of Altisidora,DEATH OF PURCELL. 189and is sung by that witty damsel while lie is persecutingthe Knight of the Rueful Countenance withher pretended passion : but it is by far too beautiesand too pathetic for such a purpose. It is evidentthat Purcell was quite in earnest in composingit ; so should the performer be in singing it, andthe auditor in listening to it. It would be quiteshocking to hear this exquisite effusion of feelinggiven as a joke, like the crying song in Z,ove in aVillage, with which Rosetta mystified her goutylover, Justice Woodcock, whimpering to him, butall the while laughing behind her fan. It was afavourite song of several great English vocalists ofpast times, and will unquestionably be so again,though none of our present singers seem to havesufficient strength or courage to attempt it.*Purcell also composed vocal pieces for TheFairy Queen, a play altered from The MidsummerNight's Dream, and performed in 1692 ; Timonof Athens, altered from Shakspeare by Shad well ;The Libertine and Epsom Wells, by that dramatist;Dryden's Aurungzehe ; and a masque in the tragedyof Oedipus. The well-known mad song, " I'll sailupon the dog-star," was sung in a play called TheFool's Preferment. Many of these, as well as hisoccasional or miscellaneous songs, duets, &c., arecontained in the Orpheus Britannica.This illustrious musician died on the 21st ofNovember, 1695, in the thirty-seventh year of hisIt has lately been finely sung by Miss Mason.190 PURCELL.age. It is said that his death was caused by acold, occasioned by his having been kept standingone night at his own door for a considerable time,in consequence of his wife's irritation at his havingstayed too late at a convivial party. This story hasbeen told and repeated again and again, accompaniedwith many harsh comments on the characterand conduct of Mrs. Purcell. It has been told,however, without evidence, and in the face of circumstanceswhich render it incredible. Thoughhe possessed many good and amiable qualities,Purcell's domestic character cannot be rated high.He was too much addicted to the society of meanand dissolute companions; and the irregularity of hishabits must, to his wife, have been a source of grief,anxiety, and well-grounded displeasure. That shewas destitute of affection for him, however, andtreated him with such harshness as to cause hisdeath in the manner that has been mentioned, isentirely inconsistent with the language of griefand tenderness which she made use of in herdedication of the posthumous collection of hisworks ; expressions which, if hypocritical, shedurst hardly have ventured to use at a time whenher habits of life with her husband must have beenso well known to many. Purcell's death, moreover,appears to have been the consequence ofillness of some duration. One of his finest songswas composed " during his sickness;" and in hiswill, dated three weeks before his death, he de-purcell.191scribes himself as "of sound mind, though veryill in constitution" a phrase which induces thebelief that he died of a gradual decay. By thiswill, too, he leaves all his effects to his loving wifeFrances, and appoints her his sole executrix.Would he have bestowed this mark of love andconfidence on a woman whose unkind usage hadbrought him to the brink of the grave ? It is time,therefore, that there should be an end to these idleand unwarrantable attacks on the memory of poorMrs. Purcell.Though, unhappily, fond of society unworthyof his character and genius, he was not exclusivelygiven to such society. He enjoyed the esteem andfriendship of many persons distinguished both byrank and talents. Pepys, in his Diary, speaks ofmeeting him in the fashionable circles of the day.The Lord Keeper North, an eminent patron of literatureand the arts, was among his friends; andDryden appears to have regarded him with warmaffection.Purcell left several children, one of whom,Edward, became an organist of small reputation,and died in 1751 ; of the others there is noaccount. Daniel Purcell, his brother, was a musicianof respectable abilities. He composed manysongs for the dramatic pieces of the day ; all ofwhich, however, are now forgotten.Purcell was buried in Westminster Abbey. Hismonument was erected by Lady Elizabeth Howard,192 PURCELL.Dryden's wife ; and the epitaph inscribed on itwas written by the poet himself.'* Here liesHenry Purcell, Esquire;Who left this lifeAnd is gone to that blessed placeWhere only his own harmony can be exceeded.Obiit 21™° die Novembris,Anno aetatis suae 37"^°,Antique Domini 1695."Though Purcell's genius ranged through everywalk of his art, yet its bent was towards the musicof the theatre ; and he has left behind him a largebody of dramatic compositions, which to thishour remain unrivalled among the works of theEnglish school. In variety of character, beauty ofmelody, truth and force of expression, and niceadaptation to the genius of the English language,they are to this hour unparalleled. Their imperfectionsmust be ascribed to the state of music, asapractical art, in his day ; and when this is considered,it is wonderful that these imperfections areso small and so few. In regard to composition, itmust be remembered that English secular melodywas almost created by Purcell ; the greatness ofhis predecessors having been derived, with slightexceptions, from their achievements in vocal harmony.It was not then in England as it was inItaly, where the melody of the stage had beenpolished by a succession of distinguished masters.It was still worse in regard to performance : for,PURCELL. 193though Purcell could, and did, obtain ideas of theItalian melody by reading the scores of the Italiancomposers, yet he could obtain no conception ofthe delicacies and graces of Italian singing. Hisprincipal vocalists, probably, had as fine voices,and as much native feeling, as any of their successors: but the powers of the voice were not thendeveloped by cultivation ; nor was expressionheightened and varied by the thousand refinementsof modern execution. Of all the qualities of anartist, the taste is that which is most slowlymatured ; and it is to immaturity of taste, therefore,that Purcell's defects are to be wholly ascribed.Still, we repeat, it is wonderful to observe howfree his works are from defects even of taste. Hisinnate sense of the beautiful gave rise to conceptions,which, to himself, were never realised. Whatwould have been his feelings, had he heard " Bessof Bedlam," "From rosy bowers," or, "Let thedreadful engines," sung by Madame Mara, Mrs.Sheridan, Bateman, or Sahara !But the highest quality of Purcell's music is itsgenuine English character. In this respect it remainswholly unrivalled. Purcell was fully awareof the great principle, that the vocal music ofevery country must be founded upon the peculiaraccent, or modulation, of its spoken language.Addison, (who, though not a musician, was wellacquainted with those fundamental laws of tasteand criticism which are applicable to all the fineVOL. I. o194 ENGLISH MELODY.arts,) has so clearly explained this principle, andso elegantly and happily illustrated it, that hisremarks deserve the attention of every musicalartist. Their value has suffered no abatement bythe lapse of a century.*"The only fault," says Addison, " I can find inour present practice, is the making use of the Italianrecitativo with English words.''To go to the bottom of this matter, I mustobserve, that the tone, or (as the French call it)the accent of every nation in their ordinary speech,is altogether different from that of every otherpeople ; as we may see even in the Welsh andScotch who border so near upon us. By the toneor accent, I do not mean the pronunciation of eachparticular word, but the sound of the whole sentence.Thus it is very common for an Englishgentleman, when he hears a French tragedy, tocomplain that the actors all of them speak in atone ; and therefore he very wisely prefers his owncountrymen, not considering that a foreigner complainsof the same tone in an English actor.For this reason, the recitative music, in everylanguage, should be as different as the tone oraccent of each language ; for otherwise, what mayproperly express a passion in one language willnot do it in another. Every one who has beenlong in Italy knows very well, that the cadences inthe recitative bear a remote affinity to the tone ofSpectator, No. 29. April 3, 1711.ENGLISH MELODY. 195their voices in ordinary conversation ; or, to speakmore properly, are only the accents of their languagemade more musical and tuneful. Thus thenotes of interrogation, or admiration, in the Italianmusic (if one may so call them) which resembletheir accents in discourse on such occasions, arenot unlike the ordinary tones of an English voicewhen we are angry : insomuch, that I have oftenseen our audiences extremely mistaken as to whathas been doing upon the stage, and expecting tosee the hero knock down a messenger when he hasbeen asking him a question ; or fancying that hequarrels with his friend when he only bids himgood-morrow.For this reason, the Italian artists cannot agreewith our English musicians, in admiring Purcell'scompositions, and thinking his tunes so wonderfullyadapted to his words; because both nationsdo not always express the same passions by thesame sounds.I am therefore humbly of opinion, that anEnglish composer should not follow the Italianrecitative too servilely, but make use of manygentle deviations from it, in compliance with hisown native language. He may copy out of it all thelulling softness and dying falls, (as Shakspeare callsthem,) but should still remember that he ought toaccommodate himself to an English audience ; and,by humouring the tone of our voices in ordinaryconversation, have the same regard to the accento 2196 ENGLISH MELODY.of his own language as those persons had to theirswhom he professes to imitate. It is observed thatseveral of the singing-birds of our own countrylearn to sweeten their voices and mellow the harshnessof their natural notes, by practising underthose that come from warmer climates. In thesame manner I would allow the Italian opera tolend our English music as much as may grace andsoften it, but never entirely to annihilate and destroyit. Let the infusion be as strong as you please,but still let the subject-matter of it be English.*A composer should fit his music to the geniusof the people, and consider that the delicacy ofhearing, and taste of harmony, have been formedupon those sounds which every country aboundswith : in short, that music is of a relative nature,and what is harmony to one ear may be dissonanceto another.The same observations which I have madeupon the recitative part of music, may be appliedto all our songs and airs in general."These important considerations are, in a greatmeasure, disregarded by English composers. Englishrecitative, instead of being founded on whatmay be called the natural melody of Englishspeech, is generally made up of a tissue of musicalphrases borrowed from the Italian composers ; sothat an English singer, delivering a piece of recitativein his own language, has the appearance of aAddison's musical language is not technically accurate, butthis does not affect his principles.ENGLISH MELODY. 197foreigner declaiming in broken English. Thesame thing, though in a lesser degree, is perceptiblein our English airs ; which, being made up ofpassages originally suggested by the modulationsof Italian speech, are destructive of the emphasisand accent of the words to which they are united)by the English composer. Similar effects are producedby the present imitation of the Germanmusic. Our composers act precisely as a painterwould do, who, in painting an English landscape,instead of looking upon the scenery around him,should compose his picture by copying his rocksfrom Salvator Rosa, his blue distances from Poussin,his sunshine from Claude, his trees from Ruysdael,and his cattle from Cuyp. The evil has beenaggravated of late years by the practice of adaptingItalian, German, and French operas to the Englishstage ; a practice which has almost put an end tothe existence of English melody. Even whensetting an English ballad, our composers show thattheir heads are full of Rossini, Spohr, Weber, orAuber. Compare their exotic productions withthe genuine English strains of Purcell, Arne,Linley, Arnold, Dibdin, and Shield ; and the differenceis at once perceived between copying fromart and copying from nature. But let us not bemisunderstood. A knowledge of art, and a studyof its most exquisite productions, are necessary toenable the artist to bestow grace and refinement onhis copies from nature. Purcell, the most naturalPURCELL.and the most truly English of all our composers,sought for models among the French and Italianmasters of his time. He himself has said, that"he has faithfully endeavoured a just imitation ofthe most far-famed Italian masters : but this imitation(as the present writer has elsewhere observed)did not consist in stringing together fragments ofItalian melody, and trying to force these into anunion with English words. He studied the geniusof the Italian music ; observed that its excellenciesconsisted in its smoothness and expression, and inthe exquisite adaptation of the melody to whatmay be called the accent and modulation of theItalian language ; and he endeavoured to give tohis own music corresponding qualities. It thusarises, that PurcelPs music, while it does possessthe excellencies of the Italian music which hestudied, is perfectly original, and much more trulyand essentially English than that of any composerwho has appeared before or since"* — "ThoughPurcelPs dramatic style and recitative," says Burney,"were formed, in a great measure, on Frenchmodels, there is a latent power and force in hisexpression of English words, whatever be the subject,that will make an unprejudiced native of this islandfeel, more than all the elegance, grace, and refinementof modern music, less happily applied, can do :and this pleasure is communicated to us, not bythe symmetry or rhythm of modern melody, butmusical Historia, Biography, and Criticism.PURCELL. 199by his having tuned to the true accents of ourmother-tongue, those notes of passion which aninhabitant of this island would breathe in suchsituations as the words describe. And these indigenousexpressions of passion Purcell had thepower to enforce by the energy of modulation,which, on some occasions, was bold, affecting, andsublime." — " Handel," adds the same writer,who flourished in a less barbarous age for his art,has been acknowledged Parcels superior in manyparticulars ; but in none more than the art andgrandeur of his choruses, the harmony and textureof his organ fugues, as well as his great style ofplaying that instrument ; the majesty of his grandconcertos ; the ingenuity of his accompaniments to hissongs and choruses; and even in the general melodyof the airs themselves : yet, in the accent, passion,and expression of English ivords, the vocal musicof Purcell is, sometimes to my feelings, as superiorto Handel's as an original poem to a translation."Every English student of composition ought togive his days and nights" to the music ofPurcell : not for the purpose of learning to copyhim, but of learning, from him, to copy nature.The principal dramatic singers in Purcell's timewere Mr. James Bowen, Mr. Harris, Mr. Freeman,Mr. Pate, and Mr. Mountfort, performers at thetheatres ; Mr. Damascene, Mr. Woods, Mr. Turner,and Mr. Boucher, gentlemen of the chapel-royal; Mrs. Mary Davis, Miss Shore, (afterwards200 SINGERS,Mrs. Gibber,) Mrs. Cross, Miss Campion, Mrs.Butler, and Mrs. Bracegirdle.None of the above male theatrical performers aremuch spoken of as singers ; though they aredescribed as excellent actors. The gentlemen ofthe chapel-royal, about this time, occasionallyassisted in musical performances on the stage ; butthis practice was afterwards prohibited by QueenAnne.Mrs. Davis was one of the actresses, belonging toSir William Davenant's company, who boarded inhis house. Downes says, that she played the partof Catania in a play called the Rivals ; and in thispart, which was that of a shepherdess mad for love,sang the well-known ballad, " My lodging is onthe cold ground'' so beautifully, that she captivatedKing Charles II., who took her off the stage, andhad a daughter by her, who was named MaryTudor, and was married to Francis Lord Radcliffe,afterwards Earl of Derwentwater. Mrs. Davis wasalso admired as a dancer.Miss Shore was daughter of Matthias Shore, Serjeanttrumpeter in the king's household. She wasa beautiful and amiable young woman, and at anearly age showed great musical talents, and becamea favourite pupil of Purcell. Colles Cibber, havingaccidentally heard her perform on the harpsichord,fell in love with her, and married her, when he himselfwas only two-and-twenty, and she still younger.At that time, as Cibber tells us, he had no other in-MISS CAMPION. '201come than twenty pounds a year allowed him by hisfather, and twenty shillings a week from the theatre.The marriage having taken place without the consentof the lady's father, he refused to do anything for them:upon this Mrs. Gibber betook herself to the stage ;and, after having distinguished herself as a singer,became an actress of the highest celebrity.Miss Cross was an eminent actress, especially inmusical parts. She performed the character ofAltisidora in the third part of Don Quixote, inwhich she sang the song, " From rosy bowers."Miss Campion was a young woman of low birth,but, unhappily for herself, possessed a beautifulperson and a fine voice. William, the first Dukeof Devonshire, then an old man, took her off thestage, and made her his mistress. She died in1706, in her nineteenth year ; and the duke buriedher in the church of Latimer, in Buckinghamshire,the burial-place of his family. In the chancel ofthat church he erected a monument for her, onwhich there is a Latin inscription, importing, thatshe was wise beyond her years, and bountiful to thepoor even beyond her abilities ; and, at the theatre,where she had sometime acted, modest and untainted; that being seized with a hectic fever, shehad submitted to her fate with a firm confidenceand christian piety ; and that William, Duke ofDevonshire, had, upon her beloved remains, erectedthat tomb as sacred to her memory. This ostentatiousproof of attachment to an object of illicit love202 MRS. BllACEGUlDLE.was properly looked upon as an insult to religionand good manners, and very generally censured.Mrs. Butler is described by Gibber as an excellentactress and singer. In speaking, she had asweet-toned voice, which, with her genteel air andsensible pronunciation, rendered her very interestingin many serious parts, though she excelledalso in characters of humour. She gave greatattraction, both by her acting and singing, to thepart of Philidel, the good spirit, in King Arthur.Mrs. Bracegirdle was the most favourite performerof her time. Gibber gives a captivatingdescription of her, as she was in the year 1690.She was then, he says, just blooming to her maturity,her reputation as an actress gradually risingwith the beauty of her person. There never wasany woman in such general favour with the public ;a favour which, to the very end of her theatricallife, she preserved by maintaining strict propriety ofconduct. She was a brunette, with so lively anaspect, and such a glow of health and cheerfulnessin her countenance, that she was surrounded bylovers and admirers.Among these was a Captain Hill, a man of aprofligate and brutal character, who had long persecutedher with addresses which she rejected withmerited contempt. Hill ascribed this rejection, notto his own unworthiness, but to the lady's preferenceof some other person ; and as Mountfort the actorwas a handsome man, frequently performed withMRS. BRACEGIRDLE. 203her, and was on terms of friendly intercourse withher, Hill fixed on him, though a married man, asthe object of his suspicion. Having obtained theassistance of Lord Mohun, a noted roue, of that day,and hired some soldiers, he attempted to force Mrs.Bracegirdle into a coach, as she came out of a housewhere she had supped. But her mother and thegentleman of the house, having resisted and calledfor help, she was rescued and safely guarded home.Hill and Lord Mohun, thus disappointed of theirprey, vowed vengeance, with dreadful imprecations,against Mountfort. Mrs. Bracegirdle's friends, hearingthese threats, immediately sent to Mrs. Mount-fort,advising her to warn her husband not to comehome that night ; but, unfortunately, Mrs. Mount-ford'smessengers were unable to find him. In themeantime, Lord Mohun and Captain Hill paradedthe street with their swords drawn till about midnight,when they met Mountfort on his returnhome. Lord Mohun saluted him in a friendly manner,and while they were in conversation. Hill,coming behind Mountfort, gave him a violent blowon the head with his left hand, and before Montforthad time to draw and stand on his defence, ran himthrough the body with his sword. This last circumstanceMountfort declared, as a dying man, tothe surgeon who attended him. He died on thefollowing day. Hill immediately made his escape ;but Lord Mohun was seized. He was brought totrial on the 31st January, 1693, when he was204 MRS. BRACEGIUDLE.acquitted, strangely enough, on the ground that hehad not directly assisted Hill in the murder ; fourteenpeers voting that he was guilty, and sixteen notguilty. Montfort, who was in his thirty-third year,was, says Gibber, generally lamented by his friendsand all lovers of the theatre.Mrs. Bracegirdle's name appears as a principalperformer in many of the comedies that were performedabout the end of the seventeenth and theearlier part of the eighteenth century. She appearsto have made an extraordinary impression byher manner of singing an impassioned song, composedby Eccles, in the character of Marcellus, inthe second part of Don Quixote. In the OrpheusBritaymicus there is a song, "Whilst I with griefon you did look," addressed to her in complimentto that performance.Mrs. Bracegirdle," says Aston a contemporarywriter, " that Diana of the stage, had many assailantson her virtue, as Lord Lovelace and Mr. Congreve,the last of which had her company most.But she ever resisted his vicious attacks, and yetwas always uneasy at his leaving her. She wasvery shy of Lord Lovelace's company, as being anengaging man who dressed well ; and as every dayhis servant came to her to ask her how she did, shealways returned her answer in the most obeisantwords and behaviour, that she was indifferent well,she humbly thanked his lordship. She was of alovely height, with dark brown liairund eye-bj'ows,MRS. BRACEGIRDLE. 205black sparkling eyes, and a fresh blush complexion; and, whenever she exerted herself, hadan involuntary flushing in her breast, neck, andface, having continually a cheerful aspect, and afine set of even white teeth ; never making an exithut that she left the audience in an imitation of herpleasant countenance. Her virtue had its rewardboth in applause and specie ; for it happened, thatas the Dukes of Dorset and Devonshire, Lord Halifax,and other nobles, over a bottle, were extollingMrs. Bracegirdle's virtuous behaviour ; ' Come,'says Lord Halifax, ' you all commend her virtue,but why do we not present this incomparable womanwith something worthy her acceptance V Hislordship deposited two hundred guineas, which therest made up eight hundred, and sent to her, withencomiums on her virtue. She was, when on thestage, diurnally charitable, going often into Clare-marketand giving money to the poor unemployedbasket women, insomuch that she could not passthat neighbourhood without the thankful acclamationsof people of all degrees ; so that if any personhad affronted her, they would have been indanger of being killed directly ; and yet this goodwoman was an actress."The character of this remarkable woman didnot escape obloquy. She was grossly attacked bythe notorious Tom Brown ; and Milton (in hisComparison between the two Stages, 1702) says, "hervirtue is all a juggle, 'tis legerdemain ; the best206 DRYDEN.on't is, she falls into good hands, and the secrecyof the intrigue secures her ; but as to her innocence,I believe no more on't than I believe of John Mandeville."The circumstances of her life, however,in so far as they are known, do not give countenanceto these accusations, which are probablycalumnies resulting from personal enmity. Miltonalso says, that, after the appearance of JeremyCollier's book, she, along with one or two otherperformers, were fined for uttering profane or indecentexpressions on the stage. Whatever groundsthere may have been, however, for charging Mrs.Bracegirdle with secret irregularities, it is certainthat she conducted herself with decency and prudence,passed through life with credit, supportedthe respectability of her profession, and never,by her own example, gave countenance or encouragementto the impropriety of others.Mrs. Bracegirdle continued to perform till theyear 1707, when she left the stage. In the latterpart of her life she resided in the family of FrancisChute, Esq., one of the king's counsel, at his housein Norfolk-street in the Strand, where she died, in1748, in the eighty-fifth year of her age.Dryden, who had furnished Purcell with subjectsworthy of his genius, did not long survivehim. The poet's last production was The SecularMasque, which was written about the end of theyear 1699, and, from its title, seems to have beenintended to celebrate the conclusion of the century ;ECCLES. 207Dryden having erroneously supposed that thecentury terminated with the year 1699. It is amythological satire on the reigns of the Stuart,the predecessors of King William. By the introductionof the deities of the chase, of war, and of-love,as governing the various changes of the seventeenthcentury, Dryden alludes to the sylvan sportsof James I., the bloody wars of his son, and thelicentious gallantry which prevailed in the courtof Charles II., and of James, his successor. It wasperformed in 1700, but it does not seem certainwhether or not the poet was then alive. It wasfavourably received ; and the music, which is saidto have been composed by Daniel Purcell, wasmuch approved. Though this piece is a meretrifle, it was revived with success at Drury Lane,in 1749, with new music, by Dr. Boyce.John Eccles holds a high rank among the musiciansof this period, and many of his compositionsare still well known to the lovers of the old Englishmusic. He was much employed in writing for thestage. He composed the music in a tragedy, byDennis, called Rinaldo and Armida, which wasperformed in 1690 ; and in which the song, " Thejolly breeze," was long popular. He composedthe music to Congreve's Masque, The Judgment ofParis, which was published entire. A collectionof his theatrical compositions, consisting of act-tunes,dances, and incidental songs, in a numberof dramatic pieces, was published by him with a208 ECCLES.dedication to Queen Anne. It contains manyadmirable songs, which are indeed inferior onlyto those of Purcell. The mad song, " I burn, mybrain consumes to ashes," sung by Mrs. Brace-girdle,in the character of Marcellus, in Don Quixotewas one of the masterpieces of that favourite actress.In the Orpheus Britanjiicus there is a song byPurcell, in compliment to Mrs. Bracegirdle's performanceof Eccles's song. In the latter part ofhis life, Eccles was master of the queen's band,and was known to the musical world only by theodes on her majesty's birth-day, the new year, &c.,which he composed in the course of his duty.Eccles had two brothers, Henry and Thomas,both musicians. Henry was an eminent violinist, inthe service of the French court, and the author ofa set of excellent violin solos, published at Parisin 1720. Thomas is remarkable as having beenperhaps the last of those itinerant musicians whoused to frequent taverns, and play for the entertainmentof the guests. He was a man of talentin his profession, but reduced by dissolute habitsto this degrading exercise of it. The following-accountof him and his performance was given toSir John Hawkins, by a good judge of music whoheard him play. " It was about the month ofNovember, in the year 1735, that I, with somefriends, were met to spend the evening at a tavernin the city, when this man, in a mean but decentgarb, was introduced to us by the waiter. Imme-ECCLES. 209lately on opening the door, I heard the twang ofone of his strings from under his coat, which wasaccompanied b}^ the question, ' Gentlemen, willyou please to hear any music ? ' Our curiosity andthe modesty of the man's deportment inclined usto say yes; and music he gave us, such as I hadnever heard before, nor shall again, under thesame circumstances. With as fine and delicatea hand as I ever heard, he played the whole fifthand ninth solos of Corelli, two songs of Mr. Handel,Del minacciar' in Otho, and ' Sperm si, mio carobene,' in Admetus : in short, his performance wassuch as would command the attention of the nicestear, and left us, his auditors, much at a loss toguess what it was that constrained him to seek hisliving in a way so disreputable. He made nosecret of his name; he said he was the youngestof three brothers, and that Henry, the middle one,had been his master, and was then in the serviceof the king of France. We were very little disposedto credit the account he gave us of hisbrother's situation in France ; but the collection ofsolos, above mentioned to have been published byhim at Paris, put it out of question'* Uponinquiry some time afterwards, it appeared thathe was idle and given to drinking. He was wellknown to the musicians of the time, who thoughtthemselves disgraced by this practice of his, whichwas called going a-busking.*There are many allusions, in old English writers, to theVOL. I. P210 JEREMY COLLIER.In 1698, Jeremy Collier published his celebratedView of the Immorality and Profaneness of theEnglish Stage ;" a book in which he assailed mostof the living writers, from Dryden to Durfe3^This book made a great impression on the public,who were confounded when they contemplated themass of profanity, immorality, and indecency, whichwas thus concentrated and brought all at oncebefore their eyes. "The wise and the pious,"says Dr. Johnson, "caught the alarm; and thenation wondered why it had so long sufferedirreligion and licentiousness to be openly taughtat the public charge." Dryden, to his honour,admitted the justice of the accusation against him-practiceof entertaining the guests at inns and taverns n-ithmusic. Fjrnes Morrison, in his Itinerary, giving an account ofthe manner in which it was customary to receive and treat atraveller at an English inn, says, " Then the host and hostessvisits him, and if he will late with the host, or at a common tablewith others, his male will cost him sixpence, or in some placesbut fourpence (yet this course is less honourable, and not usedby gentlemen) : but if he will late in his chamber, he commandswhat meat he will, according to his appetite, and asmuch as he thinks fit for him and his companie ; yea, the kitchenis open to him to command the meat to be dressed as hebest likes ; and when he sits at table, the host or hostess willaccompany him, or, if they have many guests, will at least visithim, taking it for curtsies to be bid sit down. while he gates,if he have company especially, he shall be offered musicke,which he may freely take or refuse ; and if he be solitary, themusickeians will give him the good day with musicke in themorning."JEREMY COLLIER. 211self. " I shall say the less of Mr. Collier," saidthe veteran poet, in the preface to his Fables,"because in many things he has taxed me justly;and I have pleaded guilty to all thoughts andexpressions of mine, which can be truly arguedof obscenity, profaneness, or immorality, and retractthem. If he be my enemy, let him triumph;if he be my friend, as I have given him no personaloccasion to be otherwise, he will be gladof my repentance. It becomes me not to drawray pen in the defence of a bad cause, when I haveso often drawn it for a good one." It does notappear that such an amende honorable as this wasmade by any other of the dramatic writers whomMr. Collier had chastised ; but his book contributedto the reformation of a great evil. "Collier'sattack on the stage," says Sir Walter Scott, " wasattended with good consequences, which that activedisputant lived to witness. Indecencies were nolonger either fashionable or tolerated ; and bydegrees the ladies began to fill the boxes at anew play, without either the necessity of wearingmasks, or the risk of incurring censure. Latertimes have carried this laudable restraint stillfarther ; till at last, if we have lost almost allthe wit of our predecessors, we at least have retainednone of their licentiousness."p2CHAPTER IX.Degeneracy of the Italian opera at the commencement of thelast century — Marcello's satire, H Teatro alia mode — Principalcomposers of that period — Scarlatti — Caldara — Lotti —Vivaldi — Improvements effected by them — Dramatic poets —Apostolo Zeno — Metastasio — His appearance an era in theItalian opera.About the end of the seventeenth and beginningof the eighteenth century, the Italian musical dramaappears, for a time, to have degenerated, and tohave become liable to many abuses. As publictheatres multiplied in the different towns, andeach department of the drama became a professiongiving employment to numbers of people in thecapacities of dramatists, composers, actors, andsingers, these occupations came to be exercised byignorant and worthless pretenders : so that, notwithstandingthe genius of a few eminent individuals,the general standard of excellence, in everybranch of the art, was much lowered. The Italianmusical dramas of that period were full of the mostridiculous absurdities. Regularity of construction,OPERA DEGENERATED. 213consistency of character, and poetical beauty, weredisregarded, provided the eye and ear were gratifiedwith splendid sights and feats of vocal execution.In one of these pieces, which represented thesiege of Persepolis, a mine exploded and blew up apart of the city. In another, Alcibiades, the Atheniangeneral, came on the stage in a fashionablecarriage, preceded by couriers and outriders, accordingto the mode of the day. In an opera calledDido, written by Bushnell, a Venetian poet, thefirst act comprehended the burning of Troy ; thesecond, the arrival of ^neas after seven years' wanderingon the shores of Carthage; the third, theflight of aeneas, and suicide of the deserted queen.These dramas, too, contained a mixture of tragedyand comedy which had neither the grandeur ofthe one, nor the vivacity of the other. Gods andheroes were mixed with buffoons, tragical incidentswith farcical jokes, and lofty or impassioned declamationwith doggrel or ribaldry. In Gibson, anopera by Giacinto Andrea Cicognini, of Florence,an eminent poet of that day, there is the followingdialogue between King Egeus and Demos, a stutteringservant. The situation is sufficiently serious,the aged king inquiring anxiously about the departureof his son.Egeo. E verso dove andranno ?Demo. {Balbutiente) S'imbarcano per co, co, co, per, co, co,CO.Egeo. Per Coimbra ?214 OPERA DEGENERATED.Demo. Per co, co, co.Egeo. Per Coral ?Demo. Oibo ! per co, co, co.Egeo. Per Cosandro ?Demo, Nemmeno ; per co, co, co.Egeo. Per Corinth.Demo. Ah ! ah ! beneMi avast di pen."In these dramas, love was always introduced asthe principal topic ; and it was often treated in achildish as well as indecent manner. In one ofthem there is a duet between two lovers, the subjectof which is their alternately asking, refusing,and giving each other kisses ; the performers, whilesinging it, " suiting the action to the word."One of the musical beauties of that time was themimicry of various sounds by means of instruments.In an Opera huff, called // podesta diColonial, the following verses were sung, whilethe composer, in his accompaniments, imitated thesounds of the animals described by the singer ;Valor la granocchiella nel pantingPer allegrezza capita qua quare ;Tibia il grill o tre, tre, tre ;L'agnellino be, be, be ;L'assinuolo whu, whu, whu,Ed il gal cucchericu ;Agni bestir sta gaia, io sempre calicoDi gui dales chi a agni otto mi rammarico."And in a piece called L' Amove in Cticina, per-MARCELLO'S SATIRE. 215formed at Bologna, the composer imitated with theorchestra the crowing of the cock and the sound ofcannon ; solely because some mention was made ofthe bird, and because one of the characters said,lo del canons al soonSolo responded bun-ban-bun-bon."Imitations of the cries of animals, or other naturalsounds, by means of instruments, when discreetlyused, may really be a musical beauty. But theexcess to which they were carried by the composersof those da^^s was most ridiculous.Although Cicognini was one of the chief corruptorsof the Italian musical drama, by introducinginto it these follies and absurdities, yet, in hisown time, he was looked upon as a restorer of thedrama. His pieces were many times reprinted ;and the Italian critics held him up as a model forimitation.In the year 1720, there appeared a satirical workof Benevento Marcello, the celebrated author of thePsalms, which gives a lively picture of the musicaldrama at that period. Marcello was a Venetiannobleman, still more distinguished by his geniusand various accomplishments than by his rank.Besides his great sacred work, which has renderedhis name illustrious, he wrote the poetry and musicof several operas, besides sonnets and other lyricalpieces. His book, which we have just mentioned,is called // Teatro alia mode, and is a curious216 MARCELLO'S SATIRE.satire on the manners as well as the music of thetime. It is described in the title-page as being"an easy and sure method of composing and performingItalian operas in the modern fashion ;" andprofesses to give useful and necessary advice topoets, composers, singers, managers, orchestra-players,machinists, scene-painters, prompters,copyists, the actresses' mothers and protectors, andother persons belonging to the theatre. A few ofthese ironical counsels will give an idea of thewhole.The author begins by telling the poet, that thereis no occasion for his reading, or having read, theold Greek and Latin authors : for this good reason,that the ancients never read any of the works ofthe moderns. He will not ask any questions aboutthe ability of the performers, but will rather inquirewhether the theatre is provided with a good bear,a good lion, a good nightingale, good thunder, lightning,and earthquakes. He will introduce a magnificentshow in his last scene, and conclude withthe usual chorus in honour of the sun, the moon,or the manager. In dedicating his libretto to somegreat personage, he will select him for his richesrather than his learning, and will give a share ofthe gratuity to his patron's cook, or maitre d'hotel,from whom he will obtain all his titles, that hemay blazon them on his title-pages, with an &c.&c. He will exalt the great man's family andancestors ; make an abundant use of such phrasesMARCELLO'S SATIRE. 217as liberality, and generosity of soul ; and if hecannot find any subject of eulogy, (as is often thecase,) he will say, that he is silent through fear ofhurting his patron's modesty, but that Fame, withher hundred brazen trumpets, will spread his immortalname from pole to pole. He will do wellto protest to the reader that his opera was composedin his youth, and may add that it was written in afew days : by this he will show that he is a truemodern, and has a proper contempt for the antiquatedprecept, nonumque premature in annum. Hemay add, too, that he became a poet solely for hisamusement, and to divert his mind from graveroccupations : but that he had published his workby the advice of his friends and the command ofhis patron, and by no means from any love ofpraise or desire of profit. He will take care not toneglect the usual explanation of the three greatpoints of every drama, the place, time, and action ;the place signifying in such-and-such a theatre ;the time, from eight to twelve o'clock at night ; theaction, the ruin of the manager. The incidents ofthe piece should consist of dungeons, daggers,poison, boar-hunts, earthquakes, sacrifices, madness,and so forth; because the people are alwaysgreatly moved by such unexpected things. A goodmodern poet ought to know nothing about music,because the ancients, according to Strabo, Pliny,&c., thought this knowledge necessary. At therehearsals he should never tell his meaning to218 MARCELLO S SATIRE.any of the performers, wisely reflecting that theyalways want to do everything in their own way.If a husband and wife are discovered in prison, andone of them is led away to die, it is indispensablethat the other remain to sing an air, which shouldbe to lively words, to relieve the feelings of theaudience, and make them understand that the wholeaffair is a joke. If two of the characters makelove, or plot a conspiracy, it should always be inthe presence of servants and attendants. The partof a father, or a tyrant, when it is the principal character,should always be given to a soprano ; reservingthe tenors and basses for captains of theguard, confidants, shepherds, messengers, and soforth.The modern composer is told that there is nooccasion for his being master of the principles ofcomposition ; a little practice being all that isnecessary. He need not know anything of poetry,or give himself any trouble about the meaning ofthe words, or even the quantities of the syllables.Neither is it necessary that he should study theproperties of the stringed or wind instruments ; ifhe can play on the harpsichord, it will do very welLIt will, however, be not amiss for him to have beenfor some years a violin-player, or music-copier forsome celebrated composer, whose original sceneshe may treasure up, and thus supply himself withsubjects for his airs, recitatives, or choruses. Hewill by no means think of reading the operaMARCELLO'S SATIRE. 211)through, but will compose it line by line ; using,for the airs, motive which he has lying by him :and if the words do not go well below the notes,he will torment the poet till they are altered to hismind. When the singer comes to a cadence, thecomposer will make all the instruments stop,leaving it to the singer to do whatever he pleases.He will serve the manager on very low terms, consideringthe thousands of crowns that the singerscost him : — he will therefore content himself withan inferior salary to the lowest of these, providedthat he is not wronged by the bear, the attendants,or the scene-shifters, being put above him. Whenhe is walking with the singers, he will always givethem the wall, keep his hat in his hand, and remaina step in the rear ; considering that the lowestof them, on the stage, is at least a general, a captainof the guards, or some such personage. Allthe airs should be formed of the same materials —long divisions, holding notes, and repetitions ofinsignificant words, as amove amove, impevo impevo,Europa Europa, fiivovi fuvovi, ovgoglio ovgoglio, &c.&:c. ; and therefore the composer should have beforehim a memorandum of the things necessary for thetermination of every air. This will enable him toeschew variety, which is no longer in use. Afterending a recitative in a flat key, he will suddenlybegin an air in three or four sharps ; and this bywayof novelty. If the modern composer wishes towrite in four parts, two of them must proceed in220 MARCELLO'S SATIRE.unison or octave, only taking care that there shallbe a diversity of movement : so that if the onepart proceeds by minims or crotchets, the otherwill be in quavers or semiquavers. He will charmthe audience with airs accompanied by the instrumentsj>i2:2:«c«^i or con sorting, trumpets, and othereffective contrivances. He will not compose airswith a simple bass accompaniment, because this isno longer the custom ; and, besides, he would takeas much time to compose one of these as a dozenwith the orchestra. The modern composer willoblige the manager to furnish him with a largeorchestra of violins, oboes, horns, &c., saving himrather the expense of double basses, of which thereis no occasion to make any use, except in tuningat the outset. The overture will be a movement inthe French style, or a prestissimo in semiquaversin a major key, to which will succeed a piano inthe minor ; concluding with a minuet, gavot, orjig, again in the major key. In this manner thecomposer will avoid all fugues, syncopations, andtreatment of subjects, as being antiquated contrivances,quite banished from modern music. Themodern composer will be most attentive to all theladies of the theatre, supplying them with plentyof old songs transposed to suit their voices, andtelling each of them that the opera is supported byher talent alone. He will bring every night someof his friends, and seat them in the orchestra ;giving the double bass or violoncello (as being theMARCELLO'S SATIRE. 2*21most useless instruments) leave of absence to makeroom for them.The singer is informed that there is no occasionfor having practised the solfeggio ; because hewould thus be in danger of acquiring a firm voice,just intonation, and the power of singing in tune ;things wholly useless in modern music. Nor is itvery necessary that he should be able to read orwrite, know how to pronounce the words or understandtheir meaning, provided he can run divisions,make shakes, cadences, &c. He will always complainof his part, saying that it is not in his way,that the airs are not in his style, and so on : andhe will sing an air by some other composer, protestingthat at such a court, or in the presence ofsuch a great personage, that air carried away allthe applause, and he was obliged to repeat it adozen times in an evening. At the rehearsals hewill merely hum his airs, and will insist on havingthe time in his own way. He will stand with onehand in his waistcoat and the other in his breechespocket, and take care not to allow a syllable to beheard. He will always keep his hat on his head,though a person of quality should speak to him, inorder to avoid catching cold : and he will not bowhis head to anybody, remembering the kings,princes, and emperors whom he is in the habit ofpersonating. On the stage he will sing with slitteeth, doing all he can to prevent a word he saysfrom being understood, and, in the recitatives.222 MARCELLO'S SATIRE.paying no respect either to commas or periods.While another performer is reciting a soliloquy, orsinging an air, he will be saluting the company inthe boxes, or tittering with musicians in the orchestra,or the attendants ; because the audienceknows very well that he is Signor So-and-so, themusico, and not prince Zoroaster, whom he is representing.A modern virtuoso will be hard toprevail on to sing at a private party. When hearrives he will walk up to the mirror, settle hiswig, draw down his ruffles, and pull up his cravatto show his diamond brooch. He will then touchthe harpsichord very carelessly, and begin his airthree or four times,, as if he could not recollect it.Having granted this great favour, he will begintalking (by way of gathering applause) with somelady, telling her stories about his travels, correspondence,and professional intrigues; all the whileogling his companion with passionate glances,and throwing back the curls of his peruke, sometimeson one shoulder, sometimes on the other.He will every minute offer the lady snuff in a differentbox, in one of which he will point out hisown portrait ; and will show her some magnificentdiamond, the gift of a distinguished patron, sayingthat he would offer it for her acceptance were it notfor delicacy. Thus he will perhaps make an impressionon her heart, and, at all events, make agreat figure in the eyes of the company. In thesociety of literary men, however eminent, he willMAUCELLO's SATIRE. 223always take precedence, because, with most people,the singer has the credit of being an artist, whilethe literary man has no consideration at all. Hewill even advise them to embrace his profession, asthe singer has plenty of money as well as fame,while the man of letters is very apt to die of hunger.If the singer is a bass, he should constantlysing tenor passages as high as he can. If a tenor,he ought to go as low as he can in the scale ofthe bass, or get up, with a falsetto voice, into theregions of the contralto, without minding whetherhe sings through his nose or his throat. He willpay his court to all the principal cicatrices andtheir protectors ; and need not despair, b}^ meansof his talent and exemplary modesty, to acquire thetitle of a count, marquis, or chevalier.The prima donna receives ample instructions inher duties both on and off the stage. She is taughthow to make engagements, and to screw the managerup to exorbitant terms ; how to obtain theprotection" of rash amateurs, who are to attendher at all times, pay her expenses, make her presents,and submit to her caprices. She is taughtto be careless at rehearsals, to be insolent to theother performers, and to perform all manner ofmusical absurdities on the stage. She must havea music-master to teach her variations, passages,and embellishments to her airs ; and some familiarfriend, an advocate or a doctor, to teach her howto move her arms, turn her head, and use her224 MARCELLO's SATIRE.handkerchief, without telling her why, for thatwould only confuse her head. She is to endeavourto vary her airs every night ; and though the variationsmay be at cross purposes with the bass, or theviolin part, or the harmony of the accompaniments,that matters little, as a modern conductor is deafand dumb. In her airs and recitatives, in actionshe will take care every night to use the same motionsof her hand, her head, her fan, and herhandkerchief. If she orders a character to be putin chains, and addresses him in an air of rage ordisdain, during the symphony she should talk andlaugh with him, point out to him people in theboxes, and show how very little she is in earnest.She will get hold of a new passage in rapid triplets,and introduce it in all her airs, quick, slow, lively,or sad ; and the higher she can rise in the scale,the surer she will be of having all the principalparts allotted to her.A modern manager, says our author, ought tohave no knowledge of music, acting, poetry, painting,or anything belonging to a theatre. He willengage his composers, and others, at the suggestionof his friends, taking care to be as narrow as possiblein his terms, except with the singers, particularlythe ladies, who must be well paid. He willput an opera into the hands of the composer on thefourth of the month, telling him that it must positivelybe brought out on the twelfth, and thattherefore he need not be very nice about the cor-marcellus'sSATIRE. 225greatness of his score. The greater part of his companyshould consist of women ; and if two ladiesdispute about having the first part, he will get twoparts composed, precisely equal in airs, recitatives,and everything else ; taking care even that thenames of the characters shall contain the samenumber of letters. He will engage singers of smallreputation, having a view rather to their looks thanto their talent; for, if pretty, they will find plentyof " protectors," which will be of advantage to histheatre. In playing his violoncello and double bass,he will abate all the second parts of the airs whichthey have not played ; desiring, for that purpose,his composer to write these second parts withoutputting a note of bass to them. If the house isthin, he will allow the performers to leave out theirrecitatives and sing half their songs, and make gamewith each other on the stage. On such nights hewill not insist on the orchestra residing their bows,nor make any objection to the attendants smokingbehind the scenes.In the directions to the orchestra, " the oboes,flutes, trumpets, bassoons, &c.," are advised to bealways out of tune. From this it would appear thatwind-instruments were in common use in the Italianopera at an earlier period than is generally supposed.The author goes on to instruct the machinists,scene-painters, attendants, dressmakers, .dancers,prompters ; the amateur patrons of the theatreand protectors of the cicatrices, with their mothersVOL. I. Q22G MARCELLO'S SATIRE.(a set of persons on whom lie bestows very particularattention) in the same sarcastic vein. Thegrave irony and quaint style of the book are veryamusing; ; and the author makes his theatrical ladiestalk 2i patois so rude as to be almost unintelligible —an indication of their want of education and breeding,and the low position which they then held inthe scale of society.In a sketch professedly satirical, some allowancemust be made for exaggeration and caricature : butit bears every mark of having been drawn from thelife ; and its general truth is confirmed by the numberof particulars in which it resembles the musicalstage, even after the lapse of a century. In thedays of ^Nlarcello, as in our own, there were distinguisheddramatic poets, composers, and singers ;but the bulk of them were in many respects suchas he describes, and are so to this hour. TheItalian playwright, called, soar excellence, " poeta,"is still generally an ignorant, despised creature, theserf of some particular theatre, and cringingly obsequiousto the popular composer and fashionablesingers, who requite his humility by making himthe butt of their ridicule.* In the sarcastic adviceswhich Marcello gives to this class of persons, aswell as to the composers and performers, we recognisemany approved practices of the present day.One difference there is ; the present Italian stage,See the anecdote of Rossini and Tottola, the "poeta" of thetheatre of San-Carlo, in Stendhal's Vie de Rossini.SCARLATTI. 227among its poets and composers, can boast of nosuch names as adorned it in the time of Marcello.The greatest of the Italian composers for thetheatre, who flourished at the beginning of the lastcentury was the celebrated Alessandro Scarlatti.This great musician was born at Naples in J 650,and spent the greatest part of his life in his nativecity, where he died in 1728. He was a voluminouswriter for the church and the chamber, as well asthe theatre. He is said to have composed above ahundred operas, which are now forgotten ; but hisnumerous cantatas are still the admiration of musicians.Antonio Caldara was also a great dramaticcomposer, though it is only by his works forthe church that he is now known. He producedhis first opera at Venice in 1697, and his last ('sAchille in Sc'iro) at Vienna in 1736. Hewas during the greatest part of his life in the imperialservice, and died at Vienna in 1763, at theage of ninety. Antonio Lotti, whose fine compositionsfor the church are still extant, composed anumber of operas for the Venetian theatre between1698 and 1717. Antonio Vivaldi was great violinistas well as a dramatic composer. He was forsome time maestro di capella to the landgrave ofHesse Darmstadt, but afterwards became directorof the conservatory of La Pitch at Venice, where heresided from the year 1713 till his death. He wasan ecclesiastic ; and it is related of him, that oneday, while he was saying mass, a theme for a fugueq2228 VIVALDI.having suddenly struck him, he quitted the altarto the surprise of the congregation, hastened intothe sacristy to write it down, and, having done so,returned to finish his office. For this misdemeanorhe was brought before the inquisition ; but thefault having been considered as an aberration ofgenius, he received no further punishment than aprohibition from saying mass for the future.These were the principal composers of the beginningof the last century who had produced operasbefore the date of Marcello's satire, and who contributedto those improvements in dramatic musicwhich were carried further by Leo, Vinci, and otherswho came after them.Similar improvements gradually took place in thedramatic composition of Italian operas. They becamemore regular and rational in their structureand incidents. It was no longer necessary that theirsubjects should be drawn from the classic mythology,or the marvels and enchantments of the middleages. " Gods and devils," says Arteaga, " werebanished from the stage, as soon as poets discoveredthe art of making men speak with dignity." It wasfound better that the feelings should be roused byan interesting story, and the heart touched by nobleor pathetic sentiments, than that the eye should bedazzledby glittering shows, or the fancy amused,at the expense of reason and common sense, byabsurd adventures and incredible prodigies. Theopera, too, received dignity and congruity by beingApostle Zero. 229cleared of the low buffoonery which it had beenusual to introduce into the most lofty and seriousscenes.Many poets, whose names are now forgotten,even in Italy, had the merit of contributing to thisreformation of the musical drama. Of some of thepoets of this period we shall have occasion to speak,in tracing the introduction of the Italian opera intoEngland. The first musical dramatist of lasting-celebritywas Apostolo Zeno, who, for a time, wasthe idol of his countrymen, till he was thrown intothe shade by the far greater splendour of his successorMetastasio.Apostolo Zeno was not only an eminent poet, butalearned critic and antiquary. He was born inthe year 1669, and descended from a noble Venetianfamily. At an early age he applied himself to literatureand the study of the history and antiquitiesof his country. In 1696 he instituted at Venice adistinguished literary society, called the AcademyDegli Animosity, and was the editor of the Giornalede Literati d' Italia, which he carried on from 1710till 1719. His first musical drama, Ulngarmi felice,was performed at Venice in 1695. In 1718 heentered into the service of the Emperor Charles VI.,in the capacity of imperial poet-laureate ; in whichsituation he resided at Vienna till 1731, when hereturned to Venice, his native city, where he diedin 1750, at the age of eighty-one. Previous to thetime of his quitting Vienna, Zeno had produced230 Apostle Zero.forty-six operas arid seventeen oratorios, besides anumber of other dramatic pieces. After his returnto Venice, he employed his latter days in the compositionof several learned and valuable works onsubjects of history, antiquities, and criticism. Hisdramatic works were published at Venice in 1744,in ten volumes, by Count Gozzi ; and in 1752 hisletters were published in three volumes by Porcelain.His commentary on the Bill. deW EloquenceItalian, one of the best of his critical works, waspublished in 1753, with a preface dictated by himselfimmediately before his death. He was a manof great modesty, and, as appears from passages inhis letters, thought diffidently of his own talents.Being conscious of the decay of his poetical powers,he recommended, some years before he quittedVienna, that Metastasio should be associated withhim in the office of poet laureate ; and, after the arrivalof his young colleague, seems to have attemptednothing but oratorios.Apostolo Zeno was called the Corneille of themusical drama ; and, in the bold and originalgenius which enabled him to leave his contemporariesso far behind him, he certainly resembledthe father of French tragedy. But the quality ofhis works was much injured by the quickness withwhich he produced them. He took only eightdays, as Maffei informs us, to write an opera ; andthis haste led him into innumerable negligence,both of construction and style. He was not suffi-apostleZero. 231gently aware of the rapidity of action which themusical drama requires. Hence his scenes are oftentoo long, and his plots so complex and crowded withincident, that one of his pieces might furnish materialsfor two or three. His language is rich inpoetical beauties, and possesses great vigour andenergy ; but he has neither the delicacy of thoughtand feeling, nor the exquisite sweetness of versification,which so eminently distinguish the incomparableMetastasio.The appearance of Metastasio may be consideredas an era in the history of the Italian opera, notonly in regard to its poetry, but its music. Thoughnot an artist, he possessed the mind of a musician ;and his judgment and taste had a powerful influenceon the greatest dramatic composers of his time.Before entering upon this new era, we shall nownotice the progress which, previous to its commencement,the Italian opera had made in othercountries.CHAPTER X.The early musical drama in Germany — German operas — Introductionof the Italian opera — German composers of theseventeenth century — Mattheson — Keiser — Arrival of .During the seventeenth century the musical dramamade little progress in Germany. The music ofthat country resembled its literature ; it was learnedand profound, with little imagination, elegance, orgrace. There were many great organists and composersfor the church ; men deeply versed in themysteries of counterpoint, with whom music wasthe art of constructing fugues and resolving harmonicalpuzzles, and by whom, consequently, simpleand popular melody was looked upon as unworthyof notice.We are told, indeed, that operas in the Germanlanguage and by German composers, were performedat the courts of German sovereigns early inthe seventeenth century. But they must have beenvery rude productions ; as all traces of them, eventhe names of their authors, seem to be lost.The first operas which have been commemoratedOPERA IN GERMANY. 233as performed in Germany, were imported fromItaly. About the year 1630, Martin Opitz, whohas been called the father of the German drama,translated from the Italian the Dafne of Rinuccini ;and the music having been adapted to the Germanwords by a composer of the name of Shuts, theopera was performed at the court of Dresden, onthe occasion of the marriage of the Land-rave ofHesse with the sister of the elector of Saxony. Soonafterwards, several other Italian operas were adaptedto German words, and performed at Ratisbon,Munich, and other places.Italian operas now began to be performed in theiroriginal language. About the middle of the seventeenthcentury, the imperial court, under the EmperorLeopold, was full of Italian ministers andnobles, and the emperor himself was fond of Italianmusic. Such, indeed, was this sovereign's love ofthe art, that it was exhibited as *' his ruling passion,strong in death." It is related, that, when on hisdeathbed, and after he had performed his last devotionswith his confessor, he ordered his band to becalled in, and expired while listening to their music.Leopold retained in his service several Italian poetsand composers, to furnish operas for the imperialcourt. Among" these was Antonio Draghi, a composerof celebrity, who remained in the imperialservice near forty years. Several dramas werewritten for the emperor's court by the MarcheseSentinel, an Italian nobleman.234 GERMAN OPERAS.Hitherto, musical dramas, as in other countries,had been performed only at the courts of princes :but they now began to make their appearance inpublic theatres. The first opera, publicly exhibitedon a German stage, was There's Adam and Eve,which was performed in the German language, atHamburg, in 1678. The second was Orontes performedthe same year. After this period manyGerman operas were performed at Hamburg, theprincipal composers of which were Strunck,*Franck,Forth, Conrad, and Courser ; the last of whomafterwards came to England, where he obtained theplace of master of the state band in Ireland. Aboutthe close of the century, the celebrated Keiserbegan to compose for the Hamburg theatre ; andStrunck was violinist to the elector of Hanover, and was*chiefly celebrated for his wonderful powers as a performer onthat instrument. While travelling in Italy, he paid a visit toCorelli at Rome. Corelli, not knowing his person, but finding,from his conversation, that he was a musical performer, inquiredwhat was his instrument. Strunck said that he played a littleon the violin, and begged the favour that the great Italian masterwould let him hear his performance. Corelli readily complied,and exerted his abilities for the gratification of the unknownamateur. On laying down the violin, he requested Strunck toplay something in his turn. Strunck began to play rather carelessly,but yet in such a style as to obtain a compliment on thefreedom of his boat, and a remark that he promised, with practice,to become an excellent player. Strunck, with a quietsmile, put all the strings out of tune, and then began to playwith amazing execution, correcting with his fingers the falsetuning of the instrument ; till at last, Corelli, in utter amazement,exclaimed, " They call me Archangel ; but, by heaven,Sir, you must be Archidiavolo /"MATTHESON. 235the operas of the Abate Steffani, which he had setto Italian words for the court of Hanover, began tobe performed at Hamburg in the German language,except the airs, which were usually sung in Italian.We shall afterwards see, that a similar medley ofItalian and English was made use of when the Italianopera was first introduced into this country.This custom (absurd as it seems) prevailed in Germanyso late as the year 1733, when Grain's operaof Pharaoh, a German version of the Gianguir ofApostolo Zeno, was performed at Brunswick ; — therecitatives only being translated into German, whilethe airs were sung in the original Italian.Mattheson, whose name will be immortalized asthe youthful friend and rival of Handel, was acomposer for the Hamburg stage. Mattheson wasnot only a composer, but an actor, singer, and instrumentalperformer. On the harpsichord he wasconsidered equal, if not superior, to Handel. As acomposer, he seems to have had little genius, andto have been given to pedantry and puerile conceits.His biographers tell us, that, towards the close ofhis life, he composed his own funeral anthem; andthat, in setting the words, from the Revelations,And there was a rainbow round about thethrone," he contrived, in a very full score, to makeevery part form an arch by a gradual ascent anddescent of the notes on the paper ; conceiving, itwould seem, that this appearance to the eyes of theperformers would convey the idea of a rainbow to236 Riser.the ears of the hearers. One of Mattheson's operascaused a duel between the two young rivals, whichnearly cost Handel his life. This was Cleopatra,in which the composer himself performed the partof Antony, while Handel, as conductor, sat atthe harpsichord in the orchestra. On the deathof Antony, which happened early in the piece,Mattheson divested himself of his royal trappings,and came into the orchestra to take his usual placeat the harpsichord. Handel, however, would notgive it up, and a violent quarrel ensued. As theywere leaving the theatre, Mattheson gave Handela slap in the face ; they drew their swords, and adesperate encounter ensued in the market-place,which was fortunately terminated by Mattheson'ssword breaking against one of his adversary'sbuttons, or, as others say, against the score ofMattheson's opera, which Handel had buttonedunder his coat.The greatest German composer of this periodwas Keiser, whose once splendid reputation, contrastedwith the oblivion into which he has nowfallen, affords a striking instance of the instabilityof musical fame. Keiser was born in 1673, anddied in 1739. He kept possession of the Hamburgstage for more than forty years, and composedabove a hundred operas. "This master," saysBurney, " was as sure of fancy and originality,whenever he put pen to paper, as Haydn is at present.In a manuscript collection of near seventyRiser. 237cantatas by the greatest composers of his time,both of Italy and Germany, in which there aretwelve by Keiser, in opening the book by chance,in any part of it where his cantatas are inserted, itis instantly known to be his music at the firstglance ; so new are the passages, and so differentthe arrangement of the notes from that of his companionsin the collection, amounting to near thirtyof the first order. For grace and facility I do notrecommend him ; indeed they were little soughtor known during his time ; but for modulation,ingenuity, and new ideas, he had scarcely hisequal." The famous Haste said to Dr. Burney,that "Keiser was one of the greatest musiciansthe world had ever seen ;" and yet, with all hisgreatness, he is now almost as completely forgottenas if he had never existed.We are informed by Riccoboni, in his GeneralHistory of the Stage, that, in the beginning of thelast century, the performers in the German operasat Hamburg were all tradesmen or handicrafts.Your shoemaker," he says, " was often the firstperformer on the stage ; and you might havebought fruit and sweetmeats of the same girl whomthe night before you saw in the character of Armidaor Semiramis." But this account must be takenwith considerable qualification : for, as has beenalready mentioned, Mattheson was a performer onthe Hamburg stage ; and Haste, before he went to238 OPERA IN GERMANY.Italy, was a tenor-singer on the same stage, in theoperas of Keiser.Such was the state of the musical drama inGermany till the period when it received a newimpulse by the arrival of Metastasio, who spentalmost his whole life at Vienna, in the service ofthe imperial court.CHAPTER XLThe Italian Opera introduced into England — Battista Draghi —Arrival of Italian singers — Margherita de I'Epine — Mrs.Torts — Musical factions — ■ Opera of Arsinoe — Camilla —Rosamond — Addison and Clayton — Nicolini — Pyrrhus andDemetrius — The Tatler — Leveridge — Ahnahide — HydaspesThe Spectator.We have already seen, that, during the time ofCharles the Second, the English dramatic musicwas in the French style, and that it so continuedtill an English school was founded by the geniusof Purcell. Before that time, however, Italianmusic had begun to be heard in England ; andPurcell himself acknowledged the benefit he hadderived from the study of the Italian masters. Ithad become fashionable for English gentlemen tovisit Italy ; and they returned with a taste for themusic, painting, and poetry of that classic land.We have given, in a preceding chapter, Evelyn'saccount of the Italian opera at Venice : and thefollowing passage in Pepys's Diary gives a curiousview of the progress of Italian music, and thegeneral state of the art, in this country.240 PEPYS.January 12th, 1667. With my Lord Bounceto his house, there to hear some Italian musique,and here we met Tom Killigrew, Sir RobertMurray, and the Italian, Signor Baptista whohath prepared a play in Italian for the opera,which Sir T. Killigrew do intend to have up ; andhere he did sing one of the acts. He himself isthe poet as well as the musician, and did sing thewhole from the words without any musique pricks,and played all along upon a harps icon most admirably,and the composition most excellent. Thewords I did not understand, and so knew not howthey were fitted, but believe very well, and all therecitativo very fine. But I perceive there is aproper accent in every country's discourse, andthat do reach in their setting of notes to words,which, therefore, cannot be natural to anybodyelse but them ; so that I am not so much smittenwith it as if I were acquainted with their accent.But the whole composition is certainly most excellent; and the poetry. Sir T. Killigrew and Sir R.Murray, who understood the words, did say was mostexcellent. I confess I was most mightily pleasedwith the musique." Pepys adds : " He (Sir T.Killigrew) tells me that he hath gone severaltimes (eight or ten times he tells me) hence toRome, to hear good musique ; so much he loves it,though he never did sing or play a note. That hehath ever endeavoured, in the late king's time,Battista Draghi..^-italian SINGERS. 241and in this, to introduce good musique ; but henever could do it, there never having been anymusique there better than ballads and songs.Hermit Poore,' and ' China Chase' [ChevyChase] was all the musique we had ; and yet noordinary fiddlers get so much money as ours dohere, which speaks our rudeness still." A sadaccount of the state of music at that time !The Italian opera which Pepys speaks of doesnot seem ever to have been represented ; andthere is no account of the production of any Italianopera on our stage till many years afterwards.Italian music, as Burney observes, was long talkedof and performed in England before we heard ofItalian singing. Even in the time of QueenElizabeth, the works of the great Italian materialistswere well known to our amateurs as well ascomposers : and Purcell, as we have seen, studiedthe Italian vocal music of his time. But we donot hear of the arrival of Italian singers till aboutthe close of the seventeenth century. In 1692, anadvertisement in the London Gazette announcesthat " the Italian lady, that is lately come over,that is so famous for singing," will sing at theconcerts in York-buildings during the season. InApril, 1693, Signor Toss, the author of the celebratedtreatise on singing, advertises a concert :and, from that time, the announcements of concertsby Italian performers became frequent.The " Italian lady," announced in 1692 asVOL. I. R242 Margarita DE l'ePINE.being so famous for her singing, was FrancescaMargherita de repine, the first Italian singer ofany note who appeared in England. She came tothis country with a German musician, of the nameof Grebe ; and hence we find her, in some of themusical squibs of the day, called " Grebe's Peg."She sang in Italian operas, and at concerts andother musical entertainments, till the year 1718,when she retired, and married the celebrated Dr.Pepusch. She was an excellent musician ; beingnot only an accomplished singer, but an extraordinaryperformer on the harpsichord. She was soswarthy and ill-favoured that her husband used tocall her Hecate, a name to which she answeredwith perfect good-humour ; but her want of personalcharms did not prevent her from enjoyingthe uninterrupted favour of the public. By hermarriage with Dr. Pepusch she brought him a fortuneof 10,000/. ; a sum which, by relieving himfrom the daily cares and toils of his profession,enabled him to follow his favourite pursuit oflearned researches into the history and antiquitiesof his art. She was a person of perfect respectability; but, nevertheless, was unceremoniouslytreated by some of the writers of the day, whohad no love for foreign players and musicians.She had a sister, who came to England in 1703 ;and these ladies are thus mentioned by Swift inhis Journal to Stella : "August 6, 1711. We havea music-meeting in our town (Windsor) to-night.MRS. TOFTS. 243I went to the rehearsal ot" it, and there wasMargarita, and her sister, and another drab, and aparcel of fiddlers. I was weary, and would not gotothe meeting, which I am sorry for, because Iheard it was a great assembly." The dean frequentlyspeaks of the music-meetings at Windsorin the course of this season ; always with spleenand an affectation of contempt; saying, for example,'' In half an hour I was tired of their fine stuff,"and so on : merely showing how little even a greatman can make himself by talking flippantl}^ ofwhat he does not understand.In the year 1703, we first hear of the celebratedMrs. Torts, who is mentioned in advertisements ofthe day, as singing English and Italian songs, at thetheatre in Lincoln's-inn-fields. This lady becamethe rival of Margherita de I'Epine; and their competitiongave rise to the first musical feud that weread of in England. The public was divided intoan Italian and English party ; the one composed ofthe partisans of Margherita, the other of theadmirers of Mrs. Torts. The spirit of faction appearsto have run high among the amateurs, bothhigh and low. When Margherita made her appearanceat Drury-lane, there was a disturbance inthe theatre while she was singing, which was supposedto have been created by the emissaries ofMrs. Torts ; a supposition which derived somecolour from the circumstance that her own femaleservant was a ringleader in the uproar. In her11 2244 MRS. TOFTS,own vindication, however, Mrs. Torts had the followingparagraph inserted in the Daily Courant ofFebruary 8, 1704 :—Ann Berwick having occasioned a disturbanceat the theatre-royal Drury-lane, on Saturday nightlast, the 5th of February, and being thereupon takeninto custody, Mrs. Torts, in vindication of her innocency,sent a letter to Mr. Rich, master of the saidtheatre, which is as followeth : — 'Sir, I was verymuch surprised when I was informed that AnnBerwick, who was lately my servant, had committeda rudeness last night at the playhouse, by throwingof oranges and hissing when Mrs. Repine, theltaliangentlewoman, sung. I hope no one will think thatit was in the least with my privity, as I assure youit was not. I abhor such practices ; and I hopeyou will cause her to be prosecuted, that she maybepunished as she deserves. I am, Sir, your humbleservant,Katharine Torts.' "The musical feuds among the aristocracy, towhich the rivalry of the British and foreign song-stressesgave rise, are thus alluded to by Hughes,the author of the Siege of Damascus jMusic has learn'd the discords of the state,And concerts jar with whig and tory hate.Here Somerset and Devonshire attendThe British Torts, and every note commend ;To native merit just, and pleas'd to seeWe've Roman hearts, from Roman bondage free.ARSINOE. 245There famed Repine does equal skill employ,While listening peers crowd to the ecstatic joy :Bedford to hear her song his dice forsakes;And Nottingham is raptured when she shakes.LuU'd statesmen melt away their drowsy cares,Of England's safety, in Italian airs."The actual introduction of the Italian opera intoEngland was preceded by adaptations of Italianpieces to the English stage. The first of these wasArsinoe, Queen of Cyprus, a translation of an operathen popular in Italy, with music composed for theEnglish words, by Thomas Clayton, a composerwhose name has acquired an unmerited celebrityfrom his connexion with Addison. Clayton hadbeen in Italy ; and, though destitute of genius, laidclaim to the character of a reformer of the Englishmusical drama, and talked so big that he contrivedto persuade the public of his capacity for the task.In the preface to the book of the words of thisopera, he thus sets forth its pretensions. "Thedesign of this entertainment being to introduce theItalian manner of singing to the English stage,which has not been before attempted, I was obligedto have an Italian opera translated ; in which thewords, however mean in several places, suited muchbetter with that manner of music than others morepoetical would do. The style of this music is toexpress the passions, which is the soul of music ;and though the voices are not equal to the Italian,yet I have engaged the best that were to be foundin England ; and I have not been wanting, to the246 ARSINOE.utmost of my diligence, in the instructing of them.The music, being recitative, may not at first meetwith that general acceptation, as is to be hoped for,from the audience's being better acquainted with it;but if this attempt shall be a means of bringingthis manner of music to be used in my nativecountry, I shall think my study and pains very wellemployed."This opera was first performed at Drury-lane, onthe 16th of January, 1705. The singers were allEnglish, consisting of Mrs. Torts, Mrs. Cross, andMrs. Lyndsay, with Messrs. Hughes, Leveridge,and Cook. At this time Signora de I'Epine sangItalian songs before or after the opera. The music, aswell as the words, of this piece were utterly contemptible; yet such was the charm of novelty, andso effectually had Clayton persuaded the publicthat he was a great man, that this worthless productionwas performed twenty-four times the first season,and eleven times the second.*Though Arsinoe is utterly unworthy of criticism, yet thereis something amusing in the folly of the composer. The veryfirst song may be taken as a specimen. The words are :Queen of Darkness, sable Night,Ease a wandering lover's pain ;Guide me, lead me.Where the nymph whom I adore,Sleeping, dreaming,Thinks of love and me no more."The first two lines are spoken in a meagre sort of recitative.Then there is a miserable air, the first part of which consists ofthe next two lines, and concludes with a perfect close. TheCAMILLA. 247The next opera after the Italian manner wasCamilla, performed for the first time at Drury-lane,on the 30th of April, 1706. It was translated fromthe Italian of Silvio Stampiglio, by OwenM'Swiney, a person who was for some time managerof that theatre, and the English words wereadapted to the original music of Marc AntonioBuononcini, the brother of Giovanni Buononcini,the celebrated rival of Handel. It was performedby the same company as Arsinoe, and met withgreat success ; having been frequently performed,alternately with Arsinoe, and Thomyris, Queen ofScythia, another opera of the same kind, till achange in the taste of the town was effected by thearrival of the first Italian dramatic singers.These were Valentini Urban, and a lady knownonly by the name of the Baroness, a native ofGermany, who had been educated in Italy, and hadacquired a considerable reputation on the continent.Along with them, Signora de I'Epine was engagedat Drury-lane ; and then the opera of Camilla wasperformed half in English and half in Italian ; theEnglish singers, as formerly, making use of thetranslation, while the Italians performed their partsin the original language. The part of Camilla, thesecond part of the air is on the last two lines ; after which thereis, as usual, a da capo, and the first part is repeated ; the songfinishing in the middle of a sentence —Guide me, lead me,Where the nymph whom I adore !"248 CAMILLA.heroine, continued to be performed by Mrs. Torts,in English, while Valentini enacted Turns inItalian. This absurdity was ridiculed by the witsof the day, but passed current with the public,who looked upon it as one of those conventionallicenses which must always, to a greater or smallerextent, be tolerated in dramatic performances. Itwas an absurdity not peculiar to England ; forRiccoboni says, that, when Italian operas were firstperformed at Hamburg, the recitative was deliveredin the German language, and the airs generallysung in Italian.The music of Camilla has considerable merit.The airs are very short, consisting of two parts, (thesecond of which is almost always in the relativeminor key,) and ending with a repetition of thefirst part. This form was adhered to, in defiance ofsense and meaning, by every dramatic composer,for the best part of a century, till it was got rid ofby Gluck and Piccini. The melodies exhibit inventionand expression, and are accompanied bysolid and ingenious basses. The song in the partof Turns "Frail are a lover's hopes," has manystrokes of feeling, and would please the mostmodern ear. The air, " Fortune ever known tovary," sung by Mrs. Torts, contains a number ofpassages in triplets, each triplet being sung to asyllable, exactly in the manner of Rossini. Theair, —I was born of a royal race,Yet must wander in disgrace''CAMILLA. 249sung by Mrs. Torts in the opening of the piece,consists of only fourteen bars ; and yet there is somuch meaning in these few notes, that it is easy toconceive the effect which Mrs. Torts is said to haveproduced in singing them.This lady acquired great celebrity b}^ her performanceof the character of Camilla. There isa pleasant allusion to it in the Spectator, in theform of a letter from the actor who personated thewild boar killed by the amazonian heroine. " Mr.Spectator," says this correspondent, "your havingbeen so humble as to take notice of the epistles ofother animals, emboldens me, who am the wildboar that was killed by Mrs. Torts, to represent toyou, that I think I was hardly used in not havingthe part of the lion in Hydaspes given to me. Itwould have been but a natural step for me to havepersonated that noble creature, after having behavedmyself to satisfaction in the part above mentioned: but that of a lion is too great a characterfor one that never trode the stage before but upontwo legs. As for the little resistance which I made,I hope it may be excused, when it is consideredthat the dart was thrown at me by so fair ahand. I must confess I had but just put on my brutality; and Camilla's charms were such, that beholdingher erect mien, hearing her charming-voice,and astonished with her grateful motion, Icould not keep up to my assumed fierceness, butdied like a man."250 MRS. TOFTS.Mrs. Torts retired from the stage in 1709. Gibber,who speaks of her from his own knowledge,says, "Whatever defect the fashionably skilfulmight find in her manner, she had, in the generalsense of her hearers, charms that few of the mostlearned singers ever arrive at"— "The beauty," headds, " of her finely proportioned figure, and exquisitelysweet, silver tone of voice, with peculiarrapid swiftness of her throat, were perfections notto be imitated by art or labour." It appears fromthe music of the operas in which she performed,that her voice was a soprano of moderate compass,and that her passages of execution were by nomeans either various or difficult.Her retirement from the stage was caused by amental malady, under the influence of which sheimagined herself to be some one or other of thecharacters she represented. This calamity is unfeelinglyalluded to by Steele, in the Taller*After saying, that "the theatre is breaking," andthat " there is a great desolation among thegentlemen and ladies who were the ornamentsof the town and used to shine in plumes and diadems,the heroes being most of them pressed andthe queens beating hemp," the writer adds, "Thegreat revolutions of this nature bring to my mindthe distresses of the unfortunate Camilla, who hashad the ill luck to break before her voice, and todisappear at a time when her beauty was in theNo. 20, May 26th, 1709.MRS. TOFTS. 251height of its bloom. This lady entered so thoroughlyinto the great characters she acted, thatwhen she had finished her part she could not thinkof retrenching her equipage, but would appear inher own lodgings with the same magnificence asshe did upon the stage. This greatness of soulhas reduced that unhappy princess to a voluntaryretirement, where she now passes her time amongthe woods and forests, thinking on the crowns andsceptres she has lost, and often humming over inher solitude,I was born of royal race,Yet must wander in disgrace," &c.But for fear of being overheard, and her qualityknown, she usually sings it in Italian ;Nacqui al regno, nacqui al trono,E pur sonoSventurata pastoral."Burney says, that it seems doubtful whether weareto take this account literally, and refers hisreaders to the Tatler, leaving the comments to theirown ingenuity. But there is no doubt that Steelealluded to the state of insanity under whichshe then laboured, and into which, though sherecovered from it for a time, she again fell inthe latter period of her life. " In the meridianof her beauty," says Hawkins, " and possessedof a large sum of money which she had acquiredby singing, Mrs. Torts quitted the stage, and wasmarried to Mr. Joseph Smith, a gentleman, who252 ROSAMOND.being appointed consul for the English nation atVenice, she went thither with him. Mr. Smithwas a great collector of books and patron of thearts. He lived in great state and magnificence ;but the disorder of his wife returning, she dweltsequestered from the world in a remote part of thehouse, and had a large garden to range in, inwhich she would frequently walk, singing, andgiving way to that innocent frenzy which hadseized her in the earlier part of her life." In thisunhappy state she continued many years, and diedabout 1760.*The favour with which the public received theseimportations from the Italian stage, induced Addisonto undertake an opera in the same style, but entirelyof English workmanship. He accordingly wrote hiscelebrated Rosamond : but unfortunately partook somuch of the general delusion as to commit the compositionof the music to the worthless pretenderClayton. It was performed for the first time on the4th of March, 1707. The part of Queen EleanorIn the French translation of the Tatler, there is the followingnote. *'La celebre Madame Torts, acres avoir brille par ladouceur et labeaute de sa voix, eut, je ne sais pas comment, lamortification de se voir negligee avant que devoir perdu les agreementqui la sentient si fameuse. De chagrin, elle prit la resolutiondealer a Rome, ou Iron dit qu'elle se fit Papiste. Le PapeClement XI., devant qui elle charta, fut charme de sa voix, etla chronique scandaleuse en publia meme quelque those deplus." No authority, however, is given foi* this piece of scandal.ROSAMOND. 253was performed by Mrs. Torts; Rosamond, by SignoraMaria Gallia, a singer of whom we have not metwith any account ; the King, by Mr. Hughes ; andthe two comic characters, Sir Trusty and Grideline,by Mr. Leveridge and Mrs. Lyndsay. Notwithstandingthe favourable prepossessions of the public,and the poetical merit of the piece, it was receivedwith the utmost coldness, and struggled with difficultythrough three representations. It was thenlaid aside, and never again performed in the lifetimeof the author ; though it was revived thirtyyears afterwards, with new music by Dr. Arne.Rosamond is a very pleasing dramatic poem,though it cannot be called a good opera. It isbetter calculated for reading than for representation.Its versification is polished and elegant, containingmany lively and graceful turns of expression,poetical thoughts, and touches of tenderness.But it lacks dramatic action and movement ; andthe interest of the story is made to terminate long-beforethe conclusion of the piece, the latter part ofwhich is spun out by forced and clumsy buffoonery,and by a tissue of fulsome compliments to the Dukeof Marlborough, which would not now be tolerated,but were considered as matters of course inan age when men of the highest literary distinctionwere not ashamed to pay their court to the greatby the grossest adulation. Rosamond owed itsfailure in a great measure to the worthlessness ofClayton's music, which the audience were now'254 Nicolai.able to compare with better things : but the defectsof the drama must also be taken into account ; fore\^en when it was afterwards performed with the prettymusic of Arne, it was unable to acquire a permanenthold of the public favour. Addison's mortificationat this ill success appears to have been thecause of the constant hostility he ever afterwardsexhibited to the Italian opera.The year 1708 was rendered memorable by thearrival of the celebrated Cavaliere Nicolixo Grimaldi,generally known by the name of Nicolini.This distinguished performer was a Neapolitan ;and is classed by Quarto among the great singerswho began to appear between 1690 and 1700. Hehad acquired a high reputation at Venice, Milan,and other cities of Italy where the musical dramawas established, when he was attracted to England(according to Gibber) by the report of our passionfor foreign operas, without any particular invitationor engagement.The first opera in which Nicolini appeared wasPyrrhus and Demetrius, a translation of the Pieroe Demetrio of Adrianoo Morsel, first performed atNaples, with the music of Alessandro Scarlatti, in1694. The translation was executed by Mac Swine,the manager, and the music was arranged to theEnglish words by Nicola Ha3^m, a composer ofsome merit, then resident in London, who composeda new overture and several additional airs.It was performed, for the first time, on the 14th ofPYRRHUS AND Demerits. 255December, 1708, and continued for a long time todraw crowded audiences. The performers werea mixture of Italians and English, who acted andsang in their respective languages : the Italiansbeing Nicolini, Valentini, Margherita de I'Epine,and the Baroness; and the English, Mrs. Torts, Mr.Cook, and Mr. Ramondon. The airs of this operaare in general excellent. Many of them are deformed,of course, by antiquated divisions ; butothers are in that pure and simple style whichwill always please ; and it is only doing justice toHarm to say that the airs added by him are notinferior to those of the more celebrated author ofthe original music.The successful representation of this opera producedthe following remarks from Sir RichardSteele, in the fourth number of the Tatler. —Letters from the Hay market inform us that onSaturday night last the opera of Pyrrhus andDemetrius was performed with great applause.This intelligence is not very acceptable to us friendsof the theatre ; for the stage being an entertainmentof the reason and all our faculties, this way ofbeing pleased with the suspense of them for threehours together, and being given up to the shallowsatisfaction of the ears and eyes only, seems to ariserather from the degeneracy of our understandingthan an improvement of our diversions. That theunderstanding has no part in the pleasure is evidentfrom what these letters very positively assert ;256 PYRRI-IUS AND Demerits.to wit, that a great part of the performance wasdone in Italian : and a great critic fell into fits inthe gallery at seeing not only time and place, butlanguage and nations, confused in the most incorrigiblemanner. His spleen is so extremely movedon this occasion, that he is going to publish anothertreatise against the introduction of operas, which,he thinks, has already inclined us to thoughts ofpeace, and, if tolerated, must infallibly dispirit usfrom carrying on the war. He has communicatedhis scheme to the whole room, and declared inwhat manner things of this kind were first introduced.He has on this occasion considered thenature of sounds in general, and made a veryelaborate digression upon the London cries, whereinhe has shown, from reason and philosophy, wdiyoysters are cried, card-matches sung, and turnipsand all other vegetables neither cried, sung, norsaid, but sold with an accent and tone neithernatural to man nor beast." NotwithstandingSteele's propensity, however, to indulge his satiricalvein at the expense of the Italian opera, he afterwardsadmits Pyrrhus and Demetrius to be "anoble entertainment," and pays a tribute to thetalents of Nicolini.* " For my own part," hesays, " I was fully satisfied with the sight of anactor, who, by the grace and propriety of his actionand gesture, does honour to the human figure.Every one will imagine I mean Signor Nicolini,Tatler, No. 113.Nicolai, 257who sets off the character he bears in an opera by hisaction, as much as he does the words of it by hisvoice. Every limb and every finger contributes to thepart he acts, inasmuch that a deaf man may go alongwith him in the sense of it. There is scarce abeautiful posture in an old statue which he doesnot plant himself in, as the different circumstancesof the story give occasion for it. He performs themost ordinary action in a manner suitable to thegreatness of his character; and shows the princeeven in the giving of a letter, or despatching ofa messenger." '' Our best actors," he adds, " aresomewhat at a loss to support themselves withproper gesture, as they move from any considerabledistance to the front of the stage ; but I haveseen the person of whom I am now speaking enteralone at the remotest part of it, and advance fromit with such greatness of air and mien as seemedto fill the stage, and, at the same time, commandedthe attention of the audience with the majesty ofhis appearance." The two passages just quotedare very inconsistent with each other. That theunderstanding had no share in the pleasure derivedfrom the Italian opera could not be said ofan entertainment in which, by Steele's own account,so much intellectual gratification was produced bythe noble performance of Nicolini. But Steele'sfine taste and excellent sense were warped, on thissubject, by his feelings of personal interest ; for heVOL. I. s258 Beveridge.was a patentee of an English theatre, and was sufferingfrom the successful rivalry of the Italian opera.Pyrrhus and Demetrius was the last opera whichwas performed partly in Italian and partly inEnglish. From that time Italian operas, performedentirely in their original form, completely engrossedthe musical stage. The English singers disappeared,and the English opera, for a time, wasin abeyance. Mrs, Torts, as has been alreadymentioned, retired in 1709 ; and Mr. Hughes, whohad performed principal parts in the Anglo-Italianoperas, is no more heard of after this period. Leve-ridge,who, from Purcell's time, had been an eminentdramatic singer, appears also, at this time, to havebeen deprived of his occupation. Leveridge hadacquired some reputation as a composer as well asasinger. In 1699 he appeared at Drury Lane inan opera called the Island Princess, composedjointly by Daniel Purcell, Jeremiah Clarke, andhimself. When operas in the Italian style wereintroduced, he had a part in all of them, as longas the English performers were allowed to sing intheir own language. After this he sang in pantomimes,at the theatres in Lincoln's Inn Fields andCovent Garden, till after the middle of the lastcentury, when he was more than eighty years old.I remember," says Dr. Burney, " his singingGhosts of every occupation,' and several of Purcell'sbass songs, occasionally, in a style which fortyTHE Tatler. 259years ago seemed antediluvian ; but as he generallywas the representative of Pluto, Neptune, or someancient divinity, it corresponded perfectly with hisfigure and character. He was not only a celebratedsinger of convivial songs, but the writer and composerof many that were in great favour withsingers and hearers of a certain class, who morepiously performed the rites of Comus and Bacchusthan those of Minerva and Apollo. He quittedthis sublunary world in 1758, at eighty-eight yearsof age."In the Tatler of January 30, 1710, there is asatire on the Italian opera, in the form of a letterfrom Penkethman, the manager of the puppet-show,which contains some witty allusions to the mannerin which operas were then performed.'Tis well known," Penkethman is made to say,it has been my constant endeavour to furnish thetown with agreeable amusements, both in my presentperformances on the theatre, and in otherundertakings of different kinds : for which reasonI have been contented to suffer so much persecutionon the British stage, and so often submitted myselfto the severities of whips, cudgels, canes, and thelike instruments of correction ; and likewise, duringthe vacation of dramatic representations last summer,I erected a booth at Greenwich, that thequality and gentry might at the same time receivethe diversion of a play and the benefit of the air.The last effort I have made, is that surprisings2260 THE TATLER.machine, or moving picture, which goes under thedenomination of the Pantheon, and has givengeneral satisfaction to all such as have had thecuriosity to see it. This my new invented operais already so well adapted to general purposes, thatit is capable of representing at once a hundredcurious figures, with all the proper movements andgestures that are necessary to make an impressionon the imagination. But whereas the strength ofthe nation's genius is such, that it does not whollyterminate in dumb show and outward magnificence,but extends even to sound, not offended sometimeswith a little mixture of sense, provided it besparingly introduced, I have contrived a methodto introduce music into my operations. Thus shallthe auditors be entertained with trills, quavers, anddivisions, in greater perfection than has been everyet known, which advantage will arise from acertain fineness and tenuity of the vocal organs,peculiar to my own players. They shall beat theair with crotchets, heroically expire in fugues,brandish their arms through the passive vacuum,and fly away upon the musical wings of the wind.But what is still more extraordinary, I resolve notto put the audience to the silly unnecessary troubleof understanding what they hear. Nothing vulgar,nothing English, shall be admitted; but the dramaconsist wholly of foreign airs and tunes, with suchdecorations as are proper to any country but ourown. My Nicolini (for you must permit me atTHE Tatler. 261present to make use of the commonly receivednames, my correspondent at Venice, having promisedto furnish me as soon as he is able with aset of the finest that can be collected from all partsabroad,) shall bemoan the cruelty of his stars andmistress in soothing Gothic ; my Valeyifmi shallanswer him most clamorously in High Dutch ; myLeveridge shall grumble harsh Hebrew gutturalsin a passion, and Lynzeiana!^ squeak out pig-notesfrom behind the curtain.In order to prevent a thing that has been morethan once laughed at in operas, I had some intentionof obliging, if I could, (by a certain magic,)all the necessary letters to sing and deliver themselves;but this I am afraid will be found impracticable.There are, however, other things which arecapable of being remedied. The Italian operas, somuch in request at present, do not seem to comeup to the main end of such representations ; thegestures of the actors are often fantastic and whimsical.My moving figures, therefore, shall use theirarms and legs with more dignity and decorum,and set one foot before another with such exactnessas can only be excelled by nature itself.The argument their drama is founded on is toolow, being usually the story of a demi-hero, personatedby a demi-man. This shall take in thetransactions of gods and goddesses, complete heroesand heroines. Further, I can so order and regulateMrs. Lyndsay.'262 ALMAHIDE.the various movements, as either to make themrepresent a set of worshipful benchers in their annualmerriments and dances, or our militia warriors intheir furious domestic exercises. But what crownsall is, that this my entertainment may be seenwithout loss of time or business, and for a verymoderate expense : nor can there be any interruptionor disappointment in the performance, sinceneither my heroes can be in any danger of losingtheir voices, nor my heroines of being ravished ortaken from me. I intend, for the convenience ofmiddling and ordinary people, to frame anothermachine of the same nature as this, and in thesame perfection, but of a size that may be easilyconveyed into a small portable vehicle made forthat purpose ; and this shall be called the PantheonItinerant, that so those whose circumstances willnot permit them to come up to the price of ashilling, maybe entertained with a complete opera forahalfpenny, either in their own houses or the street."My humble request to your worship is, thatyou would be pleased to display, in that light youare able, the perfection and excellence of my pantheon,as vrell itinerant as fixed, and show how farthe British opera is superior to the Italian."The first opera performed entirely in Italianwas Almahide, supposed to be the composition ofBuononcini. It appeared in January 1710, andwas received with favour. The singers were A a-letting, Nicolai, Margherita de I'Epine, Hassan,nvDASPEs. ^63and Isabella Girardeau, called Signora Isabella.The music is fuller of divisions and feats of execution,in the airs for the principal singers, than thatof any of the previous operas ; but it is not remarkableon any other account.In the same year, Hydaspes, composed byFrancesco Mankind, was brought on the stage byNicolini, who performed the principal character.The other performers were the same as in Alma-hide,with the addition of Lawrence, a tenor singerof some ability, who had knowledge enough ofItalian to perform an inferior part in it.Hydasjjes, as a drama, contains many puerilities,and possesses less musical merit than several operaswhich preceded it. Its success, however, was verygreat; and indeed, for a time, it was quite the ragein the fashionable world.The combat between Hydaspes and the lion wasa favourite subject for satire among the wits of theda^r. The following is the passage containing thisfamous combat, in the original, and with the translation.It must be premised that Hydaspes is thebrother of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, and his rivalin the love of the Princess Terence. Falling intothe tyrant's power, he is condemned to be devouredby a lion in the public amphitheatre, and in thepresence of his mistress. The third act opens witha scene representing the amphitheatre, filled witha crowd of spectators. Hydaspes is brought in,guarded by soldiers ; a tender dialogue between264 HYDASPES.him and Terence is broken off by the sound of atrumpet.Idaspe. Vade a mourir, o care !Terence. Ti lascio, idol mio !Idas. Terence, mio bene !Ber. Idaspe !Idas,'as,-i ^er. 3^ . ActioBe\ Terence si rd a severe sojjra li scaling dell' anjiteatro,cost Arbace, e li soldan, restando solo Idaspe nelV arena.Doo di che, viene sprigionato un leone, quale nan accorda prima vista d' Idaspe rd passeggiando sentimentsil teatro, e guaranty gli spectator ; instant Idaspe.Idas. Mostro cruel, die fai ?Vient col tuo rigorsA lacerarmi il sen ?Ma non toccare il core,II cor, che gia seraiFidele al caro ben.[77 leone accortosi d' Idaspe, se gli avvanza furioso.Ber. Chime, misera, io moro !{^Berenice sviene ; nel centre Idaspe, afferrato il leone conle brachia nel coll, lo affoga, e cade Jinabnente a terra,ponendogli esse un piece sid coll in segno di victoria.Idas. Evvi altro semicoloncui pugnar io deggia ?De novelle cementNon e quest' alma schiava.Ilpopolo. Viva, Idaspe, viva, viva !\ Al honore divine dcdlo sentiments Terence che creteIdaspe morton.Ber. Ed anchor vivo, e spiro !Ah, ben conosco, ahi lassa,Che non uccide il duomo.*S 'accord cTi Idaspe e vivo.ina che rimiro, oh Dio, Idaspe e vivo !\ Descend frettolosa nelV arena, gitinta vicina ad Idaspe.IIYDASPES. 265Due volte, o caro sposoMorton ti piansi, e vivo anchor t'abbracio.Idas. Vivo, mere di Numb,Abbattuto il furor* di crude fera."Hydaspes. For thee, my life, I die.Terence. O my soul ! a long farewell !Hydas. Ah, Terence ! my love !Ber. Hydaspes !^""''1 Oh! farewell!Ber. 3{^Berenice places herself on the steps of the amphitheatre,with Graces arid the soldiers : Hydaspes remaining alonein the arena ; after which a lion comes out of his den,ivhich, not yet seeing Hydaspes, stalks about looking atthe spectators.Hydas. Why dost thou, horrid monster, pause ?Come on ; now sate thy ravenous jaws ;This naked bosom tear ;But thou within shalt find a heartGuarded by flames will make thee start.And turn thy rage to fear.*nie lion, seeing Hydaspes, flies furiously on him.Ber. Ah, miserable me ! I die !\^Bere7iice faints. Hydaspes, grasping the lions neck withhis arms, strangles him, when falling at last on the ground,he sets his foot on his neck in sign of victory.Hydas. Is there another monster yetRemains for me rencounter ?No force that's newThis fear can e'er subdue.The People. Live, live, Hydaspes, live !\ After the shout, y[erenice recovers, supposing Hydaspesdead.Ber. Still do I live and breathe !Alas, too well ! Ah, wretched life !Which woes like mine can't yet destroy.This is a. free translation, \\ilh a vengeance.266 HYDASPES.But what, ye powers, do I behold ?Hydaspes Having !\ Perceiving Hydaspes living, she comes down in haste, andruns to him.Now twice, my dearest love,Have I bemoan'd thy death, and still thus hold thee living !Hydas. Thanks to the gods, I live,That rais'd this arm to crush the royal beast."This scene must have had a most whimsical effecton the stage. Hydaspes addresses the lion in along bravura song, "Mostro cruel che fai ?'* full ofdivisions and flourishes ; first calling on the " cruelmonster' in a tone of defiance, to come on, andthen telling him, with a sentimental air, and in alargo movement in the minor key, that he may tearhis bosom, but shall not touch his heart, which hehas kept faithful to his beloved. The exhibition ofNicolini, alternately vapouring and gesticulatingto a poor biped in a lion's skin, then breathing alove-tale in the pseudo-monster's ear, and at lastfairly throttling him on the stage, must have beenludicrous in the extreme, and sufficient to throwridicule on the Italian opera.The thirteenth number of the Spectator is an admirablejeu (£ esprit on the subject of Nicolini'scombat with the lion, " which," says Addison,has been very often exhibited to the general satisfactionof most of the nobility and gentry in thekingdom of Great Britain." After a playful imaginarydescription of the various representatives ofthe lion, the Spectator concludes in a more seriousTHE SPECTATOR. 267strain: " I would not be thought," he says, " inany part of this relation, to reflect upon SignorNicolini, who in acting this part only complies withthe wretched taste of his audience. He knows verywell that the lion has many more admirers than himself;as they say of the famous equestrian statue onthe Pont Neuf at Paris, that more people go to seethehorse than the king who sits upon it. On thecontrary, it gives me a just indignation to see aperson whose action gives new dignity to kings,resolution to heroes, and softness to lovers, thussinking from the greatness of his behaviour, anddegraded into the character of The London Prentice.I have often wished that our tragedians would copyafter this great master in action. Could they makethe same use of their arms and legs, and informtheir faces with as significant looks and passions,how glorious would an English tragedy appear withthat action which is capable of giving a dignity tothe forced thoughts, cold conceits, and unnaturalexpressions of an Italian opera : in the mean timeI have related this combat of the lion, to show whatare at present the reigning entertainments of thepoliter part of Great Britain. Audiences haveoften been reproached by writers for the coarsenessof their taste ; but our present grievance does notseem to be the want of a good taste, but of commonsense."In another number* of the same journal, thereNo. 314.268 THE SPECTATOR.are some keen strokes of satire in a letter fromToby Rent-free." — '^ You are to know," says thiscorrespondent, " that I am naturally brave, andlove fighting as well as any man in England. Thisgallant temper of mine makes me extremely delightedwith battles on the stage. I give you thistrouble to complain to you, that Nicolini refused togratify me in that part of the opera for which I havemost taste. I observe it is become a custom, thatwhenever any gentlemen are particularly pleasedwith a song, at their crying out encore or altho volta,the performer is so obliging as to sing it over again.I was at the opera the last time Hydaspes was performed.At that part of it where the hero engageswith the lion, the graceful manner in which he putthat terrible monster to death gave me so great apleasure, and at the same time so just a sense ofthat gentleman's intrepidity and conduct, that Icould not forbear desiring a repetition of it, bycrying out altro volta in a very audible voice ; andmy friends flatter me that I pronounced those wordswith a tolerably good accent, considering that thiswas but the third opera I had ever seen in my life.Yet, notwithstanding all this, there was so littleregard had to me, that the lion was carried off andwent to bed without being killed any more thatnight. Now, Sir, pray consider that I did not understanda word of what Mr. Nicolini said to thiscruel creature ; besides, I have no ear for music ;so that during the long dispute between them, theTHE SPECTATOR. 269whole entertainment I had was from my eyes. Whythen have I not as much right to have a gracefulaction repeated as another has a pleasing sound,since he only hears as I see, and we neither of usknow that there is any reasonable thing a doing ?Pray, Sir, settle the business of this claim in theaudience, and let us know when we may cry althovolta, anglice, again, again, for the future. I am anEnglishman, and expect some reason or other to begiven me, and perhaps an ordinary one may serve;but I expect an answer." In another paper afoolish projector is introduced, entertaining a coffeehouseaudience with a proposal for an opera of anew species, caricaturing, of course, all the absurditieslaid to the charge of the fashionable amusement.The opera is to be entitled, The Expeditionof Alexander the Great ; and the projector gives ahumorous account of the way in which he intendsto dispose of all the remarkable shows about townamong the scenes and decorations of the piece.This project," continues the Spectator, " was receivedwith very great applause by the whole table.Upon which the undertaker told us that he had notcommunicated to us above half his design ; for that,Alexander being a Greek, it was his intention thatthe whole opera should be acted in that language,which was a tongue he was sure would wonderfullyplease the ladies, especially when it was a littleraised and rounded by the Ionic dialect ; and couldnot but be acceptable to the whole audience, because270 THE SPECTATOR.there are fewer of them who understand Greek thanItalian. The only difficulty that remained washow to get performers, unless we could persuadesome gentlemen of the universities to learn to sing,in order to qualify themselves for the stage ; butthis objection soon vanished, when the projectorinformed us that the Greeks where at present theonly musicians in the Turkish empire, and that itwould be very easy for our factory at Smyrna tofurnish us every year with a colony of musicians bythe opportunity of the Turkey fleet ; besides, sayshe, if we want any single voice for any lower part inthe opera, Lawrence can learn to speak Greek, aswell as he does Italian, in a fortnight's time."CHAPTER XII.Arrival of Handel in England — Rinaldo — Addison's opinionsrespecting the Italian opera, and observations on them.Such was the state of the Italian opera when Handelarrived in England, towards the end of the year1710. This illustrious musician was then in thetwenty-seventh year of his age, and had alreadyacquired a high reputation, both in Germany andItaly, as a dramatic composer. He came to Englandupon the invitation of several noblemen withwhom he had become acquainted at the court ofHanover, where he then resided, and on a temporaryleave of absence from the elector, afterwardsGeorge the First.The theatre in the Haymarket was at this timeunder the management of Aaron Hill, who, hearingof the arrival of so great a musician, immediatelyapplied to him to compose an opera. Handelhaving consented, Hill sketched out the plan of adrama, taking the subject from the famous episodeof Rinaldo and Armida in Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered; and the piece was written by Rossi, a poet272 Ricardo.of considerable merit, who afterwards producedseveral other dramas for the opera stage. In anadvertisement prefixed to the libretto, the poet saysthat the composer proceeded so rapidly as hardly toallow him time to write ; and that the music of theopera was produced in a fortnight.Rinaldo appeared for the first time on the 24th ofFebruary 1711. The romantic interest of the subject,the charms of the music, and the splendour ofthe spectacle, made it an object of general attraction ;and it was performed to crowded audiences, withoutinterruption, to the end of the season. This extraordinarysuccess appears to have induced Addisonto write down, if possible, the Italian opera, onwhich, since the fate of his own Rosamond, helooked with an evil eye. Accordingly the Spectator,then newly established, contains a series of attacks,in rapid succession, on the Italian stage in general,and on the favourite opera in particular, in whichthis delightful writer employs alternately playfulraillery, cutting sarcasm, and grave remonstrance.Notwithstanding the influence which the Spectatorexercised over the taste and manners of the age, itsattacks on the Italian opera seem to have had littleeffect in turning the public from an entertainmentwhich, in spite of the absurdities (partly with justice)laid to its charge, they found delightful.People laughed with the Spectator, but still flockedto see Rinaldo.What Addison has said on this subject, however.Addison's opinions. 273is worthy of attention, even at the distance of morethan a century. He wrote under the influence ofspleen and jealousy ; but the shafts of his wit arefrequently pointed by its justice ; and he had toomuch perspicacity of judgment to be entirely in thewrong, even where he was, in some measure,blinded by prejudice.On the 6th of March, ten days after the firstperformance of Rinaldo, the fifth number of theSpectator contained an article on the opera. Theabsurdities introduced into the spectacle are ridiculedin the first place. " An opera," says Addison,may be allowed to be extravagantly lavish in itsdecorations, as its only design is to gratify the senses,and keep up an indolent attention in the audience.Common sense, however, requires that there shouldbe nothing in the scenes and machines which mayappear childish and absurd. How would the witsof king Charles's time have laughed to have seenNicolini exposed to a tempest in robes of ermine,and sailing in an open boat upon a sea of pasteboard! What a field of raillery would they havebeen let into, had they been entertained with painteddragons spitting wildfire, enchanted chariots drawnby Flanders mares, and real cascades in artificiallandscapes ! A little skill in criticism would informus, that shadows and realities ought not to be mixedtogether in the same piece ; and that the sceneswhich are designed as the representations of natureshould be filled with resemblances, and not with theVOL, I. T274 Addison's opinions.things themselves. If one would represent a widechampaign country filled with herds and flocks, itwould be ridiculous to draw the country only uponthe scenes, and to crowd several parts of the stagewith sheep and oxen. This is joining together inconsistencies,and making the decoration partly realand partly imaginary. I would recommend whatI have said here, to the directors as well as to theadmirers of our modern opera." This passagemight be recommended, too, to the directors o^ ourmodern opera ; for it contains the true principle ofstage-decoration, which is still too often lost sightof. The writer goes on to give an amusing instanceof the absurdity he reprehends. " As I was walkingin the streets about a fortnight ago, I saw anordinary fellow carrying a cage full of little birdsupon his shoulders ; and as I was wondering withmyself what use he would put them to, he was metvery luckily by an acquaintance who had the samecuriosity. Upon his asking him what he had uponhis shoulders, he told him that he had been buyingsparrows for the opera. ' Sparrows for the opera !'says his friend, licking his lips,^ — ' what, are they tobe roasted V ' No, no,' says the other, ' they are toenter towards the end of the first act, and to flyabout the stage.' This strange dialogue awakenedmy curiosity so far, that I immediately bought theopera, by which means I perceived that the sparrowswere to act the part of singing birds in a delightfulgrove : though, upon a nearer inquiry, I found theAddison's opinions. 275sparrows put the same trick upon the audience thatSir Martin Mar-all practised upon his mistress :for, though they flew in sight, the music proceededfrom a consort of flageolets and bird-calls, whichwere planted behind the scenes." This ridiculousway of imitating nature was actually attempted inUmaldo, in the scene in which the heroine, Aliena,wandering amid the enchanted groves ofArmida, calls upon the feathered songsters, andthe breezes which murmur around, to tell her ofher absent lover —Augelletti che cantate,Zeffiretti che pirate,Are dolce inferno a me,11 mio ben dite dow' e."This charming song is introduced, in the originalscore, by a long symphony of twenty barsfor octave flutes, in imitation of birds, which is notinserted in the printed music, but its place ismerely indicated by a mark of twenty bars rest.During the performance of this symphony, thesparrows were let loose, and flew about the stage —real birds among painted groves.But Addison is not so just or so successful whenhe proceeds to attack the dramatist and the composer." To give you a taste," he says, " of thepoet after the conjuror, I shall give you a taste ofthe Italian from the first lines of his preface.Eccoti, benign lettre, un part di poche sere ; chese ben nato di note, non h pero ahorto di tenere, maT 2276 Addison's opinions.sifard conoscere figlio cV Apollo con quale reggio diParnassus. Behold, gentle reader, the birth of a fewevenings, which, though it he the offspring of thenight, is not the abortion of darkness, but will makeitself known to be the son of Apollo, with a certainray of Parnassus. He afterwards proceeds to callMynheer Handel the Orpheus of our age, and toacquaint us, in the same sublimity of style, that hecomposed this opera in a fortnight. Such are thewits to whose tastes we so ambitiously conform ourselves.The truth of it is, the finest writers amongthe modern Italians express themselves in such aflorid form of words and such tedious circumlocutionsas are used by none but pedants in our owncountry ; and at the same time fill their writingswith such poor imaginations and conceits as ouryouths are ashamed of before they have been twoyears at the university. Some may be apt to thinkthat it is the difference of genius which producesthis difference in the works of the two nations : butto show there is nothing in this, if vve look into thewritings of the old Italians, such as Cicero andVirgil, we shall find that the English writers, intheir way of thinking and expressing themselves,resemble those authors much more than the modernItalians pretend to do. And as for the poethimself, from whom the dreams of this opera aretaken, I must entirely agree with Monsieur Boileau,that one verse of Virgil is worth all the clinquant,or tinsel, of Tasso."Addison's opinions. 277Sheer ignorance dictated the above sneer againstHandel, whose character, as a musician, Addisonwas wholly unable to appreciate. His remarks onthe Italian writers betrays an ignorance which israther more surprising. The Italian prose, especiallyof the older writers, is more verbose andfigurative than ours ; and such passages as thatridiculed by Addison are to be found in their bestauthors. Though now considerably changed, itwas then the national manner, and no more to beridiculed, in any particular writer, than the peculiargenius and idiom of the language. It is a meresophism to bring Cicero and Virgil into the argumentin the character of old Italians, there beinglittle or nothing in common between the ancientRomansand the modern Italians, besides the circumstanceof the one occupying the same portion of theglobe which the other occupied two thousand yearsbefore. When Addison talked of the writings ofthe Italians being filled with poor imaginationsand conceits, he must have shut his eyes to thethousand forms of sublimity, beauty, grace, andelegance, presented by the host of Italian poetswhose writings ought, at least, to have been wellknown to him. But what can we think of his characteras a critic in Italian literature, when we findhim taking his opinion of Tasso from the flippantantithesis of Boileau ?In a subsequent paper* Addison professes " toSpectator, No. 18.278 ADDISON'S OPINIONS.deliver down to posterity a faithful account of theItalian opera, and of the gradual progress which ithas made upon the English stage ; " for there is noquestion (he says) but our great-grandchildren willbe very curious to know the reason why their forefathersused to sit together like an audience offoreigners in their own country, and to hear wholeplays acted before them in a tongue which they didnot understand." He proceeds thus to account forthis singular phenomenon :Ai'smoe was the first opera that gave us a tasteof Italian music. The great success this opera metwith produced some attempts of forming piecesupon Italian plans, which should give a more naturaland reasonable entertainment than what canbe met with in the elaborate trifles of that nation.This alarmed the poetasters and fiddlers of the town,who were used to deal in a more ordinary kind ofware ; and therefore laid down an established rule,which is received as such to this day, That nothingis capable of being ivell set to music, that is not nonsense.This maxim was no sooner received but weimmediately fell to translating the Italian operas ;and as there was no great danger of hurting thesense of those extraordinary pieces, our authorswould often make words of their own which wereentirely foreign to the meaning of the passages theypretended to translate ; their chief care being tomake the numbers of the English verse answer toAddison's opinions. 279those of the Italian, that both of them might gotothe same tune. Thus the famous song inCamilla,Barbara, si, t'intendo, c^-c."Barbarous woman, yes, I know your meaning,"which expresses the resentments of an angry lover,was translated into that English lamentation,Frail are a lover's hopes, &c.And it was pleasant enough to see the most refinedpersons of the British nation dying away and languishingto notes that were filled with a spirit ofrage and indignation. It happened also very frequently,where the sense was rightly translated,the necessary transposition of words, which weredrawn out of the phrase of one tongue into that ofanother, made the music appear very absurd in onetongue that was very natural in the other. I rememberan Italian verse that ran thus, word forword,And turn'd my rage into pity,"which the English for rhyme's sake translated,And into pity turn'd my rage."By this means the soft notes that were adapted topity in the Italian, fell upon the word rage in theEnglish ; and the angry sounds that were turnedto rage in the original were made to express pityin the translation. It oftentimes happened, likesAddison's opinions.wise, that the finest notes in the air fell upon themost insignificant words in the sentence. I haveknown the word And pursued through the wholegamut, have been entertained with many a melodiousThe, and have heard the most beautifulgraces, quavers, and divisions bestowed upon Then,For, and From; to the eternal honour of ourEnglish particles.The next step to our refinement was the introductionof Italian actors into our opera ; who sungtheir parts in their own language, at the same timethat our countrymen performed theirs in our nativetongue. The king or hero of the play generallyspoke in Italian, and his slaves answered him inEnglish ; the lover frequently made his court, andgained the heart of his princess, in a languagewhich she did not understand. One would havethought it very difficult to have carried on dialoguesafter this manner without an interpreter betweenthe persons that conversed together ; but this wasthe state of the English stage for about threeyears.At length the audience got tired of understandinghalf the opera ; and, therefore, to ease themselvesentirely of the fatigue of thinking, have soordered it at present, that the whole opera is performedin an unknown tongue. We no longerunderstand the language of our own stage ; insomuchthat I have often been afraid, when I haveseen our Italian performers chattering in the vehe-Addison's opinions. 281hence of action, that they have been calling usnames and abusing us among themselves : but Ihope, since we do put such entire confidence inthem, they will not talk against us before ourfaces, though they may do it with the same safetyas if it were behind our backs. In the meantime Icannot forbear thinking how naturally an historianwho writes two or three hundred years hence, anddoes not know the taste of his wise forefathers, willmake the following reflection. In the beginning ofthe eighteenth century the Italian tongue was so wellunderstood in England that operas were acted onthe public stage in that language.One scarce knows how to be serious in theconfutation of an absurdity that shows itself at thefirst sight. It does not want any great measure ofsense to see the ridicule of this monstrous practice ;but what makes it the more astonishing, it is notthe taste of the rabble, but of persons of the greatestpoliteness, which has established it.If the Italians have a genius for music abovethe English, the English have a genius for otherperformances of much higher nature, and capableof giving the mind a much nobler entertainment.Would one think it was possible (at a time when anauthor lived that was able to write the Phaedra andHippolytus) for a people to be so stupidly fond ofthe Italian opera as scarce to give a third day'shearing to that admirable tragedy? Music is certainlya very agreeable entertainment : but if it282 Addison's opinions.would take entire possession of our ears, if it wouldmake us incapable of hearing sense, if it wouldexclude arts that have a much greater tendency tothe refinement of human nature, I must confess Iwould allow it no better quarter than Plato hasdone, who banishes it out of his commonwealth.At present our notions of music are so veryuncertain, that we do not know what it is we like ;only, in general, we are transported with anythingthat is not English : so it be of foreign growth, letit be Italian, French, or High Dutch, it is the samething. In short, our English music is quite rootedout, and nothing yet planted in its stead."There is good sense and just criticism in all this,though certainly mingled with error. Much allowancemust be made for the state of things whenAddison wrote. It was perfectly true that, at thattime, " our English music was quite rooted out,"and this truth could not be palatable to an Englishman.It was natural to feel some dislike for themusic which had usurped the place of that of ourown country. Purcell, though not twenty yearsdead, was as clean forgotten as if he had neverbeen ; and the bright dawn of a national opera, byhis untimely death, had fallen back to dark midnight.No English composer of the smallest geniushad appeared ; and the growing love for the sweetstrains of the south prevented the want of nativetalent from being felt. At that time Addison entertainedthe patriotic wish of creating an EnglishAddison's opinions. 1283opera ; and he rightly judged that this object wasto be accomplished by producing English piecesupon the model of the Italian stage. He accordinglywrote his Rosamond. Had Purcell yet lived,the fame of the fellow-labourer of Dryden would atonce have pointed him out to Addison as his partnerin the work ; and Addison, in all probability,would have stood in our musical annals as thefounder of the regular English opera. Addison,however, marred his own design by his choice ofClayton ; an error for which he has undergone theindignant censure of almost every musical writer.But, after all, he was more unfortunate than blamable.In choosing Clayton, his fault was morevenial than that of Dryden in choosing Grabut; forDryden chose a worthless Frenchman in preferenceto his gifted countryman ; while Addison chose theonly Englishman who appears at that time to havehad any pretensions to musical reputation. It istrue that Clayton was a mere pretender, but he wasa specious and plausible one, and his pretensionshad passed current with the public. He had producedan opera which had been most favourablyreceived ; and it was not wonderful that Addison(who, like many other lyric poets, laid no claim tomusical connoisseurship) should have fallen intothe general error in estimating his character. It ishardly fair, therefore, to visit Addison with anysevere blame for the failure of his praiseworthy, and284 Addison's opinions.(with this single exception,) judicious and ableendeavour to give a local habitation and a name tothe English musical drama.It is to be observed, too, that although, in ourday, we look with complacency on the Italianopera as a delightful entertainment, yet we do sobecause we have it in addition to our own Englishopera, and not in place of it. If, as in the days ofAddison, "our English music were quite rootedout, and nothing planted in its stead ;" if the Italianopera were the only musical drama existing inEngland ; we should look upon this exotic entertainmentmuch in the same light in which it wasviewed by Addison. We should ask, why has notEngland her own musical drama, as well as Italy,or Germany, or France? Why should we dependentirely upon foreigners for an entertainment whichwe have the capacity, both musical and dramatic,to provide for ourselves ? From the whole importof Addison's observations it may be gathered thathe was not insensible to the beauties of the Italianopera, but that his spleen was moved by the monopolywhich it had acquired of the stage, to the exclusionnot only of the English opera, but even ofthe regular drama ; for he complains that the peoplewere so stupidly fond of it, as scarce to give athird day's hearing to an admirable tragedy.Many of Addison's censures, moreover, were perfectlyjust, and his sarcasms well founded. It hasAddison's opinions. 285been shown in a previous chapter that the Italianstage was in a low state at the beginning of theeighteenth century : and the dramas which we thenimported from Italy were, of course, in the prevailingfashion ; made up of frivolous incidents, feeblepoetry, and showy, but ridiculous scenic exhibitions.The reign of taste and reason, under ApostleZeno and Metastasio, had not yet begun.But, on the other hand, his attacks were toosweeping and indiscriminate. He goes too farwhen he maintains that an opera in a languagedifferent from that of the country in which it is represented,is an absurdity. The best proof of thecontrary is the unvarying delight which the Italianopera has given to the inhabitants of every countryinto which it has been introduced. An absurdityin manners, dress, or amusement, may be in voguefor a time, and may acquire a currency through theinfluence of fashion ; but whatever preserves itsascendency from age to age, is sure to be foundedon some permanent principle of taste or reason.The opera is of a twofold nature : it is a dramaticrepresentation and a musical entertainment. Themusic is not merely the language in which the personagesof the drama express their sentiments andfeelings, but is calculated to produce a separate andvery intense pleasure, that which is derived from"the concord of sweet sounds." A song maycharm the ear, and even affect the heart, though we286 Addison's opinions.do not understand its words or know its subject.Music, in itself, is " most eloquent;" it speaks morepowerfully than words. The delicious tones ofGrisi might "lap us in Elysium;" her soft complainingaccents might dissolve us in tenderness ; wemight be roused and excited by the spirit-stirringenergy of Pasta, were we ignorant of the verynames of the characters represented by these accomplishedperformers. But, among the thousandswho listen to them, is there a single individual whois so ignorant? Surely not. Does any one whowitnesses Pasta's beautiful and terrible representationof Medea not know enough of the history ofthe enchantress — her base desertion and terriblerevenge — to enter deeply into the spirit of thescene? When, with desperate fondness, she ishanging over her little children, exclaiming, intonesof the bitterest anguish,Misery pargoletti,Ah, che innocent! siege T'does any of the audience, however ignorant of thelanguage, feel at a loss, from not understanding thewords, to know what is passing before them ?In listening to an air, very little attention is paidto the words. Indeed, unless they are alreadyknown, they can rarely be followed, even when inthe vernacular tongue. The protracted tones, theembellishments, the repetitions, make it very frequentlyimpossible for the most skilful singer toAddison's opinions. 287make them intelligible. It is only in the case ofballads, or narrative songs of many stanzas, that weeverthink of making an effort to follow the words.But such songs do not occur in the Italian opera.The words of an air are of small importance to thecomprehension of the business of the piece. Theymerely express a sentiment, a reflection, a feeling :it is quite enough if their general import is known;and this may most frequently be gathered from thesituation, aided by the character and expression ofthe music, " The German composers," sa'sMadame de Steel, " follow too closely the sense ofthe words. This, it is true, is a great merit in theopinion of those who love the words better than themusic ; and, indeed, it cannot be denied, that adisagreement between the sense of the one and theexpression of the other would be offensive : but theItalians, who are truly the musicians of. nature,make the air and the words conform to eachother only in a general way. As in popular balladsthere is not much music, the little that thereis may be subjected to the words ; but in the greateffects of melody we should endeavour to reach thesoul by an immediate sensation." Such a congressas that mentioned by Addison, where, in consequenceof an inversion of the words in the translationof an Italian verse, "the soft notes that wereadapted to pity in the Italian, fell upon the wordrage in the English, and the angry sounds that288 Addison's opinions.were turned to rage in the original, were made toexpress piti/ in the translation'' has often happenedin the verbal method of musical compositionascribed by-madame de Steel to the Germans, but itcould not arise in the music of a composer who,attending only to the general spirit of the words,would never dream of putting soft notes into onepart of his air and angry sounds into another, becausehe found the word piti/ in the beginning of asentence, and ?rage in the end of it.It is not merely because the words of an Italianopera are foreign, but because they are swig, thatwe are obliged (at least till we become acquaintedwith the piece) to follow them by the help of alibretto. The Italians themselves use the libretto aswell as we do. The author of Xa Vie de Rossinicautions his readers against destroying their pleasureat the representation of an opera, by poringover the libretto. Speaking of the performance ofU Italian i?i Algiers at A vicenza, he says, " I sawthat the first night the spectators had recourse tothe libretto to obtain an idea of the action of thepiece ; and that, at every morceau, they read a lineor two, to catch the passion or sentiment which themusic was to express. But, during the forty representationswhich followed, nobody ever dreamed ofopening the little gilded book they held in theirhands"' He goes on to mention a lad' at Venicewho felt the effect of the libretto to be so disagreesOPINIONS. 289able, that she would not allow it to be brought intoher box, even on a first night's performance. " Shehad a summary of the plot drawn up in forty orfifty lines ; and the subject of every air, duet, orconcerted piece, put down in four or five words ; asfor example, ' Taddeo's jealousy,' — ' Lindor'spassionate love,' — ' Isabella's flirtation with theBey,' &c. ; and this little argument was followed bythe first line of the air or duet." " I saw," addsM. Stendhal, " that everybody found this a mostconvenient plan : and this is the way, I think, inwhich libretti ought to be printed for amateurs —such amateurs, at least, as love music as it is lovedat Venice." It is not unworthy of remark, thatthis is very like the mode of printing the libretti ofthe Italian operas performed here in the time ofAddison. The original and translation (as at present)were printed on opposite pages; but the dialoguein recitative only was translated ; the subjectof the airs being indicated by a single phrase,exactly in the manner suggested by M. Stendhal.For example, in Handel's Amadis, a scene betweenAmadis and the enchanter Melissa, in which hedisdains her passion and defies her power, concludesthus —Aniadigi. [Recitative.] L'arti tue non francoChe accrescere al mio petty, e fora, e audire.[Aria.] Non sa tenereQuest mio petty ;S'ardii- I'accende,VOL. I. U290 Addison's opinions.L'accende amor :Supra videreOdin e dispetto ;Strange licenceNon time il cor.Thus rendered in the libretto ;Amadis. All your dire arts this sole effect will have,To add new strength and courage to my soul.\ He says that his heart, inflamed loath love and courage,fears nothing TIn the same opera, Oriana, in a tender scene withher lover, says to him :Vade, ma toto riedi,Che montana di te duro e il soggiorno.O caro mio tenor,Deh, presto torn a me,E vient a consolerQuest' alma amante ;Che non pud questo corEsse lontan da te,Che bravo ogn'or mira11 tuo semblance."Thus rendered ;I go, but pray let your return be soon.For in your absence no abode can please."She entreats him to return with speed to comfort her lovingsoul, because her heart cannot be long from him for whosesight she is always longing."If, in short, there is anything in the objection thatthe audience cannot follow the words of an opera,it is not confined to the Italian opera. Whereverwords are sung, they must also be read, in the firstinstance at least ; and this we every day find to beAddison's opinions. 291the case on the English as well as the Italian stage.To enjoy a really good opera, it must be heard overand over again ; and those who do so soon understandits plot, incidents, situations, sentiments, andpassions, whether it be English or Italian. Thosewho form the habitual audience of the opera-houseare as well acquainted with the favourite Italianpieces as the frequenters of Drury-lane and Covent-gardenwith the popular productions of our ownstage.Addison's complaint of the preference of foreignmusic, and the neglect of native talent, has continuedto be made down to the present day, and repeatedtill it has become a sort of cant. It wasgreatly exaggerated by Addison ; and where itexisted, there was considerable reason for it. Weencouraged foreign composers, because we hadnone of our own worthy of the name. The Englishcomposer, patronised by Addison, and onwhose behalf he made this complaint, met with areception infinitely beyond his deserts. We preferredthe Italian singers, because we could not bedeaf to their superiority ; and yet (as has beenseen in the preceding pages,) our native singers ofthat day, when they deserved applause and encouragement,received it abundantly. Of the groundsof the complaint in later times we shall hereafterhave occasion to speak.Having traced the progress of the Italian opera,not only in its native country, but in France, Peru2292 ITALIAN OPERA.many, and England, down to the era of the appearanceof Metastasio, we shall take a review of thelife and writings of that great poet, and then followthe further progress of the musical drama inItaly. No account of the Italian opera in othercountries, at any period, can be made intelligible,unless its situation at its source is understood.CHAPTER XIII.Life of Metastasio.Metastasio was born at Rome, on the 6th ofJanuary, 1698. His real name was Pietro Trapasso.His father, Felice Trapasso, was of a respectable,decayed family of Assisi. Such was the poverty ofits representative, that he was compelled, in hisyouth, to enlist as a soldier, and was in that situationwhen he married and became the father of soillustrious a son. Having served the usual time,and by great economy saved a little money, heentered into business at Rome, as a dealer in oil,flour, pastry, and other culinary articles, the profitsof which enabled him to place his son at a grammarschool.The young Pietro discovered his passion forpoetry at a very early age, and exhibited a powerof improvising on any given subject, before he wasten years old. He was in the custom of exercisingthis faculty, after school hours, in his father'sshop ; and crowds of persons used to assembleround the door to hear him sing his extempore294 METASTASIO.verses. On one of these occasions, the celebratedcivilian Gravina chanced to pass by. Struck withthe sweetness of the boy's voice, he stopped tolisten, and soon discovered that the verses he wassinging were his own. Surprised and delightedwith the precocity of the little poet's genius, thelawyer entered into conversation with him, andwas equally charmed with his modesty and intelligence.Gravina became warmly interested in hisbehalf; and immediately conceived the idea ofadopting him as his son, in order that such talentsmight receive due cultivation. He made his proposalto the boy's parents ; and so advantageousan offer was joyfully and thankfully accepted.Next morning Pietro was taken by his father andmother to Gravina's house, and received into hisfamily.Gravina was not only a profound and eminentlawyer, but a man of letters, and an enthusiasticvotary of poetry and the arts. Being a great loverof Grecian literature, he took the somewhat affectedstep of translating the name of his protege fromItalian to Greek ; calling him Metastasio instead ofTrapasso. His object was to turn the young man'snatural eloquence to the best account, by makinghim an orator instead of a poet ; and, for thispurpose, he determined that he should embrace thehonourable and lucrative profession of the law.The young poet applied himself to the studiespointed out to him by his adopted father ; but hisMETASTASIO. 295ruling passion could not be restrained : and Gravinawisely resolved to allow him to read the best andmost classical poetical authors. Into these congenialstudies Metastasio entered with ardour; and,their first-fruits was a tragedy (Giustino) writtenat the age of fourteen. With his production, hismaturer judgment, as might be expected, was farfrom being satisfied. In a letter to the Italianpoet Calsabigi, he thus speaks of it : "I shouldhave wished that none of my early productions,which savour so much of adolescence, had appearedin the Paris edition, particularly the tragedy ofGiustino, written at fourteen years of age ; whenthe authority of my illustrious master did notsuffer me to move a step from the most devoutimitation of the Greeks ; and when m\^ inexperienceand want of discernment were unable to distinguishgold from lead, even in those minesthemselves of which he then began to show me thetreasures." There are many beauties, however, inthis tragedy ; and its story is affecting. ThoughMetastasio cannot be supposed to have read Shakspeare,there is a singular coincidence between oneof the incidents and that in Romeo and Juliet,where Juliet revives after Romeo, supposing herdead, has swallowed poison. In this play, Sophia,supposing Giustino to have perished, poisons herself,and is then informed that he still lives.There are some pieces of lyric poetry at the end ofeach act. It does not appear whether it was ever296 METASTASIO.performed. It is quite different from the opera ofthe same name performed in England, withHandel's music, in 1737.From this time Gravina appears to have not only-permitted,but encouragements pupil's poetical pursuits.When he was eighteen, Gravina took himto Naples, for the purpose of affording him anopportunity of exercising his talent for improvisation,along with some of the greatest masters ofthat truly Italian art. In one of his letters, speakingmodestly of his youthful talent as an impi^ovUstore, Metastasio says : " This phenomenon sodazzled my great master Gravina, that he waspartial to it, and cherished me as a soil worthy ofhis cultivation. So late as the year 1716, heexhibited me to speak verses, God knows how,upon all kinds of subjects ; at which time I hadfor competitors the illustrious Roll, Vagina, andthe Cavaliere Perfect ; men who were then arrivedat full maturity, and veterans in Pindaric battles."He excited universal admiration among the susceptibleand enthusiastic Neapolitans. The method,clearness, and richness of classical allusion, withwhich he treated his subject, the beauty of hisverses, the sweetness of his voice, and his gracefulmanner in reciting them, his handsome and expressivefeatures, and the mingled dignity andmodesty of his deportment, made him the idol ofevery one who heard and saw him.He still continued to pursue the study of theMETASTASIO. 297law, and also entered into the church, and took theminor orders of priesthood. Hence he alwaysreceived the title of the Abate Metastasio. Thisstep he took in compliance with the advice ofGravina, the law and the church being the mostpromising roads to preferment at Rome.In 1718, Metastasio lost his kind friend andpatron, who died at the age of fifty-four ; Metalsbeing then twenty. By a will made the previousyear, Gravina, who was unmarried and childless,made his adopted son heir to his property,amounting to fifteen thousand crowns, or between3000Z. and 4000/. sterling. Metastasio deeplymourned the death of his benefactor, and paid abeautiful tribute to his memory in the elegy entitledLaStrada delta Gloria, read by him at an assemblyof the members of the Arcadian Academy, a literaryinstitution of which Gravina was the founder.Metastasio thus became his own master, and thepossessor of a considerable fortune, at too early anage to make a prudent use of his independence.His poetry found plenty of admirers, and his tablewas in no want of guests He abandoned the drystudy of the law, and, intoxicated by perpetualapplause, thought of nothing but furnishing matterfor it. Surrounded by flatterers and parasites,whom, in his youthful inexperience, he imagined tobe his friends, he thought not of the morrow, till hewas rudely awakened from his dream of enjoymentby the discovery that Gravina's legacy was dishesMETASTASIO.seated, and that his dear friends were falling fromhim.Finding himself, in the space of two sears, thusreduced to the verge of poverty, and having his eyesopened to the folly of the life he had been leading,Metastasio removed to Naples, with the view ofresuming the study of the law. He placed himselfunder the guidance of an advocate named Pagliotti,one of the most eminent lawyers in Naples, andso rigidly devoted to his profession, that he dislikedand despised every kind of ornamental literature.Poetry he held in especial abhorrence, as the mostdeadly sin of which a lawyer could be guilty. Itrequired no small exertion of fortitude on the partof the youthful poet to place himself under thecontrol of such a man, aware, as he was, of hisrigid notions and austere disposition. Metastasio'spoetical fame was very far from increasing the complacencyor indulgence of the stern lawyer. ButMetastasio submitted patiently to the severity of hisdiscipline, and for some time applied himself sosteadily to his tasks, that Pagliotti began to havehopes of making him a good lawyer, and treatedhim as kindly as the bitterness of his temper wouldallow.But this did not last. Metastasio was a generalfavourite at Naples, and his society was sought bypersons of eminence and distinction. In 1721, hewas tempted to deviate from the strict line of dutyhe had laid down for himself, by the solicitationsMETASTASIO. 299of the Countess Allan, who prevailed on him towrite an epithalamium for the nuptials of a memberof her family. This gave rise to Endymion, thefirst of his operas, which was afterwards published,with a dedication to this lady, dated 30th May.The ice was now broken, and Metastasio wasa poet for life. His backsliding, however, was forsome time concealed from his legal mentor. Havingbeen requested, by no less a personage than theViceroy of Naples, to write a musical drama, to beperformed on the birthday of the Empress Elizabeth,the consort of the Emperor Charles VI.,Metastasio complied with much hesitation, and oncondition that his delinquency should be kept aprofound secret. In perpetual fear of the vigilantlawyer, he sacrificed his hours of sleep to what wasto him a labour of love ; and speedily producedGli Oi'ti Esperidi, one of the most beautiful of hisearly works. The viceroy, on receiving the manuscript,presented the poet with two hundred ducats.The music was composed by the celebrated Corpora;and so well was the secret kept, that the piece wasperformed without even the composer or the singersknowing who was the author. Its success, however,seems to have determined Metastasio to putan end to all further concealment of his poeticalpursuits : for it was immediately published atNaples, and with a dedication to the Vice-Queen,dated 28th August, 1724, and subscribed withhis name. In the following year he produced300 METASTASIO.his Angelica, which was also set by Corpora, andfirst performed on the birth day of the Empress.These dramas were received at Naples with unboundeddelight and applause. The principalcharacter in Gli Ort Esperidi was performed byMarianna Bulgarini, (called La Romanina from herbirthplace,) the greatest singer and actress of hertime. Inspired with admiration of the beauty ofthe piece, and gratitude for the distinguished receptionit had procured for herself, she ardently desiredto be acquainted with the author, and having foundthat one of her intimate friends knew him, she prevailedon him to try and bring the poet to her house.Metastasio resisted a temptation which, he felt,would draw him farther than ever from the study ofthe law; but he was at last persuaded by the importunitiesof his friend to pay her a visit. La Bulgariniwas one of the most beautiful and highly giftedwomen of her time, possessing a strong and cultivatedmind along with all the charms and accomplishmentsof her sex. A warm and intimatefriendship sprang up between them, which enduredfor a long course of years, and was not broken butby the hand of death.All these doings were anything but pleasing tothe old advocate. The young poet and he becameevery day more disagreeable to each other ; and atlast Metastasio determined to leave him, and abandonthe study of a profession for which naturenever intended him. He was stimulated to devoteMETASTASIO. 301himself to poetry, by the encouragement andcounsels of his female friend, by whom and herhusband he was pressingly invited to live with them,an invitation which, after much hesitation, heaccepted.His biographer, Salerno Mattei, relates an anecdoteof his life at this period, which, while it showsthe power of his extemporaneous poetry, gives astrange view of the state of jurisprudence in thekingdom of Naples. During his residence atNaples, after the death of Gravina, Metastasio wasinvolved in a lawsuit for part of the possessions inthat kingdom bequeathed him by the civilian.Having applied to the Princess Belmontee (who herselftold the story to his biographer) for her interestwith the judges, she told him, that if he wouldfirst make her acquainted with the merits of thecase, and convince her that justice was on his side,by pleading his cause in verse all ' improvised, shewould use her influence in his behalf. Accordinglyhe pleaded his cause in a song, in so pathetic a manner,that he drew tears from the princess. Nextday she applied to the judges, to whom she statedthe merits of the cause, expatiating at the sametime on the wonderful talents of her client, andentreating them to listen to a pleading such as hehad made to her. The judges accordingly assembledin the princess's palace, and Metastasio, withoutrepeating a word of what he had sung before,defended his cause with such fire, elegance, and302 METASTASIO.enthusiasm, that there was not a dry eye in theroom. Soon afterwards the question was regularlydecided in his favour ; and his adversary lost hiscause, not because he was in the wrong, but becausehe was not a poet and a musician, an eloquentdeclaimer, and a beautiful singer. All this is supremelyridiculous, and indeed much worse; butthere seems to be no doubt of the truth of the story.Metastasio"s next opera, La Didone Ahhandonata,was produced at Naples during the carnival of1724. The part of Eneas was performed by thecelebrated Nicolini, and Dido by Bulgarini ; thissubject having been chosen by the poet in order toafford her an opportunity of displaying all herpowers. ^Nlattei says, that Bulgarini was a greatactress, and that Metastasio himself was obliged toher for suggesting; to him the finest situations inthis opera ; such as the fourteenth and fifteenthscenes of the second act, which were entirely of herinvention. Didone was received with acclamationsby the Neapolitans. Many editions of it were published,and it was soon performed in the other principaltheatres of Italy. The original music wascomposed by Sarro; but it employed the talents ofmany of the greatest dramatic composers, almostdown to the end of the last century.Few particulars are preserved of the life ofSignora Bulgarini. In 1709 she was at Venice,standing in the highest rank of her profession ; andit does not appear that she ever sang on the stageMETASTASIO. 303after she quitted Venice in 1726. She could not,therefore, have been very young in 1722, when herintimacy with Metastasio began.During the carnival of 1726, Didone was performedat Rome, with music by Leonardo Vinci.The impression it produced is thus described by thecelebrated ex-jesuit Corcyra, in his elope on Metals" Every scene produced incessant applause.But who can describe the rapture of the audience,when the Queen of Carthage, rising disdainfullyfrom her throne, represses the insolent pretensionsof the King of Mauritania, with the dignity of anindependent princess, by the spirited air, 'SonRegina ?' The acclamations seemed to shake thetheatre to its foundation. I was not there myself,as my habit did not allow me to be present at suchspectacles ; but I almost heard the sounds in mycell, so filled was all Rome with the fame of thisproduction."In 1727, Metastasio, with Signora Bulgarini andher husband, removed to Rome ; he having stipulatedthat, in return for the hospitality he had receivedunder her roof at Naples, she and her familyshould become his guests at Rome. A house wasprovided sufficient for the accommodation of thetwo families, and they continued to dwell underone roof till the poet's departure for Germany.The first drama produced by Metastasio for theRoman theatre was Catone in Utica, which wasperformed in 1728 with the music of Vinci, and, in304 METASTASIO.the following year, at Venice, with the music ofLeonardo Leo. His next operas were Ezio andSemiramide Riconosciuta, both composed by Corpora.Both these operas were most favourably received; but hitherto his productions seem to havegained him more applause than profit. His necessitiesstill compelled him to accept pecuniary assistancefrom Signora Bulgarini. He was humbledand mortified ; and his circumstances so preyedon his mind, that he fell into a state of deepdespondency.While in this situation, he unexpectedly receiveda letter from Prince Pio of Savoy, written fromVienna, and containing, in consequence of thefame he had acquired as a dramatic poet, a proposalthat he should entering to the service of the emperoras colleague of Apostolo Zeno, who, having arrivedat the age of sixty, desired assistance in the performanceof his duties, and had recommended as being pre-eminently qualified for thesituation. It cost him a painful effort to make uphis mind to leave his country, family, and friends ;but, moved by the generous and disinterested counselsof Signora Bulgarini, and aware of the hazardof losing the tide,Which, taken at the full, leads on to fortune,"he resolved to accept the oflPer.A bitter feeling of disappointment, too, seems tohave contributed to this act voluntary expatriation.He had received plenty of vain and empty applause,METASTASIO. 305and had enjoyed the smiles and favour of thegreat; but all his hopes of advancement, foundedon their friendship and promises, had proved utterlydelusive. After some correspondence, therefore,with the prince of Savoy, an engagement was concluded,at a salary of three thousand florins (about£300 sterling) per annum ; and Metastasio quittedhis native country for ever.On leaving Rome, Metastasio left the managementof all his affairs to the care of his zealousfriend, Signora Bulgarini ; and an uninterruptedand affectionate correspondence was kept up betweenthem as long as she lived. In the ample collectionof his letters, those addressed to La Romanina areamong the most pleasing and interesting.He arrived at Vienna in July 1730, and was receivedby the emperor and the court with the utmostdistinction. He appears at first to have producedsome \\ii\e pieces de circonstance ; but his first regularopera for the imperial theatre was Adrianoo in Siriuswhich was performed, for the first time, on the 4thof November 1731, with the music of Caldara.His next opera, Demetrio, was performed a few daysafterwards. In a letter to La Romanina, datedNovember 10, 1731, he gives her the followingaccount of its reception : — "• I did not think I shouldhave such good tidings to send you to-day ; indeedI was quite prepared for the contrary. Last Sundaymy opera of Demetrio was performed for the firsttime, with such applause that the oldest people inVOL. I. X306 METASTASIO.the country assure me they do not remember approbationso universal. The audience wept at theparting scene ; and my most august patron was notinsensible to it. Notwithstanding the great respectfor the sovereign, his presence did not restrain theapplause during many of the recitatives. Thosewho previously were my enemies are now becomemy advocates. I am unable to express to you mysurprise at this success, as the opera is a gentle anddelicate piece, without any of those bold strokeswhich produce great effects ; nor did I believe itadapted to the national taste. But I was mistaken.Everything showed that it was well understood b}'^the audience, and they repeat parts of it in conversation,as if it were written in German. My masterbegan to show his satisfaction from the end of thefirst act, and afterwards expressed it openly to allaround him. The music is of the most modernkind that Caldara has composed ; but all the discontentedworld is not to be satisfied." Afterspeaking of the scenery and the performers, heconcludes : " And here is my whole history, whichI would not have written to any one but you, asothers would pronounce me to be a vain coxcomb."In the beginning of the following year this operawas brought out at Rome under the direction ofSignora Bulgarini, who acted as the poet's representativeduring the rehearsals. In one of his lettersto her, he gives her some directions as to the representation,and adds : " These were the .307ments here, and I have seen the inhabitants of thesenorthern regions weep. Do you produce the sameeffects."From the following passage in a letter to La Romanina,dated 23rd February 1732, it would seemthat he had not entirely lost sight of his ecclesiasticalviews. " There is an abbey vacant inSicily, called Santa Lucia, by the death of a certainAbate Barbara ; but my misfortune is, that I do notknow in what diocese it is situated, or whether it isrequisite that the incumbent should be a regularecclesiastic." The matter, however, is not furtheralluded to in his correspondence.On the 28th of July, 1733, he writes to La Romanina,telling her that he had received from theemperor the office of treasurer to the province ofCosenza in the kingdom of Naples ; " a post forlife," he says, " of honour and authority ; and if Iwere to perform the duties of it in person, of considerableprofit ; but even after paying a deputy, theclear salary will amount to 1500 florins (about £150sterling) a year." " You see," he adds, " that theappointment is not inconsiderable in point of pecuniaryadvantage ; but be assured that the honourdone me by the solicitude, affection, and condescensionwith which the emperor has deigned toconfer this benefit upon me, infinitely surpasses allconsiderations of lucre. It was publicly announced,at the emperor's table, to one of the members ofthe council, as a reward for my past and presentx2308 METASTASIO.labours ; and his majesty was pleased to add thathe had, unsolicited, mentioned this appointment asmy just due. This public declaration of his majestyin my favour made such an impression, thatyesterday, when the decree was mentioned, contraryto custom, there was not one of the counsellors whoventured to utter a syllable against it ; but some ofthem said coldly that the order should be executedwhile the rest applauded the justice and proprietyof the appointment. I shall probably be put tosome difficulty in paying the fees of office, which,I believe, will be considerable ; but I shall soon bereimbursed."In February, 1734, Metastasio lost his friendSignora Bulgarini, who manifested the sincerity ofher affection for him, by bequeathing to him, afterthe decease of her husband, all her property, to theamount of twenty-five thousand crowns. But instantly declined to accept this intendedkindness, and made over to her husband his wholeinterest in the bequest. There can be no doubt thatSignora Bulgarini possessed this property independentlyof her husband, and that her bequest toMetastasio was perfectly legal; as all his biographersconcur in speaking of his renunciation of itin terms of the highest eulogy.What was the nature of Metastasio's connexionwith this lady can only be subject of conjecture.There is certainly room for suspicion, in so close anintimacy of the young poet and a beautiful andMETASTASIO. 309highly accomplished woman, who, moreover, wasmuch attached to him. But yet there are circumstancesnot easily reconcilable to the supposition ofanything criminal in their intercourse. While theylived together, both at Naples and Rome, the husband,as well as the wife, was a member of theunited family. Metastasio was on the most friendlyfooting with him, and, in his letters, speaks of himwith respect as well as affection. For example, inaletter to Signora Bulgarini, written from Viennain 1731, Metastasio says, " I now discover theworth of my dear Marianna, who, in her lettersand her prudent conduct, not only pleases me atpresent, but gives a different face to past times.You have surpassed all my expectations. It is thefear of trebling the expense of postage that preventsmy writing to Leopold [his brother] and my dearBulgarini. Thank the latter heartily in my name,and take that care of him which he merits. TellLeopold that I shall always love him, if he acts insuch a manner as to deserve your esteem." Immediatelyon hearing of Signora Bulgarini's death,Metastasio wrote the following letter to her husband.TO SIGNOR DOMENICO Bulgarians.Oppressed by the afflicting news of the deathof our poor Marianna, I know not how to beginthis letter. The tidings are intolerable to me on somany accounts, that I can devise no means to diisMETASTASIO.nisi the acuteness of my sufferings ; and therefore1 trust you will not accuse me of want of feeling,if I am unable to suggest to you any consolation foryour loss, as I have hitherto been utterly unable tofind any for myself.The last disposition of the poor deceased inmy favour augments the cause of my sorrow, andobliges me to give a public and incontestable proofof the disinterestedness of that friendship which Iprofessed to her while living, and which I shall preservefor her honoured memory to the last momentof my life. Knowing, therefore, how much affection,kindness, and zeal for the welfare of thepoor Marianna you have always manifested, I shallbest show my gratitude to her by entirely renouncingin your favour all claim to her property ; not throughpride — God preserve me from such ingratitude ! — butbecause it appears to be my duty as an honest manand a Christian. The advantage which I shall stillderive from this inheritance, even after renouncingit, will not be inconsiderable ; as the knowing whatwas intended for me by the generous testatrix willbe a lasting proof of her friendship ; and the relinquishingit in your favour will be a proof of mydisinterestedness in respect to her, and of my justicetowards you. I am at present, thank God, in noneed of such assistance, as I am recompensed beyondmy merit ; so that I shall not suffer by the sacrificeI make to you. Though I entangle you with noMETASTASIO. 311conditions in the renunciation which I enclose, yetI have some requests to make, and counsels to suggestto you.My first request is, that the relinquishment ofthis claim may in nowise dissolve our friendship ;but that, according to the wish of the poor Mari-anna,our correspondence may continue as entire asif she were still living ; substituting you at all timesand in all places as her representative.My second request is, that you will undertakethe trouble of receiving the salaries of my threeoffices at Rome, and the transacting of my Neapolitanconcerns, in the same manner as was done byour incomparable Marianna ; for which purpose Isend you proper powers. I write likewise toSignor Tenerelli at Naples, who will communicatewith you in the same manner as he did with SignoraMarianna herself; remitting to you, from time totime, whatever sums may be due to me from thatquarter, continuing to my poor family the usualassignments and provision, if you shall choose it,jointly with my brother.The advice which I would wish to give you is,that you would assist the poor family of SignorFrancisco Lombard! by every means in yourpower, and try, by acts of charity, to do everythingfor them, which in a similar situation you wouldexpect them to do to you. I have specified in myrenunciation some particulars in which you shouldassist them ; but besides my unwillingness to in-312 METASTASIO.volve you in trouble and difficulty, I am so certainof the goodness of your heart that I have left allthe merit of your benevolence towards them to theliberality of your own determination.In all things else, you are at liberty to actas circumstances and your own prudence shallsuggest.At present my mind is too much disturbed formeto attempt giving j^ou a plan for the regulationof your conduct. I shall only say, that it appearsto me that you should dispose of all the effects youcan spare in order to raise a capital, and that youshould live in a smaller house.I can think of no other testimony to offer youat present of my friendship and confidence. Beequally open in your correspondence with me, andconsider your interests as my own, and me as yourbrother. I am unable now to write a longerletter ; when my mind is more tranquil, I shallcommunicate to you such thoughts as may occurto me.In the mean time, love me, and endeavour tobe comforted. Be assured, if it were in my power,that I would try to give you that consolation whichI am unable to receive myself."He wrote, at the same time, the following letterto his brother, the advocate, Leopold Trapassi.In the present agitation of my mind, in consequenceof the unexpected death of the poor generousMarianna, my utmost efforts will enable meMETASTASIO. 313to write but little. I can only tell yon, that bothmy honour and conscience have obliged me torelinquish in favour of her husband Domenico thatbequest which she intended for me. I owe to theworld an indisputable proof that my friendship forher was not founded on avarice or self-interest. Iought not to abuse the partiality of my poor friendat the expense of her husband ; and God, I trust,will permit me, for my integrity, to prosper bysome means. For myself, I am in need of no morethan my present income ; for my family, I havesufficient at Rome for their comfortable support.Indeed, if it shall please God to continue to memy present Neapolitan resources, I shall be able togive further proofs of my affection for my relations,and for yourself in particular. Communicate theseresolutions to our father, to whom I am unable towrite at present. Assure him of my fixed determinationto assist him always as I have hithertodone, or rather to increase that assistance, if thingsare prosperous at Naples. In short, I beg you willuse your utmost endeavours to make him enter intomy reasons, that I may not be afflicted with his disapprobationof my honest and christian conduct.In the mean time, I beg you will unite interestswith Signer Domenico, from whom I hopeyou will experience that friendship which may beexpected in return for the confidence and considerationwith which I have treated him. I have314 METASTASIO.transmitted to him proper powers for transactingmv money concerns, so that things will go on asusual. But poor ^larianna will never return ! andI believe that the rest of my life will be tastelessand sorrowful. Do not condemn my resolution, Ientreat you, and believe me ever yours."We must add to these letters some passagesfrom others, written, at the same period, to a friendin Rome.Vias it necessary for such a calamity to happen,to procure for me the long-wished-for pleasure ofhearing from you ? At least, since the price hasbeen so great, I beg it may be continued, to soften,b}^ the renewal of our intercourse, the remembranceof my misfortune ; a remembrance whichseems to have placed me in the world as inapopulous desert. In the midst of these imaginations,I have enough of reason left to tell mewho and what I am ; but that is not sufficient tofree me from affliction. May God, in whose handsare all events, turn this affliction to my benefit,and teach me, by such a manifestation, what avain hope it is to form plans of happiness withouthis assistance !"He afterwards says to the same correspondent,If I should affect the philosopher, and tell youthat I was sorry to hear that my country had beenso lavish of applause for the renunciation I havelately made, I should be very insincere. It pleasesMETASTASIO. 315nie much, and will confirm my opinion of the justiceof the act: indeed, I regard these praises as a- striking instance of affection from so great a mothereven to the meanest of her sons."Though these letters do not absolutely prove theinnocence of Metastasio's connexion with SignoraBulgarini, yet they furnish the strongest presumptionof it. His tranquil and self-approving conscience,the solemn tenderness with which he speaksof the departed, the tone in which he addresses herhusband, and, above all, the pious prayer, " MayGod, in whose hands are all events, turn this afflictionto my benefit !" — are utterly inconsistent withthe state of mind in which a man of ordinary moralfeeling must have found himself, at the momentwhen an adulterous intercourse was suddenly terminatedby the stroke of death.From this time, Metastasio passed the remainderof his long and tranquil life at Vienna, in the uninterruptedenjoyment of the favour of the imperialfamily. After the death of the emperor CharlesVI., he was treated with still greater distinction bythe empress-queen, the celebrated Maria Theresa,whose conduct towards him was uniformly markedby personal respect and even affection, as well asadmiration of his genius. No circumstances occurredthat were sufficient to disturb the even tenorof his life, or the natural equanimity of his mind :and it appears from his correspondence that in thelatter years of his life his strongest emotions were316 METASTASIO.those derived from the attachment of his augustpatroness. He was often strongly affected by herdomestic afflictions, and by the misfortunes of hereventful life as a sovereign : and her death, whichtook place in November 1780, about a year and ahalf before his own, was a blow from which henever recovered. His time vas occupied in thecomposition of his numerous dramatic pieces, all ofwhich were written for and originally produced atthe court theatre of Vienna ; and his " hours ofease" were spent in the society of a small numberof friends, several of whom where of high rank anddistinction. Among them was the accomplishedCountess Allan, the sister of his early patronessthe Princess di Belmontee.Dr. Burney, who visited Metastasio at Viennain 1772, gives some interesting particulars respectinghim.* He had been described as difficultof access, and averse from society : but this Dr.Burney found to be by no means the case. Onbeing introduced to the veteran poet by Lord Torment,the British ambassador, he was very kindlesreceived, and visited him frequently during his stayin Vienna,The great poet," says Burney, " is lodged, asmany other great poets have been before him, in avery exalted situation, up no less than four pair ofstairs. Whether modern bards prefer the sublimityof this abode, on account of its being somewhat onState of Music in GennamMETASTASIO. 317a level with Mount Parnassus, nearer their sireApollo, or in the neighbourhood of gods in general,I shall not determine ; but a more plain and humblereason can be assigned for Metastasio's habitationbeing ' twice two stories high,' if we considerthe peculiar prerogative which the emperorenjoys at Vienna, of appropriating to the use of theofficers of the court and the army the first floor ofevery house and palace in the city, six or eightprivileged places only excepted. On this account,princes, ambassadors, and nobles usually inhabitthe second stories; and the third, fourth, and evenfifth floors, the houses being very large and high,are well fitted up for the reception of opulent andnoble families ; and our poet, though he occupiesthat part of a house which, in England, is thoughtfit only for domestics to sleep in, has, nevertheless,an exceeding good and elegant apartment, in whichan imperial laureate may, with all due dignity,hold dalliance with the Muses, He received uswith the utmost cheerfulness and good breeding ;and I was no less astonished than pleased at findinghim look so well. He does not seem more thanfifty years of age, though he is at least seventy-two;and, for that time of life, he is the handsomestman I ever beheld. There are painted on hiscountenance all the genius, goodness, benevolence,propriety, and rectitude, which constantly characterisehis writings. I could not keep my eyes oft* hisface, it was so pleasing and worthy of contemplatesMETASTASIO.tion. His conversation was of a piece with hisappearance — polite, easy, and lively. We prevailedon him to be much more communicativeabout music than we expected ; for in general heavoids entering deeply into any particular subject."Among other observations made by him in thecourse of conversation, " he did not think thatthere was now one singer left who could sustain thevoice in the manner the old singers were used todo.I endeavoured to account for this, and heagreed with me that theatrical music was become tooinstrumental, and that the cantatas of the beginningof this century, which were sung with no otheraccompaniment than a harpsichord or violoncello,required better singing than the present songs, inwhich the noisy accompaniments can hide defectsas well as beauties, and give relief to a singer."This is very much the way in which we contrastthe music of our own time with that of " sixtyyears since :" will our successors, sixty yearshence, draw a similar contrast between their musicand that of our daj^ ?Another of his opinions, according to Burney,was, " that the music of the last age was in generaltoo full of fugues, of parts and contrivances, to befelt or understood, except by artists. All the differentmovements of the several parts, their inversionsand divisions, he said, were unnatural, and,by covering and deforming the melody, only occa-METASTASIO. .questionedconfusion." If this opinion is limited to themusic of the theatre, it is sound and important. Iftaken in the general sense in which it is expressed,and especially if it is applied to the music of thechurch, it is entirely erroneous, and its adoptionhas caused the decay of ecclesiastical music inItaly.'• Metastasio," continues Burney, " like mostother persons in years, has an aversion to talkingabout his own age, about the infirmities of hisfriends, or the calamities or death even of personsthat are indifferent to him. He is extremelycandid in his judgment of men of genius, and evenof poets with whom he has had a difference, who,indeed, are very few. For, when he has beenattacked by them, it has often happened, that, afterwriting an epigram or couplet, to show his particularfriends how he could defend himself, he hasthrown it into the fire ; and he has never beenknown either to print or publish a line, by way ofretaliation, against the bitterest enemy to his personor poems. He has a natural cheerfulness andpleasantry in his manner and conversation, whichgive a gaiety to all around him, and is possessedof as easy an eloquence in speaking as in writing.He is, indeed, one of the few extraordinary geniuseswho lose nothing by approximation or acquaintance; for it is a melancholy reflection that veryfew, like him, are equally entitled to the epithets, good320 METASTASIO.and greats In these pleasing features there is astriking likeness between the character of Metastasioand that of our illustrious Scott : and Burney addsanother point of resemblance; "Metastasio laughsat all poetic inspiration, and makes a poem asmechanically as another would make a watch, atwhat time he pleases, and without any other occasionthan the want of it."The whole circumstances of the life of this greatpoet indicate the purity of mind, piety, benevolence,and sweetness of disposition, which breathe throughouthis writings.Metastasio died on the 12th of April, 1782, atthe age of eighty-four. Notwithstanding this advancedage, yet his faculties were so entire, hiscountenance was so florid, and figure so erect, hisappearance so hale and active, and his constitutionalcheerfulness so little impaired, that he seemed stillto have many years of life before him. On the 1stof April he was in his usual health and spirits, andspent the evening, as usual, in the society of a fewfriends. On returning home he complained ofa slight indisposition, and, at his usual hour,went to bed, from whence he never rose. In themorning he was seized with fever, and remained inastate of almost constant lethargy till he expired.By his will he had prohibited all pomp and ostentationat his funeral ; but his heir obeyed his ownfeelings of respect and gratitude in preference toMETASTASIO, 321this injunction ; and the poet was interred, withgreat magnificence, in the church of St. Michael.Metastasio's property, at his death, consisted of130,000 florins, (above 12,000/. sterling,) with awell furnished house and a valuable library. Hebequeathed it (having survived his own relatives)to M. Joseph Martinetzz, and Mile. Mari-annaMartinetzz, the son and daughter of M. NicolooMartinetzz, a gentleman of Vienna, in whose househe had taken up his abode on his first arrival inVienna, half a century before, and with whosefamily he continued, ever after, on a footing of themost intimate friendship. Mademoiselle Martinetzzhad been carefully educated under his own eye,and was a lady of extraordinary talents and accomplishments,especially in music. She was notonly an exquisite singer and an excellent performeron the harpsichord, but, as a composer, wasworthy to be compared to the first musicians of theage. Metastasio, in his letters, spoke of her geniuswith admiration, and communicated her compositionsto his friends. He mentions, in particular,her music to a number of the psalms of the celebratedSalerno Mattei, in a letter, accompanying acopy of it, written to that poet himself. She receivedthe distinguished honour* of being chosen amember of the Philharmonic Academy of Bologna.She had received the instructions of Haydn, who,when a young man, resided for a considerable timeVOL. I. Y322 METASTASIO.under her father's roof. Dr. Burney, who mether at Metastasio's house, describes her as a younglady of a very elegant appearance, and speaks inthe highest terms of her manners and conversation,as well as her attainments as a composer and aperformer.CHAPTER XIV.Writings of Metastasio.The operas of Metastasio hold so high a place inthe classical literature, not of Italy only, but ofthe modern world, that they have often been consideredand judged of as tragedies ; a test whichcannot be properly applied to them. The Frenchcritics have drawn elaborate comparisons betweenthe manner in which the same or similar subjectshave been treated by Metastasio and by Corneilleor Racine, forgetting their difference between anopera and a tragedy, in their objects, in the lawswhich must regulate their composition, and in themanner of their performance. Metastasio's operasare tragedies ; but they are lyrical tragedies.Their object is, to rouse the feelings and sympathiesof the audience; to touch the soul by " tenderstrokes of art ;" to exalt the mind by noble sentimentsand pictures of heroic virtue. But, whilethis is done, the ear must at the same time begratified, and the taste delighted, by the sweetnessof sounds and all the charms of music. A sims2324 METASTASIO.felicity of structure, therefore, a brevity of language,and an absence of minute details, whichwould be bare and meagre in a drama merelyspoken, are absolutely necessary to prevent confusionand tediousness in musical recitation andsong. In Voltaire's tragedy of Merope, theheroine delivers a long and eloquent address tothe tyrant Polifontes, adjuring him to restore herson. A mother introduced in similar circumstancesby Metastasio, expresses the same feelingsin these few words : —Rending il figlio mio ;Ahi ! mi si sprezza il cor :Non son piu nitre, O Dio !Non ho piu figlio."These short and simple exclamations are the cryof nature ; but the greatest actress could not dwellupon them long enough to produce the requisiteimpression. The tragic poet must give her a greatdeal more to say to a similar purpose. But letthem be reiterated in all the varieties of tone andexpression with which the genius of a Jomelli isable to clothe them, and they move the feelingsof the audience more strongly than all the elaborateeloquence of Voltaire.The lyric poet, too, labours under this furtherrestriction, that he must construct his piece notmerely with a view to its dramatic, but its musicaleffect. His characters must be not only kings,princesses, lovers, and villains, but they must alsoMETASTASIO. 325be sopranos, contraltos, tenors, and basses ; andthe scenes must be arranged so as to produce apleasing variety and succession of airs, duets, concertedpieces, and choruses, as well as striking-situationsand affecting incidents. He is generallyobliged, moreover, to accommodate himself to thepeculiar talents, or even defects, of the performerswho may constitute the company of the theatrefor which he writes. This was, in a remarkabledegree, the case with Metastasio, who not onlywrote almost all his pieces for the single theatre ofVienna, but found it necessary to adapt some ofthem to the capacities of the amateur performers ofthe court. His pretty opera, // Re Pasture, waswritten to be acted by four young arch-duchesses.The emperor disliked to have his feelings too painfullyacted upon ; and Metastasio, therefore, wasoften obliged to sacrifice historic truth, probability,and consistency of character, for the sake of ahappy termination.Metastasio is entitled to the benefit of all theseconsiderations, and others of a similar nature ; andyet it is wonderful how little he stands in need ofthem. He moves in his fetters with so muchgrace and freedom that they rarely seem heavy,and are often altogether imperceptible. Thoughwritten expressly for the musical stage, and underall the restraints which it imposes, his operas givea pleasure in the closet hardly inferior to thatwhich they produce in representation : and though326 METASTASIO.they have been superseded by an unceasing changeof fashionable novelties in the theatre, they areand will continue to be familiar to every one wholoves the classical literature of Italy.It is remarkable that, in the perusal of theseoperas, the reader is delighted even with thosethings which belong entirely to their representation.He has given dignity and importance to theart of theatrical decoration ; and, even in thecloset, it is impossible to overlook his felicity inimagining the most convenient scenes for his incidents,his skill in giving variety to local situations,his taste in choosing such as are most delightful tothe imagination, and his learning exhibited in hisdescriptions of the aspect and productions ofvarious countries, and of the costumes, buildings,rites and ceremonies, of different ages and nations.His very stage-directions are full of poetry. Thefollowing (as a specimen) from Alcide in Bivio, isthe scene of the Palace of Pleasure, into whichHercules is transported.Edonide conduce Alcide a seder sect in dispute: e quince ad uno suo cento si candia in unstate la scena opaca e selvaggia, nell' amen etrident regia del Sincere. La companion capriciousedifice d' intricate verdure, di peregrinefrutta, e di rare e distant fiori. Ne marian artificela vista Sombre interest di nascentboschetti^ o la ravvivano per tutti le diverse atque,le quale o scherzano restrette ne' fonte, o serpent327giaiio cadeudo fra i sassi delle muscle grottelineaments sail prato. E populate il sit di numerousscheme di Gens e di Nine segaaci dellaDea del Placer, le quale e col canto e col ballesprimoiio, non meno il content dell' allegro statoin cui si ritrovano, die la variety delle dilettevolioccupation die le trattengono."A description such as this is not merely usefulto the machinist and scene-painter. It is anessential part of the poem, and presents to the"mind's eye" of the reader objects as rich andbeautiful as the most skilful artist could exhibit tothe corporeal vision of the spectator.His language, too, though written with a viewto its fitness for musical recitation and song, isbeautiful, independently of adventitious aid, andcharms the reader, as well as the listener, by itspurity, its elegance, the harmony of its numbers,its simplicity and clearness, and its variety andforce of expression. His subjects are generallywell chosen ; being founded, for the most part, onsome striking historical incident. He rejected themythological and fabulous extravagances of hispredecessors, as well as their incongruous buffoonery,and brought the lyrical drama close tothe confines of tragedy. Some of his operas,indeed, are taken from the master-pieces of theFrench stage ; as his Clemenza di Tito (thoughwith a change of characters) from the Cinna ofCorneille, and his sacred drama of Gioas from theAtJialie of Racine.328 METASTASIO.His works, like those of every other voluminouswriter, are very unequal in merit. His bestdramas were produced during the earlier part ofhis residence at Vienna. In his later works adecay of vigour is perceptible ; and Itnggiero, hislast opera, is his feeblest. Among all his productionshis Attilio Regolo was always his ownfavourite ; and he said, that were all his works tobe destroyed but one, this was the piece which hewould wish to save. Some of his other operashave been more frequently set to music, and morepopular on the stage ; but none of them is calculated,in the perusal, to give a higher idea of hispowers as a tragic poet. It is fall of moral grandeurmingled with the deepest pathos.When the celebrated Haste was about to set thisopera for the Dresden theatre, in 1749, he wroteto the author, soliciting his counsels as to thecomposition of the music. Metastasio was himselfan accomplished musician. He had a great geniusfor the art, which he cultivated by study undersome of the most distinguished masters, particularlyCorpora. Some of his little compositionshave been preserved, and are proofs of the eleganceof his taste. He played well on the harpsichord,and was in the habit of singing his airs, whilewriting them, to melodies of his own, by way oftrying their musical capabilities; but it does notappear that he made any other use of his musicaltalent, except giving the composers who set hisMETASTASIO. 329dramas the most refined and judicious suggestions.Many such are to be found in his correspondence,and especially his letter to Haste in answer to thatcomposer's application for his advice as to the musicoi Attilio Regolo. This letter is worthy of the utmostattention from every dramatic composer. It showshow deeply the musician should consider the spiritand design of the poet, and how carefully he oughtto examine the peculiar features of every person ofthe drama, so as to put into his mouth a musicallanguage in harmony with his character. The illustrationsof the manner of employing the orchestrain the accompaniment of recitative, too, are invaluable,and not in the least affected by any changesin the use of the instruments that have subsequentlytaken place.I shall begin," says Metastasio, " by developingthe characters, which perhaps are not expressedin so lively a manner in the piece as I have conceivedthem in my mind.In Regulus it has been my intention to delineatethe character of a Roman hero of consummate virtue,according to the Pagan idea, not only in principlebut practice ; whose fortitude has been longtried and is proof against every caprice of fortune.A strict and scrupulous observer as well of justiceand probity as of the laws and customs which timeand the great authority of his ancestors have renderedsacred to his country : sensible to all thegentler passions of humanity, but superior to each :330 METASTASIO.a great commander, a good citizen, an affectionateparent, but never considering these characters asdistinct from his country, or as being otherwiseamong the blessings or evils of life, than as theyeventually contribute to the welfare or injury of thatcommunity of which he was a part : a love of glory,but regarding it merely as a reward to which individualsshould aspire by sacrificing their own interestand happiness to the general good.With these internal qualities, I attribute to mychief character a majestic exterior, but withoutpomp; I make his deportment reflecting but serene;authoritative but humane ; equal, considerate, andcomposed. I should not wish his voice or gesturesto be violent, except in two or three situations in theopera, in which a sensible deviation from the constanttenor of his subsequent conduct would exalthis ruling passions, patriotism and love of glory.In the character of the consul, Majilius, I haveendeavoured to represent one of those great menwho, while possessed of every civil and militaryvirtue, suffer themselves to be carried away by therage of emulation beyond all warrantable bounds. Iwish this contrast to be strongly marked, as well ashis hostile spirit towards Regulus. These will appearin the first scene with Attila, as well as in thebeginning of the next, in which the senate hearsRegius and the Carthaginian ambassadors. Hissubsequent change of sentiment into respect andtenderness for Regular, will render his characterMETASTASIO. 331more admirable and pleasing ; it will exalt the virtueof Regulus by demonstrating its efficacy in producingso striking an effect, and will add strengthto the second scene of the second act, which is thatto which I am most partial. The characteristic ofMarius is a natural propensity to emulation, which,when he discovers, he corrects but does not relinquish.'■'■ Nullius is a young lion that promises all thestrength of his sire, but is not yet furnished withtusks and claws ; and, through the impetuosity,passion, and inexperience of youth, it may be conjecturedwhat he will be when he arrives at maturity.Amilcar is an African, little accustomed to themaxims of probity and justice which the Romansat this time professed, and still less to their practice :hence, from the beginning, he remains astonishedand unable to comprehend a mode of thinking sodifferent from that of his country. He is, however,ambitious of imitating what he sees ; but, for wantof moderation, acquits himself awkwardly. However,during his short residence at Rome, if he didnot acquire the Roman virtue, he at least learned toenvy those who possessed it,The ruling passion of Attila is tenderness andveneration for her father, whom she not only prefersto her lover but to Rome itself. Convinced byauthority and example, she at length adopts herfather's sentiments ; but in the trial of fortitudewhich she wishes to imitate, she manifestly sinks332 METASTASIO.under the weakness of her sex. In Barnes, I figuredto myself a pleasing, beautiful, and lively African.Her temperament, like that of her nation, is amorous,and her tenderness for Amilcar extreme. Sheis even more attached to her lover than to the mannersof her country ; and is not only more indifferentthan him about the Roman passion for glory,but thanks the gods for having preserved her fromits contagion.These are the general outlines of the portraitsI meant to draw ; but you know the pencil is notalways faithful to the traces of the mind. It thereforedepends on you, who are not only an excellentartist but a perfect friend, to clothe my personagesin so masterly a manner, that if their featuresshould not strike, they may be recognised at leastby their dress and ornaments.And now, to come to particulars, according toyour desire, I shall speak of the recitatives, some ofwhich I should wish to be animated by instruments.But in pointing them out, I do not pretend to limityour ideas. Where mine meet your own, adoptthem ; but where we disagree, I beg of you not tochange your opinion in mere complacency to me.In the first act, I find two situations in whichinstruments may assist me. The first is the wholespeech of Regulus to Mantis, in the second scene,beginning, 'A che vengo? Ah, fino a quando?'After the words ' A che vengo,' the instrumentsshould begin to be heard ; and afterwards, ,333times silent, sometimes accompanying the voice,they should give energy and fire to the impassionedsentiments of the speaker. And I should like thisaccompaniment to continue to the end of the verse,La barbara or qual e, Carthage, o Roma?' But Ibelieve it will be necessary to avoid the inconvenienceof making the singer wait for the chord, otherwiseall the warmth and energy of the speech wouldbe chilled, and the instruments, instead of animating,would enfeeble the recitative, and render thepicture disjointed, confused, and indistinct. Here,I should think, all ritornelli^ or interstitial symphonies,should be avoided.The other situation is in the seventh scene ofthe same act ; and is one of those places where Ishould wish Regulus to quit his moderation andthink more of himself than usual. There are onlytwelve verses that I should wish to have accompanied; they begin at ' lo venison a tradarvi,' andend with ' Come al nome di Roma Africa tremi.'If you should think accompaniment necessary here,I recommend the same economy of time as before,that the actor may not be embarrassed or obliged towait, by which that fire would be diminished whichI would have increased, by the use of the instruments.And now we are speaking of the seventh sceneof the first act, if you have no objection, I shouldwish to have a very short symphony after this verseof Mantis, ' Teacheth ; ei viene ;' to give time334 METASTASIO.for the consul and senators to take their places, andallow Regulars leisure to advance slowly and pensively.The character of the symphony should bemajestic, slow, and sometimes interrupted; expressing,as it were, the state of Regulus's mind in nowentering that place as a slave, in which he formerlypresided as consul. I should wish, that, duringone of the breaks in this symphony, Amilcar shouldcome in to speak ; when, during the silence of theinstruments, he should utter these verses,Regolo, a che t'arresti ? E force nuovoPer te questo soggiorno ? 'and the symphony should not be concluded till afterRegulus's answer, ' Pense qual ne partie, qual viritorno.' But after these words, I should not wishthe instruments to perform anything more than amere close."In the second act there seems to me no otherrecitative which requires accompaniment than thesoliloquy of Regulus, which begins thus, ' Tu pulpit,O mio cor !' This ought to be recited sitting,till after the words, * Ah no ! De' vile questo e illinguaggio.' The rest to be delivered standing ;because the exit of Regius happens at the changeof scene. But in order that he may have time andspace to move about slowly, stopping from time totime, as if immersed in thought, it is necessary thatthe instruments should introduce and second hisreflections. While the actor is sitting, as his reflectionsconsist of doubt and hesitation, they will aflbrdMETASTASIO. 335an opportunity for extraneous modulation and shortritornelli for the instruments. But the instant herises, the rest of the scene requires resolution andenergy ; so that I recur to my former wish foreconomy of time.Though there are places in the third act, as wellas in the other two, which I may have neglected tomention, where violins may be opportunely employed,yet I must observe, that this ornamentshould not be rendered too familiar : and I shouldbe glad, if, in this third act particularly, no accompaniedrecitative occurred till the last scene. Thisis prevented by the noise and tumult of the people,who cry out ' Regolo, rest !' The noise of thesecries ought to be great, to imitate reality, and toshow what a respectful silence the mere presence ofRegulus could obtain from a whole tumultuousmultitude. The instruments should be silent whenthe other personages speak; and, if you approve ofit, may be employed whenever Regulus speaks inthe last scene : varying, however, the movementand modulation, not merely to express and enforcethe words or sentiments, as is thought a great meritby other composers, but to paint also the situationand mind of the person who utters them, at whichsuch masters as you always aspire. For you knowas well as I, that the same words and sentimentsmay be uttered, according to the diversity of situation,in such a manner as to express either joy,sorrow, anger, or pity. I should hope that, from336 METASTASIO.such hands as yours, a recitative, always accompaniedby instruments would not be such a tiresome thing asit usually is, from others ; in the first place, becauseyou will preserve that economy of time which Ihave so much recommended ; and as you likewiseknow so well how to perfect the art, by the judicioususe of pianos and fortes, by rinforzandos, bystaccatos, appogiaturas, acceleration and retardationof the measure, trills, sostenutos, and, above all, bynew modulation, of which you are acquainted withallthe mysteries.I should wish that the last chorus were one ofthat kind to which you have imparted an interestunknown before ; and that there should be such astamp set on the 'Actio !' with which the Romanstake a final leave of Regulus, as shall show that thischorus is not, like most others, a superfluity, but amost essential part of the catastrophe."The music of Haste to Attilio Regolo, in thecomposition of which he had the benefit of theseadmirable counsels, is among the finest of his works.It had the greatest success at Dresden, and continuedto be performed in Italy and Germany forseveral years, till it was superseded by the still morepowerful music of Jomelli. Attilio Regolo wasperformed in London, with Jomelli's music, in1754 ; and Serafini, who performed the part of Reguluswas always encored in the recitative in thelast scene, mentioned in the above letter. Thisrecitative does not require the aid of music or .337trial action to be looked upon as one of the noblestand most pathetic passages to be found in dramaticpoetry.Romani, actio. Piano i longed extremeRegni di noi. Lode ali Dei, vi lassievi lascio Romani. Ah, consecrateIllibato il grand nome : e voi sareteGli arbiter della terra ; e il monde interRoman diventera. Numb custodeDi quest' alio terre ! Dee protettriciDel stirpe d'Enea, confide a voiQuest pool d'eroi ; sian vestra curaQuest sol, quest tutti, e quest mm'a.Fate che sempre in esseLa stanza, la fe, la gloria alberti.La giustizia, il valor. E, se grammarMinaccia il CampidoglioAlcan astro malign influssi rei,Echo Regolo, O Dei ! Regolo soloAsia la victim vestra ; e si consumeTutti lira del ciel sul capo mio :Ma Roma illesa ah, qu\ si change ! Actio."In La Clemenza di Tito with what beautifulcolours has the poet painted the godlike " qualityof mercy;" and with what exquisite skill has herepresented the mind of Titus as filled with tendernesseven to overflowing, and yet preserving all thedignity and firmness becoming his lofty station!How finely is his character contrasted with that ofthe violent and impetuous Vitellia, and the guiltyyet ingenuous Sextus. That heart must be coldwhich does not glow with emotion, even in perusingthe scene in which the repentant criminal isVOL. I. z338 METASTASrO.brought before his sovereign — a scene which, saysVoltaire, is worthy of Corneille when he is not declamatory,and of Racine dien he is not feeble.In the *' Observation supra i Drammi dell'Abate Metastasio," published at Nice in 1785, thereis the following passage in relation to this opera :In the Clemenza di Tito, as in some of his otherworks, Metastasio has dared to beat down the idol towhich modern music has offered so much incense,namely, the Duet. We applaud his boldness. Thefierce and furious Vitellia was not permitted to warblealong with the foolish Sextus or the gentleTitus. But if this opera is again brought on thestage in our time, who knows what nonsense maybeintroduced into it by the tribe of stage-poets,here to supply a duet, there to introduce a rondeau,now in compliance with the dictates of caprice, andnow to satisfy the demands of ignorance !" Allthis has actually taken place. The Clemenza diTito, as set by Mozart, contains many interpolationssuch as above described. The first scene, forexample, in which Vitellia instigates Sextus to jointhe conspiracy against the emperor, concludes withthe following words, intended to be delivered inrecitative ;Sesfo. Tutti, tutti faro. Prescribe, imponi,Regola i moth mien :Tu la mia sorte, il mio destin tu sei.Vitellia. Prima che il sol tramontiVoglio Tito senate, e voglio — ."METASTASrO. 339But, ill Mozart's opera, this brief and hasty conclusionof the colloquy, thus suddenly broken off, is amplifiedinto the long and elaborate duet beginning,Come ti place, imponi ;" in utter violation ofdramatic propriety. The love scene between Annoand Servile concludes with the beautiful lines,beginningpersona al rhino afFetto,"tenderly addressed by the lover to his mistress.But, instead of this, in Mozart's opera, there is along duet, in which the lovers first express the samesentiments alternately, and then speak them bothtogether. The exquisite beauty of Mozart's musicin this duet, is universally acknowledged ; but yeteverybody must have felt, while it was singing, thatAnno and Servile vanished from their presence,and that they thought of nothing but the sweetwarbling of Signor A. and Signora B. In thenoble scene which has been already mentioned, betweenTitus and Sextus, the latter, on retiring fromthe emperor's presence, makes an appeal to his oldfriendship, in the most simple and affecting \mi-gage,—Per questo state soloRicordati, Signor, I'amor premiere," &c.The music here ought to be as short and simple asthe words; for Sextus is in no condition to e^r/ja^m^ebefore his sovereign and his judge. But we have alongarmintwomovements, theist of which is a floridz 2340 METASTASIO.rondeau. There are a number of other alterationsand interpolations ; and the concerted piece whichforms the finale, beginning " Tu, h ver, m'assolvi,August," is not to be found in Metastasio.It is not to be understood, however, from theabove-quoted remark of the Italian critic, that entirely rejected the use of the duet. Heonly avoided its abuse. There are many duets inhis operas ; but they are introduced sparingly, andalways with strict attention to dramatic propriety ;being constructed in the colloquial form, and havingthose passages, in which the voices join, made verybrief. As to trios, quartets, and concerted pieces,they were utterly unknown in the musical tragedyof his day. Choruses are used by him only inscenes where a multitude of people can be introducedwith propriety ; and their rarity adds to thegreatness of their effect.Perhaps the most deeply interesting of all thesedramas is Olympiad. It is not only beautiful asawhole, but contains some of the purest gems ofMetastasio's poetry. The character of Megacles isa divine picture of heroic friendship. Loving andbeloved, he determines to sacrifice his mistress tohis friend ; and yet feels less for his own wretchednessthan for his Aristea^s sorrow when she shallhear that he is gone. What sadness in his parting-wordsto the friend for whom he abandons all thatis dear to him ! —Se circa, se dice,Amico dow' e ?IVJETASTASIO. 341Amico inflict,Responds, mori.Ah no ! SI grand duomoNon carle per me :Responds, ma solo,Piangendo parti.Che abisso di pen !Lascars il suo bene,Lasciarlo per sempre,Lasciarlo cos."A perfect example of a duet is to be found in thisopera. Megacles, who has undertaken to enter thelists for his friend, in the games in which the fairAristea is to be the reward of the victor, discoversthat this Aristea is the mistress whom he himselfadores. She, believing that it is for love of herthat he has enrolled himself among the competitors,expresses the tender feelings inspired by his devotion,to which he responds with equal tenderness ;but his countenance, manner, and incoherent expressions,betray the grief and disturbance of hismind. Aristea, alarmed at his appearance, expressesher uneasiness, and tenderly inquires thecause of his agitation : and Megacles, unable tobear his own distracted thoughts and the sight ofhis mistress's distress, leaves her, overcome withanxious forebodings. The conclusion of this sceneis contained in the following duet, which showshow this form^of musical dialogue can be renderednatural and dramatic, as well as beautiful.Megacle. Ne" giorni tui feliceRicordati di me.342 METASTASIOAristea. Perche cos mi diei,Anima mia, perche ?Megacle. Tacit, bel idol rain.Aristea. Parla, mio dolce amor.Megacle. C Ah ! che parlando 1 qj^ j^j^ ,Aristea. f Ah ! che tacendo 5Tu mi traffic il cor !Aristea (apart). Reggio languid chi adornNe intend il suo languid !Megacle (apart). Di gloria mi moro,E non lo posse dir !Megacle.^ Chi mai provo di questoAristea.) AfFanno piu finestPiu barbara dolor ?"Metastasio's poetry exhibits innumerable tracesof his familiarity with the beauties of ancient literature.The following air, in this opera, sung byMegacles, is an instance :Lo seguitai feliceQuand' era il ciel serene,Alle tempest in sentVoglio seguirlo anchor.Come del' oro il fuscoScore le masse impure,Soprano le ventureDe' falsi amici il cor."We have here the sentiment in the folio wine;verses of Ovid, expressed with more elegance thanin the original.Dum juvat, et vult ride fortuna sereneIndelicate cuncta sequuntur opes ;Scilicet, ut fulvum spectator in igneous aurum,Tempore sic duro est inspicienda tides"*lyrist, lib. i. leg. 3.METASTASIO. 343The morality of this great poet is always loftyand beautiful. He does not love the darkest shadesof human character. Even his vicious personagesare rescued from unmitigated hatred or scorn bytraits of feeling, or nobleness of mind, contendingwith the influence of evil passions. But no onehas painted virtue in more glowing and captivatingcolours. What can be more sublime than theheroism of his Regulus and Cato ? What morenoble than the magnanimity of Titus, or morepathetic than the tender and devoted friendship ofMeo:acles ? His dramas are full of these exaltedviews of man's nature. When Themistocles, banishedby his ungrateful countrymen, takes refugeat the court of the Persian king, Xerxes offers himthe means of revenge by placing him at the headof the immense army assembled for the invasion ofGreece. The Athenian refuses to be the foe of hiscountry. " E che tant' ami in lei ?" — " What canyou love in your country ?" — is the question of theangry monarch ; — and how exquisite is theanswer ! —Tutti, O Signer : le ceneri degli vilesacre legge, i tutelar! Numb ;La patella, i costume ;II sudor che mi costa ;Lo splendor che ne trash ;L'aria, i bronchi, i terre, le mura, i sasineof Metastasio's beauties lies in the reflectionsand in the felicity with which they generally344 METASTASIO.flow from the circumstances of the scene. Timantes,about to die, naturally meditates on the vanity ofhuman life. How full of matter are his thoughts,and yet how simple his expressions ! — " Why," heasks, " why wish for life?" —Perche briar la vita ? e qua! sincereIn lei si trova ? Agni fortuna e pena ;E misery agni eta; Premium fancifullyD'un guard al minacciar : Siam gioci, adult,Di fortuna e clamor. Or ne trafiggeLa brama d'ottenei'e : or ne tormentsDi verdure il timor. Eternal guerraAnno i rei con se stessi : i giusti I'hanno ', -Coir india e la rode : ombre, delhi,Sogni, follies son nostra cure, e quandoII vergognoso errorA scoprir s'incomincia, allow si more."With all their beauties, however, the dramas ofMetastasio are chargeable with many faults. Hehas introduced Z,ove to an immoderate and absurdextent. In every one of his pieces love is a principalfeature — even in those, such as Catone, Te-mistake,and Attilio Regolo, where it seems mostout of place. Sometimes there are three or fourlove affairs in one piece ; and in Semiramide allthe characters are in love. Love is frequently introducedby him, not as the primary passion onwhich the subject of the piece hangs, but in a sort ofsubordinate and episodical way, as if in mere compliancewith theatrical usage : and in these cases itis necessarily cold, languid, and insipid. WhatMETASTASIO. 345interest can anybody take in the affected sighs andlang-punishments of Amenossi, Barren, Cleofile,Megabise, Selene, Tamiri, and others, who are inlove purely for form's sake ; "in the same way,"says Arteaga,* " as Don Quixote was in love withDulcinea del Toboso, whom he had never seen andknew nothing of, solely that he might conform tothe laws of chivalry, which required that everyknight should have a lady of his love." Who caresfor the languid passion of Barce, in conjunctionwith the sublime self-devotion of Regulus — theimbecile gallantry of Xerxes, beside the incomparablenobleness of Themistocles — or the frigid jealousyof Graces, alongside of the " indomitablewill" of Cato ? Such personages as these, withtheir puling and mincing sentimentalities, provokeonly impatience or ridicule.This constant introduction of love gives an effeminateand affected air even to characters in themselvesnoble and striking. It is preposterous tomake Amilcar, the Carthaginian envoy to Rome, inthe midst of the momentous affairs of his mission,employ himself in " sighing like furnace" for thecharms of a slave, under the very eyes of the sternand austere Romans ; to make Fulvous, sent todecide the dispute between Caesar and Cato, whichinvolved the destinies of the world, fall in love withPompey's widow, and assail her with a profusion ofgallantries and soft speeches ; and to make CaesarRevolution del Teatro Italian.346 METASTASIO,himself address a fair one in the language of anArcadian shepherd. And, to make the matter stillworse, all the personages, however different incountry, age, station, or character, make use intheir love-dialogues of one unvarying phraseology,filled with a sickly repetition of amorous commonplaceand hackneyed terms of endearment. EvenPolyphemus himself exhales his sighs for the fairGalatea in the following arietta ;Mio cor, tu prendi a salernoE folgori, e rochelle,E poi due lucy belleTi anno palpitate.Qual nuovo nioto infernoPrendi da que sembianti ?Quai non usati infantT' insegnano tremor?"Had Metastasio, like the English poet;, formed tohimself the image of the giant Cyclops roaring out,before he began his love-ditty,Bring me a hundred reeds, of proper growth,To make a pipe for my capacious mouth,"he would not have put into that " capacious mouth"a delicate sentimental effusion, in the style ofTibullus or Petrarch.This conventional love, which enters so largelyinto Metastasio's operas, has the necessary effect ofmaking his language forced and artificial — full ofthe cold suggestions of the fancy instead of thewarm impulses of the heart. Hence we find his31ETASTAS10 347heroes and heroines, when supposed to be underthe influence of the most agitating feelings, amusingthemselves with making strings of ingenious similescomparing themselves to ships beat bey the waves,streams dashed against the rocks, flowers, or turtle-doves; and tracing the points of resemblancethrough a dozen labouring lines. What can bemore intolerable than the following frozen conceit,uttered, too, by a passionate lover? When Fulvous,in Catone, makes an untimely declaration of hislove to Emilia, she answers him,Qual mai puo dartSperanza una inflictCinna di bruno amant.Coir odin in petty, e sue ciglie il piano ?"And he replies,Piangendo anconaRinascer soleLa bella auroraNunzia del sole ;E pur conduceSerene il dl.'^Could it be believed that the poet should havemade the lover reply to so simple and affectingan appeal by such a piece of double-refined nonsense?This appears to be Metastasio's greatest fault,and that for which he is most liable to censure ; forit was voluntary and might have been avoided.His other defects, the want of individuality and348 METASTASIO.historic truth in his characters, the frequent improbabilityof his incidents, and the deficiency ofvariety in his denouement, arose from the natureof the musical drama, and the restraints underwhich he laboured ; and, after all, he is in need ofless indulgence for them than what might reasonablybe allowed him.In his own department of the drama, Metastasiostands alone and unrivalled. He is the Shakspeareof the Italian opera, and has surpassed allwho have followed him, as well as all who havegone before him. " Sans model, dans sa carriers,"says Sismondi, " il s'est trouve aussi sans imitates,Tous les jours de nouveaux operas seriessont fourths aux compositors et presents aupublic, et pas un seul ne pent soutenir la lecture ;pas un seul auteur ne s'est fait seulement la reputationesprit et de gout dans un genre qui a donne aMetastase une place parmi les plus grands poetes."CHAPTER XV.Goldoni.Metastasio is the only poet who has achievedgreatness by devoting himself exclusively or chieflyto the musical drama. Several eminent Italianwriters, however, may be mentioned as having occasionallyturned their attention to this branch ofliterature, in the earlier part of the last century.Marcello, the celebrated composer of the Psalms,wrote two operas, Lafede Riconosciuta and Gratain Sparta, about the year 1710. Count Scipio Maffei,the author of the tragedy of Merope, wrote an elegantpastoral opera, La Nina fide. Signora Gozzi,a Venetian lady of distinguished literary attainments,who published a collection of the poetry ofthe most celebrated women in Italy, is the author oftwo operas, Aside Rh di Sparta and L'Elenia,performed at Venice in 1725 and 1730. CountDurazzo wrote L'lnnocenza giust'ijicata for the debutof the famous singer Gabrielle. It was performeda hundred times successively. Of Calsabigi, the350 GOLDONI.fellow-labourer of Gluck, we shall have occasion tospeak in conjunction with that composer. Goldonirequires especial notice as an opera writer, thoughhis fame does not rest upon what he has done in thisdepartment of the drama.Goldoni was born at Venice in 1707. He receiveda liberal education, having been intended forthe profession of the law ; but his propensity forthe theatre, which he showed at a very early age,withdrew him from every other pursuit. Before hewas eight sears old he wrote a sketch of a comedy,so ingeniously planned and so full of humour, thathis friends could hardly believe it was the productionof a child. Having finished his studies for thebar he began to practise in the courts of Venice,and was afterwards appointed secretary to the Venetianresident at Milan. Here he became acquaintedwith the manager of the theatre, for whom he"wrote several dramatic pieces. By degrees heabandoned his other occupations, and became forlife a dramatic author by profession.His first attempt was a musical tragedy, calledAmalasonte, which he carried with him to Milan,entertaining the highest hopes of its success. Onhis way to Milan he stopped at Vicenza, where heshowed his piece to Count Trissino, (a relative of thecelebrated author of Sophonisba,) whom he hadformerly known at Venice. The count *' damnedit with faint praise," and advised the author to adhereto comedy. He arrived at Milan at the timeGOLDONI. 351of the carnival, when the opera-house was open.Being previously acquainted with some of the performers,particularly the celebrated singer CafFa-riello, (or CafFarelli,) he was invited to a party, atwhich he read his piece. The event is amusinglyrelated in his memoirs.The company continued to increase ; CaffarieHomade his appearance, saw and recognised me, salutedme with the air of an Alexander, and tookhis seat by the lady of the house. A few minutesafterwards, Colonel Prata, one of the directors ofthe theatre, a man very conversant with the affairsof the drama, was announced. Madame Grossatesta(the mistress of the house) introduced me to thecount, and spoke to him of my opera. He offeredto mention me to the meeting of directors, butit would give him infinite pleasure, he said, to knowsomething of my work. I wanted nothing so muchas an opportunity of reading it. A small table andcandle were brought ; we sat round the table, andI began to read. I announced the title of Amala-sont. Caffariello sang the word, which he thoughtlong and ridiculous. Every body laughed but myself:the lady scolded, and the nightingale ceased.I read over the names of the characters, nine innumber ; here a small shrill voice, which proceededfrom an old castrato who sang in the choruses andmewed like a cat, called out, ' Too many, too manj^ ;there are at least two characters too many.' I feltvery uncomfortable, and wished to give up my35*2 Gold-VI.reading*. M. Prata desired this insolent fellow whohad not the merit of Caffariello to excuse him, tohold his tongue ; and turning to me observed, ' Itis true, Sir, there are usually not more than six orseven characters in a drama ; but when a work isdeserving of it we have no objection to be at theexpense of a couple of actors more. Have thegoodness to go on.' I resumed my reading. ' Actfirst, scene first— Clodesile and Arragon.' Caffa-riello asked me the name of the first soprano in myopera. ' Sir,' said I, ' it is Clodesile.' ' What,you open the piece with the principal actor, andmake him appear while the audience are comingin, seating themselves, and making a noise !Really, sir, I am not your man.' M. Prata hereinterposed ; ' Let us see,' he said, ' whether thefirst scene is interesting.' I read it ; and while Iwas ffoins: on, a little insignificant wretch drew apaper from his pocket and went to the harpsichordto try over an air in some part he had to perform.The mistress of the house was obliged to make apologiesto me without intermission. At last M. Pratatook me by the hand, and led me into an adjoiningcloset. Having begged me to be seated, he sat downby me, told me not to mind the rudeness of a set ofthoughtless fools, and requested me to read mydrama to him alone, that he might be able to formajudgment respecting it, and give me a sincereopinion. I thanked him for his politeness, andread the piece from beginning to end. He listenedGOLDONI. 353with patience and attention ; and, when I had done,gave me his opinion nearly in the following words :'It appears to me that you have tolerably wellstudied the poetics of Aristotle and Horace, andthat you have written your piece according to theprinciples of tragedy. You do not seem to beaware, however, that a musical drama is an imperfectwork, subject to rules and usages, destituteof common sense, I allow, but still necessary to befollowed. Were you in France, you might takemore pains to please the public, but here you mustbegin by pleasing the actors and actresses ; youmust satisfy the musical composer ; you must consultthe scene-painter. Every department has itsrules, and it would be treason against the dramato fail in their observance. Listen, then,' he continued,' and 1 shall point out to you a few of thoserules which are immutable, and with which youseem to be unacquainted.' The three principal personages of the dramaought to sing five airs each ; two in the first act,two in the second, and one in the third. Thesecond actress and the second soprano can only havethree ; and the inferior characters must be satisfiedwith a single air each, or two at the most. Theauthor of the words must furnish the musician withthe different shades which form the char oscuro ofmusic, and take care that two pathetic airs do notsucceed each other. He must observe the same precautionin distributing the bravura airs, the airs ofVOL. I. A A354 Golden.action, the inferior airs, and the minuets and rondeau.He must above all things avoid giving impassionedairs, bravura airs, or rondeau, to inferioractors. Those poor devils must be satisfied withwhat they get, and every opportunity of distinguishingthemselves is denied them.'M. Prata would have gone on, but I interruptedhim. ' You have told me enough, Sir,'I said ; ' do not take the trouble to enlarge furtheron the subject.' I thanked him again for his kindness,and took my leave."Goldoni went home and threw his manuscriptinto the fire ; and in doing so doubtless actedwisely.His first production that was brought upon thestage was Belisarius, a tragi-comedy, which wasperformed at Venice in November 1734, with greatsuccess ; and his reputation was still further increasedby the appearance of two comic intermezzi,or interludes, called La Papilla and La Barba.The manager of the theatre determined, at thistime, to bring out Apostolo Zeno's opera of Griselda,the music of which was to be composed by theAbbe Vivaldi, called // prate ross, from his redhair, and better known in Italy by that sobriquetthan by his real name.This ecclesiastic," says Goldoni in his memoirs,who was an excellent performer on the violin andan indifferent composer, had trained and instructedin singing Mademoiselle Giraud, a young singer,GOLDONI. 355the daughter of a French hairdresser, but born atVenice. She was not pretty, but graceful. Hershape was elegant, her eyes and hair beautiful, andher mouth charming : she had little voice, but agreat deal of action. She was to representGriselda.*' M. Grimani, the proprietor of the theatre,sent me to the musicians to make the necessarychanges in the opera, both for the sake of shorteningit; and changing the position and character of theairs to suit the actors and the composer. I waited,therefore, on the Abbe Vivaldi, and announced myselfas having come from Signor Grimani. I foundhim surrounded with music, and with his breviaryin his hand. He rose, made the sign of the cross,put aside his breviary, and then, after the usualcompliments, asked the purpose of my visit.Signor Grimani,' I said, ' has employed me tomake such changes as you may deem necessary inthe opera about to be performed ; I therefore wishto be informed, Sir, what are your wishes ?'— ' Soso; you are employed to make the changes in theopera of Griselda; M. Galli, then, is not now attachedto M. Grimani's theatre?' — ' M. Galli, whois very old, will always enjoy the profits of the dedicationsand the sale of the books, which I do notcare for. I shall have pleasure in executing a taskwhich will be amusing to me, and I shall be happyto begin under the orders of M. Vivaldi.' (Theabbe resumed his breviary, crossed himself again,A A 2356 GOLDONI.and made me no answer.) * Sir,' I said, * I shouldbe sorry to withdraw you from your religious contemplations; I will wait upon you another time.' —I know very well, my dear sir,' said the abbe,that you have talents for poetry. I have seen yourBelisarius with a great deal of pleasure. But thisis a very different affair. One may make a tragedy,or even an epic poem if you will, and yet not beable to write a single musical stanza.' — ' Be so goodas to allow me to look at your drama.' — ' O yes,with all my heart— where is Griselda gone to ? Itwas here — Deus in adjutorium mein intended — Domine— Domine — Domine — it was here this veryinstant — Domine ad adjuvandum — ah, here it is.See, sir, this scene between Gualtiero and Griseldais very interesting. The author has tacked a patheticair to it, but Mile. Giraud is not fond oflanguishing songs ; she wants something expressiveand full of agitation ; — an expression of the passionsby various means; by words interrupted, for example,by sighs, with action and motion — I don'tknow whether you understand me.' — ' O yes, sir,I understand you very well : besides, I have hadthe honour of hearing Mile. Giraud sing, and Iknow that her voice is not very powerful.' — ' What,sir, do you mean to insult my pupil ? She is fit foranything — she can sing anything.' — ' Well, sir,I have no doubt you are right ; pray give me thebook, and allow me to proceed.' — ' No, sir, I cannotpart with it; I am in want of it, and am pressedGOLDONI. 357I'ur time.' — ' Very well, sir, if you are pressed, lendit me for a moment, and I will instantly satisfy you V' Instantly?' — ' Yes, sir, instantly.'The abbe, with a sneer at my presumption,gave me the book, with paper and ink, resumed hisbreviary, and walked about the room reciting hishymns and psalms. I read over the scene, withwhich I was already acquainted ; I considered whatwas requisite for the musician, and in less than aquarter of an hour I wrote down an air of eightlines, divided into two parts. I then called myecclesiastic, and showed him my work. Vivaldiread it, his countenance brightened up ; he readagain, threw down his prayer-book and calledMile. Giraud. When she came in, he exclaimed,Ah, here is a wonderful man, here is an excellentpoet ; read this air : — this gentleman has just composedit without stirring from the spot, in less thanaquarter of an hour.' Then turning to me, hebegged my pardon and embraced me, protesting hewould never have any other poet. He gave me thedrama, W'itli directions to make some other changes,with all which he was perfectly satisfied ; and theopera succeeded admirably."His celebrated comic opera La Buona Figliuolawas written at Parma in 1755. It was taken fromhis own comedy of Pamela, which, again, wasfounded upon Richardson's novel. The music, atthis time, was composed by Dunii ; but, says theauthor, " La Buona Fujliiwla was more fortunate358 GOLDONI.in the hands of Piccini, who, being employed foracomic opera at Rome, several years afterwards,preferred this old drama to all the new ones offeredto him."In 1762 Goldoni went to Paris, in which city hepassed the remainder of his life. He was engagedfor two years to write dramatic pieces for the Italiantheatre. At the end of that period he was aboutto return to Italy, when he was urged to becomeItalian master to the princesses of France, the auntsof Louis XV. Soon afterwards he suddenly losthis sight, but recovered the use of one of his eyes.At the end of three years, he received, by way ofpayment for his instructions, the sum of a hundredlouis in a gold box, and a pension of four thousandlivres. This, with the profits derived from hisworks, was sufficient for the wants of himself and hiswife, in their quiet and retired way of life describedin his Memoirs.In 1783 he was invited to London by the managersof the Italian opera. He declined leavingParis, but accepted an engagement on condition ofbeing allowed to remain there. He was employedto write a comic opera, and to arrange the olddramas which were to be performed during theseason. This correspondence was continued forseveral years. When it terminated he received amark of the satisfaction of the managers, who paidhim for an opera which it was impossible for themto use. " The management," he gallantly says inGOLDONI. 350Isis Memoirs, '* was then iu the hands of women,and women are amiable in every country." One ofthe pieces written for London was a comic opera,caLl\edVictori7ia,ihe music of which was composed byPiccini ; " who," says Goldoni, " wrote to me fromNaples that he had never read a comic drama fromwhich he derived so much pleasure. Its success,however' he adds, " did not correspond with theexpectation of the managers or my own."After the death of Louis XV. he was appointedItalian teacher to the Princess Clothe, afterwardsPrincess of Piedmont ; and, after her marriage,he attended the unhappy Princess Elizabeth, thesister of Louis XVI., in the same capacity. He wasdeprived of his pension at the breaking out of therevolution, and reduced to a state of poverty. WhenBristol and the Girondist party were in power, itwas proposed to make some provision for the agedpoet ; but in so distracted a season it is not surprisingthat nothing was done in his behalf. Hedied in the beginning of 1793, in the eighty-sixthyear of his age. In 1787 he published his memoires,written by himself; a lively and entertainingwork.Goldoni's works, which are very voluminous,consist chiefly of comedies. He began with tragedyand serious opera, but afterwards attached himselfto comedy, as being more suited to his genius. Hisserious operas are only three in number, Orontes,Gustavus Adolphus, and Stat'ira ; all written for360 GOLDONI.the theatre of Venice, and composed by Galuppi.His comic operas amount to nearly fifty. They arein general slight productions, full of farce andbuffoonery, and that kind of broad humour whichis peculiar to the Italians ; but admirably adaptedto the light, airy, and grotesque music of the Italianopera hiiffa.CHAPTER XVI.State of the Italian opera in the earlier part of the 18th centuryGreat composers — Leo — Vinci — Sarro — Corpora — Rinaldodi Capua — Pergolesi — Haste — Domenico Scarlatti — Feo —Galuppi — Terradellas — Perez — Logroscino.At the same time that the poetry of the Italianopera was refined and exalted by the writings ofApostolo Zeno and Metastasio, its music was undergoinga similar process by the labours of AlessandroScarlatti, Caldara, and the other composers whohave been already mentioned as having flourishedat the beginning of the eighteenth century. Thesecomposers set the example of freeing dramaticmusic from the complication of fugues, canons, andharmonical contrivances, with which every descriptionof music had previously been encumbered-theydiscovered that the essence of dramatic musicconsisted in melody and expression. They establishedthe distinctions between recitative and air ;gave to each of these species of musical languageits peculiar features, and assigned to it its properfunctions.Their successors proceeded in the same course.362 SINGERS.Leonardo Leo added grace and melody to the airs,and richness and brilliancy to their accompaniments.Vinci increased the energy of dramatic languageby means of the recitativo obbligato, or accompaniedrecitative ; and further improvements were made inthis department by Corpora and Rinaldo di Capua ;the one having given greater variety to thephrases and greater facility to the cantilena, whilethe other heightened its effect by the instrumentalaccompaniments. Pergolesi carried melody to asgreat a degree of perfection as it perhaps has yetreached. From his grand and simple style, strongand natural expression, unity of design, beauty,and grace, this composer has very happily beencalled the Raphael of music. About this time ahost of great musicians flourished almost contemporaneously,among whom may be enumerated DomenicoScarlatti, Haste, Perez, Terradellas, ,Sarro, and Mankind ; and the period to whichthey belong has been called by Arteaga, and othercritics, the golden age of the Italian musicaldrama.Nothing contributed more to the elevation ofmusic at that period than the number of excellentsingers. In the general improvement of taste, theart of singing had arrived at a high degree ofpurity. The singers had acquired a simple andnatural style, exquisite skill in the management ofthe voice, and perfect intonation. Expression wasthe great object of their study ; and they had notSCHOOLS. 363yet learned to consider the execution of bravurapassages as the perfection of the vocal art. Embellishmentswere valued only as being the meansof expression : and the singer studied to accommodatethe musical accents to the prosody of thelanguage in such a manner, that the poetry wasrecited with proper emphasis and distinct pronunciation.Dramatic action, too, was carefully studied ;and many performers of that day appear to havedeserved eulogies as glowing as that bestowed by the>Spec^«^orupon Nicolini.There were, at that period, excellent vocal schoolsin several of the principal cities of Italy. At Rome,from that city being the chief seat of the performanceof sacred music, the utmost purity of execution,and nicety in the management of the voice, wereparticularly studied. The celebrated masters, Fedand Amatory, were accustomed to carry their pupilsto a place without the walls of Rome, where therewas a remarkable echo, which repeated the samesound a number of times : and there, in imitationof Demosthenes, they were exercised in singing tothe echo, which, by its repetition of their tones,admonished them of their defects. The schools ofBologna, Naples, Venice, Milan, and Florence,were also celebrated, and produced many greatdisciples.The principal female singers of that period wereSignora Tesi, who was esteemed the first actress ofthe age, Marianne Bulgarini, the friend of MetalsLEO.tasso, Faustina, Cuzzoni, Mingotti, and Gabrielle.Among the men were Farinelli, (probably thegreatest singer that has ever existed,) CafFarelli,Gizziello, Guarducci, Mankind, Carestini, andSenesino.Besides the above, many other eminent corn-powersand performers flourished during this "goldenage" of the Italian opera ; but the names whichhave been enumerated appear to be the most worthyof commemoration.Leonardo Leo was born at Naples in 1694, andbecame principal organist in the chapel royal ofthat city. According to Burney, his first opera,Sofonisba, was performed at Naples in 1718, andhis last, Si/ace, at Bologna in 1737. He was possessedof great versatility of talent ; being not onlya great composer for the church, but equally successfulin the serious and the comic opera. His firstopera in the comic style is called Cio; its subjectbeing the absurdity of a man who has the habit ofadding " Cioe,"or, " That is to say," to everythinghe says, and puzzles everybody about him by hisexplanations. It is described as being very livelyand humorous ; and it was very popular, not onlyat Naples, where it was first represented, but alloverItaly.Leo was the founder of a school of singing atNaples, which produced many great performers.As a composer, his labours conduced greatly to theprogress of the art. He is remarkable for the purityvinci. 365of his harmony and the elegant simplicity of hismelody, which he contributed to clear from thestiff and formal divisions with which it had beenpreviously encumbered. He composed the musicto several of Metastasio's operas ; particularly theOlimpiade 2LndArtaserse. His biographers enumerateamong his works sixteen serious operas,besides several comic operas and intermezzi. Hedied at Naples in 1745, at the age of fifty-one. Hisdeath was occasioned by an apparently trifling circumstance.Having a small tumour, or wen, uponhis cheek, he was advised to have it taken off; but,owing to the unskilfulness of the operator, or a badhabit of body, a mortification ensued, which causedhis death.Leonardo Vinci was born at Naples in 1690.When a boy, he is said to have run away from theConservatories of Gli Poveri in Giesu Crista, wherehe was a scholar, in consequence of a quarrel withCorpora, with whom his rivalry appears to havecontinued in after life. When yet very young, hewas engaged, on the strength of his early reputation,to compose an opera for Rome, and succeeded,by his Semiramide, in satisfying thefastidious audience of that city. In 1725 heproduced his Siface at Venice, and had the satisfactionof seeing that opera preferred to theSire of his rival Corpora. In 1726 he composedthe music of Metastasio's Didone Ahhandonata forRome, which established his reputation. The Sarto.lie were struck, not only with the beauty of theairs, but with the extraordinary power and dramaticeffect of the accompanied recitatives. " Virgilhimself," says Count Algarotti, " would have beenpleased to hear a composition so animated and soterrible, in which the heart and soul were at onceassailed by all the powers of music." This operais considered as the masterpiece of the composer.His music to the Artaserse of Metastasio, also composedat Rome, was performed in England ; wherethe air, " Vo volcano un mar cruel," originallycomposed for Carestini, was long popular.Vinci's death was tragical. While he was in theheight of his success at Rome, he became attachedto a lady of distinguished rank and great beauty,who, it is said, returned his passion. Having beenfoolish and unmanly enough to boast of her favours,she took her revenge, in the true Italian spirit, bypresenting him with a poisoned cup of chocolate.He was thus cut off in the year 1732, in his forty-secondyear.DomenicoSarro was another of the early reformersof dramatic music, and much esteemed both forhis ecclesiastical and secular productions. He composedthe original music of Metastasio^s DidoneAhhandonata, the opera which, when performed atNaples in 1724, laid the foundation of the poet'sfame. No particulars of the life of this composerseem to be recorded.Nicol Corpora was born at Naples in 1689.PORPORA. 3G7At an early age he was placed under the care ofAlessandro Scarlatti, and is considered the mostcelebrated scholar of that great master. He devotedhimself chiefly to dramatic music, and beganhis career at Venice, where, however, his merit wasnot at first appreciated. Before he was able to distinguishhimself, he lived for a considerable timein that city, poor and unemployed. The EmperorCharles VI., who was a musical connoisseur, wasnot pleased with his music, which, he said, was toofull of shakes and other vocal ornaments. Throughthe friendship of Haste, the imperial dilettante, notwithstandinghis prepossession, was prevailed uponto hear an oratorio of Corpora's composition. Opera,having received a hint from his friend, did notintroduce a single shake in the course of theoratorio. The emperor was quite surprised, andkept continually repeating, " Why, this is quite adifferent thing — there is not a single shake !" Atlast, however, the concluding fugue began, and theemperor observed that its theme set out with fourtrilled notes. These, of course, were taken up insuccession, in the answers, by the different parts,and worked upon according to the rules of thatspecies of composition . ' ' When the emperor, ' ' saysthe author of the Life of Haydn, who tells thestory with his usual liveliness, " who was privilegednever to laugh, heard, in the full height ofthe fugue, this deluge of shakes which seemed likethe music of a set of crazy paralytic, he could no368 PORPORA.longer preserve his gravity, but laughed outright,perhaps for the first time in his life. In France,the laud of jokes, this pleasantry might have givenoffence, but at Vienna it was the beginning of Corpora'sfortune."His first opera, Arianaa e Teseo, performed atVienna, in 1717, laid the foundation of his fame,and he produced several other works in that citywith great success. At Venice he was less fortunateat first ; the preference, as has been alreadymentioned, having been given to Vinci ; but theVenetians soon learned to appreciate his talents ;and his Arianaa obtained the applause which itmerited. He afterwards went to Dresden, wherehe was engaged as maestro di capella and singingmaster to the Princess ^laria Autonietta. He hadthere to contend with another formidable rival,in theperson of Haste, whom if he did not conquer, heMas at least not conquered by him ; for his operas,though performed in competition with those ofHaste, were received with great applause by thecourt and the public. It was here that he introducedto the public his pupil, the young and beautiful]Mingotti, whom he opposed with success to thehitherto unrivalled wife of Haste, the celebratedFaustina.In 1733, Corpora came to England, in consequenceof an invitation from the nobility andgentry who had set on foot an opera in opposition toHandel. musical faction at that time ran high inpoupoiiA. 369Englaiul. The aristocratic subscribers to the operahad taken different sides in the quarrels which hadarisen between Handel and his principal singers,Senesino and Cuzzoni ; and where, moreover,offended at the advanced price for admission to theoperas on oratorio nights. They therefore openeda subscription for a rival opera, engaging Corporaas composer and conductor, and a company ofsingers, containing Handel's mutinous troops, andstrengthened by the addition of Farinelli. ButCorpora, successful as he had been in his previouscampaigns, was unable to withstand the "giantHandel." His Arianaa e Teseo, indeed, was broughtout, and sustained twenty representations duringthe season ; and another opera by him, called Ferdinando,was performed three or four times. He conductedthis establishment for three seasons; but mostof the pieces performed were by other composers.His most successful production appears to have beenPolifemo, which (as is said in the title-page) wascomposed by Corpora, "per la Nobility Britannica,"and performed during a considerable part ofthe season of 1735. "In examining," says Burney," the favourite songs of this opera that wereprinted by Walsh, among which are five of Fari-nelli's, with one of Senesino's, and one of Montagne's,there appears to be considerable merit in themelody. Indeed, so much of the new taste andnew passages of this period seem to have beenderived from Corpora's songs, that the difference ofVOL. I. B B370 PORPORA.style and fancy in the airs of Farinelli, from thosethat were sung by Nicolini two or three and twentyyears before, is wonderful. Yet the songs ofNicolini, being the best of the time, were equallyadmired by the public, who reason from what theyhear, and improve in criticism by excellence in compositionand performance, so much as never to tolerateinferiority while memory enables them to formacomparison. The King, Queen, Prince of Wales,and Princesses, (Burney adds,) honoured the firstrepresentation of Polifemo with their presence, andthere was the fullest house of the season."Corpora, who exhibited no lack of courage inthis warfare, ventured also to dispute the palm withHandel in the composition of an oratorio. But hisDavid, brought out at the King's Theatre in 1735,was performed only three times, while Handel continuedthe performance of different oratorios, includingDeborah, Esther, and Thalia, without operas,for nearly two months. Notwithstanding his undoubtedmerit, and the support of a powerfulparty, Corpora at length found himself unable tocarry on the struggle, and left England in 1737.His operas continued to be occasionally performedin London. In 1743, in particular, ApostoloZeno's Themistocles, with Corpora's music, was performedat the opera-house, and had a run of eight 'nights. " The air in this opera," says Burney, beginning,Di che a sua voglia eleggere, is in a grand andoriginal style; the shakes, however, on the first notePORPORA. 371of a phrase or passage, seem strange from so greata singing-master. Lire tue has some new effectsand embellishments, and was pillaged by Wiseman*in his minuet. I never saw music in whichshakes were so lavished : Corpora seems to havecomposed the air, Contrast assai, in a shiveringfit." This remark, by the way, reminds us of theanecdote of the composer and the Emperor CharlesVI., the truth of which it confirms. Corporaseems to have retained his propensity towardsshakes.After Corpora's departure from England, he wasfor some time master of the Conservatories of theInciirabili at Venice. In 1759, we find him residingat Vienna, in a state of indigence. At this time,Haydn, then an obscure young man, derived thebenefit of his musical instructions. " Haydn," saysthe author of that composer's life, " did not learnrecitative of Corpora : the inferiority of his recitativesto those of the inventors of this kind of musicis a sufficient proof of this : but he learned fromhim the true Italian style of singing, and the artof accompanying on the pianoforte, which is not soeasy a thing as is commonly supposed. He succeededin obtaining these lessons in the followingA celebrated composer for and performer on the Germanflute, whose music was long very popular among the amateurs ofthat instrument.\ Not the inventor, but certainly one of the greatest improversof recitative.B B 2372 PORPORA.way. A noble Venetian, named Corner, at thattime resided at Vienna, as ambassador from theRepublic. He had a mistress passionately fond ofmusic, who had harboured old Corpora in the hotelof the embassy. Haydn found means to get introducedinto the family on account of his musicalattainments ; and his excellency carried him, alongwith his mistress and Corpora, to the baths ofManensdorfF, which were at that time a place offashionable resort. The young man, who caredfor nobody but the old Neapolitan, employed allsorts of devices to get into his good graces, andto obtain his harmonic favours. Every day he roseearly, brushed the old man's coat, cleaned his shoes,and combed out his old-fashioned periwig, thoughhe was as sour as can well be imagined. Haydnobtained at first nothing but the courteous salutationof ' fool,' or ' blockhead,' when he enteredhis room in a morning. But the bear, finding thathe was served gratuitously, and observing at thesame time the rare qualities of his self-devotedservant, allowed himself to soften now and then,and gave him good advice. Haydn was favouredwith it more especially, whenever he had to accompanythe fair Wilhelmina in singing Corpora's airs,which were filled with basses by no means easy tounderstand. Joseph thus learned in this house tosing in the best Italian taste."Corpora's situation, at this time, is affectinglydescribed by Metastasio, in a letter written by him,Ricardo Dl CAPUA. 373in March 1759, to his friend Farinelli, then atMadrid, and in high favour at the Spanish court.I am unable," says the benevolent poet, " toresist the compassion which our poor friend Corporaexcited in me yesterday, when he entreated meto second the letter, which I now enclose, with onefrom myself. It is sufficient to draw tears fromevery one possessed of humanity, to see a man ofsuch merit in his profession reduced to absolutewant of bread by the well-known misfortunes ofSaxony, whence he derived a certain pension sufficientat least for his subsistence. He understandsthat your compassionate sovereigns, in their munificenceand charity, are in the custom of grantingsmall pensions, under the title of Eleemosynary, topersons in distress ; and he entreats me to recommendhim to your intercession, that he mightobtain one, which would just enable him to subsist ;and this is not saying much." The death of FerdinandVI., which took place soon after the date ofthis letter, and which deprived Farinelli of hisinfluence at Madrid, prevented him from doinganything in behalf of the veteran composer.Corpora spent his latter years at Naples, theplace of his nativity, where he appears to havelived in great poverty. He died in 1767, at theage of eighty-two.RiNALDO Di Capua was a Neapolitan, born aboutthe beginning of the last century. He was thenatural son of a nobleman of high rank, and at first374 Ricardo DI CAPUA.studied music as an accomplishment ; but being leftby his father with only a small fortune, which hesoon dissipated, he was forced to make it his profession.He composed his first opera for the theatreof Vienna at the age of seventeen, and his productionswere in great favour over Europe for manyyears. The period of his success was from 1737,when he composed // Caro Miconosciuto, to 1758,when he produced Adrianoo in Syria, said to havebeen his last opera. Burney refers to a scene inthe opera of Vologeso as a specimen of the perfectionto which dramatic music was brought in Italybefore the middle of the last century. He has beenerroneously said to have been the inventor of accompaniedrecitatives ; but he was among the firstwho introduced, into recitatives of a strongly impassionedcharacter, long ritornelU, or instrumentalsymphonies, in order to express or imitate what itwould be ridiculous to attempt by means of thevoice. And so important an innovation gives hima claim to a place of distinction in musical history.When Dr. Burney was at Rome in 1770, Ri-waldodi Capua was living there, indigent andneglected. In the course of a long life he hadexperienced various changes of fortune. When hefound old age approaching, he collected togetherhis principal works, thinking that they would be aresource in time of need. That time came ; variousmisfortunes befel him and his family; but when hewished to have recourse to the accumulated producePERGOLESI. 375of his pen, he found that a profligate son had soldhis precious manuscripts for waste paper. Theperiod of his death is not recorded.The name of Giovanni Battista Pergolesi isone of the most illustrious in the history of music.He was born at Caria, a little town in the neighbourhoodof Naples, in the year 1704. Havingdiscovered in his childhood a disposition for music,he was placed in the Conservatories dei poveri inGiesu Crista, a celebrated musical seminary atNaples, where he produced specimens of geniuswhich would have done honour to the first mastersof the time, at an age when others could scarcelyhave acquired the rudiments of the art. Whenonly fourteen, he discovered that, according to theprevailing system of education, melody and expressionwere sacrificed to laborious counterpoint,and the art of solving harmonical problems; and,after making himself master of the principles ofharmony and the rules of orchestral writing, heentreated his family to release him from the trammelsof a school from which he felt that he couldderive no further benefit. As soon as he quittedthe conservatory, he commenced a course of studymore suitable to the bent of his own genius. Hesought the instructions of Vinci and Haste, as beingthe purest and simplest melodists of the time, andsoon not only equalled, but surpassed them in theirown style. He attained their simplicity and clearsLA Serve Patron.iiess, while he excelled them in the grace, variety,and expression of his melody.For a time, however, his countrymen did notdiscover his merits ; and his first opera was broughtout at Naples with little success. He obtained thepatronage of the Prince of Stigliano, who was ableto appreciate his genius, and procured for him employmentin composing for the Teatro Niiovo. Theworks by which he first distinguished himself wereintermezzi, which were received by his countrymenwith great favour, but being written in the Neapolitandialect, their popularity was confined to thatcity. That this was the case is much to be regretted; for the only one of them that was writtenin generally intelligible Italian, La Serva Patron,speedily became popular throughout Europe. Itsintroduction into France was almost sufficient, ofitself, to effect a revolution in the national taste ;and, though long laid aside in the theatres, it is tothis day delightful to those who love the elegantgaiety and charming simplicity of the old Italianschool.This celebrated piece is called an " Intermenta due voce," and has only two characters, the thirdperson introduced being merely a mute. In thefirst scene, Uberto, an old bachelor, appears in hismorning deshabille, grumbling to himself at hisspoiled servant-maid, who has chosen to let himcall in vain for his chocolate. His soliloquy beginsLA Serve Patron. 377in the form of a little cavatiua, containing theSpanish proverb,Aspettare e non venire,Star in letto e non dormer,Ben service e non graniteSon tre cose per noire."He goes on, in recitative, calling on " Serpent,"and complaining of the damsel's arrogance and wilfulness.Her voice is heard behind the scenes,quarrelling with her fellow-servant : at last sheappears, and, confident in the power of her charms,treats her master's testy impatience vvith the utmostnonchalance. At last, provoked beyond endurance,he declares he will go immediately and take a wife,to be rid of her impertinence. " Very well," saysthe maiden, 'take me." — "You, indeed!" —Yes, me !" —Serpina. Preponderate me.Alberto. Te !Serpp. Certo.Uher. AfFe?Serpp. AfFe.Uher. lo non so clii mi tien,Dammi, dammi un stone ;Tanto ardor !Serpp. O, voi far e dir poteteChe nulla altera che meSposar dovrete.Uher. Attend, filia mia.Serpp. Vilest dir, mia sposa.Uher. Oh, stella ! oh, sorte !Oh, questa e per me morte.378 LA Serve Patron.Serpp. O morte o vita, cosi esse deeL'ho fisso nel penser.Uber. Oh, quest e un altro diavolo piu nero."This dialogue is carried on in a rapid recitative.Its conclusion is thrown into a light and airyduet ; —Serpina. Lo conosco a quell' occhiettiFurbi, ladri, malignant,Che se ben voi dite noPur m'accenano di si.Uberto. Signorina, v'ingannate,Troppo in alto voi v elate,Gl'occhi ed io vi dion noEd un sono e questo si.Serpp. Ma perche ? non son graziosa ?Non son bella, e spiritsSii, mirate, leggiadriaVel, che brio, che maesta.Uber. Ah, coster mi va tentandoQuanto val, che me la fa.Ship. (apart.) Eh, mi par che va orlando.Via sign ore !Uber. Eh vanne via !Serpp. Risolvete.Uber. Eh, matta sei.Serpp. Son per voi gli afFetti mienE covet sposar me.Uber. Oh, che imbroglio eli e per me !"This is a perfect specimen of a comic duet.Though the parts are beautifully blended together,yet the colloquy is sustained with the utmost spirit,and the musical phrases, though graceful andelegant, add to the point and humour of the dialogue.One passage is worthy of notice, as Servan Patron. 379ing the good effect of vocal imitation suggested bya word, where the subject is humorous. WhenUberto tells his maid, " Troppo in alto voi violates'*-— " You are flying too high, my dear ? — *' he makesa flight upon the word " violate," expressive ofsarcastic mimicry. But such imitations, thoughoften employed, always have a bad effect in seriousmusic.In the second act Serpina appears, accompaniedby Response, her fellow-servant, disguised in a soldier'suniform. While she is instructions howhe is to play his part, her master enters, dressed togo out. She tells Response to wait without, and beready when he is wanted. The old gentlemanaccosts her as he is going out. She asks him if heis still resolved to marry. " Yes," he says, •' butnot you." " Well," says Serpina, " since it mustbe so, I have determined to marry too, and whatis more, I have found a husband." — " Indeed ! andwho may he be V " O, he is a soldier — CaptainTempest." —Uberto. Oh brutto norse !Serpina. E al nome sono i fasti con-respondentEli e poco flematico.Uher. Inhale ! 'Serpp. Anti lunatico.Uher. Reggio ISerpp. Va presto in coller.Uher. Passim !Serpp. E quando poi e incognitoFa ruine scompiglie —Uh, via, via380 LA Serve. .Patron.Uher. Leander mal, la vestra signora.Serpp. Perche?Uher. Se h cosi schiribizzosa meo, ed e serve,Or pensa con lui essence sposaSenza dubbio il Capitan Tempest in cholera andreE lei di pastorate una tempest aera.Serpp. A questo poi Serpppent pensera.Uher. Me ne dispiaccerebbe,Alpin del bene io ti voglio,E tu il sai.Serpp. Tan to obbligata :Instant intend a conserves,God colla sua sposa amata,E di Serpina non si scorch afFatto.Lier. Ah, tel person il ciel ;Lesser tu troppo formosaVenir me fe a tal otto."Serpina, seeing her master beginning to bemoved, addresses him in a little tender air, turningaside every now and then to observe how he isaffected.(^Lento.) A Serpina pensereteQuale volta in quale d\E crete, ah, covering !Care un tempo ella mi fu. '(allegro.) Eh mi par che gia pian pianoS'incomincia a intenerir.plenty.) Scio poi fui impertinent,Mi person— mala mente mi guitar ;Lo veto, lo veto, si.allegro.) Ei mi strange per la mano,Meglio il facto non puo girl''The contrast between the soft bewitching accentswhich she addresses to him, and the lively little pashaSEllVA PAD RON A. 381sage which she sings, sotto voce, to herself, is fullof comedy.Serpina asks her master if he would choose to seeher intended, and goes to fetch him. MeanwhileUberto expresses his irresolution and agitation —the conflict in his mind between love and prudencein a scena consisting of an accompanied recitativeand an air. This soliloquy is admirable(erect.) " Ah poveretta lei ! per altro io penser,Ma ella h serve ma il primo non surestDunque — la soberest ? Basta ! eh no, non asia ISii ! pensiei'i ribald, mandate via 'Piano ! io me I'ho alleviate;So poi com' ella e nata :*Eh, che sei motto ; piano, di gratia ;Eh non pensarei affattoMa io ch'ho compassion,E pur — quelle messina, e torn !Oh Dio ! — e siam da capoOh che confusion !(Aria.) Son imbrogliato io gia.Ho un certo che nel coreChe dir per me non sa,This was one of Bailie Jarvis's considerations, when hemade up his mind to promote his maid Mattie from her wheelby the kitchen fire to the upper end of his table, in the characterof Mrs. Jarvis, " My honest father the deacon," said theworthy Bailie, " had a by-word,Brent brow and lily skin,A loving heart and leal within,Is better than gowd or gentle kin.'Besides," as he always concluded, " Mattie was nae ordinarycassock-quean ; she was akin to the Laird of Limmerfield."382 LA Serve Patron.Non so s'^ moreO see pieta ;Sent un die poi mi diceUberto, pensa a te.lo sto fra 11 SI e il no,Fra il voglio e fra il non voglio.E sempre piu m'imbroglio ;Ah misery, inflict !Che mai sara di me ?"Serpina enters with the pretended soldier, andintroduces him as her bridegroom. He keeps aloof,and says nothing ; Serpina keeping between them.Why," says the old gentleman, " this CaptainTempest of yours has got a stormy countenance, tobe sure ; but has he got nothing to say for himself?"Oh yes, sir ; he says he wishes you to give memy portion."Your portion, girl ; are you crazy ?"Gently, sir, you'll put him in a fury."In a fury — he may be as furious as Orlando ;what is that to me ?"O, sir, only see what a rage he is getting into !He only wants four thousand crowns."Four thousand devils !"Well, but, sir, he says "What does he say ? He speaks through aninterpreter, I think."He says that you must give me the four thousandcrowns, or he won't marry me."He says so ?"LA Serve Patron. 383Yes, sir, he says so."Well, what is it to me whether he marries yonor not ?"Ah, but he says, if you won't pay my dowry,yon must marry me yourself."The old gentleman flies out at this impertinentproposition ; but his own heart inclines him tocomply ; and at last he gives the damsel his handin the presence of the witness. Serpina now disclosesthe trick ; but he has made up his mind,and takes the matter good-humouredly. He isdelighted at finding himself, as he thinks, obligedto gratify his own wishes ; and the piece concludeswith the following duet ; —Serpina. Content tu sarahS'avrai amor* per me.Uberto. Content e il coreE more auro per te.Serpp. Di pur la veritas.Uber. Questa e la veritas.Serpp. Oh Dio, mi par lie no.Iter. Non debitor, oibo.Ship. O sposo grazioso !Uber. Dilemma mia rosetta I(^A due.) Cost mi fai gode.Serpp. Se commander varro,Disgust non vrai ;Or serve piu non son.Uher. Disgust non auroSe commander vorrai ;Ma con discretion.Serpp. Quanto sei caro,Uber. Quanto sei care,(yl due). Quanto e per me placer."384 LA Serve Patron.The instrumental score of this piece consistsmerely of two violins, tenor, and bass, without anywind instruments. The two violin parts are frequentlyin unison, and the tenor often doubles thebass. The accompaniments, however, are spirited,ingenious, and so effective that every note tells ;and the harmony, thin as it is, is beautifully transparent.The voices are perfectly well supported,without being overpowered or placed under restraint; and the effect would be delightful to earsnot spoiled by the excessive richness of the modernorchestra. We are inclined, indeed, to think, that,even as it is, were the Serva Padrona revived, andperformed with the archness, grace, and humourwhich could be imparted to it by Grisi andLaplace, it would be as attractive now as it was ahundred years ago.We have met with another of Pergolesi's interment,called Tracollo, also for a male and femaleperformer ; but it is written in a dialect intelligibleonly to a Neapolitan. It seems, however, to bevery lively and amusing ; and the music is in asimilar style to that of the Serva Padrona. Inone movement only there are parts for two oboesand two horns ; the rest of the score being merelyfor the quartet of stringed instruments.These intermezzi were composed from the year1730 to 1734. In 1735, on the strength of hisreputation, he was engaged to compose an operafor the Tordinona theatre at Rome. Animated byPERGOLESI. 385the hope of distinguishing himself by the productionof a classical work, he chose the OUmpiade ofMetastasio, and set to work with the ardour ofhope and the enthusiasm inspired by so beautifula subject. But his hopes were cruelly, indeedfatally disappointed. The Roman audience, underthe influence of some strange caprice, received hisopera with the utmost coldness, while they lavishedtheir applause upon a very inferior work, called,Jerome, by Dunii, a young composer who afterwardsacquired considerable reputation in France.Dunii, who was a man of a candid and liberalspirit, was ashamed and mortified at having gainedn. triumph at the expense of a man whom he knewto be far superior to himself. But he had foreseenPergolesi's failure and his own success. Havingbeen invited to Rome to compose the second operaof the season, (Pergolesi being to compose the first,)he felt so strongly the superiority of Pergolesi, thathe had not courage to write a note till he had hearda rehearsal of the OUmpiade. He then saw thatPergolesi had not hit the prevailing taste of the time,and frankly told him that his own opera would notbe so good as the OUmpiade, but would succeedbetter. When he witnessed the cold receptiongiven to Pergolesi, he declared, with honest indignation,that he was '' frenetico control il publicoRomano ;" and, during the few days that the OUm-piade languished upon the stage, he united himselfto the small body of enlightened artists and dietsI. CO386 PERGOLEST.tante, who were charmed with the work, in theirendeavours to support it. But their efforts werevain, and Pergolesi's opera was thrown aside.He immediately returned to Naples, mortified,and, as the event showed, broken-hearted. Fromthat time he wrote no more for the stage, and probablywould never have resumed the pen, had notthe Duke of Matron, a Neapolitan nobleman, prevailedupon him to compose a Mass and Vespers forareligious festival which was about to take placeat Rome. He accordingly composed the mass,Dixit Dominus, and Mandate, which are to this dayreckoned among the finest specimens of ecclesiasticalmusic. They were performed in the churchof San Lorenzo) at Rome, and listened to with rapture.The young composer was now extolled tothe skies : but the Roman public had inflicted aninjury which they were unable to remedy. Theirapplause came too late to counteract the effects oftheir cruel and unmerited coldness and neglect.His wounded spirit had preyed upon a frame naturallydelicate, and he fell into a rapid consumption.His friend and patron, the Prince Stigliano,advised him to retire to a small house at Torre delGreco, a situation supposed to be beneficial in casesof pulmonary complaints. But his disease was pastcure ; and, after remaining a short time in this secludedretreat, he expired at the age of thirty-three.During his last sickness he composed his cantataof Orfeo ed Euridice, his Stahat Mater, and hisSalve Regina, which was the last of his works.PERGOLESI. 387The Stahat Mater, a divine emanation of geniusand feeling, is still the delight of every lover ofthe pure and beautiful ecclesiastical music of theold Italian masters. His dramatic works consist ofa single opera, the Olimpiade, and the intermezziwhich have been already mentioned.No sooner was it known that Pergolesi was dead,than all Italy joined in doing honour to his memory.The Olimpiade was revived at Rome, andperformed with the utmost splendour; and thesame people, who, a short time before, had receivedit with indifference and neglect, now flocked incrowds to hear it, and applauded it with enthusiasm: a memorable instance of the fickleness andcaprice of popular taste.A story was at one time current that Pergolesi'sdeath was caused by poison ; but Dr. Burney, fromall the information he could acquire both at Romeand Naples, is of opinion that it is without foundation.There can be no doubt that Pergolesi labouredunder consumption for a considerable timebefore his death ; and besides, the success of hisworks was not such as to make him an object ofjealousy or envy.The Olimpiade was first performed in Englandin 1742, when the character of Megacle was actedby the celebrated Monticelli. " The whole exquisitescene," says Burney, " where ' Se circa, sedice' occurs, was rendered so interesting by themanner in which it was acted as well as sung byc c 2388 PERGOLESI.Monticelli, that I have been assured by attentivehearers and good judges, that the union of poetryand music, expression and gesture, seldom havehad a more powerful effect on an English audience."The first air in Monticelli's part, " Tremensobscure atroci," (the words of which are notby Metastasio,) was sung at concerts by Frasi for tenyears at least after the run of the opera was over.Pergolesi's music is remarkable for the exquisitegrace and beauty of its melody, and its true andnatural expression. The Olimpiade is as tender andaffecting as the Serva Padrona is gay and comic.An absence of labour and effort seems to characteriseall his productions, even those for the church.But this facility was more apparent than real ; forwe are informed that he composed slowly and carefully.Ease in writing is the result of consummateart : and Pergolesi might have said with Caressing,who, like him, was celebrated for the grace and easeof his melodies, "Ah, questo facile, quanto e difficile!" This ease and simplicity of Pergolesi'sstyle, however, produced effects for which he certainlywas not responsible. He was followed byimitators, who, by copying the thinness, and seeminglyinartificial structure of his scores, withoutpossessing the genius which could give to a fewsimple notes an effect beyond what could be producedby the most elaborate contrivance, renderedthe music of the opera trifling and insipid.Adolf Haste is generally mentioned by ItalianHASSE. 389writers under the name of // Samson. Though aGerman, he belongs entirely to the Italian school ;and County Algarotti calls his music " d'ltaliaArmenia divine." He was born at Bergedorf, nearHamburg, in 1699. He learned the rudiments ofmusic at Hamburg, and became a tenor singer at theopera of that city. The celebrated Keiser was thencomposer for that theatre, and Haste took his worksas the models on which he formed his own style.He afterwards obtained the situation of singer to thecourt and theatre of Brunswick, where he broughtout his first opera, Antigone, when he was onlyeighteen years of age. He now determined to enterupon the study of his art in one of the great schoolsof Italy ; and in 1724 went to Naples, where he atfirst received instructions from Corpora. He earnestlydesired to profit by the lessons of AlessandroScarlatti, but was prevented from applying forthem by the want of means of remuneration. Fortunately,however, he met Scarlatti in society,and made such an impression on the venerablemaster by his talents, modesty, and respectful behaviourtowards himself, that he gave him lessonsgratuitously, and treated him with the affection ofa parent.Soon afterwards he obtained the notice of a greatNeapolitan banker, dio employed him to composea serenata for two voices. It was performed byFarinelli and Tesi, the greatest singers of the time;and Haste gained so much reputation by it, that he390 HASSE.was engaged to compose a piece for the great opera-house.This was Prostrate, performed in 1726 :and it so completely established his fame, that allthe great theatres of Italy disputed the advantageof having him at the head of their orchestras. In1727 he went to Venice, where he was appointedchapel-master to one of the conservatories ; and hissuccess in this city was increased by the interest ofthe celebrated Faustina, whom he afterwards married.He remained at Venice till 1730, when hewas offered the situations of chapel-master andcomposer to the king of Poland and elector ofSaxony, with a salary of twelve thousand dollarsfor himself and Faustina, who was now his wife.He remained many sears in the service of thecourt of Dresden. The king of Poland gave himunlimited power and ample resources, of which heavailed himself to place the Dresden opera on themost complete and splendid footing. He new-modelledthe orchestra, the admirable disposition ofwhich is minutely described by Rousseau, in hisDictionnaire de Musique.He resided at Dresden till the year 1763, whenthe reverses experienced by the king of Polandcompelled him to dismiss many persons from hisemployment, among whom were Haste and hiswife, who were obliged to retire upon a small pension.He had previously suffered severely by thebombardment of Berlin by the Prussians in 1760.Among other property, all his manuscripts wereHASSE. 391destroyed ; a heavy loss, as he was about to publisha complete collection of his works, the expense ofwhich the king had undertaken to defray. Hethen resided at Vienna till about the year 1775,when he retired to Venice, the birth-place of hiswife. There they both ended their days in theyear 1783 ; Faustina, at the age of ninety, and herhusband soon afterwards at the age of eighty-four.Dr. Burney, in his musical tour through Germany,visited Haste and Faustina (of whose musicalcareer we shall afterwards have occasion to speak)at Vienna in 1773, and gives some interesting particularsrespecting them."The Abate Tariff," says Burney, "carriedme to Signor Adolf Haste, who lives in a handsomehouse in the suburbs, called the Landstrass. SignoraFaustina was at the window, and, seeing usstop at the door, came to meet us : I was presentedto her by my conductor. She is a short, brown,sensible, and lively old woman ; said she was muchpleased to see a cavaliers Angles, as she had formerlybeen honoured with great marks of favour inEngland. Signor Haste soon entered the room.He is tall and rather large in size, but it is easy toimagine that in his younger days he must have beena robust and fine figure ; great gentleness and goodnessappear in his countenance and manners. Heseems to have been more ill-treated by time thanFaustina, though he is younger than her by tenyears'"392 HASSE."On paying him a second visit," Burney says,"we found all the family at home, and our visit wastruly cheerful and social. Signora Faustina is veryconversable, and is still possessed of much curiosityconcerning what is transacting in the world. Shehas likewise good remains, for seventy-two, of thatbeauty for which she was so much celebrated in heryouth, but none of her fine voice. I asked her tosing — ^ Ah, non posse ! — ho perdue tutti le miefaculty." — 'Alas ! I am no longer able,' said she,I have lost all my faculties.'"I was extremely captivated with the conversationof Signor Haste. He was easy, communicative,and rational ; equally free from pedantry,pride, and prejudice. He spoke ill of no one; but,on the contrary, did justice to the talents of severalcomposers that were occasionally named, even tothose of Corpora, who, though his first master, wasever after his greatest rival. He thinks with Metalsthat the good school of singing is lost ; andsays, that since the time of Pistocco, Bernacchi, andCorpora, no great scholars have been made."I asked him for a list of his works ; and hetold me that he had set all the operas of Metastasio,except Themistocles ; some of them three or fourtimes over, and almost all of them twice : besidesthese, he had set many operas written by ApostoloZeno ; for, in his youth, Metastasio did not writefast enough for him. To these compositions for thetheatre must be added fourteen or fifteen oratorios,HASSE. 393with masses, miserere, stabat matters, and salvereginae, for the church. Besides all which, headded, that his cantatas, serenatas, intermezzos, andduets, for voices — his trios, quartets, and concertos,for instruments — were so numerous, that he shouldnot know many of them again, if he were either tosee or hear them. He modestly compared himselfto animals of the greatest fecundity, whose progenywere either destroyed during infancy, or abandonedto chance ; and added, that he, like other badfathers, had more pleasure in producing than inpreserving his offspring. However, this censuremust be confined to the offspring of his brain, forhe has taken great care of the education of hisdaughters.During this visit, these two young ladies wereso obliging as to sing to me a salve regina, latelyset by their father, in duo. It is an exquisite composition,full of grace, taste, and propriety. Oneof them has a sweet soprano voce di camera, ofwhich the tone is delicate and interesting ; the otherhas a rich and powerful contralto voice, fit for anychurch or theatre in Europe : both have goodshakes, and such an expression, taste, and steadinessas it is natural to expect in the daughters andscholars of Signor Haste and Signora Faustina.Signor Haste is so much afflicted with the gout,that his fingers are stiff and distorted with it ; andyet there are remains of a great player in his mannerof touching the harpsichord, and of accompanyingSCARLATTI.ing ; nor is it for want of knowing learned, extraneous,and equivocal modulation, that he is sosparing of it in his works. He played to me anextempore toccata or capriccio, in which he introducedsome that were truly wonderful : but he hastoo sound a judgment to lavish on common andtrifling occasions what should be reserved for extraordinarypurposes. His modulation is in generalsimple, his melody natural, his accompanimentsfree from confusion ; and leaving to fops and pedantsall that frights, astonishes, and perplexes, he letsno other arts be discoverable in his compositionsthan those of pleasing the ear, and of satisfying theunderstanding."DoMENico Scarlatti, though his fame now restschiefly on his compositions for the harpsichord, wasone of the great reformers of Italian dramaticmusic. He was born in 1683, and was the pupilof the celebrated Alessandro Scarlatti, his father.He became first known by his compositions aboutthe year 1709, when he produced some successfuloperas at Venice. At this time he became acquaintedwith Handel, who, though not older thanhimself, had already established his reputation. Tothis great man he became much attached, and, it issaid, profited largely by his conversation and counsels.He had a long and brilliant career, both as adramatic writer, and as a composer for, and performeron, the harpsichord. He was, at one periodof his life, master of the royal chapel at Madrid,FEO. 395and teacher of the harpsichord to the queen ofSpain, to whom his admirable lessons for that instrumentare dedicated.*We are unacquainted with Domenico Scarlatti'sdramatic compositions ; but they are described bymusical writers as being of great merit. Dr. Burneyspeaks of an opera called Alessandro in Persia, performedat London in 1741, and made up of piecesby different authors. " The air. Sparge al mare,"he says, " composed by Domenico Scarlatti, is oneof the finest songs of the kind that I know. Therollins: of the billows and distraction of the crew,during a storm and shipwreck, are admirably paintedby the orchestra, and the voice part is full of finepassages for a great singer." There are other instancesof his songs thus introduced, but it does notappear that any entire opera of his was ever performedin England.Francesco Feo was born about the year 1699.He founded a vocal school at Naples, which becamecelebrated throughout Europe. After having produceda number of great compositions for thechurch, he turned his attention to the theatre, andcomposed several operas, of which Arianaa andAlsace are described as the most prominent. It hasThe taste for these beautiful compositions has been revivedby the exquisite manner in which they are performed in publicby Moscheles. There is a growing disposition to return to theworks of the old masters, which, it is to be hoped, will becomemore and more prevalent.396 GALUPPI.been remarked that Gluck has borrowed from thelatter his overture to Iphigenia. In the latter yearsof his life he devoted himself to instruction, andcompleted the musical education of Jomelli.Baldassare Galuppi, one of the greatest musiciansof the last century, was born in 1701, in thelittle island of Burano near Venice, whence he receivedthe name of Buranello. He was a pupil ofLotti. His two first operas, La Fete nelV Inconstantand Gli Aynici Hivali, were produced in 1722,He soon acquired great celebrity, and composed animmense number of operas for the principal citiesof Italy. His style, however, was not approved byMetastasio, who, in 1749, when Galuppi was almostfifty, thus speaks of him in a letter to Farinelli :I wish you joy of the music of Buranello, who,according to what I have heard, will be a good composerfor violins, violoncellos, and singers, but avery bad workman for poets. He thinks as muchabout the words, when setting them, as you doabout being elected pope ; and if he did think ofthem, I am not sure that he would do better. Heabounds in ideas, though they are not always hisown, nor well linked together. In short, he is notto my taste. I speak with sincerity to you, mydear friend ; but in public I leave him in that stateof credit in which he is held by those who judgewith the ear, and not with the understanding."In 1741, after Handel had ruined himself by carryingon operas in opposition to the nobility, andGALUPPI. 397had abandoned the attempt, the management of theopera was undertaken by the Earl of Middlesex,who engaged Galuppi as a composer. The first specimenhe gave of his abilities in that capacity wasthe opera of Penelope, written for our stage by Roll.It was coldly received, and performed only five times.The English public, accustomed to the learned andsolid style of Handel, did not relish a piece writtenin the light and flimsy style which had become prevalentin Italy. In the following year he producedScipio in Cartagena, which was performed ninetimes. In 1743 his Enrico was brought out withsuccess, and in a style of great excellence ; the principalcharacters being performed by Monticelli,Visconti, and Amorevoli, and the inferior parts bytwo female singers, Frasi and Galli, who possessedconsiderable reputation. Some of the airs in thisopera, especially " Son trope verbose," becamevery popular ; and Galuppi's style produced an influenceon our own dramatic music. Towards theend of the same season he produced Surface, whichwas performed eight times.He then returned to Italy ; but some of his mostcelebrated operas were afterwards performed inLondon at different periods, and always with success.His Ricimero was performed in 1755. Hiscomic opera II Monde della Luna, was performedin 1760, and delighted the public, not only by thelightness and gaiety of the music, but by the admiresGALUPPI.able acting and singing of Signora Paganini. Inthe following year a still greater effect was producedby his Filosofo di Campagna. " This burnett,"says Burney, " surpassed in musical merit all thecomic operas that were performed in England tillthe Buona Figlmola ; and its success was proportionedto its merit. Though Signor Paganiniwas but a coarse first man, his wife, Everard, andSarbelloni, performed their parts very much to thesatisfaction of the public. The simple and elegantair, " La bella che adorn," sung by Sarbelloni,from the mere tone of his voice, was always applauded: Everard's innocent manner of singingLa Pastoral al prato" interested every hearer ; andthe lively and playful air, " Donne, donne, siamnate," was sung in a way so piquant and agreeable,that the applause Signora Paganini acquiredby it amounted almost to acclamation. Other partsof the music were sufficiently good to support badsinging ; for the bass song, " Ho per lei in mezzo alcore," was always heard with pleasure, though sungby Paganini almost without a voice.This opera had an uninterrupted run of fifteennights. Indeed the airs of every kind in // Filosofodi Campagna were in such favour, that Paganini wasgenerally encored in whatever she sung. This performer,though not young when she came hitherfrom Berlin, increased in reputation so much duringthe run of this opera, that when it was her turn toGALUPPI. 399have a benefit, such a crowd assembled as I neverremember to have seen on the like occasion, beforeor since ; indeed not one-third of the company thatpresented themselves at the opera-house doors wereable to obtain admission. Caps were lost, and gownstorn in pieces, without number or mercy, in thestruggle to get in : ladies in full dress, who had sentaway their servants and carriages, were obligedto appear in the streets and walk home in greatnumbers without caps or attendants. Luckily theweather was fine, and did not add to their distressby rain or wind ; though their confusion was greatlyaugmented by its being broad daylight, and thestreets full of spectators, who could neither refrainfrom looking or laughing at such splendid and uncommonsty^eet- walkers."The popularity of Galuppi's compositions inEngland had a perceptible influence on our owndramatic music. His airs were introduced intothe English operas of the day ; and English composersimitated the Italian melody in their own productions; a practice which, though it contributedto polish and refine their style, yet, as generallyhappens in the case of imitations, was carried toan extravagant excess, and English songs frequentlybecame caricatures of Italian bravuras.Galuppi was for many sears maestro di capellaof the church of St. Mark, and president of theconservatory of the Iiicurahili at Venice. In 1766400 GALUPPI.he went to Petersburg!, where he was received withgreat distinction ; and had just returned from thencewhen Dr. Burney saw him at Venice in 1770, " atwhich time, though near seventy years of age, hewas as full of genius and fire as ever." — " It seems,"says Burney, " as if the genius of Signor Galuppi,like that of Titian, became more animated by age.He cannot now be less than seventy years old, andyet it is generally allowed here that his last operas,and his last compositions for the church, aboundwith more spirit, taste, and fancy, than those of anyother period of his life. His character and conversationare natural, intelligent, and agreeable. Heis in figure little and thin, but has very much thelook of a gentleman. His family has been verylarge, but all his children, except three or four, arenow well married. He has the appearance of aregular family man, and is esteemed at Venice asmuch for his private character as for his talents."Burney records Galuppi's definition of "good music,"which he thinks admirable, and, though short, verycomprehensive. " Good music," said Galuppi,consists of vayhezza, chiarezza, e huona modulation;"" — beauty, clearness, and good modulation.He might just as well have said that good musicconsists of goodness.Galuppi died at Venice in 1785, at the age ofeighty-four. During his own life, very differentestimates were formed of his merit at differentTERRADELLAS. 401times. We have seen that the mild Metastasiospoke harshly of him when he had come to themature ag of almost fifty ; and his first operawritten for the English stage was coldly received.Notwithstanding this, however, few musicians havegained a more brilliant reputation than that whichhe afterwards acquired. The truth seems to be,that his genius ripened slowly. Dramatic composition,in Italy had undergone a revolution. It hadpassed from one extreme to another. Leo, Vinci,and, above all, Pergolesi, had substituted expressivesimplicity for laboured complication ; but their imitatorshad carried this simplicity the length ofbaldness and insipidity. In the language appliedto Galuppi by Metastasio, composers became goodfor singers, but bad for poets. Dramatic expressionceased to be their study, their only object being togratify the ear of the most careless listener by agreeableairs, and to give the favourite singers the opportunityof displaying their voice and execution.Into this style Galuppi at first fell ; but he afterwardsemerged from it, and was one of the fewgreat men who supported the Italian school whenan inundation of shallow and frivolous productionsthreatened it with utter decay.Terradellas, a Spaniard, holds a high rankamong the dramatic composers of his time. He was-bornat Barcelona in 1701, and is said to have diedat Rome in 1751, in consequence of the failure ofVOL. I. D 1)402 PEREZ.one of his operas. He was in England in 174G,and composed two operas, Mitigate and Bellero-fonte, which were performed with success. Thelatter, which was published by Walsh, justifies, onexamination, its reputation. The airs for SignoraFrasi and Signor Reginelli (a contralto) are in abroad and expressive style, and contain bold andeffective modulations, and uncommon chromaticpassages. There is more firmness and vigour, too,in his accompaniments than in those of most of hiscontemporaries.David Perez, a composer of great celebrity, was'born, of Spanish parents, at Naples in 1711, andeducated in the conservatories of Santa Maria chiLorenzo in that city. He composed his first operasfor the theatre of Palermo from 1741 to 1748, andoften gained great reputation by his productions atNaples and Rome. In 1752 he went to Portugal,where he spent the remainder of his life in theservice of king Joseph. He died at Lisbon in 1778.Like Handel he was corpulent and fond of the table,a propensity which is supposed to have shortened.hisdays. He was much admired, respected, and beloved,and his memory was cherished in Portugalmany years after his death. Like Handel, too, hewas blind during the latter years of his life ; andwhile labouring under this calamity, and confinedto bed, frequently dictated compositions in partswithout the help of an instrument. He sang withPEREZ. 403great taste, particularly in the tender and patheticstyle.His opera of Alessandro nelV India, which wascomposed in 1755, for the opening of the new theatreof Lisbon on the queen's birth-day, was performedwith extraordinary splendour. A troop of horseappeared on the stage, with a Macedonian phalanx.One of the king's riding-masters rode Bucephalusto a march which Perez had composed expressly forthe paces of a noble charger ; and on this occasionthere were assembled the following great singers ;Elis, Manzoli, CafFarelli, Gizziello, Veroli, Babble,Lucian, Raaf, Rain, and Guadagni— -a constellationof unequalled brilliancy.Several of Perez's operas were performed inEngland; particularly j^^^io, in 1755, and DidoneAhbandonata in 1761. Among his works is MetalsAi'taserse, in which the air, '' Leona dal mardivisa" (the original of the English words " Waterparted from the sea") is curious, as we find that itcontains the long divisions in triplets which Arnehas introduced into his famous bravura, " TheSoldier tir'd." " There is," says Burney, " an originalspirit and elegance in all his productions ; inwhich if any defect appears, it is the want of symmetryin the phraseology of his melodies, in whichthere may sometimes be found what the Frenchcall phrases marquess and conti^ete^ns, to which criticalears in modern times are much more accustomedD D 2404 LOGROSCINO.than formerly." This defect may exist, but we confessour inability to discover it in the few compositionsof this master which we have been able toexamine. Extreme smoothness and regularity ofrhythm characterised the Italian music of that day ;and any deficiency in this respect was, of all defects,the least likely to be tolerated.Nicol LoGROSCiNO, a Neapolitan, born aboutthe end of the seventeenth century, was a composerof comic operas. As they were written in the Neapolitandialect, they were little known beyondthat state, and are now entirely forgotten ; buthe deserves honourable mention as inventor of theFinale, or that species of concerted music, terminatingeach act of an opera, in which a portion of thebusiness of the piece is carried on. The extent towhich this species of dramatic music is now carriedis one of the principal features which distinguishthe opera of the present day, and has mainly contributedto throw the works of the older mastersout of use.The composers of whom some account has beengiven in this chapter, were the principal stars of themost numerous and brilliant constellation that everhas appeared in the musical hemisphere. Theymay be called a constellation, because, thoughthey rose, reached their zenith, and set at differenttimes, yet there was a period when the whole ofthem were together above the horizon. Differing,SINGERS. 405too, as they did, in individual genius, they allbelonged to one great school, possessed of commonqualities and characteristics.The same period was illumined by an equallynumerous, splendid, and unequalled constellationof great singers, several of whom have alreadybeen incidentally mentioned, but many of themdemand more ample and regular notice.CHAPTER XVII.Great Italian singers during the above period — Tesi — Faustina —Cuzzoni — Farinelli — Senesino.Victoria Tesi was born at Florence about theyear 1690. She was a pupil of the celebratedschool of Bernacchi at Bologna. In 1719 she wasat the opera of Dresden, where she used to sing,alVottava, airs for bass voices ; but the compass ofher voice was so extraordinary, that no difficulty inregard to pitch ever gave her any trouble. Shewas not remarkable for her performance of rapidpassages; but she had a grand and majestic style,and great powers of declamation. Though notbeautiful, she captivated every body by the gracesof her deportment and action. She spent the latterpart of her life at Vienna, having for many yearsretired from the stage. She died about the year1775. Burney gives the following particulars respectingher, which he learned at Vienna in 1770.The great singer, Signora Tesi, who was a celebratedperformer upwards of fifty years ago, liveshere; she is now more than eighty, but has longTest. 407quitted the stage. She has been very sprightly inher day, and yet is at present in high favour withthe empress-queen. Her story is somewhat singular.Sire was connected with a certain count,a man of great quality and distinction, whose fondnessincreased by possession to such a degree as todetermine him to marry her ; a much more uncommonresolution in a person of high birth on thecontinent than in England. She tried to dissuadehim, enumerating all the bad consequences of suchan alliance ; but he would listen to no reasoning,nor take any denial. Finding all remonstrancesvain, she left him one morning, went to a neighbouringstreet, and addressing herself to a poorlabouring man, a journeyman baker, said she wouldgive him fifty ducats if he would marry her, notwith a view to their cohabiting together, but to servea present purpose. The poor man readily consentedto become her nominal husband. Accordinglythey were formally married ; and whenthe count renewed his solicitations, she told him itwas now utterly impossible to grant his request, forshe was already the wife of another, — a sacrificeshe had made to his fame and family."Faustina Gordon, the wife of Haste, was bornin 1693. She first appeared as a theatrical singerat Venice in 1716. In 1725 she was at Vienna,where she received great honours and rewards,Apostolo Zeno, in one of his letters, describes herbrilliant success, and adds, ^' But whatever good408 Austin.fortune or encouragement she meets with, shedeserves it all by her courteous and agreeablemanners, as well as b}^ her talents, with which shehas enchanted and gained the esteem and affectionof the whole court." He afterwards speaks of theregret expressed at Vienna, on her quitting that cityto go to London. She arrived here in 1725, whenCuzzoni was in the height of her favour ; and therivalry of these sirens produced violent feuds amongthe patrons of the opera. After remaining in Englandfor two seasons, she returned to Italy, and, in1732, was married to Haste.*Faustina is described as having been remarkablefor her personal charms and her talents as an actress,as well as for her vocal powers. She was of smallstature, but had a form of perfect symmetry, and abeautiful countenance, full of fire and intelligence.Quant, the celebrated instructor of Frederic theSecond, who was in London, in 1727, at the sametime with her, gave Dr. Burney a striking accountof her qualities as a performer. " Faustina," hesays, " had a mezzo-soprano voice, that was lessclear than penetrating. Her compass now was onlyfrom B flat to G in alt ; but after this time she extendedits limits downwards. She possessed whatthe Italians call Uni canter granite ; her executionwas articulate and brilliant. She had a fluenttongue for pronouncing words rapidly and distinctly,and a flexible throat for divisions, with so beautifulSee ante, page 390.curzon. 409and quick a shake that she could put it in motionupon short notice, just when she would. The passagesmight be smooth, or by leaps, or consist ofiterations of the same note ; their execution wasequally easy to her as to any instrument whatever.She was doubtless the first who introduced with successa swift repetition of the same note. Shesang adagios with great passion and expression,but was not equally successful if such deep sorrowwere to be impressed on the hearer as might requiredragging, sliding, or notes of syncopation, andtempo ruhato. She had a very happy memory inarbitrary changes and embellishments, and a clearand quick judgment in giving to words their fullpower and expression. In her action she was veryhappy ; and as she perfectly possessed that flexibilityof muscles and features which constitutes face-playing,she succeeded equally well in furious,amorous, and tender parts : in short, she was bornfor singing and acting."Francesca Cuzzoni was a native of Parma. Herfirst public appearance on the stage seems to havebeen with her rival Faustina, in 1719, at Venice.After having sung in most of the great theatres ofItaly, she arrived in England in 1723, where shecontinued in undiminished favour till 1729, whenshe returned to Italy.While Cuzzoni and Faustina were in Englandtogether, the spirit of rivalry between themselves,and of party among their patrons, was carried to4 10 Austin ANDan extravagant pitch. It is told by Horace Walpole,that his mother, Lady Walpole, had them ather house to sino* in a concert at which an assemblageof the finest people in the kingdom werepresent. She was under the greatest difficulty howto settle the precedence, or prevail on either to relinquishthe pas. The knot could not be untied,but it was cut by the following expedient. Findingimpossible to prevail on the one to sing while theother was present, she took Faustina to a remotepart of the house under the pretext of showing hersome curious china, during which time the companyobtained a song from Cuzzoni, who supposed thather rival had quitted the field. A similar devicewas practised in .order to get Cuzzoni out of theroom while Faustina performed.In a short time each of the rivals found partisansamong the ladies of quality, and violent animositiesbroke out among them. The party on each sidebecame numerous and formidable, and the fashionableworld was convulsed by their feuds. At firstthe heroines themselves behaved civilly to eachother. Sir Robert Walpole having taken the partof Faustina, his lady, in order that Cuzzoni mightnot be borne down by his influence, countenancedher; and when Sir Robert was from home used toinvite them both to dinner. She was at first puzzledhow to adjust the precedence between them ather table; but they behaved politely, and relievedtheir hostess by mutual concessions. But this didCurzon. 411not last ; their mutual jealousy and hatred rose tosuch a height, that on one occasion, when theyhappened to meet in public, they actually came toblows in the presence of the company.The Cuzzoni party was headed by the Countessof Pembroke, whose followers used to hoot wheneverFaustina appeared. The London Journal ofJune 10th, 1727, says, " A great disturbance happenedat the opera, occasioned by the partisans ofthe two celebrated rival ladies, Cuzzoni and Austin.The contention at first was only carried on byhissing on one side and clapping on the other ; butproceeded at length to the melodious use of canalsand other accompaniments, which manifested thezeal and politeness of that illustrious assembly.The Princess Caroline was there, but neither herroyal highness's presence, nor the laws of decorum,could restrain the glorious ardour of the combatants."This affair produced the following-epigram:Old poets sing that beasts did danceWhenever Orpheus play'd ;So, to Faustina's charming voiceWise Pembroke's asses bray'd."Faustina's chief friends among the ladies were theCountess of Burlington and Lady Delaware. Themen were generally on her side ; as she was handsomerand more agreeable than her rival.These contentions were the more absurd, as thestyles of the two singers were essentially different,412 Austin ANDand the utmost admiration of the one could be nodisparagement to the other. Their qualities arethus contrasted by Toss, their contemporary, in hisOsserimzzioni supra il Canto Figura. "Theirmerit," he says, "is superior to all praise; forwith equal strength, though in different styles, theyhelp to keep up the tottering profession from immediatelyfalling into ruin. The one is inimitable for aprivileged gift of singing, and enchanting theworld with an astonishing felicity in executingdifficulties with a brilliancy, I know not whetherderived from nature or art, which pleases to excess.The delightful, soothing cantabile of the other,joined to the sweetness of a fine voice, a perfect intonation,strictness of time, and the rarest productionsof genius in her embellishments, are qualificationsas peculiar and uncommon as they are difficultto be imitated. The pathos of the one and therapidity of the other are distinctly characteristic.What a beautiful mixture it would be, if the excellenciesof these two angelic beings could be unitedin a single individual !"The interest of the opera was greatly injured bythese disputes ; and the directors fell upon a deviceto put an end to them by getting one of the rivalsout of the way. The time for a new contract witheach of them was at hand ; and, as it was knownthat Lady Pembroke and Cuzzoni's other patronesseshad made her swear never to take a smaller salarythan Faustina, the directors resolved to offer her acurzon. 413guinea less. To this resolution they steadilyadhered : and Cuzzoni found herself ensnared byher oath into the necessity of leaving England.The following lines were written by AmbrosePhilips on her departure.Little syren of the stage,Charmer of an idle age,Empty warbler, breathing lyre.Wanton gale of fond desire ;Bane of every manly art,Sweet enfeeble of the heart ;O, too pleasing is thy strain,Hence to southern climes again !Tuneful mischief, vocal spell.To this island bid farewell ;Leave us as we ought to be,Leave the Britons rough and free."After her return to Italy she frequently met herrival Faustina, particularly at Venice in the carnivalsof 1729 and 1730 ; but they do not appearever to have sung upon the same stage. In 1734 shecame to England a second time, being engaged rosing in the opera established by the nobility inopposition to Handel ; and appears to have remainedfor two seasons. She came to London athird time in 1750, and had a benefit concert atthe Haymarket theatre ; but being now old, poor,and almost deprived of voice by infirmities, shefailed to attract an audience. After this she wentto Holland, where she was thrown into prison onaccount of her debts. Being, however, allowed to414 ' curzon.go out and sing at the theatres, though in custody,she was at length enabled to pay her debts andobtain her release. In her latter days she subsisted,it is said, by button-making, and at last died ingreat indigence at Bologna in 1 770.Her misfortunes were caused by her folly, caprice,and extravagance. She squandered her earningswith the most reckless profusion, and quarrelledwith her best friends from the ungovernable petulanceof her temper. On one occasion, when, at arehearsal, she pertinaciously refused to sing an air,belonging to her part, in one of Handel's operas,the composer brought her to reason by threateningto throw her out of the window.As a singer, she is thus described by Dr. Burney :'' She was endowed by nature with a voice that wasequally clear, sweet, and flexible. It was difficultfor the hearer to determine whether she most excelledin slow or rapid airs. A native warbleenabled her to execute divisions with such facilityas to conceal every appearance of difficulty ; andso grateful and touching was the natural tone ofher voice, that she rendered pathetic whatever shesung, in which she had leisure to unfold its wholevolume. The art of conducting, sustaining, increasing,and diminishing her tones by minutedegrees, acquired for her among professors the titleof complete mistress of her art. In a cantabile air,though the notes she added were few, she never losta favourable opportunity of enriching the cantilenaFARINELLI. 415with all the refinements and embellishments of thetime. Her shake was perfect; she had a creativefancy, and the power of occasionally accelerating*and retarding the measure in the most artificial andable manner by what the Italians call tempo ruhato.Her high notes were unrivalled in clearness andsweetness ; and her intonations were so just andfixed, that it seemed as if it were not in her powerto sing out of tune."Carlo Bronchi, surnamed Farinelli,* wasborn at Andrea, a small town in the territory ofNaples, in 1705 He received instructions in singingfrom Corpora, who, discovering his extraordinaryvocal powers, bestowed the utmost care uponhis education. When he was seventeen, he accompaniedhis instructor to Rome, Corpora beingengaged to compose an opera for one of the theatresof that city ; and here he performed the celebratedvocal feat which at once placed him aboveall his competitors. In an opera which was thenperformed, there was a song with an ohhligato accompanimentfor the trumpet, sung by Farinelli, andaccompanied by a great performer on that instrumentsEvery night there was a contest betweenthe singer and the trumpet-player, which graduallybecame more and more earnest, as the audiencebegan to take an interest in it, and to take differentsides. At length both parties seemed resolved toIt is said that he derived this cognomen from the circumstanceof his father having been a miller, or a dealer in flour.416 FARINELLT.bring; it to an issue. After each of them hadswelled out a note, and tried to rival the other inbrilliancy and force, they both had a swell and ashake together, in the interval of a third, which wascontinued so long that both seemed to be exhausted ;and the trumpeter at length gave it up, imagining,probably, that his antagonist was as much spent ashimself. But Farinelli, with the greatest apparentease, and with a smile on his face, as if to show thathe had been all the while only sporting with hisadversary, broke out all at once in the same breathwith fresh vigour, and not only continued the swelland shake upon the note, but started off into aseries of rapid and difficult divisions, till his voicewas drowned by the acclamations of the audience.From that time he maintained an undisputed supremacyover all his contemporaries.He afterwards sang in all the principal theatresin Italy, and then went to Vienna, which city hevisited three times in the course of his life. Hewas received there with the same distinction as atother places ; but he used to mention an admonitionhe received from the Emperor Charles VI.,which he said, was of more use to him than all theprecepts of his masters, or the examples of hisrivals. The emperor, after listening to him oneday with great admiration, told him, that in hissinging he neither moved nor stood still like anyother mortal ;— all was supernatural: "But," headded, " these gigantic strides, these never-ending(Carl BIE®g'^n^i[ rr'/y^'^/- 'FAE.1IMELL1I.;dan , Punished \nFARINELLT. 417notes, are merely surprising, and it is now timethat you should think of pleasing : you are toolavish of the. gifts with which nature has endowedyou ; if you wish to reach the heart, you must takea plainer and simpler road." These few words,Farinelli said, wrought an entire change in hisstyle. From that time he studied to be simpleand pathetic, as well as grand and powerful ; andthus charmed his hearers as much as he astonishedthem.In the year 1734 he came to England, beingengaged to perform at the theatre in Lincoln'sInn Fields, where the nobility's opera was carriedon, under the direction of Corpora, in opposition toHandel.The terms of Farinelli's engagement are not recorded; but the amount of his profits, arising fromhis salary, his benefit, and presents from people ofdistinction, were estimated at about 5,000/. a year.To admire Farinelli became a rage, which led thevotaries of fashion, not the lovers of music, intoextravagant folly and absurdity. Hogarth, in oneof the numbers of his Rake s Progress, has ridiculedthe infatuation of the hour. He represents his heroat his levee, surrounded by toad-eaters and hangers-on— a bravo, a jockey, a dancing-master, a fencing-master,and others. A musical composer is seatedat a harpsichord, and from the back of his chairhangs a long scroll, on which is written, " A list ofthrice presents Signor Farinelli, the Italian singer,VOL. I. E E418 FARINELLI.condescended to accept, of the English nobility andgentry, for one night's performance in the operaof Artaxerxes. A pair of diamond knee-buckles,presented by , a diamond ring, bya bank-note enclosed in a rich gold case,by ^ a gold snufF-box, chased with thestory of Orpheus charming the brutes, by T.Bakewell, esq., 100/., 200/., 100/." These werepresents mentioned in the newspapers of the dayas having been actually made. On the floor liesa picture representing Farinelli on a pedestal, withan altar before him, on which are several flaming-hearts.Near him stand a number of people withextended arms, offering him presents ; and at thefoot of the altar is a lady kneeling, with a labelissuing from her mouth, on which are the words,One God, one Farinelli," — an impious expressionreally used by a lady of fashion in her affectedecstasies during his performance of one of his songs.During his engagement at the Haymarket, SirJohn Hawkins saj^s, "All the world flocked thither,even aldermen and other citizens, with their wivesand daughters, to so great a degree, that in the cityit became a proverbial expression, that those whohad not heard Farinelli sing, and Foster* preach,A celebrated Anabaptist preacher, who lectured on Sundayevenings in the Old Jewry. Pope, who knew him, and frequentlywent to hear him preach, thus mentions him in theEpilogue to the Satires :Let modest Foster, if he will, excelTen metropolitan in preaching well."FARINELLT. 419were not qualified to appear in genteel company."At the first private rehearsal after his arrivalhere, in Signora Cuzzoni's apartments, LordCooper, who acted as manager of the opera, observingthat the band did not follow him, but wereall gaping with wonder as if thunderstruck, desiredthem to be attentive ; when they all confessed thatthey had been so overpowered with admiration andastonishment as to be unable to accompany him.*With the exception of a short excursion to Parisin the summer of 1736, Farinelli remained inLondon till May 1737. During the time of hisstay, he was employed in supporting the party bywhom he was engaged in their struggle againstHandel ; a struggle, which though unsuccessful ontheir part, was ruinous to the object of their hostility,and injurious to the interests of music, fromthe dissensions and factions to which it gave riseamong the patrons of the art. Although the admirationof Farinelii's powers, among the real dilettanti,continued unabated, yet the foolish andignorant rage caused by his arrival gave way to theexcitement produced by greater novelties. " There isalways such rage for novelty atthe opera," saysCib-her in his Apology I/, published in 1739, " that withinthese two years we have seen even Farinelli sing to anaudience of five-and-thirty pounds." When heThis remarkable circumstance was related to Dr. Burneyby one of the band.F. E 'J420 FARINELLI.left England, however, it was with the intentionof returning the following year, as he had enteredinto an engagement to that effect with the noblemanagers of the opera. But this was prevented byan invitation which he received to visit the court ofSpain. In his way to Madrid he sang at Paris,where, according to Riccoboni, he enchanted theFrench themselves, though the prejudice againstItalian music and Italian singing was then at itsheight.Farinelli's journey to Madrid was in consequenceof an invitation from the queen of Spain. Herhusband, Philip V., laboured under a mental disease,which exhibited itself in a dejection of spirits,rendering him incapable of attending to business,or of taking the ordinary care of his person. Hewould not even allow himself to be shaved, and remainedin a state of total apathy. He had alwaysshown great love of music, and sensibility to itseffects ; it was therefore determined to try itspower, as a remedy for his disease ; and it was withthis view that the greatest singer of the age wascalled in as his physician.On Farinelli's arrival, the queen contrived thatthere should be a concert in a room adjoining theking's apartment ; and the singer performed oneof his most pathetic airs. Philip appeared at firstsurprised, and then moved. At the end of thesecond air he called the singer into his chamber,loaded him with compliments and kind express421sons, asked him how he could sufficiently recompensesuch talents, and assured him that he coulddeny him nothing. Farinelli, who had been previouslyinstructed, only begged that his majestywould allow his attendants to shave and dress him,and that he would endeavour to appear in councilas usual. From this time the king's disease gaveway to medical treatment ; and the singer had thehonour (to which he was undoubtedly entitled) ofthe cure.Farinelli was taken into the service of the court.A pension of about 3,000/. per annum was settledupon him, and he was not permitted to sing any longerin public. During the first ten years of his residenceat the court of Spain, he sang every nightto the king the same four airs, one of which wasthe famous " Pallid il sole" of Haste. By singingto his majesty every evening, his favour increasedto such a degree, that he was honouredwith the order of St. Ago, and acquired so muchinfluence that he was regarded as tie king's firstminister. Raised to such a height, most men wouldhave been giddy with their elevation ; but Fari-nelli never forgot his true position. He rememberedthat he was a musician, and conducted himselfto the Spanish nobility with that proper humilitywhich became his situation ; so that, insteadof becoming an object of their jealousy and hatred,he gained their confidence and esteem. Thesesentiments were confirmed when it was observed,422 FAllINELLI.that he kept himself entirely aloof from everyspecies of intrigue, and never made use of his influencefor any selfish or unworthy motive.Several pleasing anecdotes are related of him atthis period. One day, as he was going to theking's closet, to which he had access at all times,he overheard an old officer of the guard cursehim, and say to another, " Honours can be heapedon such scoundrels as this, while a poor soldierlikemyself, after thirty years' service, remainsunnoticed." Farinelli, without seeming to hearthis reproach, took occasion to remind the king thathe had neglected an old servant, and procured aregiment for the man who had spoken of him soharshly. In passing out, after leaving the king,he gave the officer his commission, telling him thathe had heard him complain of having served thirtyyears without promotion; " but," he added, " youdid wrong to accuse the king of neglecting to rewardyour zeal."A circumstance, which happened to Farinelliduring the first year of his residence at Madrid,has been made the subject of a favourite little Germanopera. The singer ordered a superb suit ofclothes for a court gala, and when the tailorbrought it home, asked him for his bill. " I havemade no bill, sir," said the tailor, " nor do I intendto make one. Instead of money, I have afavour to beg of you. I know that what I desire isinestimable, and fit only for monarchs ; but since IFAUINELLI. 423have had the honour to work for a person of whomevery body speaks with rapture, all the payment Ishall ever require is a song." Farinelli tried invain to prevail on the tailor to take his money.At length, giving way to the tradesman's humbleentreaties, and probably more flattered by this tributeto his talents than by the applause he hadreceived in the saloons of princes, he sat down tothe harpsichord, and sang some of his finest airs,enjoying the pleasure and astonishment of his enchantedhearer : and the more the poor tailorseemed charmed and affected, the more Farinelliexerted himself in displaying every species of excellence.When he had done, the tailor thankedhim in the most rapturous and grateful manner,and took his leave. " No, my friend," said Fari-nelli, " I am a little proud, and it is perhaps fromthat circumstance that I have acquired some smallsuperiority over other singers. I have given way toyour weakness ; and it is but fair that you, in yourturn, should indulge me in mine." And, taking-outhis purse, he insisted on the tailor receivingnearly double the amount of his bill.After the death of Philip V,, Farinelli continuedto enjoy the favour of his successor, Ferdinand VI.,by whom he was dignified with the order of Cala-brava.He persuaded that prince to establish anopera, of which he was director. He brought fromItaly the best composers and singers of the time,424 ' FAllINELLl.and got his friend Metastasio to write for thistheatre.On the death of Ferdinand, Farinelli was dismissedfrom his employment and obliged to leaveSpain ; but his pension was still continued.Charles III., the brother and successor of Ferdinand,was not only without taste for music, but hada positive dislike to it, and would not suffer a voiceor an instrument to be heard in his palace. Heordered Farinelli to return to Italy ; but, by astrange caprice, stipulated, in consideration ofFarinelli's retaining his pension, that he should notreturn to Naples, but should spend the remainder ofhis days at Bologna. It was with much sorrow thathe left the country in which he had lived four-and-twentyyears, and in which he had formed manyfriendships and connexions. There cannot be astronger proof of the prudence and moderation ofhis character than the circumstance of his havingbeen so many years the chief favourite of the sovereign,a situation in itself sufficiently obnoxious,without having incurred odium or made himselfenemies.In Metastasio's correspondence there is a greatdeal of evidence of the estimation in which Fari-nelli was held in Spain. In one of his letters toFarinelli the poet says, " The Spanish ministerplenipotentiary, Don Antonio de Azlor, from yourcourt, is arrived, and pleases extremely here. HeFARINELLI. 425is interrogated by everybody concerning you, andall are extremely satisfied with his answers. Heassures us that your prosperity has not in the leastaltered the gentleness and moderation of your character: a rock, according to ancient and modernexamples, extremely difficult to avoid ; and muchmore amid the favours than the persecutions offortune. He says that, though raised to such anenviable situation, you have not an enemy. Toobtain forgiveness for such prosperity, I can easilyconceive how wise, how disinterested, and howbeneficent must be your conduct. I congratulateyou on those inestimable characteristics, which areyour own, and not the gifts of fortune ; and I congratulatemyself for having known and loved youbefore you had given such distinguished proofs ofyour estimable and amiable qualities'' In anotherof Metastasio's letters to Farinelli, written in 1752,when the latter was at the height of his favour andfortune, the poet says, " I have seen for a shorttime Count Esterhazy, after his return from Madrid,and have found him full of you. He regardsyou as a hero, and has desired me to tell you so ;which will oblige me likewise to love you morethan ever. At this last assertion I cannot helplaughing ; but I own that to hear you thus praisedaffords me the same pleasure as if it was myself;so much does our old, true, and mutual friendshipseem to have united us together and consolidated426 FARINELLI.our interests. God preserve you, my dear Ge-mellow*'and inspire others to think as you do."In a letter written in 1756, Metastasio says,At length our noble and worthy MonsignorMigazzi, archbishop of Vienna, is arrived here fromMadrid. I have put his patience to extraordinarytrials, by my numerous and minute questions concerningyour health, your way of life, your friendshipfor me, and the public approbation which youhave so well contrived to merit. He went so faras to tell me, that, aware of your heroic conduct incircumstances so seducing, he might venture tocanonise you without the fear of opposition. Figureto yourself, if you can, how sweet such music mustbe to the ears of your most faithful and affectionateGemellus'' On the death of Farinelli's royal patron,Ferdinand, in 1759, Metastasio wrote him thus:Yesterday was delivered to me your letter of thesecond of August, from Villaviciosa : and, thoughtinctured with the gloomy colour reflected fromyour painful situation, it was great consolation tometo find that, with your feeble state of health,you have had sufficient vigour to resist so tremendousa shock. The news of your beneficent kinghaving been delivered from his sufferings arrivedat Vienna four days before your letter. It is to be*' Twin ; a term of endearment constantly used by Metalsin his letters to Farinelli, implying the constant unionwhich had subsisted between them from their youth upwards.FARINELLI. 427hoped that the melancholy state in which he solong remained without the smallest chance of recoverydiminished the violence of a blow whichmust have been expected, and which delivered thepoor prince from the painful existence in which helanguished. And yet, with all these solid reasons,I judge, my dear Gemelli, by the emotions of myown heart, what your feelings must be ; but I promisemyself much more from your virtue thanmine ; because the examples of moderation whichyou have so long furnished to the world in themidst of the most intoxicating smiles of fortune, giveus assurances of your meeting her frowns withequal fortitude. Be of comfort, my dear Gemelli ;inconstancy in human affairs is the universal conditionon which we live, as every mortal knows bywoful experience. No misfortune, however, canrob you of the praise of not suffering yourself to beseduced or dazzled by the blaze with which youwere so long; surrounded."It appears from many passages in Metastasio'sletters, that Farinelli's banishment from the countryin which he had spent the best period of his life,continued long to prey upon his mind and depresshis spirits, though he bore with firmness what hefelt as a heavy calamity. " Your last letter," saysMetastasio to him in 1764, " really consoled me.From the serenity and pleasantry with which it iscoloured from the beginning to the end, I contesFARINELLI.clive that you are at length arrived at the secret ofwiping from your mind that cursed soot which hasdiscoloured it so long. I congratulate you on yoursuccess in an enterprise which borders on a speciesof heroism of which few are capable. We have aninfinite number of great men, venerated as modelsof knowledge and prudence, who have sunk undercatastrophes much less violent than yours. Mayhappiness, therefore, attend my dear Gemelli, whohas proved himself as much superior to adversityas to prosperity, and who knovy^s how to estimatehuman happiness better than those who call themselvesphilosophers, and does not need the jargonof the schools to enable him to stand firm and immovablein every blast. Heaven bless you, andkeep you in this wise and placid state for at leasthalf a century !"In 1779, when Metastasio and Farinelli wereboth aged men, the venerable poet says, in a letterto a lady of Bologna, " You have obliged me extremely,my dear Signora Giacinta, by honouringme with the continuance of your correspondence,and assuring me of the affectionate remembrancewhich my dear and respected friend Signor CarloBronchi retains for me, which I return with a mutualand most constant reciprocation. I love andesteem him as much as it is possible for a man tobe loved and esteemed, who has so far surpassedall his peers, not only by his excellence in theFAUINELLI. 429charming art which he professed, but by the uncommonvirtues of his mind, which have renderedhim amiable and admirable in every situation intowhich fortune has thrown him." The last use whichMetastasio made of his pen was to write to Fari-nelli, in 1782, after an uninterrupted friendship ofupwards of sixty years.Dr. Burney, who visited Farinelli at Bologna in1770, and was hospitably entertained by him,describes him as tall and thin, but by no meansinfirm, and younger in appearance than Dr. Burneyexpected. He had long left off singing, butamused himself still on the harpsichord and violclamour. He had a number of harpsichords madein different countries, which he had named, accordingto the place they held in his favour, after thegreatest of the Italian painters. His first favouritewas a pianoforte, made at Florence so early as theyear 1730, on which was inscribed in gold lettersRaffaelle crUrhino; then he had a Correggio, aGuido, a Titian, and others. He played a considerabletime upon his Raphael with great judgmentand delicacy. He had a sister living in hishouse with her two children, one of which was aninfant, and he was coaxingly fond of it, though itwas cross, sickly, homely, and unamiable : " aconvincing proof," says Burney, " among others,to me, that he was designed by nature for familyattentions and domestic comforts."430 FARINELLI.He was always most polite and attentive to theEnglish who visited him in his retirement, andseemed to remember the kindness and favour ofindividuals, more than the neglect of the publicduring the last year of his residence in London.When the Marquis of Carmarthen paid him a visit,on being told that he was the son of his patron andfriend the Duke of Leeds, Farinelli threw his armsround his neck and embraced him with tears ofjoy. He died at Bologna in 1782, in the seventy-seventhyear of his age.It is evident from the whole tenor of Farinelli'slife, that he was a man of a powerful and well-regulatedmind, and of a very amiable disposition.During the whole of Metastasio's life, he was thatgreat poet's principal correspondent ; and thetopics discussed in their letters, frequently involvingnice and profound speculations on the principlesof poetry and music, show that the one, as wellas the other, was possessed of an enlarged andcultivated understanding. As a singer, there isevery reason to believe, from all that can begathered from contemporary accounts, that lie hasnever yet been surpassed. In respect to the executionof musical passages, though he transcendedany notion that had previously been formed of thepowers of the human voice, and though it wouldseem that the composers of those times were unableto invent passages sufficiently difficult to display hisSENTESINO. 431force and rapidity, yet the utmost difficulties of thiskind which he achieved, (as may be seen by thepassages of execution in his hi'avura songs,) arewithin the reach of any ordinary singer of the presentday. But none of his successors, it may beconfidently said, has excelled him, or even equalledhim, in beauty of voice and skill in its management,in truth of intonation, in purity of style, and,above all, in the power of moving the feelings ofhis hearers. Of this power a most striking illustrationis afforded by an incident which would haveappeared incredible had he not confirmed its truthto Dr. Burney. When Senesino and he were inEngland at the same time, they had not for sometimean opportunity of hearing each other, in consequenceof their engagements at different theatres.At last, however, they were both engaged to sing onthe same stage. Senesino had the part of a furioustyrant, and Farinelli that of an unfortunate hero inchains ; but, in the course of the first air, the captiveso softened the heart of the tyrant, thatSenesino, forgetting his stage-character, ran toFarinelli and embraced him in his own.Francesco Bernard, commonly called Sene-sin,was born at Sienna, about the year 1680. Wefirst hear of him as a celebrated singer when hewas at Dresden, in the year 1719. The Italianopera of that city was then on a splendid footing,and the company consisted of the greatest singers432 SENESINOof the time. According to Quant,* who heardSenesino at that time, he had a powerful, clear,equal, and sweet contralto voice, with a perfect intonationand an excellent shake. His manner ofsinging was masterly and his elocution unrivalled.Though he never loaded adagios with too manyornaments, yet he delivered the original and essentialnotes with the utmost refinement. He sangallegros with great fire, and marked rapid divisions,from the chest, in an articulate and pleasing manner.His countenance was well adapted to thestage, and his action was natural and noble. Tothese qualities he joined a majestic figure ; but hisaspect and deportment were more suited to the partof a hero than of a lover.When the establishment for the performance ofoperas in London, under the title of the RoyalAcademy of Music, was set on foot by a body ofthe nobility and gentry in 1720, Handel, who wascommissioned to form a company, hearing of thesplendour of the Dresden opera, took a journey tothat city, and engaged Senesino and several othermembers of the company. He was the principalsinger in Handel's operas till the year 1726, whenhe found it necessary, from the state of his health, togo to Italy. In 1730 he returned to England, andresumed his situation at the Haymarket. WhenBurney's State of Music in Germany, vol. ii.seneSino. 433the musical quarrels broke out, which ended in theestablishment of an opera, in 1733, in opposition toHandel, Senesino became a member of the hostilecompany : But Farinelli being engaged by the sameparty in 1734, Senesino soon afterwards left England.He retired to his native country of Tuscany,and died about the year 1750.VOL. I. F FCHAPTER XVIII.Caffarelli — Gizziello — Carestini — Guarducci — Durastanti —Guadagni — Mingotti — Gabrielle — Want of tenor and basssingers.Caffarelli, or Caffariello, was born in 1703.He was the son of a Neapolitan peasant, and his namewas Gaetano Majora, though he is commonlyknown by the above surname. His natural giftsattracted the notice of Corpora, who gave instructionsat the same time to him and to Farinelli,whose origin was equally obscure. Corpora, it issaid, taught him in a very extraordinary manner.For a period of five years he permitted him to singnothing but a series of scales and exercises, all ofwhich he wrote down successively on a single sheetof paper. In the sixth year he proceeded to give hisscholar instructions in articulation, pronunciation,and declamation. Caffarelli submitted without amurmur to this unexampled discipline ; though,even at the end of six years, he imagined he hadgot a very little way beyond the mere rudiments ofthe art : but, to his astonishment, his master oneday thus addressed him : — " Young man, you mayCAFFARELLI. 435now leave me. You have nothing more to learnfrom me, and are the greatest singer in the world."This story has been repeated by the best informedwriters, and, no doubt, is founded in truth, thoughwith much exaggeration. A slow and progressivemethod of tuition is certainly the only way to produceexcellence ; but this seems to be carrying theprinciple to a most extravagant length. None butaplodding drudge, without a spark of genius, couldhave submitted to a process which would have beentoo much for the patient endurance even of a Russianserf ; or if a single spark had existed at first, itmust have been extinguished by so barbarous atreatment.Be this, however, as it may, Caffarelli did becomeone of the greatest singers of his time, though hedid not arrive rapidly at the height of his fame.His first appearance in public was at Rome, in 1726;and he gained such reputation in Italy, that he wasengaged, in 1738, to supply the place of Farinelliat the London opera-house. He was not very successfulhere. He had to contend with the disadvantagearising from the remembrance, yet recent,of Farinelli's wonderful powers ; and he was neverwell, or in good voice, during the time he remainedin London, which was only a single season.At a subsequent period Cafl'arelli was lookedupon as Farinelli's rival, and many critics consideredhim the greater singer of the two. Among theseF F 2436 CAFFARELLI.was Corpora, who had been master to both. Thoughhe could not bear the insolence of CafFarelli's disposition,he used to say that he was the greatestsinger that Italy had ever produced. At the mar-^rage of the king of Sardinia, then prince of Savoy,with the infanta of Spain, who had long been Fari-nelli's scholar, it was with great difficulty thatCaffarelli was prevailed upon to go to Turin to singat the royal nuptials. Being obliged to go by anorder of the king of Naples, he was sullen and notdisposed to exert himself, saying, that he had losthis book of closes on the road, and should be able todonothing. This was told to his Sardinian majesty,who did not well know how to treat suchimpertinence, Caffarelli not being his subject.But, on the first night of performance, the princeof Savoy went behind the scenes, as the opera wasgoing to begin, and said to Caffarelli that he wasvery happy to see him, though his princess thoughtit hardly possible that any singer could give himpleasure after Farinelli. "Now, Caffarelli," addedthe prince, clapping him on the shoulder, " doexert yourself a little, and cure the princess of thisprejudice in her master's favour." CafFarelli'svanity was piqued ; '' Sir," he exclaimed, " herhighness shall to-night hear two Farewells in one!"and, exerting all his faculties, he sang in a mannerwhich produced acclamations of delight and astonishment.CAFFARELLI. 437He went to Vienna in 1749. Metastasio, in oneof his letters to Farinelli, gives an account of hisreception in the Austrian capital.You will be curious," says the poet, " to knowhow CafFarelli has been received. The wondersrelated of him by his adherents had excited expectationsof something above humanity ; but the firstnight he absolutely displeased everybody. He saidhe was so oppressed and disconcerted by the presenceof their imperial majesties that he could notrecover himself; and, indeed, in the subsequentrepresentations he regained his credit so much,that some of the nobility and gentry now exalt himto the firmament, and even go so far as to makeheretical comparisons. There are, however, innumerablecritics who find his voice strong, but false,screaming and disobedient ; so that he can donothing considerable without forcing it, and whenforced it becomes harsh and disagreeable. Theysay he has no judgment, and that by frequentlyattempting what he is unable to execute he leavesit unfinished ; that he has an old-fashioned and badtaste ; and that they can discover in his graces theantique and stale flourishes of Nicolini and Matuc-cio. They maintain that he treads the stage abominably; that in the recitatives he is an old nun ;and that in all he sings there is a whimsical tone oflamentation sufficient to sour the gayest allegro.They allow that he can sometimes please excessively,but say that these happy moments are uncertain.438 CAFFARELLI,and depend on the caprice of his voice and temper,and do not make amends for the suffering producedby his imperfections. You will be pleased toobserve that I only quote, but do not decide ; on thecontrary, I protest to you that I have all the esteemfor the performer which he merits. The failure ofthe first night, the diversity of opinions, and thelittle appearance there is of his having acquired thefavour of your august patroness, a princess whomyou know to be an exquisite judge of music, havehumbled him so extremely, that from his presentmodesty and resignation you would not know him.If he continues in this disposition, I hope he willacquire many of those suffrages which were at firstrefused him."His arrogance and turbulent spirit, however,speedily revived, and produced di fracas of whichMetastasio gives the following lively account in oneof his letters to the Princess di Belmontee.In exchange for the musical news with whichyour excellency has honoured me concerning ouramiable friend Monticelli, I shall give you somemilitary tidings of our valiant CafFarelli, who a fewdays ago gave public proofs of his being no less avotary of Mars than of Apollo. For my misfortuneI was not present at these warlike feats, but thefollowing is a most faithful narrative.The poet of this theatre is a Milanese young-man,descended from very worthy parents ; but inconsiderate,a great admirer of the fair sex, despisingCAFFARELLI. 439money, and as deficient in judgment as he is rich intalent. To this young author the managers of thetheatre have entrusted the whole arrangements ofthe stage. I know not whether it proceeded fromrivalry in abilities or in personal beauty, but thepoet and the singer have all along been on the quivive,and have treated each other with sneers andsarcasms. At length Migliavacca (the poet) issuedorders for a rehearsal of the opera in preparation.All the performers obeyed the summons exceptCaffarelli ; he appeared, however, at the end of therehearsal, and asked the company, with a verydisdainful air, what was the use of these rehearsals ?The conductor answered, in a voice of authority,that no one was accountable to him for what wasdone ; that he ought to be glad that his failurein attendance had been suffered ; that his presenceor absence was of little consequence to the successof the opera, but that whatever he chose to do himself,he ought at least to let others do their duty.Caifarelli, in a great rage, exclaimed that he whohad ordered such a rehearsal was a solemn coxcomb.At this all the patience and dignity of thepoet forsook him ; and getting into a toweringpassion, he honoured the singer with all thoseglorious titles which Caifarelli had earned in variousparts of Europe, and slightly touched, but in livelycolours, some of the most memorable particulars ofhis life : nor was he likely soon to come to a close ;but the hero of the panegyric, cutting the thread of440 CAFFARELLI.his own praise, boldly called out to his eulogist,Follow me, if thou hast courage, to a place wherethere is none to assist thee !' and, moving towardsthe door, beckoned to him to come out. The poethesitated a moment, and then saying with a smile,Truly such an adversary makes me blush ; butcome along, since it is a christian act to chastise afool or a madman,' — advanced to take the field.But CafFarelli, who had flattered himself, perhaps,that the muses would not be so valiant, or imaginedthat, according to the rules of the criminal law,a delinquent ought to be punished m loco pat ratedelicti, changed his first resolution of seekinganother field of battle, and intrenching himselfbehind the door, drew his bright blade, and presentedits point to the enemy. Nor did the otherrefuse the combat —Ma fiery anch' eli il rilucente acciaroLibero della placid glaring.'The by-sanders tremble ; each calls on his tutelarsaint, expecting every moment to see poetical andvocal blood besprinkle the harpsichords and doublebasses. But at length, the Signora Tesi, risingfrom under her canopy, where till now she had remaineda most tranquil spectator, walked with aslow and stately step towards the combatants ; whenO sovereign power of beauty ! - the frantic CafFa-belli, even in the fiercest paroxysm of his wrath,captivated and appeased by this unexpected tenderness,runs with rapture to meet her, hys his swordCAFFAKELLI. 441at her feet, begs pardon for his error, and generouslysacrificing to her his vengeance, seals, with a thousandkisses upon her hand, his protestations ofobedience, respect, and humility. The nymph signifiesher forgiveness by a nod ; the poet sheathshis sword ; the spectators begin to breathe again ;and the tumultuous assembly breaks up amid thejoyous sounds of laughter. In collecting the numbersof the wounded and the slain, none was foundbat the poor copyist, who, in trying to part thecombatants, had received a small contusion in theclavicle of the foot, from an involuntary kick ofthe poet's Pegasus. Next day the battle was commemoratedin an anonymous sonnet ; and soon afteran answer was produced by the belligerent poet.I hope to procure a copy of both to enclose in thisepistle. To-day the German comedians are to representthis extraordinary event on the stage. Theysay that already not a place is to be had for love ormoney, and it is not yet twelve o'clock. I shouldlike to be one of the audience, if I had an invisiblering."Caffarelli's success at Vienna does not appear tohave been equal to his deserts as an artist. Hisconceit and self-sufficiency must have created anunfavourable impression ; and Metastasio's opinion,we may suppose, was in some degree influenced bythe circumstance that Caffarelli looked upon himself,and was looked upon by others, as the rival442 GIZZIELLO.of Farinelli, to whom the poet was so greatlyattached.Mr. Garrick, who heard CafFarelli at Naples in1764, when he was turned of sixty, thus speaks ofhim in a letter to Dr. Burney : " Yesterday we attendedthe ceremony of making a nun ; she was thedaughter of a duke, and the whole was conductedwith great splendour and magnificence. The churchwas richly ornamented, and there were two largebands of music of all kinds. The consecration wasperformed with great solemnity, and I was verymuch affected ; and to crown the whole, the principalpart was sung by the famous Caffarelli, who, thoughold, has pleased me more than all the singers I everheard. He touched me ; and it is the first time Ihave been touched since I came into Italy."Caffarelli spent his latter days at Naples, in theenjoyment of a large fortune which he had made byhis profession. He resided in a magnificent housewhich he had built for himself, and over the doorof which he had placed this inscription: " AmphionTheirs, ego domus" He bought a dukedom, afterhis own decease, for his nephew, who accordinglybecame Duce di Santa Dorado. Caffarelli died in1783, in his eightieth year.GizziELLO (whose name was Conti) was engagedby Handel, and came to England in 1736. Thoughthen a young man, he had gained great reputationin Italy ; but such were his modesty and diffidence,GIZZIELLO. 443that when he first heard Farinelli at a private rehearsal,he burst into tears, and fainted away fromdespondency. He was in London for two seasons,and received with much favour. His voice was thena very high soprano, and his style remarkable forpathos, delicacy, and refinement. His manner ofsinging is said to have had a considerable effect inmodernising the character of Handel's opera airs.When Gizziello first sang at Rome, before hecame to England, his performance was consideredso admirable that it became the subject of conversationthroughout Italy. Caifarelli. who was thenat Naples, and at the height of his fame, was sostruck by what he heard of the young singer, thathe seized the first opportunity, when he could bespared from the opera, of going to Rome to hearhim. He travelled post all night, and arriving atRome the following evening, entered the pit wrappedup in a cloak, and unknown to anybody. Gizziellosang ; and, when he had done, Caftarelli cried outwitha loud voice, " Bravo, bravissimo, Gizziello!^ CaflTarelli che ti lo dice !" and, immediatelysplitting the theatre, set out the same night on hisreturn to Naples.After leaving England, Gizziello pursued hisstudies so diligently and successfully, that he evencontested the palm with Farinelli at Madrid* Hewas at Lisbon during the earthquake in 1775 ; andhis mind was so deeply impressed by the horror of444 Caressing.that tremendous visitation, that he retired into amonastery, where he ended his days.Carestini first appeared at Rome in 1721. In1723 he was at Prague, during the great musicalperformances there, on the occasion of the coronationof the emperor Charles VI. as king of Bohemia ;on which occasion an opera was performed in theopen air, in which the chorus consisted of a hundredvoices, and the orchestra of two hundred instruments.He came to England in 1733, being engagedby Handel to supply the place of Senesino,who, with almost the whole of Handel's company,had deserted him and joined the rival establishmentset on foot by the nobility. Carestini remainedabout seven years in England ; a proof of the estimationin which he was held. After leaving Englandhe sang for many years in Italy, Germany, andRussia, with the highest reputation. He died aboutthe year 1758. " Carestini's person," says Burney.'was tall, beautiful, and majestic. He was a veryanimated and intelligent actor ; and having a considerableportion of enthusiasm in his composition,with a lively and inventive imagination, he renderedeverything he sung interesting by good taste,energy, and judicious embellishments. He manifestedgreat agility in the execution of difficultdivisions from the chest in a most articulate andadmirable manner."Among the principal singers of this period wasDURASTANTI. 445GuARDUCci, a pupil of the famous Bologuese schoolof singing conducted by Bernacchi. Guarduccicame to England in 1767, and remained for severalseasons. He was then somewhat in years, tall andawkward in his figure and an inanimate actor ; circumstanceswhich at first created a prepossessionagainst him ; but his merit at length was recognised.He soon discovered," says Burney, " that a singercould not captivate the English by tricks or instrumentalexecution, and told me some years afterthat the gravity of our taste had been of great useto him." The English are as liable to be caught bytricks of execution as their neighbours ; but itwould rather appear that Guarducci 's powers ofexecution were insufficient to produce this effectwas," continues Burney, " the plainest andmost simple singer, of the first class, I ever heard.All his effects were produced by expression and highfinishing, nor did he ever aim at execution." Suchqualities will be appreciated by all hearers, howevermuch they may be dazzled by the performance ofbrilliant difficulties.Margherita DuRASTANTiwas engaged by Handelat the same time with Senesino, and came with himto England. She sang in the operas composed byHandel, Buononcini, and Attilio Ariosto, till theyear 1723, when she quitted England, findingherself unable to contend with the superior powersof Cuzzoni. She took a formal leave of the Englishnation, by singing on the stage the following song,446 DURASTANTI.written for her by Pope, at the desire of her patronthe Earl of Peterborough.'* Generous, gay, and gallant nation,Bold in arms and bright in arts ;Land secure from all invasion,All but Cupid's gentle darts !From your charms, oh who would run ?Who would leave you for the sun ?Happy soil, adieu, adieu !Let old charmers yield to new ;In ai-ms, in arts, be still more shining ;All your joys be still increasing,All your tastes be still refining,All your jars for ever ceasing :But let old charmers yield to new ;Happy soil, adieu, adieu"*This effusion was thus burlesqued by Arbuthnot.Puppies, whom I now am leaving.Merry sometimes, always mad,Who lavish most when debts are craving,On fool, on farce, and masquerade !Who would not from such bubbles run,And leave such blessings for the sun ?Happy soil, and simple crew !Let old sharpers yield to new.All your tastes be still refining ;All your nonsense still more shining :Blest in some Cronstadt or Bosch,He more awkward, he more husky ;And never want, when these are lost t' us,Another Heidegger and Faustus.Happy soil, and simple crew !Let old sharpers yield to new !Bubbles all, adieu, adieu !"GUADAGNI. .447In the Evening Post oil \\\ March, 1721, there is.the following paragraph : " Last Thursday his majestywas pleased to stand godfather, and the princessand the Lady Bruce godmothers, to a daughterof Mrs. Durastanti, chief singer in the opera-house.The Marquis Visconti for the king, and theLady Lichfield for the princess." This circumstancedeserves mention, as a remarkable indication of therespect which was paid in the highest quarters tothis lady's private character.Gaetano Guadagni was a native of Vicenza.At an early age, and before he had acquired anyconsiderable reputation, he came to England, in1748, in a company of singers who performed ,or opere huff, with great success. Thoughhis style was then unformed, the excellence of hisvoice attracted the notice of Handel, who employedhim to sing in the oratorios of the Messiah andSampson. During his first residence in England,he was more noticed for his singing in English thanin Italian. When he performed in the Englishopera of the Fairies, Garrick took pleasure in givinghim instructions in the art of acting. He leftLondon about the year 1753 ; and in the folio wing-yearwas at Lisbon with Gizziello, and narrowlyescaped destruction during the earthquake. WhenGizziello, after this calamity, retired to a monastery,he persuaded the young singer to accompany himin his retreat, where, during a considerable time,he took pains in directing his studies ; and it is to448 GUADAGNI.this circumstance that Guadagni's subsequent excellenceand celebrity may be ascribed. Aftersinging for several years, with great reputation, inItaly and Germany, he returned to England in1769. He left this country in 1771, after having,notwithstanding his great talents, made himself unpopularby an uncompromising and troublesometemper. He quarrelled with the honourable Mr.Hobart, then patentee of the opera, on the groundof some imaginary affront offered to his sister ; andhis determination to support the dignity and proprietyof his dramatic character by refusing to bowwhen applauded, or to injure the effect of an interestingscene by repeating an air when encored, sooffended the public, that at length he never appearedwithout being hissed. The musical worldwas then split into factions and cabals ; and hisenemies used to begin an encore with which hewould not comply, for the purpose of bringing uponhim the indignation of the audience.In 1772, Dr. Burney, in his travels through Germany,found Guadagni at Munich, in the service ofthe Elector of Bavaria, and enjoying the respectand honour due to his talents. He entertained thetourist with great hospitality, and spoke of individualsin England with much gratitude and kindness,but complained bitterly (and seemingly withreason) of the treatment he had received from thepublic. He finally retired to his native country,and died at Padua in 1786.GUADAGNI. 449Bnrncy, describing Guadagni during his last residencein England, says, " As an actor he seemsto have had no equal on an}^ stage in Europe : hisfigure was uncommonly elegant and noble ; hiscountenance replete with beauty, intelligence, anddignity ; and his attitudes and gestures were so fullof grace and propriety that they would have beenexcellent studies for a statuary." — As a singer, hisstyle was very peculiar. " The music he sung,"sa's Burney, " was the simplest imaginable ; a fewnotes with frequent pauses, and opportunities ofbeing liberated from the composer and the band,were all he wanted. And in these seemingly extemporaneouseffusions he proved the inherentpower of melody totally divorced from harmony, andunassisted even by poisonous accompaniment. Surprisedat such great effects from causes apparentlyso small, I frequently tried to analyse the pleasurehe communicated to the audience, and found thatit chiefly arose from his artful manner of diminishingthe tones of his voice like the dying notes of anaeolian harp. Most other singers captivate by aswell or mess de voce ; but Guadagni, after beginninga note or passage with all the force he couldsafely exert, fined it off to a thread, and gave it allthe effect of extreme distance." His voice, however,was then comparatively thin and feeble,having lost a portion of the power and volumewhich it possessed when he was formerly in England; but, notwithstanding this defect, he must beVOL. I. G G450 MINGOTTI.considered as a dramatic singer of the highestclass.Caterina Mingotti was born at Naples aboutthe year 1726. Her father, an officer in theAustrian service, carried her, in her infancy, intoGermany; and, being soon afterwards left an orphan,she was placed by an uncle in a convent at Grate inSilesia, where her fine voice and ardent love ofmusic induced the abbess to give her a musicaleducation. When she was fourteen, she was left,by the death of her uncle, in a destitute situation,and was soon afterwards induced to marry SignorMingotti, manager of the opera at Dresden, a manadvanced in years. At Dresden she attracted thenotice of Corpora, who procured an engagement forher at the theatre, where, it is said, her performancemade so great an impression, that the celebratedFaustina was impelled by jealousy to leave Dresden.The fame she acquired in that city procured for heran invitation to Naples, where she first appeared inAristea, in the Olimpiade, composed by Galuppi,and gained prodigious applause, not only by hersinging, but the new reading which, as an actress,she gave the character.From Naples she returned to Dresden, and afterwardswent to Madrid, where she sang, with Giz-ziello, in the operas, under the direction of Fari-nelli, who was so rigid in his restrictions, that hewould not allow her to sing anywhere but in theopera at court, or even to practise in a room nextMlNGOTTf. 451the street. She was requested to sing at privateconcerts by many of the Spanish nobility, but couldnot obtain permission from the opera-director, whocarried his rigour so far as to deny a pregnant ladyof high rank the pleasure of hearing her, thoughshe was unable to go to the theatre, and declaredthat she longed for a song from Mingotti. In Spainthis species of mental malady is treated with theutmost attention. The lady's husband complainedto the king of Farinelli's obduracy, which, he said,might be fatal to his wife and his child ; and theconsequence was a royal mandate, ordering to receive the lady at her house and gratifyher longing.After remaining two years in Spain, SignoraMingotti came to England in 1754, and excitedunbounded admiration. She soon engaged in disputeswith Vaneschi, the manager of the opera,which occasioned violent feuds and animosities inthe musical world, almost every person of fashionthinking it necessary, in supporting that character,to side with one or other of the parties.Many amusing anecdotes are told of the absurditiescommitted, under the influence of this musicalmania, by the votaries of ton. Mrs. Fox Lane, afterwardsLady Single, a warm patroness of Mingotti,desirous to enlist in her cause the Hon. GeneralCrewe, gave him one day a long history of the disputesbetween the singer and the manager, appealingto him for his judgment on so momentous a subject.G G 2452 MINGOTTI.The general listened with much seeming attention ;but when she thought him sufficiently impressedwith the wrongs of Signora Mingotti, he asked hervery quietly, " And pray, madam, who is SignoraMingotti?" — " Get. out of my house!" cried thelady in a passion, " you shall never hear her singanother note at my concerts as long as you live." —Admission to Mrs. Lane's concerts, at which and the famous violinist Giardini used exclusivelyto perform, was considered, like the entreeto Alack's at present, as the conclusive stampto the character of a person of fashion. Therewas no sacrifice or mortification to which fashionablepeople would not submit in order to obtain it :And," says Burney, " la padi'ona della can lostbut few opportunities of letting them know thevalue she set on her invitations, by using them likedogs when they were there. Whenever a benefitwas in contemplation for one of her proteges, taking-careof the honour of her guests, she obliged themto behave with due gratitude and munificence on theoccasion. ' Come !' she would say to her friends,give me five guineas,' — a demand as implicitlyobeyed as if made on the road. Nor had any one,who wished ever to be admitted into such goodcompany again, the courage to ask the occasion ofthe demand ; but patiently waited to know thelady's pleasure to tell them whether they should behonoured with a ticket to Giardini's or Mingotti'sbenefit."MINGOTTI.Vaneschi having become bankrupt and left thecountry, Giardini and Mingotti were foolish enoughto undertake the management of the opera, whichbrought them both, as it has done many others, tothe brink of ruin. Mingotti left England in 1758,and afterwards sang at the principal cities in Italy.In 1763 she established herself at Munich, whereshe was residing when Dr. Burney visited that cityin 1772. Her ruinous speculation in London hadswallowed up the fortune she had previously madeby her exertions ; and her income was barely sufficient,with economy, to support her respectably.She seemed," Burney says, " to live very comfortably,was well received at court, and esteemedby all who were able to judge of her understandingand enjoy her conversation." " It gave me great]pleasure," he adds, " to hear her speak concerningpractical music, which she does with as much intelligenceas any maestro di capella with whom I everconversed. Her knowledge in singing, and powersof expression, in different styles, are still amazing,and must delight all such as can receive pleasurefrom song, unconnected with the blandishments ofyouth and beauty. She speaks three languages,German, French, and Italian, so well that it is difficultto say which of them is her own. English shelikewise speaks, and Spanish, well enough to conversein them, and understands Latin ; but inthe three languages first mentioned she is trulyeloquent."454 Gabrielle.As a singer and actress Dr. Burney thus describesher: " Her style of singing was alwaysgrand, and such as discovered her to be a perfectmistress of her art. She was a most judicious andcomplete actress, extending her intelligence to thepoetry and every part of the drama ; yet hergreatest admirers acknowledged that her voiceand manner would have been still more irresistible,if she had possessed a little more feminine graceand softness."The last star which we shall enumerate in thisvocal constellation, is the celebrated CaterinaGabrielle —celebrated not less for the singularityof her character than for her powers as a singer.She was the daughter of a cardinal's cook, andthence acquired the appellation (after the Italianfashion) of La Cuochetina. She was a pupil ofCorpora's ; and at an early age made herself remarkablethroughout Italy for her extraordinarytalents, and her capricious and untractable disposition.She was engaged to go to Madrid in 1758;on which occasion Metastasio gave his friend Fari-nelli the following account of her. " The amusingstories which you hear from Italy concerning ourSignora Gabrielle are but too true : She is young,an Italian, favoured by nature, and of transcendentabilities in music : so that it is not surprising that,like other sirens, she should be capricious. But inyour hands I hope she will be more prudent. Sheis perfectly aware of her own merit, and yet ex-gabrielle.455extremely timid. In order to moderate her impetuosity,it will be necessary, perhaps, to impress hermind with great respect for, or rather positive fearof, the sovereign and the court : but that this maynot depress her spirits too much in performance, youshould likewise encourage her by your approbationand the applause of your friends ; and I assure youshe will deserve it. Indeed you are a more expertpilot than I, and I have no doubt will turn yourskill to good account. At Vienna, Milan, andLucca, where this young singer was dexterouslymanaged, she enchanted everybody who heard her;but at Padua, where they tried to use the whipmore than the spur, they threw away their money."We do not learn how far, or how successfully,Farinelli availed himself of these hints of the good-naturedpoet.Bygone, in his Tour through Sicily and Malta,gives an ample and entertaining account of thissingular person. " The first woman," says thisagreeable writer, " is Gabrielle, who is certainlythe greatest singer in the world, and those whosing in the same theatre must be capital, otherwisethey never can be attended to. This, indeed, hasbeen the fate of all the performers, except Pacchie-rotti, and he too gave himself up for lost on hearingher performance. It happened to be an air ofexecution, exactly adapted to her voice, in whichshe exerted herself in so astonishing a manner, that,before it was half done, poor Pacchierotti burst out456 . Gabrielle.a crying, and ran in behind the scenes, lamentingthat he had dared to appear on the same stage withso wonderful a singer, where his small talents mustnot only be lost, but where he must ever be accusedof presumption, which he hoped was foreignto his character. It was with some difficulty theycould prevail upon him to appear again ; but froman applause well merited, both from his talentsand modesty, he soon began to pluck up a littlecourage ; and in the singing of a tender air, evenshe herself, as well as the audience, is said to havebeen moved.The performance of Gabrielle is so generallyknown and admired, that it is needless to say anythingto you on that subject. Her wonderful executionand volubility of voice has long been theadmiration of Italy, and has even obliged them toinvent a new term to express it ; and would she .exert herself as much to please as to astonish, shemight almost perform the wonders that have beenascribed to Orpheus and Timotheus : but it happens,luckily perhaps for the repose of mankind,that her caprice is, if possible, even greater thanher talents, and has made her still more contemptiblethan these have made her celebrated. By thismeans, her character has often proved a sufficientantidote both to the charms of her voice and thoseof her person, which are, indeed, almost equallypowerful : but if these had been united to the qualitiesof a modest and an amiable mind, she wouldGabrielle. 457have made dreadful havoc in the world. However,with all her faults, she is certainly the mostdangerous siren of modern times, and has mademore conquests, I suppose, than any one womanbreathing. It is but justice to add, that, contraryto the generality of her profession, she is by nomeans selfish or mercenary, but, on the contrary,has given many singular proofs of generosity anddisinterestedness. She is very rich, from thebounty, as is supposed, of the last emperor, who wasfond of having her at Vienna : but she was at lastbanished that city, as she has likewise been mostof those in Italy, from the broils and squabbles thather intriguing spirit, perhaps, still more than herbeauty, had excited.'^ There are a great many anecdotes concerningher that would not make an unentertaining volume,and, I am told, are, or will soon be, published.Although she is considerably upwards of thirty, onthe stage she scarcely appears to be eighteen ; andthis art of appearing young is none of the mostcontemptible she possesses. When she is in goodhumour, and really chooses to exert herself, thereis nothing in music I have ever heard, to be comparedto her performance ; for she sings to the heartas well as to the fancy, when she pleases, and shethen commands every passion with unboundedsway. But she is seldom capable of exercisingthese wonderful powers ; and her caprice and hertalents, exerting themselves by turns, have given458 Gabrielle.her all her life the singular fate of becoming alternatelyan object of admiration and contempt. Herpowers in acting and reciting are scarcely inferiorto those of her singing : sometimes a few words inthe recitative, with a simple accompaniment, producean effect that I have never been sensible offrom any other performer, and incline me to believewhat Rousseau advances on this branch ofmusic, which with us is so much despised. Sheowes much of her merit to the instruction she receivedfrom Metastasio, particularly in acting andreciting ; and he allows that she does more justiceto his operas than any other actress that everattempted them.Her caprice is so fixed and stubborn, that neitherinterest, nor flattery, nor threats, nor punishmentshave the least power over it ; and it appearsthat treating her with respect and contempt havean equal tendency to increase it. It is seldom thatshe condescends to exert these wonderful talents ;but most particularly if she imagines that such anexertion is expected. And instead of singing herairs as other actresses do, for the most part sheonly hums them over, a mezzo voce : and no artwhatever is capable of making her sing when shedoes not choose it. The most successful expedienthas ever been found, to prevail on her favouritelover (for she always has one) to place himself inthe centre of the pit or the front box ; and if theyare on good terms, which is seldom the case.GABRIELLI. 459she will address her tender airs to him, and exertherself to the utmost. Her present inamorato promisedto give us this specimen of his power overher. He took his seat accordingly ; but Gabrielle,probably suspecting the connivance, would take nonotice of him ; so that even this expedient doesnot always succeed. The viceroy, who is fond ofmusic, has tried every method with her to no purpose.Some time ago he gave a great dinner tothe principal nobility of Palermo, and sent an invitationto Gabrielle to be of the party. Every otherperson arrived at the hour of invitation. The viceroyordered dinner to be put back, and sent to lether know that the company waited her. Themessenger found her reading in bed. She saidshe was sorry for having made the company wait,and begged he would make her apology, butthat really she had entirely forgot her engagement.The viceroy would have forgiven this piece of insolence,but when the company came to the opera,Gabrielle repeated her part with the utmost negligenceand indifference, and sang all her airs inwhat they call sotto voce, that is, so low that theycan scarcely be heard. The viceroy was offended;but as he is a good-tempered man, he was loth tomake use of authority ; but at last, by a perseverancein this insolent stubbornness, she obligedhim to threaten her with punishment in case sheany longer refused to sing. On this she grewmore obstinate than ever, declaring that force and460 GABRIELLI.authority should never succeed with her ; that hemight make her cry, but never could make hersing. The viceroy then sent her to prison, whereshe remained twelve days ; during which time shegave magnificent entertainments every day, paidthe debts of all the poor prisoners, and distributedlarge sums in charity. The viceroy was obliged togive up struggling with her, and she was at lastset at liberty amidst the acclamations of thepoor.Luckily for us, she is at present in good humour,and sometimes exerts herself to the utmost of herpower. She says she has several times been onterms with the manager of our opera, but thinksshe shall never be able to pluck up resolutionenough to go to England. What do you think is herreason ? It is by no means a bad one. She says shecannot command her caprice, but for the most partitcommands her ; and that there she could have noopportunity of indulging it. For, says she, wereI to take it into my head not to sing, I am told thepeople there would certainly mob me, and perhapsbreak my bones ; now I like to sleep in a wholeskin, although it should even be in a prison. Shealleges, too, that it is not always caprice that preventsher from singing, but that it often dependsupon physical causes. And this, indeed, I canreadily believe : for that wonderful flexibility ofvoice, that runs with such rapidity and neatnessthrough the most minute divisions, and producesGabrielle, 461almost instantaneously so great a variety of modulation,must surely depend on the very nicest toneof the fibres. And if these are in the smallestdegree relaxed, or their elasticity diminished, howis it possible that their contractions and expansionscan so readily obey the will as to produce theseeffects ? The opening of the glottis which formsthe voice is extremely small, and in every varietyof tone its diameter must suffer a sensible change ;for the same diameter must ever produce the sametone. So wonderfully minute are its contractionsand dilatations, that Dr. Neil, I think, computesthat in some voices its opening, not more than thetenth of an inch, is divided into upwards of twelvehundred parts, the different sound of every one ofwhich is perceptible to an exact ear. Now what anice tension of fibres must this require ! I shouldimagine even the most minute change in the airmust cause a sensible difference, and that in ourfoggy climate the fibres would be in danger oflosing this wonderful sensibility, or at least that theywould very often be put out of tune. It is the samecase with an ordinary voice, where the variety ofdivisions run through, and the volubility with whichthey are executed, bear no proportion to those of aGabrielle"*The public do not make sufficient allowance for the extremedelicacy of the vocal organs of great singers. Signora told Burney,. that " she was frequently hissed by the Englishfor having the toothache, a cold, or a fever, to which the462 GABRIELLI.Notwithstanding lier dread of the English public,however, Gabrielle came to London in 1775. Shedid not make so great an impression as she ought tohave done ; for, though no longer young, she hadneither lost her beauty nor her vocal powers."She had no indications," says Burney, " of lowbirth in her countenance or deportment, which hadall the grace and dignity of a Roman matron.Her reputation was so great before her arrival inEngland, for singing and caprice, that the public,expecting perhaps too much of both, was unwillingto allow her due praise in her performance, and tooliberal in ascribing everything she said and did topride and insolence. It having been reported thatgood people of England will readily allow every human being tobe liable, except an actor or a singer," Our vocal performers areconstantly twitted with theatrical moments, as if they, of all peoplein the world, can never have an illness unless there is adesign in it ; and are thus inconsiderately treated with greatinjustice. Look at the life of an Italian prima donna — MadameGrisi, for instance— during the London season ;, her continualand seemingly indefatigable exertion, night after night, andmorning after morning, at operas, concerts, rehearsals, and musicalparties at the houses of the great, exposed to the effects ofheated rooms and chilling draughts, and suffering, moreover, underthose influences of our climate which are so strongly felt bythe " children of the south." Observe, at the same time, withwhat steadiness she goes through her various labours, and howvery seldom the public have to complain of disappointment ; andwe shall be convinced that no class of persons are less apt thangreat singers to allow even real indisposition to interfere with thefulfilment of their duties.GABUIKLLI. 463she often feigned sickness, and sang ill when shewas able to sing well, few were willing to allow shecould be sick, or that she ever sang her best whenshe was here ; and those who were inclined tobelieve that sometimes she might perhaps haveexerted herself in pure caprice, thought her voiceon the decline, or that fame, as usual, had deviatedfrom the truth in speaking of her talents. Hervoice, though of an exquisite quality, was not verypowerful. As an actress, though of low stature,there were such grace and dignity in her gesturesand deportment as caught every unprejudiced eye ;indeed she filled the stage and occupied the attentionof the spectators so much, that they could lookat nothing else while she was in view. Her freaksand espiegleries, which had fixed her reputation,seemed to have been very much subdued before herarrival in England. In conversation she seemedthe most intelligent and best bred virtuosa withwhom I had ever conversed ; not only on the subjectof music, but on every subject concerningwhich a well-educated female, who had seen theworld, might reasonably be expected to have obtainedinformation. She had been three years inRussia previous to her arrival in England, duringwhich time no peculiarities of individual character,national manners, or court etiquette, had escapedher observation. In youth, her beauty and capricehad occasioned a universal delirium among heryoung countrymen, and there were still remains of464 BASS SINGERS.both sufficiently powerful, while she was in England,to render credible their former influence."Soon after leaving England she retired to Bologna,where she spent the remainder of her life in tranquillity.Besides the singers of whom some account hasnow been given, many others (some of them ofhardly inferior pretensions) might be enumeratedas being the immediate disciples of the great Italianschools in the beginning of the last century.Among these may be mentioned the names ofValentini, Amorevoli, Monticelli, Manzoli, Raaf,Signora Strata and Signora Frasi.It is to be remarked, that, during the periodwhen the Italian school of singing was in its mostflourishing state, the principal male performerswere possessed of soprano or contralto voices. Inthe operas of that time, subordinate parts onlywere written for tenor or bass voices, and given toperformers of inferior note. In several of Handel'sItalian operas, written for our stage, there are partsfor a bass, which were performed by Roschi, asinger of ability, though it does not seem that hehad any reputation on the continent. WhenHandel, in 1729, formed a company for the performanceof Italian operas, and announced theirnames in the newspapers, he said that there wasa bass voice from Hamburgh, there being noneworth engaging in Italy." This bass voice belongedto a singer of the name of Reimschneider, andTENOR SINGERS. 465there were two other German singers, Rein hold andWaltz, whose names are attached to the bass partsin the published music of several Italian operasperformed in London. Parts for a tenor voice areof very rare occurrence : and the only tenor singerbelonging to the Italian school of the period inquestion, who acquired any great degree of celebrity,was Raaf, a native of Germany. At a time whenthe hero or the lover was a soprano or a contralto,the tenor must necessarily have been excluded,except in the very rare instances where parts forthese different voices could be introduced withoutinterfering with each other, and producing an incongruouseffect. In tyrants, old men, or roughand harsh characters, the bass voice could be appropriatelyintroduced : but it would seem that nothing-morewas required from the performance than forceand energy, without any of the polish and cultivationwhich have been attained by the bass-singersof more recent times.END OF VOL. i.VOL. 1. H HLONDON;IliOTSON AND Palmer!, Printers, SAVOY Street, Strand).