MUSICAL DRAMA.VOL. II.M MemoirsTHE MUSICAL DRAMA.BY GEORGE HOGARTH,AUTHOR OFMUSICAL HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, AND CRITICISM.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON :RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,IJufclisfjcr in ordinary to peer fWajrstg.1838.LONDON:Fronted BY IBOTSON AND PALMER,SAVOY STREET, STRAND.CONTENTSOF THE SECOND VOLUME.CHAPTER I.The Italian opera established in England — Handel's Rinaldo —Calypso and Telemachus — Galliard — Anastasia Robinson —Amadigi — The Contrivances — The Royal Academy of first composers and singers — Radamisto — Astarto —Muzio Scevola — Opera subscriptions — Griselda — BononciniAriosto — Neglect of the Italian opera — Tolomeo Re d'EgitioClose of the Royal Academy of Music— Opera conductedby Heidegger and Handel — New singers engaged — ParthenopeThe nobility's opera — Opposition to Handel — Ruinousconsequences to him — He abandons dramatic composition —Chronological list of his Italian operas — His published operasObservations on Handel's Italian music— Operas of contemporarycomposers — Decline of the Italian opera about themiddle of the eighteenth century . . Page 1VI CONTENTS.CHAPTER II.Neglect of the English opera at the beginning of the 1 8thcentury — The Beggars Opera — Its origin — First performance—Political allusions — Its success— Lavinia Fenton -Thomas Walker— Jeremiah Clarke — Authors of songs —Observations on The Beggars Opera— Polly— Gay's otherpieces — Acis and Galatea — Its music by Handel . 40CHAPTER III.Miss Rafter, afterwards Mrs. Clive — Henry Carey— Miss Arne,afterwards Mrs. Gibber— Thomas Augustine Arne — JohnBeard — Cecilia Young, afterwards Mrs. Arne — Lampe — TheDragon of Wantley — Comus — Various operas by Arne —Artaxerxes — English recitative — Arne's airs — Love in a Village— Character of Arne — Boyce — The Chaplet and Shepherd'sLottery — Pasticcio operas —-miss Brent — Michael ArneCHAPTER IV.State of the Italian opera in the middle of the last century —Structure of an opera — Recitative — Various classes of airs —Changes effected by composers — Jomelli . . 103CHAPTER V.Picking — Sacchini — Anfossi — Traetta — Guglielmi — Sarti — Minorcomposers . . . .132CHAPTER VI.Paesiello— Cimarosa — Zingarelli . . .154CHAPTER VII.Italian singers — Guadagni — Millico — Cecilia Davies — MazziniAgujari — Banti — Todi — Pacchierotti — Rubinelli— MarchesMara— Billington . . . .171CONTENTS. VIICHAPTER VIII.The musical drama in Germany — The Italian opera establishedindifferent German states — At Vienna — Gluck— At DresdenAt Berlin— Frederick II. — Hasse, Graun, and Agricola —Madame Mara — John Christian Bach — Naumann — Missis— Haydn . . . .187CHAPTER IX.Mozart . . 225CHAPTER X.The French opera — Rameau — Italian burlettas — Disputes —Rousseau's Devin du Village — French burlettas — Montreville— Dunii — Favart and Madame Favart — Contemporarydescriptions of the French opera — Les adieux de Thalie 268CHAPTER XI.Sedaine — Gretry — Arrival of Gluck — Patronised by the Frenchparty — Arrival of Picking — His Roland — The Gluckists andPiccinists — Operas by Gluck and by Picking — MademoiselleLaguerre — Rebellion at the Opera — Musical Feuds 297CHAPTER XIISacchini — Tribute by Picking to Gluck's memory — Their rivalryand its consequences — Gretry's operas — D'Hele — DalayracGossec — Salieri — Beaumarchais — Mehul — Cherubini —Catel, Berton, and Le Sueur — Boieldieu — Herold — AuberMeyerbeer — Halevy — French singing . .321CHAPTER XIII.Italian opera to the present time — London opera-house— Winter'soperas — Mrs. Billington — Madame Grassini — Mr. Braham— Madame Catalans — Introduction of Mozart's operas —Bertinotti, Tramezzani, and Naldi — Vestris — Fodor — Remarkableseason of 1817 — Camporese — Ambrogetti— Rossini.Vlll CONTENTS.CHAPTER XIV.Madame Pasta — Veluti — Mademoiselle Sontag — Madame Malibran— Present Italian performers — Present state of theItalian Opera 395CHAPTER XV.The English opera since the time of Arne — Linley — SheridanThe Duenna — Linley's operas — Jackson — Mrs. Crouch —Dr. Arnold — Dibdin — Shield — Storage— Billington, Mara,Incledon, Braham, Kelly, and other vocal performers — BishopAdaptations of foreign operas — Recent English operas —Vocal performers — Present state of the opera. . 427MEMOIRSMUSICAL DRAMA.CHAPTER I.The Italian opera established in England — Handel's Rinaldo —Calypso and Telemachus — Galliard — Anastasia Robinson —Amadigi — The Contrivances — The Royal Academy of Music— Its first composers and singers — Radamisto — Astarto —Muzio Scevola — Opera subscriptions — Griselda — BononciniAriosti — Neglect of the Italian opera — Tolomeo Re d'EgittoClose of the Royal Academy of Music— Opera conductedby Heidegger and Handel — New singers engaged — ParthenopeThe nobility's opera — Opposition to Handel — Ruinousconsequences to him — He abandons dramatic composition —Chronological list of his Italian operas — His published operasObservations on Handel's Italian music — Operas of contemporarycomposers — Decline of the Italian opera about themiddle of the eighteenth century.The establishment of the Italian opera in Englandmay be dated from the arrival of Handel, and theVOL. II. BRicardo.appearance of his first opera, Rinaldo, which (ashas been mentioned in a previous chapter) tookplace in 1711. From that time, Italian operas, byhim and the most distinguished composers of theday, were regularly performed by complete Italiancompanies ; and such were their attractions, thatthe English opera, for a time, was almost entirelyabandoned.Rinaldo, though inferior to many of Handel'ssubsequent operas, was beyond comparison the mostmasterly work of this description that had been heardin England. The airs are generally antiquated intheir form ; and the phrases of melody have beenso often repeated by subsequent composers, thatthey now appear hackneyed and common. Toimagine their effect when originally produced, it isnecessary to keep in view the state of music at thattime : and this remark is generally applicable tomusic of an old date, especially if it is of a melodiousand popular kind. One air, however, in thisopera, furnishes a remarkable exception ; — the airFurie terrible," sung byArmida. It is a wildburst of passion, full of the force and energy ofGluck, whose style, too, it resembles in its brevity,and the want of the eternal da capo of Handel'sdays. There is an impassioned air in this opera,II tricerbero humiliate," which became so popularfrom Nicolini's singing, that it was adapted to abacchanalian song beginning "Let the waiter bringclean glasses," and long sung at convivial meetingsCALYPSO.throughout the kingdom. In the published musicof the opera, the words of this jovial ditty arejoined to the air, in addition to the original Italianwords ! The music (besides the dialogue in recitative)consists entirely of airs, with one duet, anda chorus by way of finale, a trivial and flimsy production.This opera, with repetitions of Hydaspes andAlma hide , and two operas, Antiochus and Hamlet,both of them written by Apostolo Zeno, and composedby Gasparini, supplied the stage for a coupleof seasons. In 1712, another attempt was made toproduce an English opera. This was Calypso andTelemachus, written by Mr. Hughes, and composedby Mr. Galliard. Mr. Hughes assigned as a reasonfor this attempt, that "it could never have beenthe intention of those who first promoted the Italianopera, that it should take entire possession of ourstage, to the exclusion of everything of the likekind that could be produced here." — "Though theEnglish language," he further says in his preface,is not so soft and full of vowels as the Italian, itdoes not follow that it is therefore incapable ofharmony. It is certainly of great importance indramatic entertainments that they should be performedin a language understood by the audience ;and though the airs of an opera may be heard withdelight, as instrumental pieces, without words, yetit is impossible that the recitative should give plea2CALYPSO.sure when the words are either taken away or unintelligible."In pursuance of these views, Mr. Hughes constructedhis opera in the Italian form, with thedialogue in recitative. The piece was well written,and the songs possessed of poetical merit. Mr. Galliard,too, was an able composer, and competent todojustice to the music: but, whether from thepiece being wanting in interest and dramatic effect,or from the inferiority of the singers, or from theunfitness of the English language for dialogue inrecitative, the opera supported but five representations,and these only at intervals. After the thirdperformance, Nicolini appeared in Antiochus forthe last time previous to his departure for Italy, aswas then imagined, for ever. Mr. Addison, in theSpectator for June 14th, 1712, says, "I am sorryto find by the opera-bills for this day, that we arelikely to lose the greatest performer in dramaticmusic that is now living, or that perhaps everappeared upon a stage. I need not acquaint myreaders that I am speaking of Signor Nicolini.The town is highly obliged to this excellent artistfor having shown us the Italian music in its perfection,as well as for that generous approbation helately gave to an opera of our own country, in whichthe composer endeavoured to do justice to thebeauty of the words, by following that noble examplewhich has been set him by the greatest foreignGALLIARD.masters in that art." — This little bit of puff seemsto have done Calypso little good : for, after twoperformances more, it was finally laid aside.This opera deserved a better fate, if we mayjudge from the printed music, which contains anumber of beautiful things. Some of the airs areloaded with long divisions, which could have beenno objection to them at that time : but others areso graceful and expressive, and in so pure a taste,that they cannot fail to give pleasure at any time.The opening air, " For thee the willing watersflow," sung by Calypso, is full of tender melancholy,and has some fine descriptive passages in theaccompaniments. There is a great deal of passionthroughout this part. The opera concludes with anair by Calypso, expressive of her despair at beingforsaken, and ending w T with a burst of grief, " Othat Calypso too could die!" The high note sustainedfor two bars is the very cry of agony, andgiven by such a singer as Marguerite de repine,who performed the part, ought to have produceda powerful effect. The air in the part of Minerva,See these golden beams," is a noble composition,and would still make an excellent concert song.There are, indeed, many things in this opera whichare worthy the attention of our best singers even atthis day.John Ernest Galliard, the composer of thisopera, was a native of Hell, and came to England,in the suite of Prince George of Denmark, in the6 ANASTASIA ROBINSON.capacity of a performer on the oboe. He spent theremainder of his life in this country ; and, notwithstandinghis want of success in the above instance,became a popular composer for the theatres in Lincoln'sInn Fields and Covent-garden. His huntingsong, " With early horn," was long in great vogueat the theatres and concerts, and is still well knownto the lovers of old English melody. At his lastbenefit, in 1746, among other compositions of histhat were performed, was a piece for twenty-fourbassoons and four double-basses. He died in 1749.In 1714, the celebrated Anastasia Robinsonmade her first appearance as a dramatic singer.This lady was the daughter of a portrait painter,of a good family in Leicestershire. She at firstlearned music as an accomplishment : but herfather, being afflicted with a disease in his eyeswhich terminated in blindness, and, being thusrendered unable to support his family by the exerciseof his art, thought of availing himself of hisdaughter's extraordinary disposition for music, byeducating her for it as a profession. She accordinglyreceived instructions in Italian, and in thedifferent branches of music, from the first teachersof the time. Her general improvement was notneglected, and she acquired those accomplishmentswhich add grace and elegance to the female character.To these advantages she added a considerableshare of beauty, and a cheerful and engaging-disposition; so that she had become a generalANASTASIA ROBINSON.favourite in a respectable circle of society, evenbefore her entrance into public life. Her first appearancesas a vocalist were at concerts, where sheused to accompany herself on the harpsichord.She soon gained the favour of the public, and thecountenance and patronage of some persons of highrank ; and her father, encouraged by her success,took a house in Golden-square, where he establisheda weekly concert, or musical conversazione, whichwas much frequented by people of taste andfashion.Her first appearance at the Italian opera was inan opera called Crest, the music of which seems tohave been a pasticcio, or compilation from the worksof various composers of the time. She next appeared,the same season, in Armenia, an opera byan anonymous composer. From this period, tillthe year 1724, she continued to occupy a principalsituation at the opera, with increasing reputationand applause. Her salary, Dr. Burney says, was1000/., and her emoluments by benefits andpresents, were estimated at nearly as muchmore. She quitted the stage, and the exercise ofher profession, in consequence of a private marriagewith the Earl of Peterborough, who madehimself so celebrated by his brilliant exploits at thehead of the British troops in Spain during the warof the Succession.This marriage being then unknown, her retirementfrom the stage was said to have been occasionedby an insult which she received one evening8 ANA6TASIA ROBINSON.from Senesino, and for which he was severelycaned on the spot by Lord Peterborough, who wasbehind the scenes. Lady Mary Worsley Montagu,in a letter to the Countess of Mar, written in 1723,thus notices this affair, among other pieces of thescandal of the day. "The second heroine (Mrs.Robinson) has engaged half the town in arms, fromthe nicety of her virtue, which was not able to bearthe too near approach of Senesino in the opera, andher condescension in her accepting of Lord Peterboroughfor a champion, who has signalised bothhis love and courage upon this occasion in as manyinstances as ever Don Quixote did for Dulcinea.Poor Senesino, like a vanquished giant, was forcedto confess upon his knees that Anastasia was a nonpareilof virtue and beauty. Lord Stanhope,* asdwarf to the said giant, joked on his side, and waschallenged for his pains. Lord Delaware was LordPeterborough's second ; my lady miscarried — thewhole town divided into parties on this importantpoint. Innumerable have been the disorders betweenthe two sexes on so great an account, besideshalf the House of Peers being put under an arrest.By the providence of Heaven, and the wise cares ofhis majesty, no bloodshed ensued. However,things are now tolerably accommodated ; and thefair lady rides through the town in triumph in theshining berlin of her hero, not to reckon the moresolid advantage of 100/. a month which 'tis said heThe celebrated Philip Dormer Stanhope, Earl of Chester-held.hi** am<ANASTASIA ROBINSON. 9allows her." Such was the stigma under whichLord Peterborough allowed his wife to remain formany years, till he removed it by a public declarationof their marriage.Dr. Burney has inserted in his History an accountof this lady, and of the circumstances connectedwith her marriage, communicated to himby Mrs. Delay, Lady Peterborough's contemporaryand intimate friend. It is very pleasing,and must necessarily be authentic.Mrs. Anastasia Robinson," says Mrs. Delay,"was of a middling stature, not handsome, but ofa pleasing, modest countenance, with large blueeyes. Her deportment was easy, unaffected, andgraceful. Her manner and address very engaging,and her behaviour, on all occasions, that of a gentlewoman,with perfect propriety. She was not onlyliked by all her acquaintance, but loved andcaressed by persons of the highest rank, withwhom she appeared always equal, without assuming.Her father's house, in Golden-square, wasfrequented by all the men of genius and refinedtaste of the times. Among the number of personsof distinction who frequented Mr. Robinson's house,and seemed to distinguish his daughter in a particularmanner, were the Earl of Peterborough andGeneral H . The latter had shown a long-attachmentto her, and his attentions were so remarkable,that they seemed more than the effectsof common politeness ; and as he was a very agreeableman and in good circumstances, he was10 ANASTAS1A ROBINSON.favourably received, not doubting but that hisintentions were honourable. A declaration of avery contrary nature was treated with the contemptit deserved, though Mrs. A. Robinson wasvery much prepossessed in his favour."Soon after this, Lord Peterborough endeavouredto convince her of his partial regard forher; but, agreeable and artful as he was, sheremained very much upon her guard, which ratherincreased than diminished his admiration and passionfor her. Yet still his pride struggled withhis inclination ; for all this time she was engagedto sing in public, a circumstance very grievous toher; but, urged by the best of motives, she submittedto it, in order to assist her parents, whosefortune was much reduced by Mr. Robinson's lossof sight, which deprived him of the benefit of hisprofession as a painter.At length Lord Peterborough made his declarationto her on honourable terms. He found itwould be vain to make proposals on any other,and as he omitted no circumstance that couldengage her esteem and gratitude, she acceptedthem, as she was sincerely attached to him. Heearnestly requested her keeping it a secret till amore convenient time for him to make it known,to which she readily consented, having a perfectconfidence in his honour.Mrs. A. Robinson had a sister, a very prettyaccomplished woman, who married Dr. Arbuthnot'sbrother. After the death of Mr. Robinson, LordANASTASIA ROBINSON, 1 1Peterborough took a house near Fulham, in theneighbourhood of his own villa at Parson's-green,where he settled Mrs. Robinson and her mother.They never lived under the same roof, till the earl,being seized with a violent fit of illness, solicitedher to attend him at Mount Bevis, near Southampton,which she refused with firmness, but uponcondition that, though still denied to take hisname, she might be permitted to wear her wedding-ring;to which, finding her inexorable, he atlength consented."His haughty spirit was still reluctant to themaking a declaration that would have done justiceto so worthy a character as the person to whom hewas now united ; and indeed his uncontrollabletemper and high opinion of his own actions madehim a very awful husband, ill suited to Lady Peterborough'sgood sense, amiable temper, and delicatesentiments. She was a Roman Catholic, butnever gave offence to those of a contrary opinion,though very strict in what she thought her duty.Her excellent principles and fortitude of mind supportedher through many severe trials in her conjugalstate. But at last he prevailed on himselfto do her justice, instigated, it is supposed, by hisbad state of health, which obliged him to seekanother climate, and she absolutely refused to gowith him unless he declared his marriage. Herattendance on him in this illness nearly cost herher life.He appointed a day for all his nearest relations12 ANASTASIA ROBINSON.to meet him at the apartment over the gateway ofSt. James's palace, belonging to Mr. Points, whowas married to Lord Peterborough's niece, and atthat time preceptor of Prince William, afterwardsDuke of Cumberland. He also appointed LadyPeterborough to be there at the same time. Whenthey were all assembled, he began a most eloquentoration, enumerating all the virtues and perfectionsof Mrs. A. Robinson, and the rectitude of her conductduring his long acquaintance with her, forwhich he acknowledged his great obligation andsincere attachment, declaring he was determinedto do her that justice which he ought to have donelong ago, which was, presenting her to all hisfamily as his wife. He spoke this harangue withso much energy, and in parts so pathetically, thatLady Peterborough, not being apprised of his intentions,was so affected that she fainted away inthe midst of the company.After Lord Peterborough's death, she lived avery retired life, chiefly at Mount Bevis, and wasseldom prevailed on to leave that habitation butby the Duchess of Portland, who was always happyto have her company at Bestrode, when she couldobtain it, and often visited her at her own house."Among Lord Peterborough's papers, she foundhis memoirs, written by himself, in which hedeclared he had been guilty of such actions aswould have reflected very much upon his character,for which reason she burnt them. This, however,contributed to complete the excellency of herENGLISH OPERAS. 13principles, though it did not fail giving offence tothe curious inquirers after anecdotes of so remarkablea character as that of the Earl of Peterborough."Lord Peterborough's declaration of his marriagetook place in 1735, and he died at Lisbon the sameyear. Lady Peterborough died in 1750.Anastasia Robinson's voice was a contralto.From the airs written for her by Handel andother composers, it appears that it was of smallcompass, and that her powers of execution werenot great. Her success must be ascribed to anexpressive simplicity in her style of singing, andher agreeable qualities as an actress.Handel's next opera, Amadigi, or Amadigi ofGait, was first performed on 25th May, 1715.The music of this piece was never published, butDr. Burney, who examined the MS. score, describesit as containing many beauties. The principalcharacters were performed by Nicolini (whohad returned to England) and Anastasia Robinson.For several seasons this was the only new productionof any importance.During this period no English operas were attempted,but some little musical entertainments, ormasterpieces, appear to have been brought forward.One of these was The Contrivances, a musicalfarce, the words and music of which were byHenry Carey. It was first performed in 1715,and was very successful. " Arethusa," says the14 ENGLISH OPERAS.Biographia Dramaticaa, cc used to be the probationarypart for female singers before they were boldenough to venture upon characters of more consequence: a mode of conduct which would bemore serviceable to the stage than beginning, asis usual now, with stepping on the top round ofthe ladder at once, a circumstance which precludesascension and includes the danger of a fall." Nothing,indeed, can be more absurd or more disadvantageousto themselves, than the course whichhas been generally followed by aspirants to theatricalfame. Every unfledged actor must take hisfirst flight in Hamlet, Othello, or Macbeth ; andMandane, as being the greatest and most difficultpart in our musical drama, has been especiallychosen for the debut of young female vocalists.How many promising commencements of this sorthave been followed by total disappointment !In 1717, an attempt was made to call the attentionof the public to English operas, by the performanceof Camilla and Thomyris, at the littletheatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields, entirely by Englishsingers, except Marguerite de Repine ; but theexperiment was unsuccessful. From this timethere was an intermission for some years in theperformance of Italian operas, so that Londonappears to have been without any musical dramaticentertainments till the establishment of the Italiantheatre, called the Royal Academy of Music, in1720.ITALIAN OPERA. 15This establishment was the result of a planformed by a number of distinguished members ofthe aristocracy, for patronising and carrying on theItalian opera. A fund of 50,0001. was raised bysubscription, among the first personages of thekingdom, his majesty, George I., contributingl.,000Z. The subscribers were incorporated into asociety or company, whose affairs were conductedby a governor, deputy governor, and twenty directors.The first year the Duke of Newcastle wasgovernor ; Lord Single, deputy governor ; andthe directors were the Dukes of Portland andQueensberry, the Earls of Burlington, Stair, andLandgrave, Lords Chetwynd and Stanhope, GeneralsDormer, Wade, and Hunter, Sir John Van-burgh,Colonels Blathwayt and O'Hara, and JamesBruce, Thomas Cole of Norfolk, Confers Darcy,Brian Fairfax, George Harrison, William Pulteney,and Francis Wentworth, Esquires.These gentlemen proceeded in their enterprisewith great spirit. Handel, who at that time wasresiding with the Duke of Chances at Cannons,was engaged as composer, and commissioned toprocure singers ; and Bononcini and Attilio Ariosti,composers of reputation on the continent, werealso engaged to write operas. Handel immediatelyproceeded to Dresden, where Italian operas werethen performed with great splendour at the courtof Augustus, king of Poland and elector of16 MUZIO Schola.Saxony ; and there he engaged Senesino, Cronstadt,Bosch, and Signora Durastanti.The first opera composed by Handel for theRoyal Academy of Music was Hhadamisto, writtenby Haym, a work superior to any which the composerhad yet produced in this country. "Itseems'' says Burney, "as if he was not insensibleof its worth ; as he dedicated the book of thewords to the king, George I., subscribing himselfhis majesty's ' most faithful subject ;' which, as hewas neither a Hanoverian by birth, nor a native ofEngland, seems to imply his having been naturalisedhere by a bill in parliament. " WhetherHandel was, or was not, naturalised in England,de jure, he certainly was so de facto, by an uninterruptedresidence of half a century in this country,where he arrived a youth of five-and-twenty,and where, at the age of seventy-five, he closed hislife full of years and honour.Bononcini, Handel's celebrated rival in dramaticcomposition, produced his first opera, Astarto, inthe same year. It had great success, and wasfrequently performed for several seasons ; though,on an examination of the music, it does not seem tohave deserved the favour with which it wasreceived.The next novelty was the opera of Muzio Scevola,remarkable from the circumstance of being thejoint production of the three composers, Handel,Bononcini, and Ariosti. It has been said that theITALIAN OPERA. 17division was made by the directors of the RoyalAcademy, for the purpose of trying the abilities ofthe different composers, and of deciding which ofthem was deserving of preference. But thereseems no ground for any other supposition thanthat the expedient was adopted for the sake ofdespatch. No step was consequently taken by thedirectors, implying a preference of any of the supposedcompetitors ; and all three continued, formany years afterwards, to compose operas for thistheatre.Notwithstanding the efforts of three great composers,aided by the strongest company of performersthat had ever been assembled in England,the Royal Academy of Music did not prosper. About15,000^. of the capital subscribed was spent in thecourse of little more than a year from the establishmentof the academy ; and the subscribers appearto have become very reluctant to answer the callsmade upon them, as appears from the advertisementspublished by the directors in the newspapers,urging the payment of the instalments in arrear,and threatening the defaulters with " the utmostrigour of the law." A new mode of subscriptionwas therefore adopted. Intimation was made tothe public, that tickets for the ensuing seasonshould be issued on these terms ; that each subscriber,on the delivery of his ticket, should payten guineas; that, on the 1st of February ensuing,VOL. II. c18 HANDEL AND I50N0NCINI.each subscriber should pay a further sum of fiveguineas, and five guineas more on the 1st of May.The academy promised fifty performances, andobliged themselves to allow a deduction proportionably,in case they did not give that number. Thisannouncement, which was made on the 25th ofNovember 1721, was the origin of the plan of anannual subscription, free from all risks or demandsbeyond its amount, which has been followed eversince.The comparative merit of Handel and Bononcinibecame the subject of violent disputes in the fashionablecircles. The Italian composer, though far inferiorto his illustrious rival, was a man of greatmerit, and had a large body of warm partisans.Swift, who bestows a passing lash on many of thefollies of his day, ridiculed the dissensions on thissubject.Some say that Signor BononciniCompar'd to Handel's a mere ninny ;While others say that, to him, HandelIs hardly fit to hold a candle.Strange, that such difference should be'Twixt tweedle-dum and tweedle-dee !"Bononcini's Griselda, the best opera he producedin this country, was brought out in 1722, and hada very great run. The character of the patientheroine was represented by Anastasia Robinson,whose performance of this part is said to have completedher conquest of the heart of Lord .19borough. The drama, written by Rollii, and foundedon the well-known legend, is pleasing and interesting; and the airs, though frequently disfigured bythe flounces and furbelows of the day, have a greatdeal of sweetness, elegance, and expression. Hisaccompaniments have not the depth and solidity ofthose of Handel ; but they are free and brilliant,and contain pretty effects by means of wind instruments,particularly the oboes An examination,in short, of the score of Gviselda (the only one wehave seen of this author's) convinces us thatBonon-cii was by no means undeserving of the favour heenjoyed in his lifetime ; though his reputation hassuffered with posterity from his name being alwaysassociated, much to its disadvantage, with that ofHandel.Giovanni Baptista Bononcini (or Buonon-cii) was a native of Modena. Long before hisarrival in England he had distinguished himself asacomposer both in Italy and Germany ; and wasalso known in this country by the music of Camilla,adapted to English words by Haym. In 1720 hewas in high reputation as a dramatic composer atRome, when he was invited to London by the directorsof the Royal Academy of Music. He continuedin London, maintaining a respectable footingas composer for the opera-house, even while Handelwas producing his finest dramatic works, till 1727,when his last opera, Astyanax, was produced. Afterthis time a pension of £500 a year was settled onc220 BONONCINI.him by the Duchess of Marlborough, by whom hehad been always warmly patronised ; and he wasreceived by her into her house, where he lived inease and affluence, presiding at the duchess's concerts,and gaining large sums by the publication ofhis compositions. He fell into discredit, however,by publishing, as his own, a madrigal which was discoveredto have been composed by Lotti, of Venice.The work was claimed by its true author ; and acorrespondence took place, between him and thesecretary of the Royal Academy, in the course ofwhich Lotti produced such evidence of the madrigalbeing his, that Bononcini stood convicted of thetheft. After this discovery his reputation sufferedso much, that soon afterwards, in 1733, he leftEngland. It is said that he quitted this countryalong with a notorious impostor who, under thetitle of Count Ugh, had obtained a footing in thefashionable circles, and pretended to possess the artof making gold. Bononcini became his dupe, andwas persuaded to share his fortunes ; but the connexiondoes not appear to have subsisted long ; forafew years after leaving England, Bononcini was atParis, subsisting by the exercise of his profession.At the conclusion of the peace of Aix-la-chapellein 1748, he was invited to Vienna by the emperorto compose the music for the rejoicing on that occasion; and afterwards went to Venice, in companywith Monticello, where they were both engaged forthe ensuing carnival. This is the last account weAriosto. 21have of him ; neither the dates of his birth nor ofhis death being recorded. His eighth work, a bookof chamber duets, was published (according toBurney) at Bologna in 1691 . If we suppose that hewas then no more than thirty, he must, in 1748,have been eighty-seven. When in England, he wasin the habit of calling himself a very old man ; anassertion which, being seemingly contradicted byhis appearance and activity, was ascribed to an unaccountableaffectation. But the elate of the abovepublication corroborates it, and gives countenanceto what Dr. Burney says was the general opinion,that Bononcini's life was extended to nearly acentury.Attilio Ariosti, the third member of this musicaltriumvirate, maintained a respectable positionin England, though his music was not so much invogue as that of Bononcini. Like that composer,Ariosti was a veteran when he arrived in thiscountry. We find his name among the Italiancomposers as early as 1696. He composed severaloperas for the Royal Academy of Music, the last ofwhich, Vespasian, which appeared in 1724, wasthe best and most successful. Burney describes thisopera as having considerable merit ; and says thatAttilio seems to have been a perfectly good harmonist,who had treasured up much good music inhis head, but had little invention." The bravuraair, composed for Senesino, given by Burney as aspecimen, though full of what he properly calls22 DECLINE OPthe vocal fopperies of the times," is well constructed,and contains some remarkably pretty andingenious imitations in the accompaniment. Wehave no account of Ariosti's life after his departurefrom England.The Royal Academy of Music closed its existencein. 1728. Notwithstanding the zeal with which itsmusical management was conducted by Handel, theseries of beautiful works which he himself furnished,and the efforts of the first performers of the age,the affairs of this establishment never prospered.The annual receipts were alw T says below the expenditure; so that constant demands were made uponthe subscribers of the original capital of £50,000,the whole of which was thus called up and expendedin less than seven years. The decline of the Italianopera, during this period, may be ascribed to variouscauses ; one of them certainly was, the rivalrieswhich existed among Handel's principal singers,especially Faustina and Cuzzoni, and the foolishviolence with which the leaders of fashion took partin their quarrels, in place of joining (as they oughtto have done) in supporting an entertainment towhich both these rivals contributed their talents,without paying any regard to petty jealousies, whichnever would have been indulged in, had they notbeen so absurdly instigated and abetted. Thepublic, too, had begun to grow weary of an entertainment,the character and beauties of which were,as yet, but little understood in England, and whichTHE ITALIAN OPERA. 23had been supported exclusively by the aristocracy,more for the sake of fashion than from any real tastefor the Italian musical drama. The appearance ofthe Beggar s Opera, which at once became the rageamong all classes, was an additional cause of theneglect of the Italian theatre.A letter by the celebrated Dr. Arbuthnot, in theLondon Journal of March 23, 1728, gives a goodview of the state of musical taste at that time. " Asthere is nothing," he says, " which surprises alltrue lovers of music more than the neglect intowhich the Italian operas are at present fallen, so Icannot but think it a very extraordinary instance ofthe fickle and inconstant temper of the Englishnation ; a failing which they have been always endeavouringto cast upon their neighbours in France,but to which they themselves have just as good atitle, as will appear to any one who will take thetrouble to consult our historians." He goes on tonotice the childish eagerness with which we had atfirst discarded our own language and music for theItalian, which, the instant we had acquired it in perfection,served only to raise disputes among us anddivide the nation into parties, proving that our excessivefondness for Italian operas proceeded, notfrom a true taste for good music, but from a mereaffectation of it; and he concludes thus : " TheBeggar s Opera I take to be. a touchstone to tryBritish taste on, and it has accordingly provedeffectual in discovering our true inclinations, which,24 DECLINE OFhowever artfully they may have been disguised forawhile, will one time or another start up and disclosethemselves. aesop's story of the cat, who atthe petition of her lover was changed into a finewoman, is pretty well known ; notwithstandingwhich alteration, we find that, upon the appearanceof a mouse, she could not resist the temptation ofspringing out of her husband's arms to pursue it,though it was on the very wedding-night. OurEnglish audience have been for some time returningto their cattish nature, of which some particularsounds from the gallery have given us sufficientwarning. And since they have so openly declaredthemselves, I must only desire that they will notthink they can put on the fine woman again justwhen they please, but content themselves with theirskill in caterwauling. — For my own part, I cannotthink it would be any loss to real lovers of music,if all those false friends who have made pretensionsto it only in compliance with the fashion, wouldseparate themselves from them ; provided ourItalian opera could be brought under such regulationsas to go on without them. We might thenbe able to sit and enjoy an entertainment of thissort, free from those disturbances which are frequentin English theatres, without any regard, not onlyto performers, but even to the presence of majestyitself.* In short, my comfort is, that though soThis evidently alludes to the disgraceful row in the opera-housea few months before, when the fashionable partisans ofTHE ITALIAN OPERA. 25great a desertion may force us so to contract the expensesof our operas, as would put an end to ourhaving them in as great perfection as at present,yet we shall be able at least to hear them withoutinterruption."In 1728 Handel brought out his Tolomeo Re(TEgitto, the last opera he composed for the RoyalAcademy of Music. In his dedication to the earlof Albemarle, he implores that nobleman's protectionfor operas in general, as being " on the decline."Notwithstanding its merit, it was performedonly seven times. The parties who hadembarked in the establishment now refused to comeunder any new engagements for carrying it on :and, at the end of the season, when the theatreclosed, the company broke up, and the performerswent abroad in search of other engagements.In the same year, Handel, finding the Italianopera no longer supported by its former patrons,entered into an engagement with Heidegger, who wasthen in possession of the opera-houses to carry it onat their own risk. He set out for Italy in autumn1728, where he engaged a new company of singers,who, however, did not arrive in London till theautumn of the following year. Their arrival wasthus announced to the public in the Daily Courant:- — " Mr. Handel, who is just returned from Italy,Faustina and Cuzzoni converted the theatre into a bear-garden,unrestrained by the presence of the princess Caroline, Seeante, vol. i. p. 41 1.26 SINGERS.has contracted with the following persons to performin the Italian operas : Signor Bernacchi, whois esteemed the best singer in Italy. SignoraMerighi, a woman of a very fine presence, an excellentactress, and a very good singer, with acounter-tenor voice. Signora Strata, who hath avery fine treble voice, a person of singular merit.Signor Hannibal Pio Fabric, a most excellent tenor,and a fine voice. His wife, who performs a man'spart well. Signora Bertoldi, who has a very finetreble voice ; she is also a very genteel actress, bothin men and women's parts. A bass voice fromHamburgh, there being none worth engaging inItaly." This bass singer, whose name was notmentioned, was John Gottfried Reimschneider.These performers, announced in this pompousand ridiculous style, (no doubt by Mr. Heidegger,)formed a very inferior company to that of theRoyal Academy of Music, which comprised Sene-sin,Faustina, Cuzzoni, and Anastasia Robinson.None of them were of first-rate talents. Bernacchiowes his posthumous fame, not to his own vocalpowers, but to the celebrated school of singingwhich he founded at Bologna. Strata, though agood singer, was unable to make any impressionafter Faustina and Cuzzoni ; and her figure was somuch the reverse of handsome, that she was usuallycalled the pig. None of the others had acquired,or deserved, any celebrity ; and Handel was sin-operaDISPUTES. 27regularly injudicious, or unfortunate, in the executionof his mission.Whether from this cause, or a continued indifferenceon the part of the public towards the Italianopera, the new undertaking did not flourish,although Handel exerted all the powers of hisgenius in its support. Parthenope, one of the finestof his operas, which was first performed in February1730, had only seven representations in the courseof the season. In order to strengthen the company,Senesino was again engaged, though Handel and hehad previously been on bad terms. The re-engagementof this singer was unfortunate for Handel ;for their former differences were renewed, and wenton increasing till they terminated in a total breachin 1733. The people of fashion, as was usual inthose days, took part in these disputes ; and the resultwas an association of a body of the nobilityand gentry to carry on Italian operas in oppositionto Handel. This party opened a subscription forperforming operas at the theatre in Lincoln's InnFields ; invited Porpora as composer and conductor; and engaged a powerful company, comprisingSenesino and Cuzzoni.In order to make head against this opposition,Handel again repaired to Italy to engage performers,a task in which he appears to have been by nomeans skilful. At Bologna he heard Farinelli andCaressing, the latter of whom he unaccountably28 OPERA DISPUTES.preferred ; and his opponents, availing themselvesof his error, immediately engaged Farinelli. Thetwo rival establishments continued to be carried on,the one in the Hayrnarket and the other in Lincoln'sInn Fields, till 1735; when Handel's contract withHeidegger having expired, he left the Hayrnarket,and removed to Covent-garden, while "the nobility"took possession of the Hayrnarket theatre.Handel made the most strenuous efforts to contendagainst the weight of aristocratic influence;and though a large portion of the nobility wereopposed to him, he had the support of the king andthe royal family. The king subscribed a thousandpounds towards carrying on the operas at Covent-gardenthe first season ; and their majesties andtheir family several times visited the theatre. Bytheir struggle, the two hostile establishments onlyruined themselves and each other ; and at the endof the season of 1737, both of them were brokenup. The appetite for Italian music, never very greator general, had now become palled by satiety; andthe English ballad operas, now frequently performed,were more congenial to the general taste ofthe public.By this contest Handel for the time was ruined,having spent, in the course of it, the whole fortune,to the extent of ten thousand pounds, which hehad previously accumulated. Both his body andmind sank under his distresses. In the spring ofhandel's last opera. 291737, apologies were made in the newspapers forhis absence from the theatre, on the score of indisposition,which was ascribed to rheumatism. Buthe laboured under deep depression of spirits, andhad a stroke of palsy. In this condition he wasremoved to Tunbridge, and afterwards to Aix-la-Chapelle, where he derived so much benefit fromthe waters, or rather from a life of tranquillity, thathe was able to return to London in November withrenovated health and spirits.Heidegger had now resumed the management ofthe theatre in the Haymarket, which had beenabandoned by the nobility ; and Handel againjoined him. The affairs of the opera went on ascalamitously as before ; and Handel, after anothervigorous but unavailing struggle, brought out, onthe 10th of January, 1740, the opera of Deidamia,the last work he ever composed for the stage.Though one of the best of his dramatic productions,it was performed only three times ; but the publicwere less inexcusable on this occasion than theyhad been on some previous ones; for the companydid not contain a single first-rate performer, andwere quite incapable of doing it justice.Here, at the age of fifty-six, Handel terminatedhis labours as a dramatic composer ; but it was tofollow the much more glorious career which hasraised him to unrivalled and unapproachable greatness.From 1711 to 1740 inclusive, Handel composed30 handel's operas.thirty-five Italian operas for the English stage ; agreater number than those of all the other composersput together, which were performed in Londonduring that period. The following is a chronologicallist of them :Rinaldo, first performed in 1711II Pastor Fido - - - - 1712Teseo (Theseus) - - - - 1713Amadigi (Amadigi of Gaul) 1715Radamisto 1720Muzio Scevola - - - 1721Floridante - - -Tone (Otho) - - - - 1723FlavioGiulio Cesare 1724TamerlaneRodelinda 1725Scipionene 1726AlexandreAdmeto 1727Riccardo Primo - -Siroe 1728Tolomeo (Ptolemy) - - - ■Lothario 1729Parthenope 1730Poro (Pons) 1731Ezio (iEtius) 1732SosarmeOrlando 1733Ariadne 1734Ariodante 1735Alcina - .Atlanta 1736Armenia 1737handel's operas. 31Giustino 1787Terence - -Faramondo 1738Sense (Xerxes) - - - -Imeneo (Operetta) - 1740DeidamiaOf these operas, the following, as far as we havebeen able to discover, are those which were published;— Rinaldo, Radamisto, Floridante, Otho,Flavio, Giidio Cesare, Tamerlano, Rodelinda, Sci-prone,Alessandro, Admeto, Riccardo Primo, Woe,Lothario, Parthenope, Poro, Ezio, Sosarme, Orlando,Atlanta, and Deidamia. They were all printedby Walsh, the well-known publisher of that day ;and many copies of them are still in existence.Of the others which, from their not having beenprinted entire, may be supposed to have been lesssuccessful, many of the most favourite pieces werepublished in various collections. One of these isApollo's Feast," in four volumes, containing " thefavourite songs out of all Mr. Handel's operas ;"and another is "Twelve Duets, collected out ofall the late operas composed by Mr. Handel ;"both printed by Walsh : and the favourite songs inPtolemy, Amadis, and Theseus, were also published.The manuscript scores of the whole, webelieve, are preserved in the king's library.It is much to be lamented that Handel's Italianoperas, the rich fruits of his genius during thirtyyears of his life, are now, and must in a great32 handel's operas.measure ever be, lost to the world. They neverwere known out of England ; and even in England,in consequence of the changes which took place inthe structure and style of dramatic music, theywere soon laid aside and forgotten. That theyshould cease to be performed on the stage was anecessary result of these changes : but it by nomeans follows that an immense body of vocal music,of the highest class, and full of imperishable beauties,should be consigned to oblivion.It would profit nothing to enter into any detailedreview of forgotten dramatic pieces which no supposablerevolution in public taste can ever have theeffect of reviving. As might be expected fromHandel's sense and judgment, the poems on whichhe employed his genius were generally (if not uniformly)possessed of merit. Several of them werepublished under the name of Nicola Haym, a manof considerable reputation both as a poet and amusician. These are Teseo, Radamisto, Otho,Flavio, Giulio Caesar e, Tamerlano, Rodelinda, andSiroe : but as Rodelinda really was written byApostolo Zeno, and Siroe by Metastasio, thoughHaym took the credit of both, it may be doubtedwhether, in other instances also, he did not deckhimself with borrowed feathers. Scipionene is byApostolo Zeno. Poro is the Alessandro of MetalsMuzio Scevola, Floridante, and RiccardoPrimo are by Rollii,* whose merit as a lyric poet isPaula Antonio Rollii is the author of excellent translationshandel's operas. 33acknowledged by the Italian critics. They aregenerally upon striking heroic or romantic subjects,affording ample scope for dramatic effect andmusical expression ; and, represented as they wereby the greatest performers of the time, they musthave given as much delight as ever has beenafforded by the musical drama.But whatever pleasure they must have given tothe audiences of that age, they would fail to do sonow ; and, indeed, their performance would be impracticable.The music of the principal parts waswritten for a class of voices which no longer exists;and for these parts no performers could now befound. A series of recitatives and airs, with onlyan occasional duet, and a concluding chorus of theslightest kind,* would appear meagre and dull toears accustomed to the brilliant concerted piecesand finales of the modern stage ; and Handel'saccompaniments would appear thin and poor amidstthe richness and variety of the modern orchestra.The vocal parts, too, are to a great extent in anobsolete taste. Many of the airs are mere stringsof Anacreon, Pindar, and Milton, into Italian. He resided longin England, where he published editions of Boccaccio andAriosto. His works were printed at London in 1777.There is a trio in Alcina for a soprano and two contraltovoices, beautifully constructed, impassioned, dramatic, and sofree from any tinge of antiquity, that it might have appeared inan opera of yesterday. It is surprising that Handel, who thusshowed himself aware of the use that might be made of concertedpieces, has hardly ever employed them.VOL. II. D34 handel's operas.of dry, formal divisions and unmeaning passagesof execution, calculated to show off the powers ofthe fashionable singers ; and many others, admirablein their design, and containing the finest traitsof melody and expression, are spun out to a wearisomelength, and deformed by the cumbrous trappingswith which they are loaded. Musical phrases,too, which, when Handel used them, had the charmof novelty, have become familiar and commonthrough repetition by his successors.Handel's Italian operas must now be looked uponas affording materials for concert or chamber performance; and, in this point of view, they containrich and ample treasures. Though Handel, to acertain extent, conformed to the fashion of his time,yet his genius and taste prevented him from beingenslaved by it ; and his operas contain multitudesof airs which are models of simplicity, symmetry,and grace — airs which, in every age, must charmthe ear and reach the heart, not of one, perhaps,who looks upon music as a matter of fashion, andthinks nothing worth listening to but the newestimportation from Italy, but of every one who hasears to hear, and a heart to feel, the everlasting-beautiesof pure melody and true expression. Adisposition to recur to the works of the old mastershas begun to characterise the musical taste of England,and is becoming more and more prevalent.The madrigals of the age of Elizabeth, the songsof Purcell, the fugues of Sebastian Bach, thehandel's operas. 35sonatas of Scarlatti, are applauded by audienceswho a few years ago were ignorant of their existence.The same thing would be the case with theopera airs of Handel, were our chief vocalists toexplore them, study them, and bring them beforethe public. And were a skilful musician to raisesome of these " gems of purest ray serene" fromthe "dark unfathomed caves" of oblivion in whichthey now lie buried, by publishing an elegantselection of them with the accompanimentswritten in the modern manner, he would renderan essential service to his art, and his labourscould not fail to be highly and extensively appreciated.In thus using these songs as concert or chambermusic, there would not be any difficulty on thescore of the words, or any occasion for changingthem. An opera air (especially in works of the oldschool) is a single thought or feeling, briefly andsimply expressed ; and, being generally quite intelligiblewithout reference to any particular personor situation, may be sung by itself with perfectpropriety and good effect. Take, for example, thebeautiful air in Rosaries, so well known under itsEnglish name of " Lord, remember David."Rends '1 serene al ciglio ;Madre, non hanger iii.Temper d'alcun seraglioOggi come poi tu ?"D 236 handel's operas.This is the whole : and it is understood as a tenderand soothing address by a daughter to a mother,which does not require, in order to comprehend itsmeaning and feel its expression, any reference tothe opera in which it is sung. ,Any listener mayimagine a situation in which a mother may be thusaddressed by her child. By preserving the originalwords, full effect is given to the exquisite tenderness,as well as the graceful flow of the melody,both of which are much impaired by the Englishwords. So much, indeed, is this the case, thatRends '1 serene al ciglio," and " Lord rememberDavid," hardly appear to be the same music.Several others of Handel's Italian airs have beenunited to sacred English words, with similar injuryto their beauty and expression.Another consequence of the English public knowinga very small number of these airs, only in connexionwith sacred English words, is an impressionthat they are of too grave and solemn a castfor their original purpose, and better fitted toexpress the language of devotion than of earthlypassion. This is an error, caused by a pervertedassociation between the airs and the English words.There is a certain degree of vagueness in musicalexpression ; and an air, by the words applied to it,may be made to assume a new character, which, tothose who know it under no other, may appear tobe its real one. The music of "Holy, holy, LordITALIAN COMPOSERS. 37God almighty," may seem sufficiently devotional;but the same music, as the air in Rodelinda, " Dovesei, amato bene?" addressed to a lover by his mistress,glows with ardent passion. We know thisbeautiful air, only in the cold, measured style inwhich we hear it sung at our sacred music-meetings; but imagine it breathed by a Grisi in hermost passionate accents, and we shall conceive itstrue meaning and expression.The fame of Handel is spreading from clay today,and the numbers of his admirers increasing.His chief title to immortality rests upon his sublimeoratorios ; but a full knowledge of his genius,in all its variety and extent, cannot be gained withoutexploring the treasures which lie hid in the dustyscores of his Italian operas.During the period in which Handel produced hisItalian operas, many of the pieces of the most distinguishedcomposers of the time were also performedon the London stage. Besides Bononciniand Ariosti, operas by Porpora, Vinci, Veracity,Domenico Scarlatti, Hasse, and other masters, whohave been already mentioned, were represented.After this time the theatre was supplied for a whilewith pieces by Galuppi, Gluck, (neither of whomhad as yet given much promise of their futuregreatness,) Pescetti, Lampugnani, and several othercomposers of very inferior rank to those who hadpreceded them. England felt the effects of the38 COMPOSERS AND SINGERS.decay of the musical drama in Italy ; and mediocritywas the characteristic of the singers as well asof the composers. Owing to this decline on theone hand, and probably, on the other, to the gradualrise of our national opera, and the attentionpaid to it, the Italian opera fell into such neglect,that for several years, about the middle of the lastcentury, the performance of serious operas appearsto have been given up.In 1753 and 1754," says Burney, " seriousoperas, after languishing in poverty and disgracefrom the departure of Monticello in 1746, wereagain attempted under the management of SignorVaneschi. And in November the theatre wasopened with pasticcios and revived operas, performedby a company of singers to which the publicmanifested no great partiality. During this yearand the beginning of 1754, Nerone, a pasticcio ;Galuppi's Enrico ; Didone, by Campi ; Artaxerxespasticcio ; Admeto, by Handel ; and Attilio, byJomelli, were all received with great indifference,as performed by Serafini, the first man, with littlevoice, though a good actor ; Visconti, first woman,but now passee ; with Ranger, Albumin, Passeriniand Frasi : nor could the united powers andsum-total of attraction of these singers keep themanager out of debt, or hardly out of jail, till thearrival of Mingotti, who, in the autumn of 1754,revived the favour of our lyric theatre with considerablesplendour."ITALIAN OPERA. 39Before following the subsequent career of theItalian opera in England, it is necessary to take aview of its further progress in its native country.But in the mean time it may be proper to return tothe English opera, and to trace the steps by whichit had now arrived at considerable importance.CHAPTER II.Neglect of the English opera at the beginning of the 18thcentury — The Beggars Opera — Its origin — First performance— Political allusions — Its success — Lavinia Fenton —Thomas Walker — Jeremiah Clarke — Authors of songs —Observations on The Beggar s Opera — Polly — Gay's otherpieces — Acts and Galatea — Its music by Handel.It has been seen that the establishment of theItalian opera in England was attended with thetotal neglect of the English musical drama. Fromthe year 1712, when Hughes and Galliard made anabortive attempt to revive it by producing the operaof Calypso, no English musical piece of the slightestnote (excepting Carey's Contrivances, performed in1715) was produced, till the year 17*27, when a newimpulse was given to the public taste by the appearanceof the Beggars Opera.The music of this celebrated piece consists ofballad airs, common at the time, to which Gayadapted the words of his songs. Among them areseveral of the finest Scotch melodies ; a circumstancewhich probably arose from Gay's residencein Edinburgh with his patron the Duke of Queens-beggar'sopera. 41berry. The airs were provided with accompaniments,and prepared for performance, by Dr.Pepusch.It has been generally said that the Beggar s Operawas intended to ridicule the Italian opera ; an evidentmistake, for there is not the slightest attemptto burlesque or parody the Italian dramas or music,to which it has not the smallest resemblance eitherin subject, style, or form. The following accountof its origin and first performance is given by Pope.Dr. Swift had been observing once to Mr. Gaywhat an odd pretty thing a Newgate pastoral mightmake. Gay was inclined to try such a thing forsome time, but afterwards thought it would be betterto write a comedy on the same plan. This waswhat gave rise to the Beggar's Opera. He beganon it ; and when first he mentioned it to Swift, thedoctor did not much like the project. As he carriedit on, he showed what he wrote to both of us, andwe now and then gave a correction, or a word ortwo of advice ; but it was wholly of his own writing.When it was done, neither of us thought it wouldsucceed. We showed it to Congreve, who said itwould either take greatly or be damned confoundedly.We were all, at the first night of it,in great uncertainty of the event, till we were muchencouraged by overhearing the Duke of Argyle,who sat in the next box to us, say, ' It will do — itmust do ! I see it in the eyes of them.' This wasa good while before the first act was over, and so42 beggar's opera.gave us ease soon ; for the duke (besides his owngood taste) had a particular knack in discoveringthe taste of the public. He was quite right in thisas usual : the good-nature of the audience appearedstronger every act, and ended in a clamour ofapplause." We learn, however, from Boswell, onthe authority of Quin, that the Beggar s Opera,during the first night of its appearance, was long inavery dubious state ; that there was a dispositionto damn it, and that it was saved by the song,Oh, ponder well, be not severe !" the audiencebeing much affected by the innocent looks of Polly,when she came to these two lines, which exhibit atonce a painful and ridiculous image, —For on the rope that hangs my dear,Depends poor Polly's life''This first performance was on 29th January 1728.The reception of the piece is thus described in thenotes to the Duncan : " This piece was receivedwith greater applause than ever was known. Besidesbeing acted in London sixty-three days withoutintermission, and renewed the next season withequal applause, it spread into all the great towns ofEngland ; — it made its progress into Wales, Scotland,and Ireland ; the ladies carried about withthem the favourite songs of it in fans ; houses werefurnished with it in screens ; furthermore it droveout of England (for that season) the Italian opera,which had carried all before it for ten sears."beggar's opera. 43There are many satirical allusions, both in thedialogue and the songs, to the public charactersand transactions of the clay. Sir Robert Walpolehad frequently been the object of Gay's satire. Hewas not deterred, however, from being present onthe first night, and sat in the stage-box. Locket'ssong —When you censure the age,Be cautious and sage,Lest the courtiers offended should be ;If you mention vice or bribe,'Tis so pat to all the tribe,That each cries, that was levell'd at me !"was loudly encored. Sir Robert, observing thepointed manner in which the audience applied thelast line to him, dexterously parried the thrust, atthe end of the second repetition of the song, bycalling out " encore !" in a voice that was audiblethroughout the house. This produced a generalcheer from the audience, and the song was sung athird time.Notwithstanding this escape, however, the audiencecontinued, for many years afterwards, to applyto Sir Robert Walpole various allusions in theBeggar's Opera, so that (Macklin says) he couldnever, with any satisfaction, be present at its performance.Not only was the song above mentionedapplied to him, but the name of Bob Booty wasnever mentioned without raising a laugh at his expense; and the quarrelling scene between Peaches44 beggar's opera.and Locket was so well understood at the time toallude to a recent quarrel between the two ministers,Sir Robert and Lord Townshend, that it constantlykept the audience in a roar of laughter. HoraceWalpole gives an account of the extraordinaryscene between the two statesmen thus alluded to byGay. Sir Robert and Lord Townshend happenedto meet at Colonel Selwyn's, in Cleveland-court,after having differed as to a foreign negociation,which Walpole objected to being mentioned in theHouse of Commons. They renewed their dispute ;and, in answer to Walpole's objection, Townshendsaid, " Since you object, and the House of Commonsis more your affair than mine, I shall notpersist in my opinion : but, as I now give way, Icannot help observing, that, upon my honour, Ithink that mode of proceeding would have beenmost advisable." Walpole, piqued at this expression,replied with heat, " My Lord, for once,then, there is no man's sincerity which I doubt somuch as yours ; and I never doubt it so much aswhen you are pleased to use such strong expressions."Townshend, incensed at this sarcasm, seized SirRobert by the collar. Sir Robert laid hold of hisin return ; and both, at the same instant quittingtheir holds, laid their hands on their swords. Mrs.Selwyn, frightened, wanted to call the guard, butwas prevented by Mr. Pelham, who made it upbetween them, though the contemptuous expressionsused on this occasion rendered all attempts to healLatina FENTON. 45the breach ineffectual. This scene happened in theend of the year 1727, not many weeks before theappearance of the Beggar s Opera, and was thenfresh in the memory of the public.The opera was first offered to Gibber, then managerof Drury Lane, and rejected by him. It wasthen offered to Rich, the rival potentate of CoventGarden, who had the good sense and good fortuneto accept it. Its profits were so very great, both tothe author and the manager, that it was said thatthe " Beggar s Opera had made Rich gay, and Gayrich." The author's profits are said to have beennot less than £2,000. Not only was it profitable tothe author and manager, but to some of the performers,whom it at once raised from obscurity todistinction. Miss Fenton, who represented Polly,became all at once the idol of the town. Herportrait was engraved and sold in great numbers.Her life was written ; books of letters and verses toher published ; collections made of her bon-motsand witticisms ; and she herself placed in a situationwhich led to her elevation to the peerage.Lavinia Fenton was the daughter of Mr. Berwick,a lieutenant in the navy, and was born in 1708.When she was an infant her mother married aperson of the name of Fenton, a coffee-house keeperat Charing-cross, and the child was then called bythe name of her father-in-law. She discovered agenius for singing before she could speak ; and, assoon as she was old enough, she received instruction46 Latina FENTON.from some of the best masters, principally in theEnglish ballad style. She also exhibited a talentfor acting. At eighteen she obtained an engagementat the Haymarket, and made her debut in thecharacter of Monimia in the Orphan, her performanceof which made her be regarded as a very promisingactress. Her beauty at the same time attractedmany admirers ; among others, a younglibertine of high rank fell so desperately in love withher, that he offered to abandon the pleasures of thetown, and retire with her into the country on anyterms, short of marriage, she. might propose. Theoffer was rejected with disdain ; and the circumstance,becoming public, greatly increased herreputation.She afterwards appeared in the character ofCherry in the Beaux Stratagem, which she lookedso admirably, and played with such delightful simplicityand archness, that she charmed the public,and obtained from Rich, the manager of CoventGarden, the tempting offer of fifteen shillings aweek. Induced by this liberality, she left the Hay-marketfor Covent Garden, where she remained atthe same salary till she appeared in the Beggar sOpera, when her salary, in consequence of theastonishing success of this piece, was raised tothirty shillings a week.Her great celebrity made her more than ever theobject of the amorous addresses of men of fashion.She appears to have withstood many attempts ofLatina FENTON. 47this nature, till she was addressed by the Duke ofBolton, to whose solicitations, though he was amarried man, she at length yielded, probably witha view to the elevation which she afterwards attained.Swift, in one of his letters written at this time, says,The Duke of Bolton has run away with PollyPeaches, having settled four hundred a year onher during pleasure, and, upon disagreement, twohundred more." She lived with this nobleman, ashis mistress, for twenty-three years. On the deathof the Duchess of Bolton in 1751, the duke immediatelymarried Miss Fen ton. She died in 1760,at the age of fifty-two.It is said that the Duke of Bolton often declaredthat he was first captivated by the plaintive andbewitching manner in which Polly sang the appealto her father and mother, " O ponder well, be notsevere." Macklin said that her dress in Polly wasvery simple, resembling that of a modern quaker ;and this is confirmed by the portraits of her whichhave been preserved.A very favourable character of her in her elevationis given by Dr. Joseph Wanton, in a note subjoinedto one of Swift's letters to Gay. " Shewas," he says, " a very accomplished and mostagreeable companion ; had much wit, good strongsense, and a just taste in polite literature Herperson was agreeable and well made ; though Ithink she could never be called a beauty. I havehad the pleasure of being at table with her, when48 Latina FENTON.her conversation was much admired by the firstcharacters of the age, particularly by old LordBathurst and Lord Granville."The original Macheath, Thomas Walker, gainedmuch celebrity by means of this part. It was originallyintended that it should be performed byQuin, whose vocal abilities were barely sufficient toenable him to sing a convivial song at a dinner-table.He did not, therefore, much relish the taskof sustaining a musical part, but nevertheless tookhis share in the rehearsals. At the close of one ofthem Walker was heard humming some of thesongs behind the scenes, in a style which attractedthe notice of the persons on the stage. Quinseized the opportunity of getting rid of the part,and said to Rich, " Ay, there's a man much morequalified to do you justice than I am." Walkerwas immediately called on to come forward ; andGay, who was present, instantly seeing his superiority,accepted him as the hero of the piece.Walker, for some years before this time, had beenrising in reputation as an actor ; but his success inMacheath seems to have been fatal to him. Hiscompany became so much courted by debauchedyoung men of fashion, that he fell into inveteratehabits of dissipation; and, after a constant declinein health, character, and circumstances, died inDublin, in great distress, in 1744, in the forty-sixthyear of his age. He was the author ofseveral dramatic pieces of little moment, which,beggar's opera. 49however, met with some temporary success. Asan actor and singer, he is thus described by Davies:He had from nature great advantages of voiceand person : his countenance was manly and expressive; and the humour, ease, and gaiety whichhe assumed in Macheath and other characters ofthis complexion, rendered him a great favouritewith the public. He knew little scientifically ofmusic, other than singing a song in good balladtune ; but that singing was supported by a speakingeye and inimitable action."The air of the celebrated song, " 'Tis womanthat seduces all mankind," was composed byJeremiah Clarke, organist of the Chapel-royal, anda distinguished composer of cathedral music. Hecame to an untimely and melancholy end, attendedwith extraordinary circumstances, which werecommunicated by one of his intimate friends to Dr.Burney. " Being at the house of a friend in thecountry, he found himself so miserable, that hesuddenly determined to return to London. Hisfriend, observing in his behaviour great marks ofdejection, furnished him with a horse and a servantto attend him. In his way to town, a fit of melancholyand despair having seized him, he alighted,and giving his horse to the servant, went into afield, in the corner of which there was a pond surroundedwith trees, which pointed out to his choicetwo ways of getting rid of life : but not being moreinclined to the one than to the other, he left it toVOL. II. E50 beggar's opera.the determination of chance; and taking a piece ofmoney out of his pocket, and tossing it in theair, determined to abide by its decision ; but themoney falling on its edge in the clay, seemed toprohibit both these means of destruction. Hismind was too much disordered to receive comfortfrom, or take advantage of this delay : he thereforemounted his horse and rode to London, determinedto find some other means of getting rid of life;and in July, 1707, not many weeks after hisreturn, he shot himself in his own house in St. Paul'sChurchyard. The late Mr. John Reading,organist of St. Dunstan's Church, intimately acquaintedwith Clarke, happening to go by thedoor at the instant the pistol went off, upon enteringthe house found his friend and fellow-studentin the agonies of death."The songs in the Beggar s Opera were not allwritten by Gay. The first song, "The modes ofthe court," was written by Lord Chesterfield;Virgins are like the fair flower in its lustre,"(united to a beautiful air of Purcell's,) by SirCharles Banbury Williams ; " Where you censurethe age," by Swift; and "Gamesters and lawyersare jugglers alike" was supposed to be written byMr. Fortescue, then Master of the Rolls.*This piece has kept possession of the stage forupwards of a century. Macheath and Polly haveThis information is given in the Memoirs of Macklin, onthe authority of the dowager Lady Townshend.beggar's opera. 51been favourite parts with most of our principalvocal performers ; and, when well represented, ithas rarely failed to draw crowded audiences inevery part of the kingdom. Its effects on publicmorals have been the subject of much discussionand controversy. Soon after its appearance it waspraised by Swift, as a piece which placed all kindsof vice in the strongest and most odious light.Others, however, censured it, as giving encouragementnot only to vice but to crime, by making ahighwayman the hero, and dismissing him at lastunpunished. It was even said that its performancehad a visible effect in increasing the number ofthis description of freebooters. The celebratedpolice magistrate, Sir John Fielding, once toldHugh Kelly, the dramatist, on a successful run ofthe Beggar s Opera, that he expected, in consequenceof it, a fresh cargo of highwaymen at hisoffice. Upon Kelly's expressing his surprise atthis, Sir John assured him, that, ever since thefirst representation of that piece, there had been,on every successful run, a proportionate number ofhighwaymen brought to the office, as would appearby the books any morning he chose to look overthem. Kelly did so, and found the observation tobe strictly correct.*Sir John Fielding's conviction on this subjectappears from the circumstance, that, in 1772, headdressed letters to the managers of both theMemoirs of Macklin.E 252 beggar's opera.theatres, remonstrating against the performance ofthe Beggar s Opera, on account of its tendency toincrease the number of thieves and highwaymen.Garrick, then unprovided with a Macheath, affectedto approve of this advice : but Colman's answerwas as follows: — "Mr. Colman's compliments toSir John Fielding. He does not think his the onlyhouse in Bow-street where thieves are hardenedand encouraged, and will persist in continuing therepresentation of that admirable satire, the Beggar sOpera"*Dr. Johnson, noticing the two contradictoryopinions as to the moral effects of this piece, says,-fBoth these opinions are surely exaggerated. Theplay, like many others, was plainly written only todivert, without any moral purpose, and is thereforenot likely to do good : nor can it be conceived,without more speculation than life requires oradmits, to be productive of much evil. Highwaymenand housebreakers seldom frequent the playhouse,or mingle in any elegant diversion ; nor is itpossible for any one to imagine that he may robwith safety, because he sees Macheath representedupon the stage." In one of the Doctor's conversationsrecorded by Boswell, we also find an opiniongiven by him on this subject. " The Beggar sOpera" says Boswell, " and the common questionwhether it was pernicious in its effects, having beenMemoirs of Lee Letcis.t Li fi of Gay.beggar's opera. 53discussed; Johnson — 'As to this matter, whichhas been very much contested, I myself am ofopinion that more influence has been ascribed tothe Beggar s Opera than it in reality ever had ;for I do not believe that any man was ever made arogue by being present at its representation. Atthe same time I do not deny that it may have someinfluence, by making the character of a roguefamiliar, and in some degree pleasing.' Then collectinghimself, as it were, to give a heavy stroke;There is in it such a lamentation of all principles,as to be injurious to morality.' "Swift's opinion that the Beggar s Opera was amoral piece, because it placed all kinds of vice inthe strongest and most odious light, is such a palpableabsurdity, that we may be well assured itnever would have been advanced by a man of hisjudgment, had it not been for his personal predilectionfor his friend the author. Dr. Johnson's argumentthat this piece could not be productive ofmuch evil, because highwaymen and housebreakersseldom frequent the playhouse, or minglein any elegant diversion, is founded on erroneouspremises ; the fact being, on the contrary, that thetheatres have always been very much frequentedby such persons. There are no highwaymen now.Changes in the state of society. and manners haveextinguished the race ; and the memory of theTurpin, Duvals, and Shepherds of other days, livesonly in the pages of our novelists and playsbeggar's opera.writers. There are no clashing blades now amongthe applauding audience, like those whose heartsburnt within them at the inspiring war-cry,Let us take the road !Hark, I hear the sound of coaches !"and who rushed from the theatre, animated withthe love of glory as well as of gold, to realise,on the heaths of Hounslow or Earshot, the glowing-imageswhich had been placed before them. Whateverit may once have done, the example of Mac-heathwill no longer create highwaymen. Butthese heroes have left their successors, though of asomewhat different class ; the swells of the presentday — gentlemen, too, and men of pleasure abouttown, who can both enjoy and profit by the picturesof London life they find in the BeggarsOpera. Macheath, moreover, is not the only heroof the piece. There are fine specimens of everykind of depredator on the property of the public ;and Filch, the dexterous pickpocket, if we mayjudge from the shouts and laughter of the galleries,has more friends and admirers among the audiencethan the bold highwayman ever had, even inthe palmy days of the road. But, independentlyof the direct incentive to robbery and theft, Dr.Johnson, we think t has stated the great objectionto this piece in the very Johnsonian phrase alreadyquoted ; " there is in it such a lamentation of allprinciples, as to be injurious to morality." Onebeggar's opera. 55cannot touch pitch without being defiled ; nor canthe mind become familiar with profligacy and indecencywithout contamination. The piece ismerely a display of different forms of depravity.Every character is vicious and debased, with theexception of Polly ; and she, so situated, is felt tobe a moral impossibility, for the purity of her charactercould not have lived in such an atmosphereof pollution. Attempts have latterly been made todiminish the grossness of the exhibition ; and certainscenes, which were always represented five-and-twentyyears ago, have since been omitted, asbeing offensive to common decency. Characters,sentiments, and language, so calculated to sullythe mind of ingenuous youth, are carefully kept byparents from the view and knowledge of their sonsand daughters in every situation except within thewalls of our national theatres. Recently, however,the Beggars Opera has been rarely performed.Whether this has arisen from a growing sense ofits impropriety, or from the want of fitting representativesof the hero and heroine, we shall notpretend to say. We believe that its licentiousnesshas contributed, no less than its wit and the beautyof its music, to the favour it has so long enjoyed :but it may be presumed that the time is come, orat least approaching, when its licentiousness willbanish it from the stage, notwithstanding its witand the beauty of its music.A well-meaning but very abortive attempt to56 BEGGARS OPERA.improve the morality of this piece was made by aCaptain Thompson, whose new version of it wasproduced at Covent Garden in 1777. The mostmaterial change was made in the close. Mac-heathis sentenced to hard labour on the Thames,Here he is visited by Polly and Lucy, acknowledgesthe lenity of his sentence, and promises to becomea virtuous member of society. The audience, however,did not approve of this homily being tackedto their favourite display of blackguardism ; andthe piece was damned accordingly.The success of the Beggar s Opera induced Gayto write a continuation of it, which he entitledPolly. But at that time he was out of favour withthe court, having been charged with the authorshipof some libels and seditious pamphlets : and itsperformance was prohibited by the Lord Chamberlain,at the very time when it was about to be putin rehearsal. This, however, was no loss to theauthor ; for it would most probably, on account ofits inferiority, have failed in the performance;whereas its publication, supported by a large subscription,which was procured by Gay's great personalinterest, and in consequence of the persecutionhe had undergone, produced as large a sum asaconsiderable run of the piece would have obtainedfor him. He prefixed to it a preface, inwhich he gives the following account of its suppression." It was on Saturday evening, December7, 1728, that I waited on the Lord Chamberlain.Polly 57I desired to have the honour of reading the operato his grace, but was ordered to leave it with him,which I did, upon expectation of having it returnedon the Monday following. But I had it not tillThursday, December 12, when I received it fromhis grace, with this answer ; ' That it was notallowed to be acted, but commanded to be suppress'This was told me in general without anyreasons assigned, or any charge against me of myhaving given any particular offence. Since thisprohibition, I have been told that I am accused, ingeneral terms, of having written many disaffectedlibels and seditious pamphlets. As it has ever beenmy utmost, ambition if that word may be used onthis occasion) to lead a quiet and inoffensive life,I thought my innocence in this particular wouldnever have required a justification ; and as thiskind of writing is what I have ever detested andnever practised, I am persuaded so groundless acalumny can never be believed but by those whodo not know me."Polly was revived by Colman, at the Haymarket,in 1777, but without success. A remarkable circumstancehappened on this occasion. TheDuchess of Queensberry, who had been Gay'spatroness, and had exerted herself, first, in endeavouringto get this piece performed, and then topromote the subscription on its publication, waspresent, fifty years afterwards, at its representationin the Haymarket theatre. She was then very58 ACIS AND GALATEA.old, and survived this, her last visit to the theatre,only a few weeks.Gay's fame rests chiefly on the Beggar s Opera.Among his other dramatic pieces was Acis andGalatea, immortalised by its union with the musicof Handel, which was performed in 1732, and aforgotten opera, called Achilles, performed in1733.Acis and Galatea, though a musical drama, wasnot intended to be acted in the manner of an opera.It was, however, performed in this manner at theHaymarket theatre, without Handel's sanction.This performance was announced by the following-advertisement: " May 10th, (1732,) at the theatrein the Haymarket, on Thursday, the 12th instant,Acis and Galatea, a pastoral drama, set by Mr.Handel, will be performed, with all the choruses,scenes, machines, and other decorations ; being thefirst time it was performed in a theatrical way.The part of Acis by Mr. Mounted, being the firsttime of his appearing in character on any stage ;Galatea by Miss Arne. Pit and boxes at five shillings."Miss Arne, afterwards Mrs. Cibber, wasthe sister of the celebrated composer. This illegitimateperformance produced the following announcementfrom Handel : " June the 10th, willbe performed Acis and Galatea, a serenata, revisedwith several additions, at the opera-house, by agreat number of the best voices and instruments.There will be no action on the stage; but theACIS AND GALATEA. 59scene will represent, in a picturesque manner, arural prospect, with rocks, groves, fountains, andgrottos, among which will be disposed a chorus ofnymphs and shepherds; the habits and every decorationsuited to the subject." This undoubtedly isthe manner in which this charming little pieceought to be performed. It is a dramatic poem, butnot an acting play, and the incidents are such ascannot be represented on the stage. A few yearsago another attempt was made to perform it as anopera, but without success. Polyphemus is entirelyan ideal character, and any attempt to personatehim must be ridiculous ; and the concluding scene,in which the giant throws a huge rock at the headof his rival, produced shouts of merriment. Actsand Galatea is performed in an orchestra, in themanner in which oratorios are performed : but itseffect would certainly be heightened by the picturesquescenery and decorations employed by Handelhimself.In listening to Acis and Galatea, one cannot butregret that Handel never employed his genius onthe English opera. Had this piece been constructedwith a view to theatrical representation, theeffect of the music, so performed, would have beenin the highest degree dramatic : supposing the curtainto rise upon a pastoral landscape, and the stageto be filled by picturesque groups of " happynymphs and happy swains," how delicious wouldbe their choral song in praise of " the pleasures of60 ACIS AND GALATEA.the plains !" Imagine, likewise, the effect of thechorus announcing the terrible approach of thegiant, uttered by the same groups, with all theappearance and action of confusion and dismay.Finer specimens of the theatrical chorus are. nowhereto be found ; and there is nothing in hisown Italian operas at all comparable to them. Norcan anything be more dramatic than the design ofthe lovely trio, " The flocks shall leave the mountains,"composed of the tender accents of thelovers, all unconscious of their danger, mingledwith the moody m tittering of the jealous monster,which rise to a burst of vindictive fury. The airs,too, how sweet and graceful — how full of varietyand freshness ! Had Handel been induced, by anyfortunate circumstances, to write a few Englishoperas, he would unquestionably have producedsuch models of excellence as would have influenced,to this day, the character of our musicaldrama.CHAPTER III.Miss Rafter, afterwards Mrs. Clive — Henry Carey— Miss Arne,afterwards Mrs. Cibber— Thomas Augustine Arne — JohnBeard — Cecilia Young, afterwards Mrs. Arne — Lampe — TheDragon of Wantley — Comus — Various operas by Arne —Artaxerxes — English recitative — Arne's airs — Love in a Village— Character of Arne — Boyce — The Chaplet and Shepherd'sLottery — Pasticcio operas — Miss Brent — Michael Arne.In 1730," says Dr. Burney, " Miss Rafter,afterwards the celebrated Mrs. Clive, first appearedon the stage at Drury-lane, as a singer, at thebenefit of Harry Carey, who seems to have beenher singing-master." This is inaccurate. MissRafter, whose promising vocal talents had attractedthe notice of Cibber, first appeared in 1729, at theage of seventeen, in the character of a boy, andsang a song with great approbation. She immediatelyafterwards appeared in a pastoral drama ofCibber's, called Love in a Riddle, in which sheperformed the part of a shepherdess. In the bill,the part of Phillips is by " Mrs. Rafter." At thattime that appellation of miss, instead of mistress,62 MRS. CLIVE.was beginning to be applied to unmarried ladies ;and we find mistress and miss applied to MissRafter in the course of the same year. Love in aRiddle was violently hooted the first night. Onthe second night, when the Prince of Wales waspresent, it met with the same reception ; on whichCibber came forward and said that the piece shouldbe withdrawn, but that, in the meantime, he hopedthe audience would consider in whose presencethey were. While Miss Rafter was singing, theriot ceased. A person in the boxes called out tohis companion, " Zounds, Tom, take care, or thatcharming little devil will save all !" This piecewas afterwards reproduced with considerable alterations,and performed with success, under the titleof Damon and Phillips.In 1732 Miss Rafter married Mr. Clive, a gentlemanof the law ; but the union was not productiveof happiness, and they agreed to separate. " Yet,"says the Biographia Dramaticaa, " notwithstandingthe temptations to which a theatre is sometimesapt to expose young persons of the female sex, andthe too great readiness of the public to give way tounkind suppositions in regard to them, calumnyitself has never seemed to aim the slightest arrowat her fame." In 1768 she quitted the stage, andretired to a small but elegant house near StrawberryHill, where she passed the remainder of her life inease and independence, respected and beloved forher virtues and pleasing qualities.MRS. CLIVE. 63A more extensive walk in comedy," saysDavies, " than that of Mrs. Clive, cannot be imagined; the chambermaid, in every varied shapewhich art or nature could lend her ; characters ofwhim and affectation, from the high-bred LadyFanciful to the vulgar Mrs. Heidelberg ; countrygirls, romps, hoydens, and dowdies ; superannuatedbeauties, viragoes, and humorists. To a strongand pleasing voice, with an ear for music, sheadded all the sprightly action requisite to a numberof parts in ballad farces. Her mirth was so genuine,that whether it was restrained to the arch sneerand the suppressed half laugh, widened to the broadgrin, or extended to the downright honest burst ofloud laughter, the audience was sure to accompanyher." — " Her singing," says Burney, " which wasintolerable when she meant it to be fine, in balladfarces and songs of humour, was, like her comicacting, everything it should be." She was a favouriteof the public as a singer as well as anactress ; and we find her name in the dramatispersonae of most of the musical pieces which appearedwhile she remained on the stage.The entertainment for Carey's benefit, in whichMiss Rafter appeared in 1730, seems to have beenmarked with the eccentricity of his character. Itwas whimsically announced in the Daily Post ofDecember 3. After mentioning the play, (whichwas Greenwich Park?) and the additional entertainmentsof singing, particularly a dialogue of Purcell,64 CAREY.by Mr. Carey and Miss Rafter, and a cantata ofMr. Carey's by Miss Rafter, there is an apologyfrom Carey for the tragedy of half an act {Chronon-hotonthologus) not being performed ; but a promiseis made of indemnification by the entertainmentsbetween the acts : And there is the following editorialparagraph; " At our friend Harry Carey'sbenefit to-night, the powers of music, poetry, andpainting assemble in his behalf, he being an admirerof the three sister arts : the body of musiciansmeet in the Haymarket, whence they marchin great order, preceded by a magnificent movingorgan, in form of a pageant, accompanied by allthe kinds of musical instruments ever in use, fromTubal Cain to this day; a great multitude of booksellers,authors, and printers form themselves intoa body at Temple-bar, whence they march withgreat decency to Covent Garden, preceded by alittle army of printers' devils with their proper instruments: here the two bodies of music andpoetry are joined by the brothers of the pencil ;when, after taking some refreshment at the ,they march in solemn procession to thetheatre, amidst an innumerable crowd of spectators."The success of the Beggar s Opera now causedthe production of other pieces in a similar form,and may be said to have given rise to the Englishballad opera. One of the first of these was TheVillage Opera, written by Charles Johnson, theARNE. 65music of which consisted of old tunes to new words.Bickerstaff's celebrated Love in a Village was animitation of this piece.In 1732, an opera, Teraminta, written by HenryCarey, and composed by Smith, a musician ofsome ability, was brought out with little effect ;but, in the same year, another opera, called Amelia,also written by Carey, and composed by JohnFrederick Lampe, was performed with success.The music of this last opera, according to theadvertisement of the performance, was " set in theItalian manner." In this piece Miss Arne, afterwardsthe celebrated Mrs. Gibber, made her firstappearance as a singer, and was much applauded.Miss Arne was the sister of Thomas AugustineArne, who, though himself as yet unknown as amusician, had prepared his sister, by his instructions,for her successful debut. They were thechildren of an eminent upholsterer in King-street,Covent Garden, in whose house the Indian kingslodged in their visit to London, so humorouslydescribed in the Spectator. The young man receiveda good education, having been intended forthe profession of the law. When at Eton, he is saidto have tormented his schoolfellows by constantlyblowing on an old cracked flute. After he returnedhome, he used to gratify his passion for music byborrowing a livery and going to the upper galleryof the opera-house, which was then appropriatedto domestics. He had a spinet concealed in hisVOL. II. F66 ARNE.room, on which, after muffling the strings with ahandkerchief, he used to practise during the night.He was articled as clerk to an attorney, but madegreater progress in music than in law. He contrivedto obtain instructions on the violin, on whichinstrument he acquired such a proficiency, thathis father, happening to call one evening upon agentleman in the neighbourhood, and being showninto the drawing-room where a musical party wasassembled, found his son in the act of leading theband. Finding the young man's musical propensitiesso unconquerable, and his abilities so great,his father allowed him not only to pursue the studyof the art with a view to making it his profession,but to instruct his sister in singing.The success of his pupil in the part of Ameliainduced Arne to prepare another for her. Heaccordingly composed new music for Addison'sopera of Rosamond. Jt was performed in 1733,confirming the reputation of Miss Arne, and layingthe foundation of that of her brother, who nowbecame known for the first time as a composer.His next work was Fielding's Tom Thumb, alteredinto the form of an opera, the music of which wasannounced as being composed "after the Italianmanner." It was performed in 1733, the part ofTom Thumb being represented by Master Arne,the composer's brother. Though Arne thus madehimself favourably known to the public, he did notfor some years produce any work of consequence.BEARD. 67Comus, which established his reputation, did notappear till 1738.In 1736, John Beard, the celebrated tenorsinger, made his first appearance on the stage, atCovent Garden, in a dramatic entertainment calledThe Royal Chase, or Merlin s Cave. He was bornin 1717, and received his musical education in theChapel-royal. He was one of the singers in theDuke of Chances' chapel at Cannons during thetime that Handel resided with that munificentnobleman, and had a part in Esther, Handel's firstoratorio, when it was originally performed there.After his appearance on the stage, he immediatelybecame the favourite of the town, and for manyyears held a pre-eminent place among the Englishvocalists, taking the principal part in almost everymusical piece which was performed.In January, 1739, Beard married Lady HenriettaHerbert, only daughter of James, Earl of Landgrave,and widow of Lord Edward Herbert, secondson of the Marquis of Powis ; a marriage which, ofcourse, gave rise at the time to abundance ofscandal. Lady Mary Worsley Montague, in one ofher letters to Lady Pomfret, says, " Lady HarrietHerbert furnished the tea-tables here with freshtattle for the last fortnight. I was one of thefirst informed of her adventure by Lady Gage, whowas told that morning by a priest that she haddesired him to marry her the next day to Beard,who sings in the farces at Drury Lane. He refusedf 268 BEARD.her that good office, and immediately told Lady-gage,who (having been unfortunate in her friends)was frightened at this affair, and asked my advice.I told her honestly that since the lady was capable ofsuch amours, I did not doubt, if this was broke off,she would bestow her person and fortune on somehackney-coachman or chairman ; and that I reallysaw no method of saving her from ruin, and herfamily from dishonour, but by poisoning her ; andoffered to be at the expense of the arsenic, and evento administer it with my own hands, if she wouldinvite her to drink tea with her that evening. Buton her not approving that method, she sent toLady Montague, Mrs. Dutch, and all the relationswithin the reach of messengers. They carried LadyHarriet to Twickenham, though I told them it wasa bad air for girls. She is since returned to London,and some people believe her married ; others,that she is too much intimidated by Mr. Landgrave'sthreats to dare to go through this ceremony;but the secret is now public, and in what manner itwill conclude I know not. Her relations havecertainly no reason to be amazed at her constitution,but are violently surprised at the mixture of devotionthat forces her to have recourse to the churchin her necessities ; which has not been the roadtaken by the matrons of her family. Such examplesare very detrimental to our whole sex, and areapt to influence the other into a belief that we areunfit to manage either liberty or money."BEARD. 69Lord Wharncliffe, in a note on this passage, says,Lady Harriet Herbert, daughter of the last Marquisof Powis — she did marry Beard in spite ofher relations. He was a singer at Vauxhall, andan actor in musical pieces at the theatre ; but whatwas much worse, a man of very indifferent characters"*His lordship here makes two mistakes. —Lady Harriet Herbert was not the daughter of theMarquis of Powis, but the widow of his son ; andBeard's character was not only irreproachable, butexcellent. According to every account of him, hewas a man of liberal attainments, pleasing manners,good principles, and respectable conduct.Though Lady Harriet Herbert married so muchbeneath her degree, and against the consent of herfamily, the union did not prove an unhappy one.She died in 1753; and a handsome monument waserected to her memory by her husband in St. pancreaschurchyard, on which it is recorded that,On the 8th of January, 1738-9, she became thewife of Mr. John Beard, who, during a happyunion of fourteen years, tenderly loved her personand admired her virtues ; who sincerely feels andlaments her loss ; and must for ever revere hermemory, to which he consecrates this monument."In 1759 he married a daughter of Rich, onwhose death he became one of the proprietors andacting manager of Covent Garden theatre. InLetters and Works of Lady Mary Worsley Montague,edited by Lord Wharncliffe, vol. ii. p. 218.70 MKS. Cibber.1768 he retired from the stage, and in 1791 he died,at the age of seventy-four. He spent his latter yearsin ease and affluence, in the society of many respectablefriends whom he had gained by his estimablequalities and agreeable talents.Beard was not only an excellent dramatic performer,but an eminent singer of sacred music, andfor many years sustained the principal male part inHandel's oratorios. As a theatrical singer he had arival in the person of Lowe, who enjoyed a considerableshare of public favour. " With the finesttenor voice I ever heard in my life," says Burney,for want of diligence and cultivation, Lowe couldnever be safely trusted with anything better than aballad, which he constantly learned by his ear ;whereas Mr. Beard, with an inferior voice, constantlypossessed the favour of the public by hissuperior conduct, knowledge of music, and intelligenceas an actor." #Miss Arne, soon after she established her reputationas a singer by her performance of Rosamond-becamethe second wife of the celebrated, or rathernotorious, Theophilus Gibber, to whom she wasmarried in 1734. Cibber's own and his wife'semoluments, though very considerable, were insufficientto supply his extravagant expenses ; and, soonafter their marriage, the derangement of his affairs# This comparison between Lowe and Beard may be appliedto the two great modern English tenor-singers, Incledon andBraham.MRS. CIBBER. 71rendered it necessary for him to retire to France.During his absence a liaison took place betweenMrs. Cibber and a young gentleman of fortune, atwhich, after his return, he is said not only to haveconnived, but even to have been accessory to theircorrespondence. He was afterwards induced, however,to bring an action of crim. con. against thegentleman, laying his damages at 5,000/ ; but theamount which he recovered (ten pounds) shows thesense which was entertained of his own conduct.This worthless and unhappy man was drowned inashipwreck in 1758. The vessel in which he hadembarked for Ireland was driven by stormy weatherto the western coast of Scotland, where it was lost,and most of the crew and passengers perished. Mrs.Cibber remained on the Drury Lane stage till herdeath in 1760. When the intelligence of herdeath was communicated to Garrick, he gave hercharacter in the following words : " Tragedy isdead with her : and yet she was the greatest femaleplayer belonging to my house. I could easily parrythe artless thrusts, and despise the coarse languageof some of my other heroines ; but, whatever wasGibber's object, a new part or a new dress, she wasalways sure to carry her point by the force of herinvective, and the steadiness of her perseverance."Her person is described by her biographers as havingbeen perfectly elegant. Even when she hadlost the bloom of youth, although she wanted thatfulness of person which is frequently so effectual in72 MRS. ARNE.concealing the hand of time, it was impossible tocontemplate her figure and face without thinkingher both young and handsome. Her voice wasnaturally plaintive and musical ; but its powerswere such as to second her fine and striking featuresin the expression of the most violent as well as themost tender passions. She made some attempts incomedy, but with inferior success. As a singer, hernatural gifts, and the cultivation they received fromthe tuition of her brother, were such, that shewould have risen to the highest eminence, had shenot turned her attention to the dramatic more thanthe musical part of her profession, and become oneof the greatest of the English tragedians.The greatest English female singer of this periodwas Miss Cecilia Young, who afterwards becamethe wife of Dr. Arne. She was a pupil of Gemi-niani, the celebrated composer and violinist, andmade her first appearance at Drury Lane in 1730.With a good natural voice and fine shake," saysBurney, " she had been so well taught, that herstyle of singing was infinitely superior to that ofany other Englishwoman of her time." Mrs.Arne was an Italian as well as an English singer,and her name appears in the operas of Handel, aswell as in the English dramatic pieces of her time.She had two sisters, Isabella and Esther, bothfavourite vocalists. Isabella Young married Lampe,the composer. These three sisters were alive in1789, when Burney published the last volume ofDRAGON OF Wanted. 73his history. Mrs. Arne is said to have died aboutthe year 1795, when she must have been upwardsof eighty.In 1737, The Dragon of Wantley was first performedat Covent Garden. The piece was writtenby Henry Carey, and the music composed byLampe. It is founded on the old ballad of Mooreof Moorehall, and is an admirable burlesque ofthe Italian opera. The extravagant love, heroism,and fury of the Italian stage, are mimicked withgreat humour ; and the songs, though ludicrous inthe highest degree, are set in the Italian seriousstyle of that day. The effect was heightened bythe most absurd and fantastical costumes and ridiculousmachinery ; and the success of the piecewas not inferior even to that of the Beggar s Opera.The piece was published, with a dedication byCarey to Lampe, in which he says, " Many joyoushours have we shared during the composition ofthis opera, chopping and changing, lopping, ekingout, and coining of words, syllables, and jingle, todisplay in English the beauties of nonsense so prevailingin the Italian operas ; this pleasure has beensince transmitted to the gay, the good-natured, andjocular part of mankind, who have tasted the jokeand enjoyed the laugh." The songs and duets wereat the same time published by the composer.The music of this " burlesque opera" (as it iscalled in the title) is excellent. It is admirablyadapted to the words, on the supposition that they74 DRAGON OF Wanted.are perfectly serious ; and its great beauty andreally pathetic expression give infinite zest to theirgrotesque absurdity. The melodies are spirited andgraceful ; and the orchestral score (consisting ofthe quartet of stringed instruments with the additionof two oboes) is clear and simple, yet veryingenious and full of charming effects.The drama is made up of the usual elements ofan Italian opera of that day. There is the famousMoore of Moorehall, the redoubtable dragon-killeras well as lady-killer ; there are two damsels, bothin love with him, and the slighted fair one, ofcourse, full of jealousy and rage ; and there is theterrible monster who falls before the victorious hero.We have here ample room for all the tragic passionsof the opera sera. The character of Moore ofMoorehall was sustained by Sal way, a performer ofwhom we have no account ; but, from his successfulexecution of the music of this part, he must havebeen a tenor-singer of considerable powers. Thetwo inamoratas, Margery, the heroine, and Mauxa-linda her rival, were represented by Isabella Young,(afterwards wife of the composer,) and EstherYoung, her sister ; and Reinhold, the bass-singer,was the Dragon.The aria with which Moore of Moore-hall makes-hisentree, is one of the finest bacchanalian songs tobe found in English music. The words are,Zeno, Plato, Aristotle,All were lovers of the bottle:DRAGON OF Wanted. 75Poets, painters, and musicians,Churchmen, lawyers, and physicians,All admire a pretty lass,All require a cheerful glass.Every pleasure has its season ;Love and drinking are no treason."These words are set with great boldness, breadth,and freedom ; and the song would still be highlyeffective either on the stage or in the concert-room.The fair Margery is spokeswoman of a deputationto petition the champion to rescue them from thedevouring monster ; and she addresses him in thefollowing words, clothed with a lovely melody :Gentle knight, all knights exceeding,Pink of prowess and good breeding,Let a virgin's tears inspire thee,Let a maiden's blushes fire thee.For my father and my mother,For my sister and my brother,For my friends that stand before thee,Thus I sue thee, thus implore thee,Thus I kiss thy valiant garment,Humbly hoping there's no harm isn't."Before the champion sets out on his enterprise,there is a tender scena between him and his mistress,in which there is this duet :Moore. Let my dearest be near me,To warm me, to cheer me,To fire me, inspire meWith kisses and ale.Margery. I'll ever be near theeTo warm thee, to cheer thee,76 DRAGON OF Wanted.To fire thee, inspire theeWith kisses and ale.Moore. Your fears I'll abolish.Marg. This dragon demolish.Moore. I'll work him, I'll jerk himFrom nostril to tail.Marg. Ay, work him and jerk himFrom nostril to tail."The long roulade in both parts, on "wo — rk him,"is whimsical in the extreme.The two dulcinea fall by the ears in this fashion:Margery -\ Insulting gipsy,and > You're surely tipsy,Mauxalinda, ) Or non te ipse,To chatter so.Your too much feedingHas spoil'd your breeding ; —Go, trollop, go !"In this duet the Italian musical forms for expressingrage are amusingly introduced. Nothing canbe more comic than the way in which the angrydamsels reciprocate the epithet "trollop," and atlast shout, at the same time, in each other's ears,Go, trollop, go !" and, even in laughing at the absurdityof the effect, one cannot but be delightedwith the cleverness and spirit of the music.While the hero is gone to fight the dragon, thedisconsolate Margery gives vent to her sorrows inahighly-wrought air, containing strong expression,striking modulation, and fine orchestraleffects. Thus she sings :Sure my stays will burst with sobbing,And my heart quite crack with throbbing ;DRAGON OF Wanted. 7/My poor eyes as red as ferrets,And I hasn't a grain of spirits.Oh, I would not for any moneyThis vile beast should kill my honey ;Better kiss me, gentle knight,Than with dragons fierce to fight."The grand scene of the encounter between Mooreof Moorehall and the dragon is evidently in ridiculeof the combat between Hydaspes and thelion.* Moore addresses his antagonist in a dashing-bravery:Dragon, dragon, thus I dare thee,Soon to atoms thus I'll tear thee,Thus thy insolence subdue.But regarding where my dear is,Then, alas, 1 know what fear is,Gentle Margery, for you."Moore utters this last piece of sentiment in alanguishing largo movement, in the same manner asHydaspes, after a bold defiance to the lion, tellshim, in a similar tone, that he may lacerate hisbosom, but shall not touch his heart, which he haspreserved faithful to his mistress. The dragon, inreply, uses some coarse language (taken from theold ballad) in a fine rolling bass, and is then putto death selon les regis. There are several otherfine things in the opera, particularly a cavatina,sung by the second woman :Oh, give me not up to the law,I'd much rather beg on crutches ;# See ante, vol. i. p. 263.78 DRAGON OF Wanted.Once in a solicitor's paw,You ne'er get out of his clutches."This sentiment, equally just and pathetic, is conveyedin an expressive melody, accompanied onlyby the violoncello obbligato, in the manner whichHandel, in some of his songs, borrowed from thecantatas of Alessandro Scarlatti.This opera is one of the things which causes regretthat so many fine productions of the oldentime have fallen into oblivion. Were it once morebrought upon the stage, the piece would be foundvery amusing, and the music exceedingly agreeable ;and the principal parts would display to advantagethe powers of our best vocal performers. Itmay be supposed that the zest of the satire is lost,because the Italian operas which were the immediatesubjects of ridicule are long since forgotten. ButFielding's Tom Thumb has been acted for a century,though very few people know anything about thepassages in the contemporary tragedies which areparodied in that inimitable piece of humour. InThe Dragon of Wantley, the contrast between theridiculous subject and the tragic pomp and circumstancewith which it is treated, and between thegrotesque words and the serious and expressivemusic — so much at variance with them, and yet soadmirably adapted to them — with which they areclothed, would still produce its effect, while thebeauty of the music would give pleasure to everyperson of taste.HENRY CAREY. 79In 1738 Carey brought out a sequel to theDragon of Wantley, under the title of Margery.It was performed (says the Biographia Dramaticaa)with great applause at Coven t Garden ; but we havenot met with any other information respecting it.In 1739, he produced a musical piece called Nancy,or the Parting Lovers; of the subject of which hegives the following account : "At the beginningof the late impress, the author saw a young fellowhurried away by a press-gang, and followed by hissweetheart, a very pretty wench, and perfectly neatthough plain in her dress ; her tears, her distress,and moving softness, drew attention and compassionfrom all who beheld her." It was a pleasing andaffecting little piece, and very favourably received."The song, ' And canst thou leave thy Nancy ?' "says Dibdin, " shows that Carey's mind was musical.There is more genius in it than in many alaboured fugue."This appears to have been the last of HenryCarey's productions. In 1743 he committed suicide,probably in consequence of embarrassed circumstances.He was a favourite of the public, yetalways indigent, from which it may be concludedthat he was improvident, like too many of thechildren of song ; though it does not appear that hewas vicious or dissipated in his habits. The tenorof his life, in this respect, may be inferred from thetone of his songs and dramatic pieces, which,though lively and humorous, are remarkably free80 LAMPE.from immorality. He was a musician as well as adramatist and a poet. Without having acquiredlearning or skill in the art, he produced manypleasing and natural melodies. He wrote both thewords and music of a very popular little piececalled The Honest Yorkshireman ; and the well-known"Sally in our Alley" is a pretty specimenof his talent as a writer and composer of ballads.As a musician," says Sir John Hawkins, "Careyseems to have been the first of the lowest rank, andas a poet the last of that class of which Durfeywas the first, with this difference, that in all thesongs written on love, wine, and such kind of subjects,he seems to have manifested an inviolableregard for decency and good manners."John Frederick Lampe, the composer of theDragon of Wantley, was a Saxon. He arrived inEngland about the year 1726, and became known asacomposer by his opera of Amelia, which has beenalready mentioned. Besides his dramatic pieces,he composed a great number of popular songs ; and,in his attention to the emphasis and accent ofEnglish words, he may serve as a model even forour native musicians. In 1750 he went to resideat Edinburgh, and was much esteemed and respectedby the patrons of music in that city ; but in 1751he was seized with an illness, of which he died atthe age of fifty-nine.In 1738, Arne established his reputation as adramatic composer by his music to Milton's Comus.comus. 81This piece, as then revived, was considerablyaltered, and rendered more fit for representation, byMr. John Dalton, a gentleman of some literary reputation,who died, in 1763, prebendary of Worcesterand rector of St. Mary-at-Hill. He extended agood deal the musical portion of the piece, not onlyby the insertion of songs selected from Milton'sother works, but by the addition of several of hisown, which were very happily suited to the mannerof the original author. The parts of Comus andof the second attendant spirit were performed byBeard ; Euphrosyne by Mrs. Clive ; and the Ladyand pastoral nymph by Mrs. Arne.The piece had a great run, and has since beenrevived at different periods with success. Furtheralterations were made upon it by Colman, in 1772.The dialogue was greatly mutilated, because it wasfound that moral lessons and descriptive passages,however beautiful and poetical in themselves, arecold and tedious on the stage. During the run ofComus, after its revival in 1738, Mr. Dalton soughtout Milton's grand-daughter, Elizabeth Foster,who was then living in extreme old age and poverty.By his benevolent exertions, her illustrious ancestor'sdrama was performed for her benefit at DruryLane, on the 5th April, 1750, by which she obtainedabove one hundred and thirty pounds. Garrick spokea prologue written for the occasion by Johnson.In Comus, Arne introduced a style of melodywhich may be said to be peculiarly his own ; beingVOL. II. G82 comus.neither that of the older English masters, nor of theItalian composers of the day. It is graceful, flowing,and elegant ; depending for its effect neitheron the resources of harmony and uncommon modulation,nor on feats of vocal execution. It is, at thesame time, very expressive, and finely adapted, notonly to the spirit, but to the accentuation andprosody of the poetry. The music, too, is highlydramatic and characteristic. The careless jollity ofComus, the elegant voluptuousness of Euphrosyne,and the graceful simplicity and tenderness of thepastoral nymph, are finely expressed in the airs ofthese different personages ; as, for example, inNow Phoebus sinketh in the west," " By dimpledbrook," and " How gentle was my Damon's air."And from the descriptions which we have of Beard,Mrs. Clive, and Mrs. Arne, they must have beenadmirable representatives of the characters.But Co?nus, though a beautiful dramatic poem,is more suited to the closet than the stage ; and thecharming music of the piece, though it can nolonger be heard in the theatre, ought still to givedelight in the chamber or the concert-room.From this time to the end of his career, Arneenjoyed an undisputed pre-eminence as an Englishdramatic composer ; and yet it is a remarkable circumstancethat only two of his operas, Comus andArtaxerxes, produced four-and-twenty years afterwards,had great success. Of his numerous pieces,composed during this interval, a very few obtainedarne's operas. 83a moderate share of popularity, while the remainderseem to have failed decidedly on the stage.Among those which had success were The JovialCrew, The Judgment of Paris, Eliza, and Thomasand Sally. Among his failures may be enumeratedThe Blind Beggar of Retinal Green, The fall ofPhaeton, King Pepin s Campaign, Don Salerno, TheTemple of Dulness, The Guardian Outwitted, andAchilles in Petticoats. The indifferent success, ortotal failure, on the stage, of these pieces, was byno means imputable to the music, but to the dramasthemselves, which were generally feeble and insipid.Arne, unfortunately, was too often his own poet; anart to which he had no vocation. The music, however,even of those operas which failed on the stage,was not altogether thrown away ; for a great dealof it, when published, became generally popular ;and many beautiful songs still continue in favour,though the pieces for which they were composedare entirely forgotten.The Jovial Crew was one of Arne's early productions.When first brought out, Miss Rafter appearedin it ; but it was afterwards performed withMiss Brent as the principal character, and hersongs in the piece were published. They are verybeautiful, especially the air, " See how the lambsare sporting," which is a fine specimen of Arne'ssimple English style. Nothing, we believe, isknown of the piece, further than that it is an alter284 JUDGMENT OF PARTS.ration of Brome's play with the same title into athree act opera.The music of The Judgment of Paris was publishedin 1740; "as performed," says the title-page," by Mr. Beard, Mr. Low r e, Mrs. Arne, Mrs.Clive, Miss Edwards, and others, at the theatre-royalDrury Lane ;" and, of course, during thetime of its performance at that theatre. Of thedrama we can give no account ; but had it beenequal to the music, this opera ought to have beenone of Arne's most successful works. The overtureis by far the best of his instrumental compositionsthat we have met with. A short introduction leadsinto an excellent fugue, in which the subject andits counterpoint are inverted and treated withlearning and skill, and yet with great freedom andsimplicity of effect. This movement alone is sufficientto put an end to any question as to Arne'sability as a contrapuntist. There is then a free andgraceful minuet ; and the conclusion, after thefashion of the time, is an elegant gig ha, a good dealin the style of Corelli. The scene in which thethree goddesses contend, before Paris, for the palmof beauty, is admirable. Venus (originally personatedby Mrs. Arne) first addresses him in a captivatingair, "Hither turn thee, gentle swain," accompaniedby the violoncello obbligato, in a manner thatwould make Lindsey's fingers tingle with delight.This is followed by a trio for three soprano voices ;JUDGMENT OF PARIS. 85each of the goddesses importuning him — " Turn tome,for / am she." The manner in which thevoices interrupt, respond to, and mingle with eachother, is equally beautiful and dramatic, and musthave had the additional charm of novelty at a timewhen such concerted pieces were almost unknownon the stage. Even now it would be a charmingmorceau in a concert-room. Paris replies to theirsolicitations in a song which ends thus ;Apart let me view then each heavenly fair,For three at a time there's no mortal can bear ;*And since a gay robe an ill shape may disguise,When each is undressI'll judge of the best,For 'tis not a face that must carry the prize."From what follows it would seem that this conditionwas complied with, and that the three divinitiesstood before the Trojan shepherd in all theircharms, as described in ancient story ; though howour ancestors managed this piece of stage-effect issomewhat difficult to conjecture. Each goddessthen addresses him separately. Juno sings thewell-known " Let ambition fire thy mind ;" andPallas sings an inspiring war-song, accompaniedwith drums and trumpets. But Venus sings thedelights of love ; the allurements of ambition andwar go for nothing ; and the enraptured shepherdyields her the prize in a graceful and flowing tenor" For two at a time there's no mortal can bear."Bears Opera.86 arne's operas.song, (originally sung by Beard,) " Forbear, forbear,O goddess of desire." The whole of thisscene is well worthy of the attention of our modernsingers. It would display their finest qualities ofvoice and expression ; and their exertions would berepaid by the pleasure which its novelty, (for. whatis forgotten becomes new,) as well as its beauty,would give any English audience.Eliza was a long and (to judge from the wordsof the music) a dull piece, on the subject of theSpanish Armada. The principal character wasEliza (or queen Elizabeth) personated by Miss IsabellaYoung ; and the chief songs are loyal andpatriotic effusions suited to the occasion, but veryfar, we should suppose, from being interesting atsuch a distance of time from the period to whichthey relate. The piece, however, was enlivened byan underplot, in which pastoral and rustic characterswere introduced. Some of the music is very beautiful,and long remained popular. The plaintivelittle ballad, " My fond shepherds of late," is stillremembered with delight by many amateurs of theold school. The celebrated Miss Brent, then apupil of the composer's, had a subordinate part inthis piece.Thomas and Sally is an interesting little opera,written by BickerstafT. Its subject consists of theattempts by a country squire on the virtue of amaiden of low degree, who, after resisting his importunitiesand temptations, is at last rescued fromARTAXERXES. 87intended violence by her sweetheart, a young sailor.Thomas and Sally was favourably received ; butsome nautical critics objected to its sea-language astechnically wrong. A sailor among the audience,hearing the expression, " Tack about and bearaway," remarked, " Why that's as much as to say,go out at the door and up the chimney." Thispiece contains some sweet and touching ballads.It appeared in 1760.Artaxerxes, the greatest of Arne's works, and themost celebrated English opera which has yet appeared,was first performed in 1762. The wordsare a poor translation, by the composer himself, ofMetastasio's Artaserse ; and the music is in theItalian style of the day. The dialogue is entirelyin recitative ; and many of the airs are filled withthe phrases, divisions, and passages of execution,then fashionable on the Italian stage. The principalmale character (Graces) was performed byan Italian soprano singer, the celebrated Tend occiputit is now performed by English tenor singers.The part of Artaxerxes, personated by Peretti, anotherItalian soprano, has always been since representedby a female. The character of Mandanewas performed by Miss Brent, who had by thistime acquired great vocal powers ; and Artabanby Beard.The success of this opera was not only extraordinaryin the time of its novelty, but has been permanentin a singular degree. It has continued to88 ARTAXERXES.be performed down to the present time ; and tosucceed in the character of Mandane has been considereda test of the vocal powers of every femaledramatic singer who has risen to eminence.This success must be ascribed entirely to the attractionof the airs. The drama is feeble and insipidin the extreme, and never can have inspiredany spectator with the slightest interest. Thebeauties of Metastasio have oozed out in the clumsyprocess of translation, and nothing remains but abald, disjointed dialogue, which, besides, is renderedunintelligible by a sing-song Italian recitative,and flat, prosaic songs, the words of many ofwhich are lost in the midst of a profusion of rouladesand bravura passages.The circumstance of the dialogue of Artaxerxesbeing wholly written in recitative has been consideredas that which gives it, par excellence, thecharacter of a legitimate English opera. Becausesuch is the form of the Italian musical drama, ithas been held that the same form is requisite inours. But this does not follow. We must consultthe genius of our language, which is not, like theItalian, fitted for the purposes of musical dialogue.The Italian language is in itself so musical, thatrecitative is very little more than the natural inflectionsand modulations of speech, heightened andreduced to determinate musical intervals. Thelevel dialogue, accordingly, of the Italian opera,which, without expressing passion or emotion, isARTAXERXES. 89necessary for carrying on the business of the drama,differs, if it is at all rapid, very little from ordinaryspeech, and can be followed by the audience. Butthis is peculiar to the Italian : no other languagehas accents and inflections belonging to it which,in the ordinary dialogue of the drama, can beheightened into recitative. Hence, when Arneand others have attempted to introduce this sort ofmusical dialogue into our opera, they have not hadrecourse to the natural music, (as it may be called,)or the accent and inflections of English speech, buthave imitated the recitative of the Italian composers: and the consequence is, that, in listening tothe dialogue of Artaxerxes, the actors all appear tobe Italians, speaking broken English with the accentof their own tongue. English, moreover, notpossessing the same facility of articulation as Italian,an English dialogue, if it is at all rapid, orcomposed of sentences of any length, cannot bedelivered in recitative so as to be intelligible. Thetruth is, that nobody cares anything about the dialogueof Artaxerxes; and that it was so disregardedfrom the beginning, and even by the composerhimself, may be inferred from the fact, thattwo of the principal parts were performed byItalians, Tenducci and Peretti, who certainly couldnot have carried on a dramatic dialogue in Englishwith anything like clearness or propriety.These remarks are applicable to simple recitative,or that in which the ordinary dialogue of an opera90 ART A XERXES.is carried on. The higher species, called accompaniedrecitative, may be employed with effect inEnglish, German, or French, as well as in Italian :because the inflections which denote emotion orpassion are so strongly marked, that they may beconverted into musical phrases. But here, again,the composers of these countries are accustomed toimitate the Italian recitative, instead of foundingit on the peculiar character of their own language.In this, too, Arne has erred : and his accompaniedrecitative, as well as his simple, sounds more likeItalian than English. Purcell, in this respect, wasthe model to have been followed : he having beenthe only English master who had founded a powerfuland expressive recitative on the natural musicof English speech.Those, therefore, who demand recitative as anessential condition of the legitimate English opera,appear to take an erroneous view of the matter.Though Artaxerxes was greatly successful, yetevery other attempt of the kind has failed, except(as in the case of the Dragon of Want ley) when itwas for the purpose of burlesque. Artaxerxes hasbeen successful in spite of its dialogue in recitative.*The celebrated Gretry, whose views of his art are the resultof sound judgment and experience gained in his long andbrilliant career as a dramatic composer, has given his opinionon this subject. After returning from Italy, where he had pursuedhis studies, and heard nothing but musical dialogue on theArtaxerxes. 91The airs of this opera, on the other hand, werecalculated to make a great and enduring impressionon the public. It was Arne's object to introduceto the English stage a style of vocal compositionand performance as yet new to it. Thefinish, refinement, and brilliant execution of theItalian school had been confined to the Italianopera-house ; and it was within its walls only thatany English singers, who possessed these qualities,had obtained an opportunity of displaying them.For some time the English composers had beenanimated by a strong spirit of rivalry towards theirItalian competitors, and had been attempting todraw the attention of the public to the nationalstage, he could not, he says, at first accustom himself to thepractice of singing and speaking in the same piece ; but he becameconvinced that it was the most reasonable. " Le poete aune exposition a faire, des scenes a filer, s'il veut etablir oudeveloper un character. Que peut alors le recitative ? Fatiguepar sa monotonie, et nuire a la rapidity du dialogue. II n'y aque les jeunes poetes qui pressent trop leurs scenes, de peurd'etre longs ; homme que contain mieux la nature, sait qu onneproduit des effets qu'en les preparing et les meant doucementjusqu' a leurs plus hauts degree. Laissons done parler lascene Mormons a la fois des comedies declamations et desmusicians charters, sans quoi nos ouvrages dramatists perdrontle merit qu'ils out, et celui qu'ils peuvent encore .Je desiderata mettre en musique une vraie tragedie oule dialogue serait parle ; imagine qu'elle produirait un plusgrand effet que nos opera changes d'un bout a l'autre." — Essaissur la Musique, torn. i. p. 130.92 Artaxerxes.musical stage. With this view they endeavouredto fight the enemy with their own weapons. " Therewere in England, at this time," says Barney,several candidates for fame in theatrical andchoral music ; Arne, Lampe, Smith, Defence, andGreene, tried their strength against Handel ; but itwas the contention of infants with a giant. Indeedthey composed for inferior performers as wellas inferior hearers ; but they appear to have beenso sensible of their own want of resources, that theutmost they attempted seems to have been an humbleand timid imitation of Handel's style of composition.Arne began to distinguish himself by new-settingAddison's opera of Rosamond ; Lampe by Amelia,an English drama written by Carey ; and Smithby Teraminta, another opera written by the sameauthor : these were all said, in the play-bills andadvertisements, to be set in the Italian manner.Defence set an oratorio called Judith, and Dr.Greene a Te Deem and part of the song of Deborah.These, though not very successful, contributedto diminish the public attention to Italianoperas, and by that means injured Handel withouteffectually serving themselves." — In the course ofthese attempts to emulate the Italian school, thestyle of singing on the English stage underwent agreat improvement. Mrs. Cibber, Mrs. Arne,Miss Young, Mr. Beard, and lastly, miss Brent,were accomplished vocalists, conversant with theARTAXERXES. 93refinements as well as the difficulties of Italian performance,for which, too, the audiences of the Englishtheatres had gradually begun to acquire ataste. It was in these circumstances, and with thesemeans, that Arne, in composing Artaxerxes, endeavouredto contend with the Italian composers ontheir own ground, and to enable his singers to contendwith their foreign rivals in their own style.He therefore made an English version of one ofMetastasio's operas, and imitated the manner inwhich it had previously been set by the most eminentItalian composers, copying the structure ofthe scenes, the form of the recitatives, and the styleof the airs, some of which are nothing more thanstrings of passages employed by Porpora, Hasse,Galuppi, Jomelli, and other Italian masters then invogue. This is especially the case with the airs inthe part of Mandane, which he wrote for his pupilMiss Brent, and into which, availing himself of hervocal powers, he crowded all the divisions and difficultieswhich had ever been heard at the Italianopera. Even in this age of brilliant execution, tosing the airs, " Fly, soft ideas," and " The soldiertired of war's alarms," with force, clearness, andease, is a vocal feat of which very few, even of themost eminent vocalists, have shown themselvescapable.It was thus in Artaxerxes that English audiences,in English theatres, first enjoyed the luxury of thatflorid and ornate singing which seldom fails to94 ARTAXERXES.excite admiration and pleasure, even when it saysnothing to the feelings. To the audiences of theEnglish theatres, too, it had all the charm of novelty: for they were not aware that the brilliantdisplays of execution which so much surprised anddelighted them, were common and hackneyed onthe Italian stage. This, indeed, has been in agreat measure the case almost to the present time ;for the bulk of the audiences of our national theatreshas always consisted of persons not in thehabit of frequenting the Italian opera, and whosechief idea of bravura singing has been derived fromthe performance of Billington, or Stephens, orPaton, in this very opera of Artaxerxes. Now,however, that the music of all the foreign schools,Italian, German, and French, has become naturalised,as it were, among us, and daily heard in allour theatres, the old-fashioned finery of Arne haslost its power to dazzle or delight ; and " The soldiertired" will never again be listened to with therapture which it has so often produced.It is not, then, in the great songs of this operathat its permanent beauties consist, but in the simpleand unpretending airs in which Arne, followingthe impulse of his genius, and disregarding hisItalian models, adhered to that natural Englishstyle so peculiarly his own. Artaxerxes cannotkeep its place on the stage. There is nothing in itas a drama to interest and attract ; and its antiquatedstructure, consisting of monotonous recitativeIN A VILLAGE. 95times, interrupted only by airs, will not satisfyaudiences accustomed to the brilliant and variedforms of the modern opera. The bravuras, too,will pass away, for the singers no longer need themfor the purpose of displaying the agility of theirthroats. But those beautiful effusions of feeling;,"In infancy our hopes and fears," "If o'er thecruel tyrant," and "Water parted from the sea, 1 'will long be prized among the purest gems of Englishmelody.Immediately after Artaxerxes, Arne composedthe music of an opera called The Birth of Hercules,written by William Shirley, the author of a numberof unsuccessful pieces. " It was rehearsed,"says Dibdin, " but never performed, The musicwas extremely beautiful, but it would not probablyhave succeeded ; it was not dramatic. The songscomposed for Beard, Tenducci, Peretti, and MissBrent, were of the first excellence. I was presentat the rehearsal, and their effect will never beerased from my memory. It was withdrawn, aswas generally understood, through some caprice ofthe author."In 1763 appeared Love in a Village, written byBickerstaff. This well-known opera is a lively andagreeable little comedy, the music of which consistsof airs, and a few duets, mingled with the dialogue.These airs are partly selected from the Italian operasof the day, and partly composed by Arne, whoprobably adapted and arranged the whole, and presarne's olympiad.pared the piece for publication. Several of Arne'sairs are among the most beautiful of his compositions,particularly, " Ah, had I been by fatedecreed," and "Gentle youth, ah, tell me why;"and " The traveller benighted" is a difficult bravurain the Italian style, which Mrs. Billingtonused to deliver with extraordinary brilliancy. Lovein a Village, from its dramatic merit, as well as thebeauty of the airs, still keeps its place on the stage.In 1765, Arne was induced, by the success of hisimitation of the Italian style in Artaxerxes, tocompose an Italian opera, and he was furthertempted by the opportunity of having the principalcharacter performed by the celebrated Man-soli,then newly arrived in England. He chose theOlimpiade of Metastasio ; but his attempt was atotal failure. "The common playhouse and balladpassages," says Dr. Burney, "which occurred inalmost every air in his opera, made the audiencewonder how they got there. A tarnished Monmouth-streetsuit of clothes in the side-boxes would nothave surprised them more. This production wasperformed but twice, and never printed. Manyreasons may be assigned for the failure of a man ofreal genius, who had on so many occasionsdelighted the frequenters of our national theatresand public gardens : a different language, differentsingers, and a different audience and styleof music from his own, carried him out of hisusual element ; and he mangled the Italian poetry,ARNE.energies, and accents nearly as much as a native ofItaly just arrived in London would English, in asimilar situation"— His failure showed that to copythe peculiarities of a foreign style, and to composeentirely in that style, are very different things.After this period Arne produced no regular musicalpieces, but his genius was not unemployed.When King Arthur was received in 1771, he madesome additions to the music of Purcell, but withoutinjuring or mutilating the work of that illustriouscomposer, whose genius Arne always regardedwith reverence. He also made additions, in thesame manner, to the music of The Tempest, amongwhich is the charming air sung by Ariel, "Wherethe bee sucks," which is truly fairy music. Hecomposed a number of songs for several of Shakspeare'splays, which are now inseparably united tothem. Such are " When daisies pied" and "Underthe greenwood tree," in As you like it. He alsocomposed the music performed in Garrick's celebratedpageant in honour of Shakspeare, the StratfordJubilee. His Vauxhall songs, and other fugitiveproductions, are innumerable.Arne composed two oratorios, Abel and Judith,which were unsuccessful. "And yet," says Burney,"it would be unjust to say that they did not merita- better fate ; for though the choruses were muchinferior in force to those of Handel, yet the airs werefrequently admirable." But Arne's strength wasnot equal to a contest with the gigantic power ofVOL. II. H98 ARNE.Handel. His degree of doctor of music wasobtained from the University of Oxford, on thescore of his merit as a composer of sacred music.Arne died on the 5th of March, 1778. Hehad been educated in the principles of the RomanCatholic church ; but, during a gay and somewhatdissipated life, had been negligent of the duties ofreligion. On his deathbed, however, his religiousfeelings were strongly awakened. He was attendedby a priest, and died in a devout and penitentstate of mind. It is said that he sang, with greatfervour, a " hallelujah" about an hour before heexpired. Notwithstanding his great talents andreputation, he was always in narrow circumstances,in consequence of his love of pleasure and improvidenthabits.As an English dramatic composer, Arne must beconsidered as holding the next place to Purcell,and, from the popularity of his music, had a stillgreater influence on the taste of his countrymen.His melody is more uniformly sweet, flowing, andgraceful, than that of Purcell ; but he was far frompossessing that illustrious man's grandeur of conception,deep feeling, and impassioned energy. Henever fails to please, and often charms the hearer;but never dissolves him in tenderness, op rouses himwith such spirit-stirring strains as those of Purcell .In Artaxerxes he was unable to rise to the loftytone of musical tragedy. This opera, in truth, withallits merit, is a mixture of two different and in-Anne. 99congruous styles, the one consisting of servile imitationof the Italian composers of the time, andthe other being his own natural manner ; a mannerwhich, however sweet and beautiful, is wanting ingrandeur and elevation. The gems of the operaare simple ballads, the familiar style of whichwould have suited a village-green better than thegorgeous precincts of the Persian court. The onlyreally tragic music in the piece is to be found in thepart of Artaban, written for Beard, an energeticEnglish singer. The air, " Behold, on Lethe'sdismal strand," is a powerful composition ; and itmay be remarked that this song is one of thefew instances in which Arne, in his translation, hascaught the poetical spirit of the original.Behold, on Lethe's dismal strand,Thy father's murder *d spirit stand ;In his face what grief profound !See, he rolls his haggard eyes,And hark ! Revenge, revenge, he cries,And points to his still bleeding wound."Arne enjoyed the advantage over his great predecessorof writing in a more advanced age oforchestral composition. His harmonies are richand varied, and he employed the instruments thenin use with judgment and delicacy. Like the othercomposers of that day, the oboes are the windinstruments principally employed, in addition tothe violins, violas, and basses. Considerable useis made of the flutes; and the clarinets (an instruct2100 PASTICCIOS.ment beginning to be known) are introduced intwo or three places. Arne certainly contributed tothe improvement of instrumental accompanimentas well as of vocal melody.During the time that Arne was at the head ofour dramatic musicians, few operas of note wereproduced by any other composer. Perhaps theonly one worthy of notice, besides those whichhave been already mentioned, is The Chaplet, amusical entertainment in one act, written by MosesMended, and composed by Dr. Boyce. The dialogueis in recitative, and it contains some beautifulairs and duets. This piece was very successful, andcontinued for a long time to be popular. The sameauthor and composer produced another little piececalled The Shepherd' s Lottery , which also succeeded,but not in the same degree as The Chaplet.For a considerable time after the appearance ofArtaxerxes, our musical stage was chiefly suppliedby means of pasticcios in the style of Lone in a Village.Several of them were written by Bickerstaff,the author of that favourite piece. The best ofthem are The Maid of the Mill, and Lionel andClarissa, both of which have considerable dramaticmerit, and contain many beautiful airs selectedfrom the works of the Italian composers. Theseoperas, as well as Love in a Village, have kept possessionof the stage, and are still occasionallyrevived. Being performed innumerable times inevery theatre in the kingdom, and by all our bestMISS BRENT. 101dramatic singers, they contributed greatly to diffusea taste for Italian melody. In all these pieces thepart of the heroine was originally sustained byMiss Brent. This lady (as has been already mentioned)was a pupil of Dr. Arne. While her vocalabilities were as yet unknown to the public, Garrickwrote to Arne, expressing a wish to hear her. Whenhe did so, he readily admitted her merit, but at thesame time told Arne that " all his geese wereswans." "Tommy," said he, "you should consider,after all, that music is at best but pickle to myroast beef." — " By — , Davy," rejoined Arne in thesame strain, " your beef shall be well pickled beforeI have done." Miss Brent accordingly madeher appearance at the rival theatre of CoventGarden in the Beggar s Opera, which was performedduring the whole season with such success, thatDrury Lane was nearly deserted, except on thenights when Garrick himself acted. His exertionsto retrieve his losses on this occasion were of suchinjury to his health, that he went to Italy for itsrecovery. On his return, he found himself obliged(says the Biographia Dramaticaa) "to gratify thepublic taste by pickling his roast beef after Dr.Arne's method ;" for which purpose he engaged, asarival to Miss Brent, Miss Wright, who was afterwardsmarried to Michael Arne, Dr. Arne's son.Miss Brent married Thomas Pinto, a distinguishedviolinist, and, as Mrs. Pinto, long retainedher celebrity. Dibdin, in his History of the Stage,MICHAEL MINE.thus describes her as a vocal performer: "Mrs.Pinto, possessing an exquisite voice, and being undera master the great characteristics of whosemusical abilities were natural ease and unaffectedsimplicity, was a most valuable singer. Her powerwas resistless, her neatness was truly interesting,and her variety was incessant. Though she owed agreat deal to nature, she owed a great deal to Arne,without whose careful hand her singing might perhapshave been too luxuriant."Michael Arne, Dr. Arne's son, was an able musician,and obtained considerable reputation from hisopera of Cimon, which was produced at DruryLane theatre in 1764. It was long popular ; andsome of the airs, particularly " Yet awhile, sweetsleep," and " The sweet passion of love," are notyet forgotten. He was addicted to the study ofchemistry, and was subject to the infatuation (astrange one in the eighteenth century) of believingin the philosopher's stone. He built a laboratoryat Chelsea, and spent his money in the pursuit ofthis chimera ; but recovering his senses before hewas ruined, he returned to his professional avocations,and was a prolific composer of songs andballads for the theatres and other places of musicalentertainment.CHAPTER IV.State of the Italian opera in the middle of the last century —Structure of an opera — Recitative — Various classes of airs —Changes effected by composers — Jomelli.We have already traced the progress of the Italianopera to the middle of the last century. At thattime it had established itself in Germany and England,where it had become the favourite musicalentertainment of the higher classes of society. InEngland, too, it had produced some effect on theform and character of our own national opera, andon the style of English composition and performance.This effect does not seem to have been producedin Germany, in which country it can hardlybe said that there was as yet any national opera ;all the great native dramatic musicians being disciplesof the Italian school, and occupied in composingfor the Italian stage. In France the Italianopera had obtained no footing whatever ; the stateof music in that kingdom still remaining nearly asit has been described in a previous chapter.From this period, however, the Italian schoolexercised a much greater and more immediate in-104 STRUCTURE OF AN OPERA.fluence on the national musical drama of all thesecountries than it had previously done.By the middle of the last century, the Italianopera, both in its poetry and music, had beengradually brought to a state of great polish and refinement,and had come to assume a certain form,and to be constructed according to a model fromwhich no deviation was permitted.In the structure of an opera the number of characterswas generally limited to six, three of eachsex ; and, if it was not a positive rule, it was atleast a practice hardly ever departed from, to makethem all lovers ; — a practice, the too slavish adherenceto which introduced feebleness and absurdityinto some of the finest works of Metastasio.The principal male and female singers were, eachof them, to have airs of all the different kindswhich we shall presently describe. The piece wasto be divided into three acts, and not to exceed acertain number of verses. It was required thateach scene should terminate with an air ; that thesame character should not have two airs in succession; that an air should not be followed by anotherof the same class ; and that the principal airsof the piece should conclude the first and secondacts. In the second and third acts there should beascena, consisting of an accompanied recitative, anair of execution, and a grand duet sung by the heroand heroine. There were occasional choruses ;but trios and other concerted pieces were unknown,CLASSES OF AIRS. 105except in the opera buffa, where they were beginningto be introduced.The recitative was divided into the two classes ofsimple and accompanied; a distinction which hasalready been explained.The air was divided into several kinds ; and theclassification then formed being by no means arbitrary,but founded on principles of taste, still subsists.In explaining this classification, we shallavail ourselves of Dr. Brown's elegant treatise onthe poetry and music of the Italian opera.The first and highest class is the aria cantabile,so called by pre-eminence, as if it alone were entitledto the name of song : and indeed it is theonly kind of song which gives the singer an opportunityof displaying all his powers of every description.The proper objects of this kind of airare sentiments of tenderness ; and its proper expressionis a pleasing sadness. Hence the ariacantabile, while it is susceptible of great pathos,admits of being highly ornamented, because, thoughthe sentiments it expresses are affecting, they aresuch as the mind dwells on with pleasure : and, forthe same reason, the subject of the cantabile shouldnever border on deep distress nor approach to violentagitation, both of which are evidently inconsistentwith ornament. The motion of this air is very slow,and its constituent notes (or those which belong essentiallyto the unembellished melody) proportionallylong. These notes are in general very few,106 CLASSES OF AIRS.simple in their progression, and so arranged as toallow great scope to the skill of the singer. In thiskind of song the instrumental accompaniments arerestricted to almost nothing ; the accompanimentbeing merely sufficient to support the voice, andkept so subordinate as never to interfere with it, orattract attention.The aria di portamento derives its name fromthe term which expresses the carriage or sustainingof the voice. It is composed chiefly of long notes,such as the singer can dwell on, and have therebyan opportunity of displaying the beauties of hisvoice and calling forth its powers ; for the beautyof sound itself, and of vocal sound in particular, asbeing the finest of all sounds, is held by the Italiansto be one of the chief sources of the pleasure derivedfrom music. The subjects proper for thisclass of air are sentiments of dignity, but calm andundisturbed by passion. The subject of the. portamentois too grave and serious to admit of that degreeof ornament which is essential to the cantabile.To illustrate (says Brown) the specific difference ofthese two classes, I might say that were Venus tosing, her mode of song would be the cantabile ; theporta?nento would be that of the queen of gods andmen.The aria di mezzo carattere is a species of air,which, though expressive neither of the dignity ofthe portamento nor of the pathos of the cantabile, is,however, serious and pleasing. There may be anCLASSES OF AIRS. 107almost infinite variety of touching and interestingsentiments, which are not, nevertheless, of sufficientimportance to be made the subject of airs of theabove classes : for these the aria chi mezzo carattereis calculated. From the great variety which thisair consequently embraces, as well as from the lessemphatic nature of the sentiments which it is employedto convey, its general expression is not sodetermined as that of the former classes ; yet, withrespect to each individual air, the expression is farfrom being vague or dubious : and though somegreater latitude be here granted to the fancy of thecomposer, nothing is given to his caprice, the senseof the words clearly defining the expression inpoint both of quality and degree. Thus this classof airs, while it retains its own particular character,may by turns have some affinity with all the otherclasses. But while its latitude is great in respect tovariety, it is obviously much limited with regard todegree. It may be soothing but not sad — pleasingbut not elevated — lively but not gay. The movementof this air is by the Italians termed andante,which is the medium of musical time between theextremes of slow and quick. In this species of airthe orchestra, though it ought never to cover thevoice, is not kept in such subordination to it as in theclasses already described. It is not only allowed toplay louder, but may be more frequently introducedby itself, and may on the whole contribute more tothe general effect of the air.108 CLASSES OF AIRS.The aria parlante, or speaking air, admits neitherof long notes in its composition, nor of many ornamentsin its performance. The rapidity of itsmovement is determined by the force of the passionwhich it expresses. This species of air sometimesgoes by the name of aria di nota e parole, and ofaria agitate. It may be said to take up expressionwhere the aria di mezzo carattere leaves it. Someairs of this last class, of the liveliest kind, mayapproach indeed so near to some of the parlanteairs of the least agitated cast, that it might be difficultto say to which class they belonged. But assoon as the expression begins to be in any degreeimpetuous, the distinction is evident : as the degreeof passion to be expressed increases, the air assumesthe name of aria agitate, ana di strepito, aria in-striata. Expressions of fear, of joy, of grief, ofrage, when at all impetuous, even to their mostviolent degrees, are all comprehended under thevarious subdivisions of this class. Their rhythmhas its peculiar province ; the effect of this kind ofair depending chiefly on its powers. The instrumentalparts are likewise of great efficacy, particularlyin the expression of the more violent passions ;giving, by the addition of a great body of sound,and by the distinctness and rapidity of their execution,a force and energy to the whole which nevercould be produced by the voice alone. It is observedby Rousseau, that as violent passion has atendency to choke the voice, so, in the expressionCLASSES OF AIRS. 109of it by musical sounds, a roulade, which is a successionof notes rapidly uttered upon one vowel, hasoften a more powerful effect than distinct articulation.It is into airs of this kind that such passagesare commonly introduced.The aria di bravura, or aria d'agilitd, is thatwhich is composed chiefly — indeed too often merelyto afford the singer an opportunity of displayingextraordinary powers of voice and execution.Though this kind of air may sometimes be introducedwithout impropriety, and even with someeffect, yet, in general, the means are here confoundedwith the end. Such airs too frequentlyserve no other purpose than that of astonishing theignorant, while they make the judicious grieve.These are the various classes of airs recognisedby the Italian poets, musicians, and critics. Dr.Brown has added another, suggested by himself,which he calls airs of imitation ; airs in which themusic describes or imitates the appearances ofnature. He cites, as an instance, the air " Hush,ye pretty warbling choir," in Handel's Acis andGalatea, in which he says, " while the vocal partmost feelingly speaks the passion, a little flageoletfrom the orchestra carries on, throughout, the delightfulwarbling of the choir :" and he adds, thatthis species of imitation must never be given to thevoice, but always to the orchestra. This is sufficientto show that there can be no such thing asairs of imitation, considered as a separate class.110 CLASSES OF AIRS.How can an air derive its name, as belonging to aclass, from a circumstance excluded from air altogether?How can " Hush, ye pretty warblingchoir," be called an air of imitation, when the airdoes not contain a vestige of imitation ? The airmight have been exactly what it is, without any accompanimentfor the flageolet. This air, in truth,is just an aria di mezzo carattere ; or (according toDr. Brown's description of that class) an air containingan expression of feeling not sufficientlystrong to be made the subject of the cantabile or the•portamento, and in which the accompaniment is soimportant as to contribute to the general effect ofthe air.It is a principle which has been uniformly acknowledgedand acted upon by the Italian composers,that expression only is the province of thevoice, and that every thing like description or imitationis excluded from it : and it is for this reasonthat imitation or description has not been admittedby them as a characteristic of any class of airs.The following lines of Metastasio are beautifullydescriptive ; —Laura, che trembleTra franca e fronde ;Leona, che mormonTra sponte e sponte,E meno stableDel vostro cor."But how is the singer to represent these images ?CLASSES OF AIRS. IllBy what shakes, what roulades, what modulationsof voice, is he to paint the soft trembling* of thebreeze among* the leaves, or the murmuring* of therivulet between its banks ? Any such attempt atmusical mimicry would only excite laughter. Thesame thing* would be the consequence, were he tomimic the roaring of a stormy sea, the rolling* ofthunder, the howling* of wild beasts, or the notes ofbirds : and we have already had occasion, morethan once, to point out the unhappy and ridiculouseffects sometimes produced in serious compositions,even by great masters, when they happened to losesight of this important principle. But all theseimitative effects, thus absolutely forbidden to thevoice, may be produced, with equal propriety andbeauty, by the accompanying instruments. Everycomposer, accordingly, who has set the above air,has so treated it ; and it obviously falls under theclass of the aria di mezzo carattere.Imitative passages for the instruments may beemployed to heighten the effect of every kind ofair, even the most impassioned that can be imagined.Suppose Lear, by the cruelty of his daughters, exposed,on the barren heath, to the " pelting of thepitiless storm," were to vent in song* the passionswhich distracted his soul —-" The tempest in my mindDoth from my senses take all feeling else,Save what beats there. — Filial ingratitude !Is it not as this mouth should tear this handFor lifting food tort ? — But I will punish home : —112 CLASSES OF AIRS.No, I will weep no more. — In such a nightTo shut me out ! —Pour on, I will endure : —In such a night as this ! O Began, General !Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all !O, that way madness lies — let me shun that —No more of that !"His accents would be the cry of suffering natureand agonised feeling : but the genius of a Beethovenwould present to the imagination the horrorsof the scene — the blackness of the night, and thetempest howling round the head of the desolate oldman, — by the gloomy harmonies and appallingsounds proceeding from the orchestra, and minglingin wild confusion with the voice of the actor. Thesong would express the passions of the man ; theinstruments would paint his situation.We are inclined, therefore, to believe, that theItalian classification of the different kinds of vocalmelody is complete, and incapable of being extended.It is founded entirely upon expression ; for, even inthe aria di bravura, brilliancy of execution is lookedupon only as one of the means of expression.Whenever the means are substituted for the end,and the air has no other object than the display ofagility, then it forfeits its claim to be considered aslegitimate melody of any class. The classificationin question contains the elements of every kind ofvocal expression. These elements, indeed, are nowmore blended than formerly ; the division of entireairs into their various classes is less strict, and anCHANGE OF STYLE. 113extended air of modern date may contain the elementsof different classes : and yet these elements are inthemselves indestructible, and every piece of legitimatemelody, however varied or complicated, mayberesolved into them. If many things called airs,in the Italian operas of the present vitiated school,are incapable of being resolved into these primaryelements of expression, it is because they are madeup of an unmeaning jargon unworthy of the nameof melody.The Italian opera having assumed the formwhich has now been described, preserved it, withlittle alteration, for a considerable time. But thespirit of change was constantly at work. The influenceof the German school, both in respect tovocal harmony and instrumental accompaniment,began to be perceptible in the style of the Italiancomposers ; the airs were no longer composed withthe same adherence to established models; and thedramatic structure of the scenes acquired a varietyof new forms by the introduction of concertedpieces and finales.These changes were gradually effected by a bodyof composers who may be classed as contemporaries,and as being a generation immediately succeedingthat which extended down to the middle of thelast century. Among these composers the first inorder is Jomelli, who, indeed, might have beenclassed likewise in the preceding generation, as heVOL. II. I1 14 Corelli.had arrived at great eminence before the middle ofthe century. But it was after that period that hislong residence in Germany produced a change inhis style, which, though unfavourably received byhis countrymen, had a material influence on thestyle of his successors.Nicol Jomelli was born at Averse, a smalltown near Naples, in the year 1714. His taste formusic, as has been generally the case with greatcomposers, manifested itself at an early age, and helearned the rudiments of music almost in his infancy.He was then placed in one of the conservatoriesof Naples, where he received instructionsfrom the celebrated, Leonardo Leo. Soon after hequitted this seminary, his master happened to heara cantata of his composition performed at the houseof a friend, and was so transported with pleasurethat he exclaimed, that the young man, in a fewyears, would be the admiration of all Europe ; — aprediction which was soon realised. Jomelli wasonly three-and-twenty when his first opera, TerrorAmoroso, was performed at Naples ; and in the followingyear his Odoardo was produced in the samecity. Such was the reputation which he obtainedby means of these works, juvenile as they were,that in 1740 he was invited to Rome, where hecomposed two operas, Ricimero and Astianatte ; theformer of which was received with such enthusiasm,that the composer was carried in triumph from theJ0MELL1. 115orchestra, where he had conducted the performance,to the stage, that he might receive the plaudits ofthe audience.In 1741 he went to Bologna, where he composedhis opera of Ezio. Soon after his arrival he visitedthe famous Padre Martini, the most learned contrapuntistof his time ; and, without making himselfknown, requested to be admitted among Martini'spupils. Martini, according to the usual practice,gave him a subject for a fugue, desiring him to workit out, in order to discover what his intendedscholar knew, and what he required to learn. Jo-mellset to work on the spot, and developed thefugue with such facility, and in so masterly a manner,that the veteran, struck with surprise, exclaimed," Who are you ? You are making gameof me ; you should be the master, and I the scholar !"Jomelli answered, that he was the young composeremployed to write the opera about to be performedat the theatre, and begged Martini's countenanceand counsels. The request was willingly granted ;and Jomelli afterwards said that he had receivedmuch valuable instruction from this great master.After remaining several years at Bologna, Jo-mellreturned to Rome, where his Didone was producedwith even greater success than liicimero.Its merits were the theme of unbounded praise ;and his fame was now so great that his countrymen,the Neapolitans, eagerly called on him to returnhome, that they, too, might have the satisfaction ofi 2116 Corelli.applauding and rewarding his genius. He compliedwith a desire so flattering to himself: and, soonafter his arrival at Naples, produced his Eugene,which completely satisfied the highly-raised expectationsof the public.His next journey was to Venice, a city whosesuffrage was of the highest importance to the reputationof a musical artist. He there composed hisMerope; and the government, as a mark of admirationof his talents, appointed him master of theconservatory for girls. In 1749 he again visitedRome, where a different reception awaited him.His Armada was performed ; but, from some causenot easily accounted for, a hostile spirit had beenexcited against him * and, on his appearing in thechest, he was received by the audience with sucha storm of disapprobation, that, in the fear of personalviolence, he was obliged to make a precipitateretreat from the theatre ; and he took his departurefrom Rome the same night. It is said thatthis violent animosity was stirred up against him bythe intrigues of some of his fellow musicians, inconsequenceof his having endeavoured to obtainthe situation of maestro di capella of St. Peter's ;a step which the public were taught to consider asan unpardonable piece of presumption on the partof so young a man, though he was now five-and-thirty.There was probably some foundation forthe opinion, that neither his years nor educationwere sufficient to qualify him for an office requiringJOMELLI. 117great learning and long experience ; but the Romanstook a preposterous way of expressing it,This check, however, is said to have induced himto apply himself assiduously to the study of counterpointand the most profound brandies of his art,especially the department of ecclesiastical composition,in which he surpassed all his Italian contemporaries,and has never, indeed, been rivalled byany of his successors.Immediately after he thus quitted Rome, he repairedto Vienna, where Metastasio was then in theheight of his fame and influence. On his arrivalin that capital, he produced his Achille in Scire,which met with the most complete success. Theillustrious poet found in Jomelli a kindred soul ;and mutual admiration and esteem formed the basisof a warm and permanent friendship between them.In a letter from Metastasio to Farinelli, written inNovember 1749, soon after Jomelli's arrival atVienna, the poet thus speaks of him : " Jomelli isabout thirty-five years of age, of a spherical figure,pacific disposition, with an engaging countenance,most pleasing manners, and excellent morals. Hehas surprised me. I have found in him all theharmony of Hasse, with all the grace, expression,and invention of Vinci." In another letter to thesame correspondent he says : " Jomelli is the bestcomposer for words, of whom I have any knowledge.It is true that he is too much given to repetition,but this is the epidemic malady of Italy, of which118 JOMELLI.he will soon be cured. He has sometimes restrainedthe caprice and invention of singers. — If ever youshould see him," Metastasio adds, " you will beattached to him, as he is certainly the most amiablegourmand that ever existed."Jomelli having received a commission from Fari-nelli to compose a piece for the court of Spain,Metastasio wrote to Farinelli, in August 1750,a letter which contains his opinion of the musicaltaste then prevalent in Italy. " Our good andadmirable Cornell," says Metastasio, " is out of hiswits to execute your commission well. He haswritten me a long letter, in which he talks ofnothing else. I am very anxious that he shouldplease the public of Spain. For your part, who judiciouslylove harmony and expression, I have nodoubt of your approbation. But in Italy, at present,there is a taste for nothing but extravagance andvocal symphonies, in which we sometimes hear anexcellent violin, flute, or oboe, but never the voiceof a human creature : so that music is intendednow to excite no other emotion but that of surprise.Things are carried to such an excess, that if notsoon reformed, we shall justly become the buffoonsof all other nations. Composers and performersbeing ambitious only of tickling the ears, withoutever thinking of the hearts of the audience, aregenerally condemned, in every theatre, to the disgracefuloffice of degrading the acts of an operainto interment for the dances, which occupy theJOMELLI. 1 19chief attention of the spectators. And it is to you,my good master, that this degeneracy is owing. Itis your happy and wonderful powers, which all arestriving in vain to emulate. But even to limp afteryou requires legs such as none are gifted with." Itappears that Jomelli had failed to execute the commissiongiven him, and that Farinelli had complainedof his conduct to Metastasio ; for, in January1751, the poet writes thus : "If you knew Jomellipersonally, you would not wonder at the indolenceof which you complain. He has a tranquil andserene mind, and loves to lounge about at his ease,and indulge the fatness of his well-fed body, givingway to every impulse that can save him the troubleof resistance ; so that he is always under the influenceof those who are about him. Grieve at thison your own account if you will, or rather deplorein him this unlucky fault, but never believe that hemeant to deceive you. A fraud would involve hiseasy temper in too much trouble."During his residence in Vienna, Jomelli composedthe music of several of Metastasio's operas,particularly Didone and Achille in Scire, whichwere received with enthusiasm by the public. Duringhis whole life, indeed, in his dramatic labours, heemployed himself almost exclusively on the worksof his illustrious friend.In 1751 he returned to Rome, the people of whichhad forgotten, or were perhaps ashamed of theirformer hostility towards him. Soon afterwards he120 JOMELLI.was appointed maestro di capella of St. Peter's, anoffice to which he could now aspire without being-accusedof presumption. In a letter written at thisperiod, Metastasio says : "At present he is maestrodi capella of St. Peter's at Rome, and is the delightof that city, not only for his professional abilities,but for his complacency, good temper, propriety ofdeportment, and good morals." At this time hecomposed much sacred music for the choir of St.Peter's, and many of his operas.The greatness of Jomelli's reputation now inducedthe Duke of Nuremberg, one of the greatestconnoisseurs of the time, to invite him, on veryadvantageous terms, to settle at his court. Jomelliaccepted the proposal, and resided at Stutgard fornearly twenty years, during which time he produceda great number of works for the church, the theatre,and the chamber.During this long residence in Germany, his stylegradually underwent a change. He acquired arelish for the full harmony and elaborate mode ofcomposition for which the German school hasalways been remarkable ; and the alteration in hismanner excited the regret and censure of Metasta-sho, whose taste seems not to have been at allaffected by his having spent a large portion of hislife in the Austrian capital. This appears from thefollowing interesting letter, addressed by Metasta-sho to Jomelli, in April 1765."And does my admirable Jomelli, then, rememberJOMELLI. 121me? The confirmation of this truth, which, however,in spite of your eternal silence, T neverdoubted, has afforded me a pleasure I am unableto describe. Indeed I am so much the more delightedwith your last dear letter of the 3rd ofMarch, as I had so long in vain tried to procure it ;having sent you some time ago my Alcide in Bivioby M. de Rois, and since that, written you a long-epistlewhich ought to have been forwarded to youby Signora Scott, at present the prima donna ofthe opera in England, who, on quitting this place,set out for London. But either my couriers havebeen to blame, or my despatches ineffectual ; andyet I am so sure of your affection, that whatevermay happen I shall never doubt it.I regard the two masterly airs with which youhave so kindly favoured me as precious gifts ; and,as far as the limits of my musical knowledge extend,I have admired the new and harmonious textureof the voice and accompaniments, the eleganceof the one, the contrivance of the other, and theuncommon unity of the whole, which render themworthy of your abilities. I must confess, however,my dear Jomelli, that though this style impressesme with respect for the writer, you have, when youplease, another which instantly seizes on the heart,without giving the mind the trouble of reflection.When I have heard a thousand times your airsNon so trover l'errore," and " Quando sara queldi," with innumerable others which I cannot nowrecollect, that are still more captivating, they leave122 JOMELLI.me no longer master of myself, but make me feelall that you must have felt in composing them.Ah, my dear Jomelli, do not abandon a faculty inwhich you have not, nor ever will have, a rival. Inmasterly airs there may be composers, perhaps,who by dint of pains and labour will approach you;but in finding their road to the hearts of others,their own must be formed of fibres as delicate andsensitive as yours. It is true that, in writing in thisnew style, you cannot help sometimes expressing thepassions in the way which your own happy temperamentsuggests ; but being obliged, in order tosupport your learned idea, too frequently to interruptthe voice, the impressions already made on themind of the hearer are effaced ; and for the reputationof a great master, you neglect that of anamiable and most powerful musician."In 1768 Jomelli returned to his native country,and resumed his musical labours at Naples, fromwhich he had been so long absent. Immediatelyon his return, he found that the style of compositionwhich he had acquired in Germany — hisfull and complicated harmony, and adherence tothe old rules of elaborate counterpoint, werenot favourably received by his countrymen. Heappears to have expressed his chagrin on thisaccount to his old master, the venerable PadreMartini, of Bologna, from whom his complaintsdrew the following letter, written in March 1768.My dear Jomelli, — I was a good deal grieved onreading the contents of your letter from Naples.JOMELLI. 123You complain of the injustice that has been done toyour music at the theatre San Carlo, after its havingreceived so many and such flattering marks ofapprobation throughout the rest of Europe : butallow me to say, that you wrong yourself in makingsuch a complaint. You would, perhaps, have donewell to bear in mind the parting advice which Igave you when you were on the point of settingout for Vienna, and asked me for some hints thatmight prove useful to you in the musical career onwhich you were about to enter. I told you thatone of the principal points to which a composerought to direct his attention, was to win the affectionsand engage the feelings of his hearers. I toldyou, that as men vary in their dispositions andpassions according to the variety of climates, formsof government, and modes of education, you shouldbegin by studying the character of the nation forwhich you write, and aim to adapt your melodiesand accompaniments to the national taste of thecountry. And lastly, I told you that old rulesshould not be allowed to fetter the native energiesof genius, and that nothing was more importantthan occasionally to give a loose rein to the salliesof an ardent imagination. I have read over yourmusic : I have no fault to find with it, except, perhaps,your strong tone of colouring, which, as youdo not give sufficient attention to the char oscuro,the finer gradations of tint necessary to a finishedpiece, gave me, I must confess, some moments of124 JOMELLI.annoyance. I am an old man. I observe that thepredominant characteristics, the physiognomy, if Imay so express it, of the age, is changed, and thatthe old style will no longer have any chance ofsuccess : in a word, that he who possesses thehappy art of accommodating himself to the spiritof the times will bear away the palm. Let me requestyou to bear in mind the famous saying of St.Paul, that ' we are debtors to the learned and theunlearned ;' for it would be chimerical to hope tolive in a land of doctors. It should therefore beour aim so to please the learned as not to disgustthe unlearned."Last year, some of my people took it into theirheads to perform one of my masses in the church ofSan Antonio at Padua. I did all in my power todissuade them, but to no purpose ; I was obliged togive way to their well-meant zeal. But what did Ido as a dernier ressort ? Why, my dear Jomelli, Icontrived to leave out a good portion of the Kyrieand two considerable passages of the Gloria, inorder to save both myself and others from ennui.I will not say a word of the good-nature of theaudience, who, out of respect to my age, and to the,perhaps, not unhonoured remembrance of myyouth, were induced to applaud : but it was donepretty much in the style of a dead body raising itshand under a galvanic operation. I had never anypretensions to the title either of a learned man or apoet, but I was always fond of the maxim utile dulce.JOMELLI. 1 25Pray do not disdain to follow my example, and Iwill answer for it you will be satisfied with the result.A majestic, grand, and impressive overture,an introduction founded on the strict rules of counterpoint,a melody without much accompaniment,these form the admiration of the learned, ofancient matrons, and sage dilettanti; but the plainand unlearned will have noise, otherwise they fallasleep. What then is to be done 1 Why, have recourseto the horn, the drum, the cymbal, and thetrombone. This will awake them ; this will throwthem into raptures : nothing will do but that thunderingharmony which seems to invite to battle, andto rouse the sluggish blood to deeds of death. Thisis the presiding genius of our age, and will, perhaps,become still more so in that which is to follow.The learned will blame the composer as they please,but the ignorant will not fail to shout, Viva il maestro!— the master for ever !Aristarchus pronounced a severe censure onthose unlearned and inharmonious souls, who, inhis day, presumed to pass their judgment uponmusicians. Yes, even in those early days, musicianshad learned the art of gaining the favour ofthe many, unawed by the censures of the few. Asto yourself, my friend, the learned will not denythat you can write in the old style, if you choose :the half-learned will, if you humour them, greetyou with the title of their magnus Apollo ; but, what126 JOMELLl.is of more solid importance, you will not only bewell received but well paid. Dear Jomelli, be advisedby your old master. Follow the path whichhe points out to you ! and let the Aristarchus talkon as they may. Heaven preserve you, and farewells"*Dr. Burney, who visited Naples in October1770, says :f " This morning I first had the pleasureof seeing and conversing with Signor Jomelli,who arrived at Naples from the country but thenight before. He is extremely corpulent, and inthe face not unlike what I remember Handel tohave been, yet far more polite and soft in his manner.I found him in his night-gown, at an instructfind this interesting letter in The Harmoniconon for1826, translated from an Italian journal, in which it had recentlyappeared. " Would not one be led," says The Harmoniconon, " toimagine that the good Padre Martini was gifted with the spiritof prophecy, and, looking into the future, had seen the composersand the orchestras of the nineteenth century ? What would hehave said had he seen the composers of our times, not contentwith employing to excess the drum and the trumpet in theorchestra, transporting them as often as an opportunity will allowupon the stage itself, persuaded, as it would seem, that noise iseffect, and that to enrapture and to stun are synonymous ? Hence,within these few years, how many amateurs are there whom theopera seems to have rendered deaf!" — It is easy to perceive thesupreme contempt which the venerable musician entertained forthe style which he was counselling Jomelli, from worldly considerations,to adopt.f State of Music in France and Italy.JOMELLI. 127merit, writing. He received me very politely, andmade many apologies for not having called on meinconsequence of a card which I had left at hishouse ; but apologies were indeed unnecessary, ashewas but just come to town, and at the point ofbringing out a new opera, that must have occupiedboth his time and thoughts sufficiently."This opera was Demofoonte, which was performeda few days afterwards. "I went," says Burney,"to the first representation of Signor Jomelli'sopera of Demofoonte, in the grand theatre of SanCarlo. It is not easy to imagine or describe thegrandeur or magnificence of this spectacle. Itbeing the great festival of St. Charles, and theking of Spain's name-day, the court was in grandgala, and the house was not only doubly illuminatedbut amazingly crowded with well-dressedcompany. Yet, with all this, it must be ownedthat the magnitude of the building and noise ofthe audience are such, that neither the voices norinstruments can be heard distinctly. I was told,however, that, on account of the king and queenbeing present, the people were much less noisy thanon common nights. There was not a hand movedby way of applause during the whole representation,though the audience in general seemedpleased with the music : but, to say the truth, it didnot afford me the same delight as at the rehearsal ;nor did the singers, though they exerted themesJOMELLI.selves more, appear to equal advantage. Not oneof the present voices is sufficiently powerful forsuch a theatre, when so crowded and so noisy.Signora Bianchi, the first woman whose sweetvoice and simple manner of singing gave me andothers so much pleasure at the rehearsal, did notsatisfy the Neapolitans, who have been accustomedto the force and brilliancy of a Gabrielle, a Tiber,and a De Amici. There is too much simplicity inher manner for the depraved appetites of these enfantgates, who are never pleased but when astonished.As to the music, much of the clair-obscure was lost,and nothing could be heard distinctly but the noisyand furious parts which were meant merely to giverelief to the rest : the mezzo tinto and back-groundwere generally lost, and indeed little was left butthe bold and coarse strokes of the composer'spencil."Jomelli was much mortified by the cold receptionof this opera, and, in the hope of regainingthe favour of the public, exerted all his powers inthe composition of his Iphigenia in Aulide. Butthis work was hastily got up and badly performed;and, notwithstanding its great beauties, experienceda total failure. He was so much affected bythis misfortune that he was struck with palsy ;from which he recovered so much as to be able tocompose his sublime Miserere, the last and greatestof his works, the words of which are taken fromJOMELLI. 129Salerno Mattei's translation of the fifty first Psalm.But the blow was fatal ; and he died on the 28thof August, 1774, at the age of sixty.Mattei, the celebrated poet and critic who hasjust been mentioned, in a memoir of Jomelli containedin his Saggio di Poesie Latine ed Italian,thus speaks of him as a man and a musician :Jomelli was my friend : he lived two years inmy neighbourhood, and I had frequent opportunitiesof conversing with him, and of admiring hiscaptivating manners, particularly his modesty inspeaking of rival artists, whose compositions hereadily praised, though their authors were notequally candid in speaking of him.Jomelli had acquired considerable knowledgein other arts besides music. His poetry was fullof taste, and there is a fine ode of his writing, inthe collection published at Rome, on the subjectof the reconciliation between the pope and the kingof Portugal.He was ambitious of distinguishing himselffrom other composers in a way peculiar to himself.His invention was always fertile, his style lyricaland Pindaric ; and, just as Pindar darted fromone subject to another, Jomelli changed his tonesand themes in a way wholly new and learnedlyirregular.But though his learning and elaborationwhich appeared in his works, procured him theVOL. II. K130 JOMELLI.esteem of consummate musicians, they sometimeslost him that of the multitude. He found thetheatre at Naples, and indeed almost all thetheatres of Italy, in the greatest corruption ;where, in and out of the orchestra, all is noise andconfusion. No one thing* harmonises with another:the company, regardless of what is acting,and wholly ignorant of the subject, after muchnoise and chattering, are hardly quiet when an airof particular interest is performed by a singer ofthe first class. A learned and ingenious kind of music,like that of Jomelli, full of harmony and contrivance,which requires careful execution and theutmost stillness and attention on the part of theaudience, could not satisfy the frivolous anddepraved taste of the Italians, who used to saythat the music of Gluck, Jomelli, Hasse, and Bach,was too rough and German, and pleased them lessthan the songs of the gondoliers, and airs with fewaccompaniments and many graces and divisions.It was without sufficiently reflecting upon thepresent depraved taste of his countrymen thatJomelli set Iphigenia, his last opera, in such a scientificand elaborate style that the audience was dissatisfiedwith it. But, to say the truth, most ofthe singers, who had but little time to rehearse,(Jomelli having only finished the opera on the dayof its representation,) executed this learned compositionin a very imperfect manner ; and in a fewJOMELLI. 131evenings it was withdrawn. This work, however,by a caprice not uncommon in theatrical matters,is now admired and thought far superior to thetwo which preceded it ; and every judge and loverof good music has it on his harpsichord desk,and would continue for ever to hear it withdelight."k 2CHAPTER V.Picking — Sacchini — Anfossi — Traetta — Guglielmi — Sarti-minorcomposers.Picking, a contemporary of Jomelli, though hislife was prolonged to a later period, effected greatinnovations in the style and structure of the Italianopera.Nicol Picking was born in 1728 at Bari, atown in the kingdom of Naples. He was designedfor the church ; but his propensity for music wassuch that his father was obliged to give way to it,and he was placed in the conservatory of St.Onophrio, then under the direction of Leo. Hisardent genius rendered him impatient of the slowand formal mode of tuition to which he was subjectedby the subordinate teacher to whose care hewas committed. Without rules, or any other guidethan the music he had an opportunity of hearing,he indulged his inclination for composition bywriting psalms, and oratorio and opera airs, and,at last, a whole mass. This irregular conduct waspiccini. 133reported to Leo, who sent for the culprit, andordered him, in a severe tone, to produce his score.Picking, in great alarm, went to fetch it, and put itinto the master's hands. Leo turned over theleaves, and ordered that it should be immediatelytried. The performers were summoned, and theparts distributed ; and when all was ready, Leogravely put his conductor's baton into the youngcomposer's hand, and desired him to beat the time.Picking, in great confusion, saw nothing for it butto obey, and, giving the signal with a tremblinghand, the piece commenced. As it went on, theyouthful maestro forgot his fears, and conductedthe performance with decision and fire, and theauditory were charmed with the spirit and effect ofthe music. Everybody loaded the composer withpraises, except Leo, who, after remaining for sometimesilent, reproved Picking for thus abusing thedelightful gift he had received from nature. " Insteadof studying the principles of the art," hesaid, "you give yourself up to all the flights ofyour imagination ; and when, without plan or rule,you have succeeded in making what you call ascore, you think you have accomplished a masterpiece."Picking's spirit was roused by this reproach,and he declared that he had been impelledto the efforts so severely blamed by the useless andunmeaning lessons to which he was subject, andwhich had disgusted him with study. Leo, feelingthat the youth was in the right, spoke to him134 piccini.kindly, and desired him to attend every morning,in order to receive instructions from himself.On Leo's death he was succeeded by Durante,who soon distinguished Picking's pre-eminent merit.He conceived a particular affection for him, anddelighted in explaining to him the secrets of harmony."The others," he used to say, " are myscholars, but this young man is my friend."After twelve years of study under these greatmasters, Picking left the conservatory. The firstfruitsof a genius so highly cultivated were two orthree comic operas, composed for one of the minortheatres of Naples, and very favourably receivedby the public. One of these, II furioso del proprioanno, had a run for four successive seasons — amost extraordinary circumstance in Italy, wherethere is such incessant craving for novelty.In 1756 his first serious opera, Zenobia, was performedat the theatre of San Carlo with the mostbrilliant success. His next opera, UAlcssandronelly India, produced at Rome, established hisreputation.In 1760 he produced the famous comic opera,La Cecchina, or La Buona Figliuola, one of themost successful pieces that has ever appeared. Theenthusiasm which it excited in Rome, where it wasfirst performed, amounted to extravagance. Itwas immediately performed all over Italy, even inthe smallest country theatres, and everywherereceived with the same admiration. All classes,piccini. 135from the highest to the lowest, crowded to see it.New fashions in dress were named from it ; andshops and taverns took La Cecchina for their sign.A family of rank having built a villa in the neighbourhoodof Rome, called it La Cecchina. Theairs were sung by ladies and gentlemen in theirdomestic circles, by artisans at their labour, bycountry people in the fields, by itinerant musiciansin the streets and highways. All Italy, in short,resounded with the music or the praises of LaCecchina.The drama of La Buona Figliuola is by Goldoni,*and founded on Richardson's novel of Pamela.The music approaches more nearly to the modernform than that of any other piece equally old.The two finales, which terminated each act, werethe great features of novelty. The merit of theinvention of these concerted pieces belongs toLogroscino ;t but, in this opera, Picking gave hisfinales a development and extent which pieces ofthis description had never previously received.The airs are remarkable for their easy flow andunaffected simplicity.While La Buona Figliuola was in the height ofits popularity at Rome, Jomelli passed through thatcity on his return from Stutgard to Naples. Onhis arrival, everybody was talking of the new operaand its author, of whom he had never heard.See ante, vol. i., p. 357.t See ante, vol. i., p. 404.136 piccini.Imagining it to be the childish production of someprecocious boy, he went to the theatre with greatindifference. He listened to the opera with attention,without making a single remark. Whenit was over, he was surrounded by a crowd of amateurs,all anxious to hear what he thought of theirfavourite work. "Hear the opinion of Jomelli,"he said ; " this is invention :" as emphatic a panegyricas this great man could have possibly pronounced.Picking's next opera was the Olimpiade of ; a piece which had been set by the greatestof his precursors — Pergolesi, Galuppi, andJomelli. He rivalled these great men, and, insome parts, even surpassed them. It is admittedthat his version of the air " Se circa, se dice''excels every other in beauty and expression.In this opera Picking set the example to theItalian composers of departing from the uniformitywhich had previously been observed in the structureof airs and duets. In the airs, it was theunvarying practice, after the second part, whichwas short and crowded with modulations, to beginda capo, and conclude with the first part. Duets,also, were cast in one mould. They began with aslow movement, the voices being first separate andthen united : next came, as in the airs, a shortsecond part, and then the first part was repeated.Picking, both in his airs and duets, adopted theform of a slow movement followed by a quick one,piccini. 137which became more and more rapid and energetictowards the close, and concluded without anyreturn to the first movement. The effect of thisinnovation was strikingly apparent in the duet,"Ne' giorni tui felice," when it was comparedwith the duets composed to the same words by themasters who had previously set the opera. It wasfound to be so animated and dramatic, that thesame form was adopted by Sacchini, Anfossi, Sarti,and all the other composers who afterwards set thesame opera : and indeed this manner of acceleratingthe movement of a piece is found to express sohappily the increasing intensity of passion or feeling,that airs in this form are more frequently metwith than in any other, even in modern compositions.Picking remained at Rome for fifteen years ; andfor all that time preserved the favour of the publicof that city, remarkable as they have always been forfeebleness and caprice. He met at last, however, arival in their favour in Anfossi, who, havingbrought out an opera, in 1773, with great success,took possession of the affections of a people whocan never have more than one idol at a time. Theadmirers of Anfossi actually hissed a new operaof Picking's from the stage, and got a piece ofAnfossi's substituted for it. Picking, deeply affectedby this injustice, immediately left Rome for Naples,where he was seized with a long and serious illness.On his recovery he declared that he138 piccini.would never again compose for Rome ; and hekept his word.At Naples Picking's works were as successful asever, and he enjoyed the highest considerationamong his countrymen. The first families consideredit an honour to have him as a guest ; and nostranger visited Naples without desiring to enjoythe pleasure of his society.While in this situation, he received an invitationto visit France, for the purpose of writing for theFrench opera. He accepted the proposal ; and, inDecember 1766, arrived with his family in Paris.Some account of his residence in that capital, andthe memorable contest between his partisans andthose of Gluck will be given in the sequel, asbelonging to the history of the musical drama inFrance. He remained in that country till the year1791, when, having been deprived of his employmentsand pensions in consequence of the revolution,he returned to his native country.He was received at Naples with great distinction,and the king granted him a pension. He had producedseveral successful works, when he ruined hisprospects by his folly in publicly professing thepolitical principles he had imbibed at Paris. Heconsequently became obnoxious to the government,was placed under the surveillance of the police,and remained for four years absolutely imprisonedin his house. Being thus prevented from theexercise of his talents, and having lost all the pro-picking.139party which he had possessed in France, he wasreduced to a state of indigence. In this unhappysituation he remained till 1798, when, having obtainedpermission to leave Naples, he returned toFrance.On his arrival his friends exerted themselves inhis behalf, and obtained for him a small pensionfrom the government; but their efforts to procurethe restoration of his former pension from theopera were thwarted by the intrigues of personswho looked upon themselves as his rivals-Hewas soon afterwards rejoined by a part of his family.This, though a consolation to him, added, in hisnarrow circumstances, to his embarrassments ; andhis anxiety on account of the difficulties of hissituation, and the unprotected state of his childrenwho had been left at Naples, brought on an attack otpalsy. On his recovery he took the resolution ofmaking a personal application to the First Consul,who received him graciously, and directed that heshould be appointed one of the inspectors of theconservatory, as a mark of national gratitudefor the services be had rendered to the music ofFrance. But this favour came too late. He wasexhausted by mental and bodily suffering, andexpired at the village of Pass on the 7th of May,1800;, at the age of seventy-two.He left a widow and six children, who were notneglected by the French government. They wereallowed a residence at the public expense ; and the140 PTCCINI.place which had been conferred upon him wasgiven to the composer Monsigny, under the conditionof half the salary of 5,000 francs being paid toMadame Picking. His son, Ludovico Picking, becamea composer of considerable eminence, andbrought out a number of dramatic pieces, bothin Italy and France.Picking," says M. Ginguen6, his biographer,was under the middle size, but well made, withconsiderable dignity of carriage. His countenancewas very agreeable. His mind was acute, enlarged,and cultivated. Latin and Italian literature werefamiliar to him when he went to France; and afterwardshe became almost as well acquainted withFrench literature. He spoke and wrote Italianwith great purity ; but among his countrymen hepreferred the Neapolitan dialect, which he consideredthe most expressive, the most difficult, andmost figurative of all languages. He used it principallyin narration, with a gaiety, a truth, and apantomimic expression, after the manner of hiscountry, which delighted the Neapolitans, andmade his stories intelligible even to those who hada slight knowledge of the Italian language."As a musician, Picking is distinguished for thepurity and simplicity of his style. He alwayswished to preserve the supremacy of the voice, and,though he well knew how to make his instrumentalparts both rich and effective, he was a determinedenemy to the indiscriminate and unmeaning-useof florid and complex accompaniments whichPICCINI. 141were coming into fashion even in his day. Hisopinions on this subject have been recorded by hisbiographer, and have not lost, through the lapse oftime, any of their claims to attention."We very soon learn, " he said, " all that canenter into harmony. It is not what may be admittedthat it is difficult to learn, but what ought to beleft out. The four-stringed instruments which formthe basis of an orchestra, accommodate themselvesequally to all sorts of expression. This is not thecase with wind instruments and instruments ofpercussion. The oboe has an expression whichdoes not belong to the clarinet : and it, in itsturn, differs totally from that of the flute. Thehorns change their character according to the key inwhich they are employed. The bassoon, when notconfounded with the bass, becomes sad and melancholy.The trombones have a mournful expression,whilst that of the trumpet is warlike and brilliant.The deafening cymbal is entirely military,and the moment I hear it I expect to see cavalrydefile. Were the employment which nature herselfassigns to these instruments preserved to them,a variety of effects, and a series of infinitely diversifiedpictures, would be produced. But they are allthrown in at once, and used incessantly ; and theythus overpower and indurate the ear, without presentingany picture to the mind, to which theear is the passage. I should be glad to know howthey will rouse it when it is accustomed to this Picking.roar, which will soon happen, and of what newwitchcraft they will avail themselves. Perhaps theywill return to nature, and the true means which areacknowledged by the art. It is well known whathappens to palates blunted by the use of spirituousliquors. In a few months, moreover, everythingmay be learned which is necessary to produce theseexaggerated effects ; but it requires much time andstudy to be able to excite genuine emotion. Howcan any one hesitate in the choice ?"Equally sound and useful are his remarks onexcess in modulation :To modulate is to take a route which the earwill follow willingly. It even asks to be led ; — butonly on condition that when arrived at the point towhich you have conducted it, it may there findsomething which repays it for its journey, andwhere it may enjoy some repose. If you keep itconstantly going on without granting what it demands,it becomes weary, and will follow you nolonger." — "To modulate," he says again, " is notdifficult in itself: there is a routine for that as wellas all other trades. The proof of this is found inthose enharmonic modulations which appear to theignorant as the height of science, and are, after all,the mere sport of scholars. To create melody froma given modulation, to quit it only by the legitimatemeans, to return to it without harshness orinsipidity, to make the change of modulation ajust means of expression and of judicious variety ;JOMELLI AND PICCTNI. 143these are the real difficulties. But to quit a keyalmost as soon as we have entered it, to becomeextravagant without reason or end, to proceed byjumps and skips, merely because we do not knowhow to remain where we are ; — to modulate, inshort, for the sake of modulating, is to prove thatthe artist is ignorant of the end of his art as wellas of its principles, and that he affects a superabundanceof imagination and learning, in order toconceal the want of both the one and the other."The two great composers, of whom some accounthas now been given, contributed greatly, though indifferentways, to the improvement of the Italianopera. The stage had come to be in a great measuresupplied by the productions of shallow andsuperficial musicians, such as Pescetti, Lampugnani,and others, whose airs were little more than stringsof common-places, calculated to show off the executionof favourite singers, and destitute of learning,invention, and dramatic effect. Jomelli broughtto the service of the opera the resources of depthof harmony, variety of modulation, and richnessof orchestral accompaniments : and, though in hisown time, his countrymen were so insensible of themerit of his music as to exclaim that it was "scenesyet it gradually produced its effect upon theirtaste. Picking adopted a style of melody of themost simple and expressive kind, keeping hisaccompaniments in complete subserviency to the144 SACCHINI.voice, but rendering them beautiful and interestingby his attention to the character of the different instruments,and the variety of effects produced byhis use of them. But his great innovations consistedin his departure from the old conventionalforms of the opera ; in the banishment of theeternal da capo from his airs and duets, and in theuse of concerted pieces and finales. These noveltieswere adopted by all his contemporaries andsuccessors ; and the opera thus acquired a rapidityof action, an animation, and dramatic effect, whichit had never before possessed.The first Italian composer who followed in thetrack of Picking was a man of genius equal to hisown — Antonio Sacchini. This great master wasborn at Naples in 1735, and, in his early years,studied in the conservatory of St. Ontario, underDurante. At this time he paid much attention tothe violin ; and his skill as a performer on that instrumentenabled him to give his accompanimentspeculiar elegance and effect, and suggested themany hviWmnt obbligato passages for the violin whichwe meet with in his operas.In 1762 he had gained such celebrity that heobtained an engagement as composer to the principaltheatre at Rome, in which situation he continuedfor seven or eight years. In 1769, he wasappointed successor to Galuppi, as director of theconservatory of L'Ospedaletto at Venice, a .145nary for the musical tuition of girls. The celebratedSignora Gabrielle was educated iu thisschool while it was under Sacchini's direction.He arrived in England in 1772, and supportedhere the high reputation he had gained on the continent."His operas," says Burney, "of the Cidand Tamerlano were equal, if not superior, to anymusical dramas I had heard in any part of Europe.The airs of Millico, the first man, were whollywritten in the delicate and pathetic style of thatsinger ; as the first woman's part was in the spiritedand nervous style of Corelli. And he cherishedthe talents of the inferior singers in so judicious amanner, that all their defects were constantly disguisedor concealed.* Savoir, notwithstanding hisfine voice, had been worse than unnoticed before thisperiod, for he was almost insulted ; yet so excellentwas the music he had to execute in Sacchini'soperas, and so favourably did it call him into notice,that instead of going off the stage in silence, hewas applauded and even encored nearly as muchand as frequently as the first singers. Carrara, too,a young singer, whose voice was naturally drowsy,childish, and insipid, from the beauty of her songs,This is a matter of the utmost importance in dramatic composition.Many a work of merit has failed from the composer'swant of attention to the qualities of the performers, or his wantof skill in concealing their defects and turning their powers tothe best advantage. Burney's illustrations of this, given above,are very instructive.VOL. II. L146 SACCHINI.was well received. Indeed, each of these dramaswas so entire, so masterly, yet so new and natural,that there was nothing left for criticism to censure,though innumerable beauties to point out andadmire. It was evident that this composer had ataste so exquisite, and so totally free from pedantry,that he was frequently new without effort ; neverthinking of himself or his fame for any particularexcellence, but totally occupied with the ideas ofthe poet, and the propriety, consistency, and effectsof the whole drama. His accompaniments, thoughalways rich and ingenious, never call off attentionfrom the voice, but, by a constant transparency,the principal melody is rendered distinguishablethrough all the contrivance of imitative and picturesquedesign in the instruments."During his residence in England, Sacchini producedmany operas ; but his improvidence andwant of economy involved him in difficulties, andhe suffered from the cabals of persons who choseto consider themselves as his rivals. Mazzini, thecelebrated singer, who had composed several operas,declared himself to be the author of the principalsongs in all the operas which had latelyappeared under Sacchini's name, and even threatenedto make affidavit to this effect before a magistrate,which, however, he does not seem ever tohave done. The story bears absurdity on the faceof it ; and Burney understands the truth to havebeen, that during the severe fits of the gout toSACCHINI. 147which Sacchini was subject, when he was calledupon for his operas before they were ready, hemight have employed Mazzini (according to a practiceby no means uncommon) to fill up the parts,compose some of the recitatives, and perhaps a fewunimportant airs for the inferior singers. Thecalumny, however, was propagated with industriousmalice, and gained ground, though it was disbelievedand despised by Sacchini's friends and thereasonable part of the public. But it so deeplyaffected both his comfort and his interest, andadded so much to his embarrassments, that hefound it necessary, in 1781, to leave London forParis. In the following year he returned to London,where he only increased his debts and difficulties.He therefore, in 1784, finally left England,and settled in Paris, where he died in September,1786.Sacchini, as Picking had done, directed histalents to the French stage, for which he composedseveral of his greatest works. These pieces, andthe circumstances attending their production, willbe afterwards noticed. Sacchini died in theheight of public favour in France, and was honouredwith a public funeral, attended with every mark ofrespect for his memory.In his own country, Sacchini is long since forgotten,and the same thing is the case in England ;for, among those who listen to his melodies introducedinto an English opera of forty or fifty yearsl 2148 SACCHINI.ago, few know even the name of the author.* Buthis French operas keep their place in the repertoryof the grand opera ; and the greatest of them,CEdippe en Colonne, in a German dress, is still performedat Berlin, and other places of Germany,where the memory of the masterpieces of the oldschool is not wholly lost among the novelties of theday. We find in a German journal the followingnotice of its performance at Cassel. " Sacchini'sgrand opera Oedipus zu Colonel, was produced onthe occasion of the birthday of our eldest princess.The reception which this masterpiece of the goodold time met with here is a satisfactory proof, thattaste and feeling for music of the clear, simple,and expressive kind, is not lost. The accompaniment,also, in which not only the clarinet, thetrumpet, and the trombone are unemployed, buteven the bassoon is but sparingly used, but which,with all its economy of means, displays so muchpower, convinced us that great masses of harmonyare not always necessary to produce great effects .This opera continues to be performed, and hasexcited a general wish to have recourse to thevigorous productions of a period in which nativegenius abounded and spurned the trammels ofimitation." — The German journals, it. may be added,contain innumerable instances of the regard stillpaid to the great works of a former age by a peopleair " Henry cull'd the flow'ret's bloom," in Rosinaa, is abeautiful specimen of Sacchini's style.anfossi. 149pie whose musical predilections, being foundedon judgment and taste, resist the influence offashion.Anfossi, who has been mentioned as the successfulrival of Picking at Rome, was a composer ofmerit. He was born about the year 1736, and educatedin one of the conservatories of Naples. Inhis youth he received much friendship from Picking,who not only gave him instructions in his art, butprocured him an engagement at one of the theatresof Rome. Anfossi was at first unfortunate ; but, encouragedby Picking to exertion and perseverance,he was at length so successful as to supplant hisfriend and instructor in the unstable favour of theRoman public. He experienced, however, theirfickleness in his turn. His opera of Olimpiade,performed in 1776, completely failed ; and this unexpectedmortification drove him from Rome. Heafterwards went to Paris, where he produced anopera on the French stage with moderate success.In 1782 he came to London, where he remainedthree years ; but he arrived at an unfavourabletime ; for, Sacchini having preceded him, and theaffairs of the opera-house being in a state of theutmost embarrassment, he had no opportunity ofdoing anything worthy of his reputation. In 1787he returned to Rome, where he was received withthe favour he had formerly enjoyed, and producedseveral successful works. He died in that city in1795. Anfossi did not possess the inventive genius150 GUGLIELMI.of Picking and Sacchini ; but his style was clearand elegant, and many of his concerted pieceswere considered as models in that species of composition.Among the other Italian composers of this period,Traetta and Guglielmi were the most eminent.They were both of the Neapolitan school, and bothacquired a very high reputation on the continent,though neither of them had much success in England.They, as well as several others of lesser note,followed in the footsteps of Picking.An anecdote of Guglielmi, related by Ferrari,*is characteristic of the man, as well as of the Neapolitanpublic. " He was engaged to write anopera buffa for the Christmas season at Naples.The piece produced was Adalinda. Guglielmi wasa good musician and well versed in dramatic composition,but indolent, avaricious, and conceited.He would write two or three entire pieces in everynew opera, and leave the recitatives and concertedpieces to be supplied by his scholars, and even bythe copyists of Naples. At the first representationthe opera was hissed as it deserved : indeed, aboutthe middle of the second act, the dissatisfactionbecame so general that it was found necessary todrop the curtain, and the performers stole away asthey could. On quitting the theatre, Guglielmi invitedsome of his friends to supper, to devise meansAnecdote piacevoli ed interessanti ; a gossiping little book,containing, however, a good deal of curious musical information.GUGLIELMI. 151for bringing matters round the following evening.In the morning he repaired to the Cafe del Venetian,the great rendezvous of the principal performersof the theatres. He there found the manager.He went up to him, and taking a roll ofmusic from his pocket, said, " There is a piecewhich will set all to rights again ; Adalinda will gowell enough to-night. Hand me seventy ducats,and that will do." The manager looked at the titleof the manuscript, and found it to be " Vega manosospirata ; a posthumous terzetto of Adalinda."Knowing the character of the maestro, he put themusic in his pocket, ordered the master of thecoffee-house to pay Guglielmi the money, set thecopyist to work, ordered a rehearsal, and producedthe piece the same evening. The affair was immediatelyknown all over Naples ; and when eveningarrived, the doors of the theatre were besieged by acrowd long before the time of opening. At lengththe performance began. The public, in their eagerexpectation of the new piece, suffered all the rest topass unnoticed. At last the terzetto was sung ; theapplause was deafening, and the singers wereobliged to repeat it three times over.* After this,the first finale and the pieces of the second act,which had been hissed the preceding evening, wereextolled to the skies, and in particular a duet, theIt was by the same device that Rossini changed the fate ofMore in Egitto, after it had failed the first night.152 SARTI.music of which was as wretched as the words weresilly."Another composer of that period was Sarti, thanwhom few musicians have, in their own time, enjoyedgreater popularity. He was born in 1730 ;and, even in his youth, rose so high in the estimationof his enthusiastic countrymen, that he wasknown among them by the title of " II divinomaestro." After producing many operas whichfilled all Europe with their fame, he went to Russia,where he spent the latter part of his life in thehighest favour with the imperial court. He diedin 1802.His most favourite opera was Giulio Sabine,which was performed in London in 1788, but didnot please so much as it had done in Italy. Thefollowing observations on this celebrated piece havebeen made by an able critic* " The opera ofGiulio Sabino, which has been published in the fullscore, may be taken as a fair sample of the claimsof Sarti to eminence as a theatrical composer; andcertainly its enthusiastic reception will not raise ouradmiration of the state of musical taste in Europeforty years since. It may perhaps be best describedby negatives. It has no concerted pieces, unlessone trio may be so designated. Except a marciafunera, it contains not one movement in a minorkey. There are neither clarinets nor flutes in theHarmoniconon ibr 1830.SARTI. 153score, nor a single prominent feature in any partfor the wind instruments that are used ; nor is thereinthe whole opera a piece, in the course of whichthe modulations wander beyond the dominant orsubdominant of the original key. In the recitativesa diminished seventh is occasionally to be found ;but throughout all the songs, one duet and a trio,of which the opera consists, it occurs only once.The popularity of Giulio Sabino must have beenfounded on the beauty and simplicity of its melodies,and the singing of Pacchierotti, for whom thepart of Sabino was written, supported by a primadonna, Signora Pozzi, and a first tenor, Nati,both of whom, from the songs written for them,must have possessed extensive voices and greatpowers of execution. On the whole, it may safelybe pronounced far inferior to the best contemporaryworks of Sacchini, Paesiello, and many otherwriters ; and to be surpassed in every point by ourown Artaxerxes, written many years before."Considerable but short-lived celebrity wasgained by Bach,* Venti, Cocchi, Giardini,f andother opera composers of this period ; but there isnothing in their works which calls for particularnotice.John Christian Bach, one of the numerous family of the illustriousSebastian Bach, was chiefly distinguished as a composerfor and performer on the piano-forte, which was then beginningto supersede the harpsichord.t The great violinist.CHAPTER VI.Paesiello — Cimarosa — Zingarelli.The musical history of the last century includesseveral Italian composers, who, though to someextent contemporary with the generation abovedescribed, may yet be considered as belonging to adifferent class. Their career having extended to alater period, the opera, in their hands, assumed astill more modern form, and some of their worksstill hold a distinguished place on the stage. Amongthese composers, the chief are Paesiello, Cimarosa,and Zingarelli.Giovanni Paesiello was born at Parents in1741. Like many other great musicians, he waseducated in the conservatory of San Ontario atNaples, when that institution was under the directionof Durante. He was first brought intonotice by a comic interment, which was performedin the conservatory, and procured for him an engagementto compose an opera for the theatre ofBologna in 1763. From that time he produced agreat number of pieces for the different ItalianPAESIELLO. 155theatres, till 1776, when he went to Russia uponan invitation from the empress Catherine II. to enterinto her service. He remained in Russia nine years,during which time he composed several of his bestworks, especially the celebrated II Barbiere diSiviglia, and the comic interment, II monde bellaLuna. At the end of this period he returned toNaples, where he was taken into the service of king-ferdinandIV., as maestro di capella, with a salaryof twelve hundred ducats a year.The opera of // Piero, composed soon after hisreturn to Naples, was remarkable for being the firstserious opera which contained concerted introductionsand finales. These, which had been long-previouslyintroduced by Logroscino into the comicopera, had been hitherto confined to it ; and theirintroduction into the serious opera was an importantstep in the progress of the musical drama.He was afterwards invited to return to Russia,but declined the proposal in consequence of beingin the service of the king of Naples ; and the samereason prevented him from accepting an invitationto Berlin and another to London. He transmitted,however, to our king's theatre the opera of La Lo-canada,of the performance of which here we do notfind any notice ; but it was afterwards performed atNaples, under the title of II Fanaticoo in Berlin.Dr. Burney, who saw Paesiello at Naples in 1770,says, " He was the only composer at Naples whocould make head against the high favour in which156 PAESIELLO.Picking stood after his Buona Figliuola. We wereso happy as to hear him hnprovinsare in music atSir William Hamilton's, where having dined, he wasbegged to sing a scene of an opera ; but there beingnone at hand which he liked to perform, he said,Date mi un libretto,' and the words of the firstopera which could be found having been put uponthe harpsichord desk, he composed and sang extemporethree or four scenes in so exquisite a manner tohis own ingenious accompaniment, that no studiedmusic or singing we ever heard, of the greatest composersor performers, ever pleased us so much. Itwas not written music — : it was inspiration."In 1787 two of his comic operas were performedin London. The one was Gli Schiavi per Amove,in which Signora Storage, who afterwards becameso celebrated on the English stage, made her firstappearance with great success. The other was77 He Theodore. The English public was delightedwith the originality, gaiety, and elegance of thesepieces, and especially with the richness and beautyof the finales, notwithstanding the suppression ofsome of Paesiello's airs to make room for others byCorri, Mazzinghi, and Storage : an unwarrantablestep, whatever the merit of the substituted airs mayhave been ; for they could hardly have been superior,it may well be supposed, to the charmingmelodies which had already been listened to withdelight all over Italy and Germany, and their introductionmust have destroyed that unity and sims157felicity of style which constitutes so much of thebeauty of the original work.In 1799, when the Neapolitan revolution convertedthe government into a short-lived republic,Paesiello was appointed the national director ofmusic. On the restoration of the Bourbon family,his acceptance of this appointment was naturallydeemed a heinous offence, and he was for some timedeprived of all his employments. He was soon,however, restored to favour ; a circumstance creditableto a family who might have been justified intreatinghim more severely, as they were entitled toexpect some mark of attachment and gratitude,during their adversity, from one who had been longingtheir employment, and on whom they had bestowedmany favours.Soon afterwards he received an invitation fromBonaparte, then chief consul of France, which heaccepted with the permission of the king of Naples.On reaching Paris, he was provided with a handsomesuite of apartments, a court equipage withsuitable attendants, with a salary of 12,000 francs(£500 sterling,) and a gratuity of 18,000 for incidentaldisbursements, besides a liberal allowancefor travelling expenses. He was offered severalhigh appointments, such as director of the ImperialAcademy of the Institution of Music, and others ;but he declined them all, and accepted only that ofmaster of the chapel, for which he composed agreat quantity of sacred music. For the Academie158 PAESIELLO.Royal de Musique he composed the French opera ofProserpine.Ferrari, in his Aneddoli Piacevoli, says, " Paesiellowas at this time the idol of Bonaparte, and the feelingwas reciprocal. Scarcely a day passed but thecomposer dined with the First Consul, an honourwhich was at once flattering and inconvenient toPaesiello, for it proved a serious interruption to hisstudies." Ferrari describes Proserpine as " themost beautiful though not the most successful ofPaesiello's operas."After a residence of two years and a half in Paris,finding that the climate was injurious to the healthof his wife, he returned to Naples.When Joseph Bonaparte took possession of thethrone of Naples, he confirmed Paesiello in his appointments; and when Joseph, on his going toSpain, was succeeded by Murat, or Joachim Napoleon,that sovereign also confirmed him in hisplaces. In his latter years he obtained manyhonours. He received from king Joseph the decorationof the order of the Two Similes, and wasnominated a member of the Academia Napoleonat Lucca, the Italian Academy at Leghorn, theSons of Apollo at Paris, and the Institute ofFrance.On the fall of the Bonaparte family, Paesiello'sfortunes underwent an unfavourable change. Hissituation at Naples in 1814 is described by Ferrari.What delight," says that writer, " did I .159prince in again seeing Naples after an absenceof eight-and-twenty years, and in finding my goodold master, Paesiello, still enjoying excellent health,though his situation in life was much less fortunatethan when I had last seen him ! On our very firstmeeting he gave me an account of all that had unhappilybefallen him. He said that his attachmentto Bonaparte and his dynasty had been the causeof his being deprived of the pension he had formerlyreceived from Ferdinand IV. ; that, from otherpolitical circumstances, he had also lost the pensionfrom the grand duchess of Russia, as well as thatfrom Napoleon ; and that he was reduced to subsistupon the meagre appointment which he held in thechapel-royal. It was painful to see a man of geniuslike Paesiello, who for more than half a centuryhad been used to live in affluence, abandoned inhis old age by the court, the nobility, and even bythose who had called themselves his friends." Someattempts were made to obtain his restoration to thefavour of the court, but without effect ; and in thisneglected state he was left to spend the short remnantof his life.He died on the 5th of June, 1816, aged seventy-five.He was honoured with a public funeral, atwhich a Requiem, found among his papers, wasperformed. The same evening his opera of Ninawas represented at the theatre, when the king ofNaples and the whole court attended, to show160 PAESIELLO.their respect for the memory of this illustriousmusician.He asked for bread, and they gave him a stone."il Paesiello," says the Chevalier Le Sueur, " wasnot only a great musician, but possessed a largefund of general information. He was well versedin the dead languages, acquainted with all branchesof literature, and on terms of friendship with themost distinguished persons of the age. His mindwas noble, and above all mean passions ; he neitherknew envy nor the feeling of rivalry." — " Hecomposed," says the same writer, "seventy-eightoperas, of which twenty-seven were serious andfifty-one comic, — eight interment, and an immensenumber of cantatas, oratorios, masses, &c. ; sevensymphonies for the Emperor Joseph II. , severalpiano-forte pieces for the queen of Spain, and manytheatrical scenes for the court of Russia."Ferrari, who in his youth was one of Paesiello'spupils, and kept up an intercourse with him duringhis life, gives a lively and pleasing description ofhis habits and manners, and (what is still more valuable)records several of his opinions on subjectsconnected with his art. According to his account,Paesiello must have been a kind-hearted and verygood-humoured man, with a large fund of Neapolitanhumour. In his latter days he had a desireto disguise from others (and perhaps from himself)PAESIELLO. 161the real extent of his age. "I quitted Naples*'says Ferrari, "at the close of January 1816. Twodays before setting out I went to receive Paesiello'scommands, and the day following he came with aletter, which he read to me, in reply to one I hadbrought him from Count Woronzow. It containedan account of his sufferings, and terminated withthe following postscript : — ' Your excellency informsme that you are past sixty, and that you cannottell whether we shall ever meet again. Whatif / say that I am full sixty-four !' Paesiello diedthree months afterwards. I was at Lord Bristol's,when his lordship came to me with a newspaper inhis hand, exclaiming, 'Ferrari, Paesiello is dead!'' Good heavens ! and I left him but threemonths ago in perfect health, though at the age ofsixty-four.' — 'Sixty-four! you are wrong — readthis paragraph, and you will see that he was morethan eighty-four." This was an error; but hewas more than seventy-four.The opinions of great artists on the subject oftheir art are always instructive and worthy of beingpreserved. Those of Paesiello are consistent withhis character as 'a composer. Ferrari, who hadintroduced himself to him for the purpose of becominghis pupil, was naturally expressing greatadmiration of his genius, when he was cut shortby the composer saying, in his quaint phrase, thathe was a mere ass in music. Ferrari was all astonishmentthat he should so speak, after so many nobleVOL. II. m16-2PAESIELLO.operas, so many creations of genius that had delightedthe world."My dear friend," said Paesiello, " you cannotsuppose me altogether destitute of self-love. Ifyou speak to me of giving words their proper expression,of making a shepherd, a clown, a warrior,a heroine, sing in their proper character ; if youspeak to me of theatrical effects, and all that, Itell you boldly that I fear no one : but in point oftrue music I call myself a mere cipher, becausethat is an art so profound, a science so inexhaustible,that I look upon myself as the merestnovice. And as to creations and novelties, what isthere new under the sun"— "Don't rack yourbrains about novelty, ' continued the veteran composer," or diving into the secrets of science: becontent simply to search for truth. Study yourcounterpoint with unremitting attention ; examinethe compositions of good authors, both ancient andmodern ; be never weary of reading Metastasioand other dramatic poets; and, after havingblotted some reams of music paper, you will writecorrectly and with truth."In regard to the difference between the Italianand German schools, Paesiello said —In Italy, all we make account of is melody,and we employ modulation only to heighten theexpression of words. In Germany, whatever bethecause, whether it arises from a difference ofconstitution, or from a consciousness of inferiorityPAESIELLO. 163to us in respect to song, they make little account ofmelody, and employ it but rarely. Hence they areobliged to have recourse to elaborate harmonies tosupply the defect, and compensate for the absenceof the magic beauties of the voice."This dictum, however, he qualified by exceptions.For example," he said, " there is no Italian composerwho can surpass the pure melody of Hasse,the ingenious and nervous choruses of Handel, orthe tragic effects of Gluck. But no German composerhas surpassed the science of Padre Martini,the counterpoint of Durante, or the grand andmasculine harmony of Padre Vallotti." He doesnot speak of Mozart, whose works at that time werescarcely known in Italy.Paesiello's style is characterised by great simplicityand apparent facility : and yet there is probablyno composer to whose music Caressing's exclamation," Ah, quest facile quanto e difficile,"may be so emphatically applied. The profoundharmonies and learned contrivances of the Germanmasters may be imitated by dint of application andstudy ; and a perusal of Italian scores may enablethe composer to accumulate all the divisions, difficulties,and intricacies of vocal execution. ButPaesiello's few and simple notes, so full of graceand beauty, so deep and various in their expression,are beyond the reach of imitation. Soundsat all resembling his must flow, without labourand without effect, from a fountain of melody asm 2164 PAESIELLO.pure and abundant as his own. His very simplicityis the greatest mark of his abundance : it wasnever necessary for him to have recourse to artificeand complication for the purpose of concealingpoverty of invention. His accompaniments aresimilar in character to his vocal parts ; whollywithout elaboration or display of learning, butclear, picturesque, and effective. His scores arenow called thin ; but it may well be questionedwhether the change of taste, which has led this tobe considered a fault, is favourable to dramaticmusic. His accompaniments not only sustain andrelieve the voice, but are full of instrumental effects,which, in his time, were new and original, and willnever cease to charm those who prefer delicacyand refinement to loud and overpowering massesof sound. Paesiello was the author of several importantimprovements in orchestral composition.He introduced the viola, the clarinet, and thebassoon, into the theatres of Naples.Though a voluminous writer both in the seriousand comic styles, Paesiello's genius seems to haveinclined chiefly to the latter. His tragic operasare now laid aside ; but his Piazza per Amovewill always be performed when there is an actresscapable, like Pasta, of representing the beautifuland pathetic character of Nina. La Frascatanawas one of the most charming performances ofCatalans ; and that piece, with La Molinara, andseveral of Paesiello's other comic operas, keep theirCIMAROSA. 165places in the theatres of Germany, where excellenceis not sacrificed to novelty.Notwithstanding the greatness of Picking, Sac-china,and Paesiello, a still higher place must beassigned to Cimarosa. This great composer wasborn at Naples in 1754. Though not an immediatedisciple of Durante, he belonged to hisschool, having been educated at the Conservatoryof Lorenzo under Fenaroli, one of the pupils of thatgreat master. His life, down to his latter years,was a career of uninterrupted success and prosperity.He became celebrated as a dramatic composerat an early age, and in 1787 received aninvitation from the Empress Catherine of Russiato accept the office of dramatic composer to hercourt. In 1791 he went to Vienna, having beenappointed by the Emperor Leopold director of theItalian opera of that city. It was here that hecomposed his chef d'ceuvre, II Matrimonio Secret,which was received with unparalleled enthusiasm.The emperor attended the first representation, andwas so transported with delight, that, at the end ofthe piece, he invited the whole of the performers to abanquet, and sent them back the same evening tothe theatre, where they performed it a second time.Its reception in Italy was not less enthusiastic.After the death of the Emperor Leopold, Cimarosareturned to Naples, where he was appointed maestrodi capella, and produced some of his finest works,particularly II Matrimonio per Saussure, La PenesCIMAROSA.lope, U Olimpiade, II Sacrifice d'Abramo, GliAmant Comic, and lastly, Gli Orazi.Hitherto his career had been prosperous, brilliant,and unmarked by any memorable occurrence.But his latter years were most unhappy. Whenthe French for a time expelled the Bourbon familyand took possession of Naples, he so conductedhimself as to show that he was tinctured with therevolutionary spirit of the time. To what extenthe carried the display of his political opinions doesnot appear : but his conduct must at all eventshave been very indiscreet; for its consequence was,that, on the return of the exiled family, he wasimprisoned, and narrowly escaped the forfeiture ofhis life. He languished a long time in a dungeon,and was so closely immured that it was currentlyreported that he had been executed. At length hewas released, and immediately went to Venice, inconsequence,it may be presumed, of an order toquit the Neapolitan territory. He arrived at Venicein 1800, and died on the 11th of January, 1801,in consequence," says Stendhal in his Life ofRossini, " of the barbarous treatment he had metwith in the prison into which he had been thrownby Queen Caroline." This, however, it may behoped, is not true : as, after bis arrival at Venice,he not only completed and brought out his operaof L 'Imprudent Fortunate, but had partly composedanother opera, called Artemisia, when hisprogress was arrested by death. It was completedCIMAHOSA. 167by another composer, and brought on the stage ;but the audience would not allow the performanceto finish, and the curtain fell in the middle of thesecond act.Cimarosa's genius embraced both the tragic andcomic styles of composition. Gli Orazi and //Matrimonio Segreto are the finest specimens ofboth, which the Italian school has produced. Thedrama of Gli Orazi is taken from Corneille'stragedy Les Horace, to which it closely adheres.The music is full of noble simplicity, beautifulmelody, and strong expression. In the airs, dramatictruth is never sacrificed to vocal display ;and the concerted pieces are broad, grand, andeffective. Taken as a whole, the piece is free fromantiquated and obsolete forms ; and it wants nothingbut an orchestral score of greater fulness andvariety to satisfy the most modern ear. It is stillfrequently performed in Germany, though in Englandand France, and even in its native country, itseems to be forgotten.II Matrimonio Segreto is founded on our ClandestineMarriage; the plot, and all the principalincidents, being taken from the English play. Theopera is of a lighter character than the comedy.The distress of the young couple, though sufficientto excite interest, is not deep ; and Lisette, theheroine's sister, has not the dark malignity of herEnglish prototype. As a combination of gay andsportive comedy with enchanting music, this opera168 ZINGARELLI.is not to be equalled even by the productions ofMozart ; and when performed, as it has frequentlybeen of late, in Paris and London, by Grisi,Rubini, Tamburini, and Lablache, nothing canbe more animated and delightful. Though thebrazen instruments are entirely excluded from theorchestra, and even the softer wind instrumentsare sparingly used, yet the accompaniments are sorich and brilliant, and at the same time so lightand transparent, that no one, whose ear has notbeen hardened by the noisy harmony of the day,would wish them in the slightest degree differentfrom what they are. For our part, the respite fromthe din of drums and trumpets forms no small partof the pleasure we derive from the performance ofthe Matrimonio Segreto.Of the other Italian composers belonging to thisperiod, it may be sufficient to mention Zingarelli,as being the most distinguished. He was born,according to some writers, at Naples, in 1752, but,according to Gerber, at Milan, in 1760. One ofhis earliest works was Montezuma, produced atNaples in 1781, which is said to have gained theapprobation of Haydn. He then composed manyoperas for all the Italian theatres ; and on the deathof Guglielini in 1806, was appointed to that composer'splace in the chapel of the Vatican. Fromthat time he devoted himself entirely to the musicof the church.In 1811 he was commanded by Napoleon toZINGARELLI. 169present himself at Paris, because, it is said, he hadrefused, as maestro di capella of the Vatican, to producea Te Deem on the birth of the king of Rome.Be this as it may, Zingarelli became a favourite ofthe emperor, and was much attached to the Bonapartefamily. When Murat was on the throne ofNaples, Zingarelli was one of his most zealous adherents,and, on his tragical death, composed a cantatawhich was rigidly suppressed by the Neapolitanpolice. In 1813 he was appointed director ofthe newly-founded Conservatories at Naples. Fromthis time he led a life of the utmost seclusion,devoting himself to compositions for the church,until his death, which took place on 5th May, 1837.Zingarelli greatly outlived his popularity as adramatic composer. Long before his death hismost favourite pieces were withdrawn from thestage, with the single exception of Romeo e Giuliowhich has been kept alive to the present timeby the tragic powers of Madame Pasta. With herbeautiful performance of Romeo the attraction ofthe opera will cease ; for the music, though sweetand elegant, is deficient in force and dramaticcharacter. The finest scene is Romeo's soliloquyafter having swallowed the poison, consisting of therecitative, "Tranquilly io son," and the air " Ombraaorta," to which, however, Zingarelli's title hasbeen questioned, and the air ascribed to Presenting,the celebrated singer. Presenting originally performedthe part, and may have probably given the170 ZINGARELLLcomposer the subject of the air, and some suggestionsas to its style, as was frequently done by to the composers of his operas ; but thiswould afford no ground for a charge of plagiarismagainst the musician. On the other hand, thefamous Austrian hymn, " God save the EmperorFrancis," generally understood to be Haydn's, hasbeen ascribed to Zingarelli, and there has beensome controversy on the subject between Italianand German critics. Gerber, in the Dictionary ofMusicians, mentions " Dio salve Francesco Imperator; Into patriotic degli Austria," in the listof Zingarelli's works, giving it the date of 1798.But, in the title as given by Gerber, the words aresaid to have been translated into Italian from theoriginal German by Carman : which renders itprobable that Haydn's music to the original wordswas adapted to the new Italian version by ZincMany of the present Italian composers andsingers are said to have been pupils of this master.Among the composers, he gave instructions to Bellini,Mercadante, Donizetti, and Costa ; amongthe singers, to Madame Fodor, Lablache, Tambourine,and Dupes.It is as a composer for the church, which affordsmore lasting celebrity than the theatre, that thename of Zingarelli will live. His oratorio, La di Gierusalemme, composed in 1809, is hisgreatest ecclesiastical work.CHAPTER VII.Italian singers — Guadagni — Millico — Cecilia Davies — MazziniAgujari — Banti — Todi — Pacchierotti — Rubinelli —MarchesMara — Billington.The latter part of the eighteenth century exhibiteda constellation of Italian performers, of whichwe shall notice a few of the " bright particularstars" which appeared for longer or shorter periodsabove the English horizon. And, in describingthem, we must borrow the language of those contemporarycritics who were enabled to speak frompersonal knowledge.Guadagni first came to England so early as1748, when a young man. He then resided forseveral years in London, during which time he wasmore noticed for singing English than Italian. Hestudied the histrionic part of his profession by thehelp of the instructions of Garrick, who took muchpleasure in forming him as an actor. After a long-interval,during which he became one of the greatestdramatic singers in Europe, he returned to England17*2 GUAUAGNI.in 1779. " The highest expectations of his abilities,"says Burney, "were raised by rumour beforehis arrival here for the winter season ; and asan actor he seems to have had no equal on anystage in Europe. His figure was uncommonly elegantand noble ; his countenance replete withbeauty, intelligence, and dignity : and his attitudesand gestures were so full of grace and propriety,that they would have been excellent for studiesfor a statuary. The music he sung was the mostsimple imaginable ; a few notes with frequentpauses, and opportunities of being liberated fromthe composer and the band were all he wanted;and in these seemingly extemporaneous effusionshe proved the inherent power of melody totallydivorced from harmony, and unassisted even bypoisonous accompaniment. Surprised at such greateffects from causes apparently so small, I frequentlytried to analyse the pleasure communicated to theaudience, and found it chiefly arose from his artfulmanner of diminishing the tones of his voice, likethe dying notes of the aeolian harp; but Guadagni,after beginning a note or passage with all the forcehe could safely exert, fined it off to a thread,and rave it all the effect of extreme distance."His temper, unfortunately, was capricious, obstinate,and unyielding; and he consequently involvedhimself in so many quarrels with the public,that notwithstanding the admiration excited byhis talents, he hardly ever appeared on the stageMillion — MISS DAVIES. 173without being hissed, for some time before he leftEngland. He died at Padua in 1786.Millico arrived in England in 1772, about thesame time with Sacchini. Both of them had atfirst to contend with the cabals of the partisans ofthe singers and composers then in possession of thepublic ear. " None of the friends of their predecessors,"says Burney, " would allow that Millicocould sing, or the new master compose. Violentand virulent means were used to poison, or atleast to shut the ears of the unprejudiced public;but not with much success. Indeed at first boththe music and performance were frequently hissed ;but at length Sacchini's compositions were generallyallowed to be admirable, and Millico's importancewas manifested by a crowded house at hisbenefit, composed of the first persons for taste andrank in the kingdom : and, at the end of the nextseason, several who had boldly pronounced thatneither Sacchini could compose nor Millico sing,would have given a hundred pounds if they couldhave recalled their words, or made their acquaintanceforget that they had been guilty of suchmanifest injustice and absurdity !" Millico wasremarkable for the dignity and sensibility of hisstyle, and not less so for his judgment and skill asavocal instructor. He spent his latter years in hisnative city of Naples.Miss Cecilia Davies attained a high rank among174 Mazzini.the Italian singers of that day. She went to thecontinent at an early age, and was the first Englishwomanwho performed principal parts in the greattheatres of Italy, where she was known by the nameof L'Tnglesina. She appeared at the London opera-housein 1773, where she attracted much admirationfor her judicious action and her power of execution,which (Burney says) were at this timeallowed to be unrivalled by those of any othersinger that had been heard in England. Aftersinging a few years in England, she returned to thecontinent. For many years the existence of thisonce celebrated singer was forgotten, her namebeing only mentioned occasionally as belonging tothe annals of a former age, till the public recentlylearned, with surprise, that she had been living formany years in London in a state of indigence andneglect.Mazzini was a native of Rome. After havingacquired distinction in Italy and Germany, he wasengaged, in 1774, as one of the principal singers atthe opera in London. After a short residence inthe metropolis he settled in Bath, where he residedtill his death, in 1810. He enjoyed the highestreputation as a teacher, and many of our bestEnglish singers have been formed by his instructions.Braham, in particular, was his regularpupil, in his own house, for three years, and appearsto have been greatly indebted to his kindnessAGUJARI. 175and liberality. Mazzini may be classed amongthe minor dramatic composers of that period, as heproduced several operas which met with success.Lucretia Agujari was one of the most wonderfulsingers that have appeared. We have no accountof her, however, previous to 1776, when she cameto London, being engaged by the proprietors of thePantheon, at the salary of 100/. a night, for singingonly two songs — a sufficient proof of her continentalcelebrity. "The lower part of her voice,"Burney says, " was full, round, of an excellentquality, and its compass, after she quitted its naturalregister, (which it was to be wished she hadnever done,) beyond any one we had then heard.She had two octaves of fair natural voice, from Aon the fifth line in the bass to A on the sixth linein the treble ; and beyond that, in alt, she had inearly youth more than another octave ; as Sacchinitold me he had heard her go up to B flat in altissimo.Her shake was open and perfect, her intonationtrue, her execution marked and rapid, and herstyle of singing, in the natural compass of hervoice, grand and majestic. Though the patheticand tender were not what her manner or figurepromised, yet she had expressions sometimes thatwere truly touching ; and she would have been ascapable of exciting universal pleasure as admiration,if she had been a little less violent in the deliveryof her passages, and her looks had been more Batt.pere by female softness and timidity." This greatsinger died at Parma in 1783.After the departure of Agujari, the managers ofthe Pantheon engaged Signora George, afterwardsthe celebrated Madame Banti. She was thedaughter of a Venetian gondolier, and in her youthwas a street-singer : but a noble amateur, struckwith the brilliancy of her voice, had her instructedin singing at his expense. She appears to havebeen advised soon after to try her fortune in a foreigncountry ; for she left Venice for Paris, supportingherself on the journey by singing at coffee-housesand inns for small sums collected from the guests.When she got to Paris, she continued for some timeto earn her subsistence in this manner. One eveningin the year 1778, M. de Vismes, the managerof the opera, happening to pass the door of a coffeehouseon the Boulevards, was struck with the soundof a beautiful voice ; and, going in, found a young-italiangirl singing to the company in the coffee-room.He put a louis into her hand, desiring herto call on him the next morning; and the resultwas an engagement for the opera bassa, where hervery first appearance enchanted the audience.Her engagement to sing in London immediatelyfollowed ; and it was conditioned that 100/. a yearshould be deducted from her salary for the paymentof an able vocal instructor. Sacchini was her firstteacher, but he found her so idle and obstinate,BANTI. 177that he gave her up. She was then committed toSignor Piozzi,* whose patience she likewise exhausted.Her last master in England was Abel ;but her incapacity to profit by tuition was amplymade up for by her genius and natural gifts. On herleaving England she sang with enthusiastic applauseat several of the German courts, and almost all theprincipal towns in Italy. She returned to Englandin 1790, and remained for more than ten years,enjoying the highest degree of public favour. Shedied at Bologna in 1806, at the age of about fifty.Lord Mount Edgecumbef speaks rapturously ofBanti, and describes her as the most delightfulsinger he had ever heard. '* She had begun theworld," says this noble and accomplished amateur,"as a cantata di piazza, and as such havingattracted notice by her fine voice, she had beentaken from her humble calling, taught, and broughtout as a singer in concerts, first at Paris and thenin England, as before mentioned, at the Pantheon,under the name of George. But though she hadthe best masters, she was an idle scholar, and neverwould apply to the drudgery of her profession :but in her, genius supplied the place of science ;and the most correct ear, with the most exquisitetaste, enabled her to sing with more effect, moreexpression, and more apparent knowledge of herart, than many much better professors. She neverwas a good musician, nor could sing at sight withCelebrated as the second husband of Mrs. Thrace.f Musical Reminiscences of an Old Amateur.VOL. II. N178 Toi.ease; but having once learnt a song, and madeherself mistress of its character, she threw into allshe stag more pathos and true feeling than any ofher competitors. Her natural powers were of thefinest description ; her voice, sweet and beautifulthroughout, had not a fault in any part of its unusuallyextensive compass. Its lower notes, whichreached below ordinary sopranos, were rich andmellow; the middle full and powerful, and thevery high totally devoid of shrillness : the wholewas di petty, which can alone completely please andsatisfy the ear. In her youth it extended to thehighest pitch, and was capable of such agility thatshe practised and excelled most in the bravurastyle, in which she had no superior : but losing afew of her upper notes, and acquiring a taste forthe cantabile, she gave herself up almost entirelyto the latter, in which she had no equal."Signora Todi, a Portuguese, was born about theyear 1748, and was a pupil of Perez. She came toEngland in 1777; but though at an age when herpowers ought to have been fully matured, she madelittle impression on the public. Afterwards, however,she acquired a very high reputation in France,Germany, and Italy, and is ranked among the mostcelebrated singers of the eighteenth century. Aftera brilliant career she returned to her native country,where she died in 1793.*At one period Todi and Mara were rival singers at Pah is,and their comparative merits gave rise to much controversy. APACCHIEROTTI. 179Pacchierotti, the greatest singer of the lastcentury, excepting, perhaps, Farinelli, was bornin the Roman territory about the year 1750, andbegan his musical career, in 1770, at Palermo. Hecame to England in 1778, the public expectationsrespecting him having been previously highly excitedby the account of him which had been givenby Bygone in his Tour through Sicily and Malta.These expectations were not disappointed ; but,though his reception was most favourable, he remainedat this time only one season in England.He returned in 1780, and continued principal singerat the opera till 1784, when he left this country,after having performed at the commemoration ofHandel. He spent the latter years of his life inretirement at Padua.Pacchierotti's voice," says Lord Mount Edge-combe," was an extensive soprano, full and sweetin the highest degree : his powers of execution weregreat, but he had far too good taste and good senseto make a display of them where it would have beenmisapplied, confining it to one bravura song (ariad'agilita) in each opera, conscious that the chiefdelight of singing and his own supreme excellencelay in touching expression and exquisite pathos.Yet he was so thorough a musician that nothingcame amiss to him ; every style was to him equallyeasy, and he could sing, at first sight, all songs ofgentleman asked another whether he preferred Mara or Todi.Ah, Monsieur" was the reply, " c'est benton dit"N 2180 PACCHIEROTTI.the most opposite characters, not merely with thefacility and correctness which a complete knowledgeof music must give, but entering at once into theviews of the composer, and giving them all thespirit and expression he had designed. Such washis genius in his embellishments and cadences, thattheir variety was inexhaustible. He could not singa song twice in exactly the same way ; yet neverdid he introduce an ornament that was not judiciousand appropriate to the composition. His shake(then considered as an indispensable requisite,without which no one could be esteemed a perfectsinger) was the very best that could be heard inevery form in which that grace could be executed :whether taken from above or below, between wholeor semitones, fast or slow, it was always open, equal,and distinct, giving the greatest brilliancy to hiscadences, and often introduced into his passageswith the happiest effect. As an actor, with manydisadvantages of person, for he was tall and awkwardin his figure, and his features were plain, hewas nevertheless forcible and impressive ; for hefelt warmly, had excellent judgment, and was anenthusiast in his profession. His recitative wasinimitably fine, so that even those who did not understandthe language could not fail to comprehend,from his countenance, voice, and action, every sentimenthe expressed. As a concert singer, and particularlyin private society, he shone almost morethan on the stage ; for he sang with greater spiritPACCHIEROTTI. 181in a small circle of friends, and was more gratifiedwith their applause than in a public concert-roomor crowded theatre. I was in the habit of so hearinghim most frequently, and having been intimatelyacquainted with him for many years, am enabledto speak thus minutely of his performance. Onsuch occasions he would give way to his fancy, andseem almost inspired ; and I have often seen hisauditors, even those the least musical, moved totears while he was singing. Possessing a verylarge collection of music, he could give an infinitevariety of songs by every master of reputation. Ihave more than once heard him sing a cantata ofHaydn's, called Arian a Naxos, composed for asingle voice, with only a piano-forte accompaniment,and that was played by Haydn himself: it is needlessto say that the performance was perfect.* Tothis detail of his merits and peculiar qualities as asinger, I must add that he was a worthy, good man,modest and diffident even to a fault ; for it was toan excess that at times checked his exertions, andmade him dissatisfied with himself when he hadgiven the greatest delight to his hearers. He waspresuming in his manners, grateful and attachedto all his numerous friends and patrons."If we may judge from this cantata — so beautiful, impassioned,and dramatic — the world has suffered a heavy loss from the conflagrationin Prince Esterhazy's palace at Eisenstadt, which destroyedalmost all the manuscript scores of Haydn's Italianoperas.182 Marches.Many circumstances have been related, indicativeof this great singer's power of moving the feelingsof his hearers, which Lord Mount Edgecumbementions as his distinguishing excellence. Thefollowing anecdote, in particular, has been given bythe best-informed musical writers. When MetastasesArtaserse was represented at Rome with themusic of Barton, Pacchierotti performed the partof Graces. In the scene in which the prince uttersthe pathetic exclamation, " Eppur sono innocente !"the composer had placed after these words a shortinstrumental symphony. Pacchierotti uttered thephrase, but no symphony followed. Surprised, heturned hastily to the leader of the orchestra, saying,"What are you about?" The leader, as ifawakened from a trance, sobbed out with greatsimplicity, " We are crying." Not one of theband had thought of the symphony, but they wereall sitting, with eyes full of tears, gazing on theactor.Contemporary with Pacchierotti were Rubinelliand Marchesii, who have been described by LordMount Edgecumbe with his usual discrimination.Rubinelli possessed a contralto voice of finequality, but limited compass. It was full, round,firm and steady in slow movements, but had littleagility, nor did he attempt to do more than he couldexecute perfectly. His style was the true cantabile,in which few could excel him : his taste was admirable,and his science great ; his figure tall and com-Marches. 183mending, his manner and action solemn and dignified.In short, he must be reckoned, if not thefirst, yet of the first class of fine singers.Marchesii's fame had long reached this country,and he had been extolled to such a degree that impatienceand expectation were raised to the highestpitch. On the first night of his appearance thetheatre was not only crowded to the utmost in everypart, but on the rising of the curtain the stage wasso full of spectators that it was some time beforeorder and silence could be obtained, and with somedifficulty that Marchesii, who was to open the opera,could make his way before the audience. Marchesiiwas at this time a very well-looking young man,of good figure and graceful deportment. His actingwas spirited and expressive ; his vocal powers werevery great; his voice of extensive compass, but alittle inclined to be thick. His execution was veryconsiderable, and he was rather too fond of displayingit ; nor was his cantabile singing equal to hisbravura. In recitative, and scenes of energy andpassion, he was incomparable ; and had he been lesslavish of ornaments, which were not always appropriate,and possessed a more pure and simple taste,his performance would have been faultless ; it wasalways striking, animated, and effective. He chosefor his debut Sarti's beautiful opera of Giulio Sabino,in which all the songs of the principal characterand they are many and various) are of the finestdescription. But I was a little disappointed at184 Marches.Marchesii's execution of them, for they were allfamiliar to me, as I had repeatedly heard Pacchie-rotti sing them in private, and I missed his tenderexpression, particularly in the last pathetic scene,and lamented that their simplicity should be injured,as it was, by an over-flowery style. The comparisonmade me like Marchesii less than I had done atMantua, or than I did in other subsequent operashere."Lord Mount Edgecumbe classes together Pacchie-rotti, Rubinelli, and Marchesii, as " the three finestsoprani that Italy ever produced," — somewhat toostrong language, when Farinelli, Senesino, Gizziello,and Cafarelli are remembered, — and thus comparesthem with each other: " I should say that Rubi-nelli was the most simple, Marchesii the most brilliant,Pacchierotti the most touching singer. Thestyle of the first was chaste and dignified ; that ofthe second florid and spirited ; while the third, combiningall styles, and joining to exuberance of fancythe purest taste and correct judgment, united everyexcellence, and could by his variety please all descriptionsof hearers, and give unqualified delight toevery true lover of really good music." — Burneyhad previously thus compared them with each otheras actors : " Pacchierotti seemed in earnest on thestage, and consequently interested the spectator.Rubinelli had great dignity in his deportment,though he discovered but little sensibility by hisgestures or tone of voice. Marchesii, with an ele-Mot•MARA — Wellington. 185gant figure and pleasing countenance, is at oncegraceful and intelligent in his demeanour andaction."Two great Italian singers who flourished aboutthe end of the last century were not natives ofItaly. These were Madame Mara and Mrs. Wellington.These ladies also demand notice as connectedwith the dramatic music of their respectivecountries. Madame Mara did not visit Italy tillshe was forty years old, having previously attainedthe highest reputation in Germany, France, andEngland. In 1788 she first sang, at Turin, beforean Italian audience, and, in spite of the rivalry andjealousy of the native singers, and the nationalprejudice against a tramontane performer, her receptionwas enthusiastic. Equally favourable washersubsequent reception at Venice ; but notwithstandingher success, she proceeded no further intoItaly, and in 1790 returned to England, where shehad already resided for several years.Mrs. Billington, after a brilliant career as anEnglish actress and singer, took it into her head,at the age of three-and-twenty, to retire from publiclife. Being persuaded to make a continental tour,with a view solely to amusement, she went to Italy,travelling privately. At Naples, however, she waspersuaded by Sir William Hamilton to sing beforethe king and queen, who were so charmed that theyrequested and persuaded her to appear in public atthe great theatre of San Carlo. She consented,186 Wellington,and appeared in Nez di Castro, an opera writtenexpressly for her by Bianchi, a composer of considerableability. Her success was complete ; and,during a residence of above seven years in Italy,she was everywhere received with rapturous delight.After her return to England, she was at once thegreatest Italian prima donna and the greatestEnglish singer of her time.CHAPTER VIII.The musical drama in Germany — The Italian opera establishedindifferent German states — At Vienna — Gluck — At DresdenAt Berlin — Frederick II. — Hasse, Graun, and Agricola —Madame Mara — John Christian Bach — Naumann — Missis— Haydn.In a preceding chapter some account has been givenof the musical drama in Germany to the beginningof the last century. About that period the Italianopera was introduced into the principal Germancities, and, for a long time, completely arrested thegrowth of the infant national opera. At all theGerman musical theatres the works of Italian musicianswere performed by Italian singers : the nativedramatic composers employed themselves in settingthe dramas of Italian poets ; and the native singersstudied in the Italian school. Such was the situationof the musical drama in Germany for thegreater part of the last century. But it was probablyowing to this almost exclusive cultivation ofthe Italian style by the greatest German composers,who blended its grace and beauty with the strongand massive features which have always charactersOPERA IN GERMANY.rise their owu national music, that the Germanopera, when once more established, has risen sorapidly to its present high and palmy state.The musical drama may be said to have had aseparate history in each of the various independentstates of which Germany consists. When theItalian opera had been established at Vienna, Dresden,and Berlin, it afterwards, through the exampleof these principal places, gained a footing at Munich,Manheim, Stutgard, Sec, and thus came to prevailall over Germany.It has already been mentioned that the Italianopera was established at Vienna by the emperorLeopold, who was a patron of the arts. It was munificentlysupported by his successor Charles VI.,an ardent lover of music, who employed the principalItalian composers of the time, and engaged inhis service the poets Apostolo Zeno and Metastasio.Several of Metastasio's operas were composed bythe celebrated Antonio Clara, who had beenbrought to Vienna by the emperor Leopold, andwas the imperial maestro di capella when the poetarrived there. Clara died at Vienna in 1763, atthe age of ninety, after having been a dramaticcomposer in the imperial service for fifty years.His numerous operas are forgotten ; but his ecclesiasticalmusic continues to be held in the highestestimation for the sublimity of its character. Fux,whose name is now known only by his famous treatiseon composition called Gracilis ad Parnassian.GLUCK. 189was also, at that time, one of the composers of theemperor's court, and wrote the music of one or twoof Metastasio's pieces : but it was only the poet'searliest productions, as imperial laureate, that werecomposed in what must have been even then an antiquatedstyle, by these veteran musicians. Fromthat time all the great composers, who successivelyappeared in Italy during the eighteenth century,vied with each other in setting his operas.The illustrious Gluck may be considered as thefounder of the existing school of German dramaticmusic ; and yet it does not appear that he evercomposed an opera in the German language. Hismusical education, too, was in a great measureItalian, and it was in Italy that he reaped hisearliest laurels : yet he did not, like Hasse, becomean Italian musician, but impressed upon all hisworks, which were produced in the maturity of hispowers, the national characteristics of his country,as well as the features of his own most originalgenius.Christopher Gluck was a native of the UpperPalatinate, on the borders of Bohemia. The dateof his birth is differently stated, but appears tohave been in 1714 or 1715. His father was in poorcircumstances : he had settled in Bohemia, wherehe died, leaving his son in his infancy, and quiteunprovided for. He picked up in his childhoodthat knowledge of music which is acquired by everybodyin Bohemia ; and contrived, at an early age,190 GLUCK.to find his way to Vienna, supporting himself by hismusical abilities. He picked up a little money,which he laudably employed upon his education ;and had the good fortune to find a patron in anAustrian nobleman, who, observing that he possesseduncommon talents, took him into his service, carriedhim into Italy, and obtained for him the instructionsof the celebrated Martini of Milan.After four years' study under this master, Gluckcomposed his first opera, Artaserse, which was performedat Milan in 1741. It was successful, andprocured for him engagements to compose for thetheatres of Venice, Turin, and Cremona. Hisworks gained him so much reputation, that he wasinvited to London, to compose for the king's theatre,then under the direction of Lord Middlesex. Buthe made his visit to England at an unfortunatetime. It was in 1745 : the rebellion had brokenout, and foreigners were regarded with suspicion.The opera-house was shut by order of the lordchamberlain ; and it was with great difficulty thatLord Middlesex obtained permission to open itagain with a sort of Piece de circonstance, of a politicalnature, called La Caduta de Gigantic, writtenin compliment to the Duke of Cumberland, (theJupiter who had quelled the rebellious giants,) themusic of which Gluck was employed to compose.Gluck," says Burney, who had the account fromthe composer himself, " worked upon it with fearand trembling, not only on account of the fewGLUCK. 1.91friends he bad in England, but from an apprehensionof riot and popular fury, at the opening of a theatrein which none but papists and foreigners were employed."The opera was performed on 7th January1746, before the conquering duke, in honour ofwhom it w r as produced ; but its success was by nomeans flattering. The dances, in which the charmingViolent (afterwards Mrs. Garrick) appeared,were much more applauded than the music ; andthe piece had only five representations.He afterwards brought out another opera, calledArmament, which, as a whole, had little success, butcontained an air, " Rasserena il mesto ciglio,"which for many years was in the greatest vogue inEngland. It is an exceedingly graceful little rondo,and is still well known to our amateurs of the oldschool. Besides these pieces, he produced a ,called Piano e Thisbe, made up of airsselected from his various operas. His music, however,made little impression ; and his stay in Englandwas very short. He acknowledged, however,that his visit had been advantageous to him, as hisobservations on the taste of the English nation hadan effect in leading him to that simple, natural, anddramatic style which he soon afterwards adopted.For some time after his return to Germany ^Gluck appears to have composed little. He waschiefly occupied in the improvement of his mind,and the cultivation of his taste, in poetry as well asin music ; and seems to have been gradually formeGLUCK.ing those principles with respect to the union ofmusic and poetry, the development of which, inhis subsequent works, forms an era in the art.These principles, however, were slowly matured ;for we find that he was not able to reduce themimmediately to practice when he resumed hislabours for the Italian stage. In 1754 he wasinvited to return to Italy. He produced at Rome,La Clemenza di Tito, Antigone, and Celia ; andat Parma, Baucis e Fillmore, and Arise. All thesepieces were successful ; — more so, in his ownopinion, than they deserved, because they werewritten too much in the prevailing Italian taste, andin a style at variance with the opinions which hehimself now entertained on the subject of dramaticcomposition.It is curious to observe the opinions respectingGluck which were expressed by Metastasio aboutthis time.* '■ Gluck," wrote the poet to one of hiscorrespondents in 1751, " has surprising fire, buthe is mad. He composed an opera for Venice,which was very unfortunate. He has composedothers here with various success. I am not a manto pretend to judge of him." — Again, in 1756 :"I am very curious to know what reception themusic of our Gluck will meet with at Rome. Hecomposes with peculiar spirit; and, according to thepresent taste, which is said to reign in that city, Ishould imagine that he would give satisfaction." —See Burney's Memoirs of Metastasio.GLUCK. 193In the same year, in a letter to Farinelli, Metastasiosays ; " The opera which will be represented tonightin the public theatre will certainly meet withapplause. What is there that would not please onsuch a day ?* The drama is my Rh Pasture, set byGluck, a Bohemian composer, whose spirit, noise,and extravagance have supplied the place of merit,in many theatres of Europe, among those w T hom Ipity, and who do not form the minority of thefolks of this world. Thank God, we have no wantof such auditors here."This splenetic language comes strangely from theliberal and good-natured Metastasio. But Gluckwas by this time known as a schismatic, whoseheterodoxy threatened the supremacy of the Italiandramatic poetry and music.Considered as a musician, Gluck's opinions weredisinterested : for he held, that, in the lyricaldrama, music had obtained an undue ascendencyover her sister art. The poets, he maintained,attached too much importance to the mere gratificationof the ear, to which they sacrificed the truth,simplicity, and force of dramatic action. EvenMetastasio himself he looked upon as having falleninto this error : and therefore, when he was aboutto bring his system to the test of experiment, hehad recourse to a poet whose views were similar toA. fete on the occasion of the safe accouchement of theEmpress.VOL. II. O194 GLUCK.his own. This was Calzabigi, a man of genius andjudgment, who had himself formed similar opinions,and was gratified to find them shared by a greatmusician.The opera of Orfeo, written by Calzabigi, andset by Gluck, was the first result of their alliance.It was followed by Alceste, and Pride ed Eleiia,composed upon the same principles. What theseprinciples were, is very clearly explained in theDedication of Alceste to the Grand Duke of Tuscany,an able and valuable paper."When J undertook," says the composer, "toset to music the opera of Alceste, I proposed to myselfto avoid the abuses which, the mistaken vanityof singers and the excessive complaisance of composershad introduced, and which, from the mostsplendid and beautiful of all public exhibitions, hadreduced the opera to the most tiresome and ridiculous.I wished to confine music to its true province,that of seconding poetry by strengthening the expressionof the sentiments and the interest of thesituations, without interrupting the action, andweakening it by superfluous ornament. I thoughtthat music ought to give that aid to poetry, whichthe liveliness of colouring and the happy combinationof light and shade afford to a correct and well-designedpicture, animating the figures withoutinjuring their contour. I have therefore carefullyavoided interrupting a singer in the warmth of dia-cluck.195hogue, in order to wait for a tedious ritornel, orstopping him in the midst of a speech in order todisplay the agility of his voice in a long passage.I have not thought it right to pass rapidly overthe second part of the air when it is the most im-passionateand important portion of it in orderregularly to repeat the words four times, or to finishwhere the sense is not complete, in order to givethe singer the opportunity of showing that he canvary a passage in several ways according to his ownfancy.In short, I have endeavoured to reform thoseabuses against which good sense and good tastehave long exclaimed in vain.I have considered that the overture shouldmake the audience aware of the character and subjectof the piece ; — that the instrumental accompanimentshould be regulated by the interest of thedrama, and ought not to leave a void in the dialoguebetween the recitative and air; that it shouldnot break into the sense and connexion of a period,nor interrupt the warmth and energy of the action.It was also my opinion, that the chief care ofa dramatic composer should be to aim at simplicity.I have accordingly avoided making a paradeof difficulties, at the expense of a perspicuity;and I have attached no value to the discovery ofnovelty, unless it arose naturally from the situationof the character and the expression of the poetry :nor is there any rule of composition which I haveo 2J 96 GLUCK.not been willing to sacrifice to the production ofgood effect."These are my principles. Fortunately thepoem has wonderfully favoured my views. Thecelebrated author, having conceived his own planof the lyric drama, in place of flowery descriptions,useless compositions, cold and sententious morality,has substituted strong passions, interesting situations,the language of the heart, and variety ofaction. The success of the piece has justified myideas ; and the universal approbation of so enlighteneda city has proved to me that simplicity andtruth are the greatest principles of the beautiful inthe productions of the fine arts."Orfeo, the first illustration of the opinions entertainedby Gluck and Calzabigi, was performed atVienna in 1764. The first representation wasattended with doubtful success. The audience,accustomed to the form of the recitative, and thelong and florid airs of the Italian opera, werehardly prepared for so novel a style of composition.On every successive representation, however, it wasfound to be more and more interesting and attractive,till at last it received the unanimous applauseof the public.In the following year Gluck was called to Parma,on the occasion of a court-festival. He proposed tobring out Orfeo, but met with great opposition fromthe court and the performers. The Italian diets197tante were not influenced by the judgment of theViennese, and were predisposed against a piecewhich was said to differ so much from their modelsof dramatic and musical excellence. Millico declinedto perform the part of Orpheus, apprehensivethat it would destroy his reputation. Gluck,however, was firm, and succeeded in having thepiece performed. He knew that the Italiansjudged from feeling, and not from systems of criticism,and trusted to the effect of his music on asensitive and enthusiastic people. He was not disappointed.Every prejudice was swept away bythe very first representation, which was receivedwith acclamations. It was performed twenty-eighttimes in uninterrupted succession, and the Armadaof Traetta, who had been engaged at the same timewith Gluck, notwithstanding this composer's highand deserved reputation, was not brought forwardat all. Orfeo was immediately performed, withthe most brilliant success, at all the principal theatresin Italy — at Naples, Rome, Venice, Milan, andBologna. This last city, it is said, was enriched,during a single season, by the receipt of above ahundred thousand sequins, (fifty thousand poundssterling,) in consequence of the influx of strangersattracted by the fame of Orfeo.None of Gluck's works are more characteristic ofhis genius, or exemplify more remarkably the peculiaritiesof his style, than this opera of Orfeo. Asadramatic poem, too, it exhibits the talents ofCalzabigi in a very favourable light. Its structure198 GLUCK.is simple in the extreme, and the characters very few ;but the incidents and situations are admirably calculatedfor effect and musical expression.After a short and rather flimsy overture, the firstscene discovers Orpheus inconsolable for the loss ofEurydice, and surrounded by a company of tressilianshepherds and shepherdesses who sympathisewith the bereaved husband in his grief, and join inhis lamentations. This forms a beautiful anddeeply pathetic chorus, interrupted with thebroken exclamations of Orpheus. When theyhave strewed her tomb with flowers, he prays themto leave him in solitude ; and when the last strainsof the departing chorus have died away, he givesvent to his sorrow in a soliloquy, in which a simpleand melancholy air is followed by an impassionedburst of recitative, exquisitely blended with thewailing notes of the oboes. The god of love appearsto him, and announces that he has come tothe aid of so faithful a votary, and that, as a rewardfor his truth and constancy, he shall be permittedto descend to the shades, and endeavour so to softenthe hearts of the infernal deities by means of his lyre,that they may restore to him his Eurydice; addingthe condition, that he is on no account to look uponher. The smooth and flowing accents in which thegod conveys his behests are finely contrasted with theexclamations of surprise, gladness, and terror withwhich Orpheus receives the communication. Thedeity vanishes, and the lover, in a long scena, ex-cluck.199presses his joyful hope and confidence of success.The air contains passages of great compass, andbrilliant divisions, which, however, far from beingof that unmeaning kind which merely displays theexecution of the singer, seem to be full of a rapturewhich articulate language is unable to express.This highly-wrought and splendid air closes thefirst act.*In the second act the scene is transported to thebanks of the Styx. A brief strain of wild andterrible harmony, from brazen instruments, comessuddenly upon the ear ; and a company of fiendsburst into an appalling chorus, demanding who isthe audacious mortal who has dared to approachtheir domains. These dismal sounds, uttered inunison, are mingled with the harsh chords of thebrass instruments, and fierce dances of infernalspirits. Orpheus appears with his lyre, the preludingnotes of which are imitated by the arpeggiosof a harp in the orchestra. He addresses thespectres in suppliant accents, and beseeches themto suffer themselves to be moved by his tears, butreceives for answer only a terrific monosyllable,This air is not in the original Italian score, but was addedwhen the opera was adapted to the French stage. The act atfirst terminated with a recitative by Orpheus ; but this appearingcold and meagre, Gluck was persuaded to add the air, inorder to give brilliancy to the conclusion. Even this would notbe satisfactory now-a-days, when a full chorus is consideredan indispensable termination to an act.GLUCK.No !" His strains become more and more touchingand impassioned ; and their effect in softeninghis dreadful auditory is apparent in the altered expressionof the chorus which fills up the intervalsbetween the stanzas he sings. They are at lengthsubdued by his melody, and he is allowed to passforward, amid the fantastic dances of the infernalcrew.The scene changes to the groves of Elysium,where Eurydice is discovered surrounded by groupsof happy spirits. She sings a beautiful graziosoair, mingled with the sweet choral strains of hercompanions, expressive of the peace and tranquillityof these blissful abodes. A soft instrumental symphony,mingled with passages imitative of the songsof birds, and the murmuring of the breezes of paradise,precedes the entrance of Orpheus, andaccompanies his song. He appears delighted andwondering at the objects which surround him. Heis welcomed by a company of blessed spirits, whomhe implores to bring him to his beloved ; and theyannounce that she is about to be restored to him.Though she returns to earth," they say, " she willstill find Elysium inthe arms of so tender a husband."With this chorus, full of the sweetest and mostgrateful harmony, the second act closes.The third act opens with the meeting of the reunitedpair. Their rapturous emotions are expressedin broken and hurried phrases of recitative. Orpheuscalls upon Eurydice to follow him, that theyGLUCK. '201may return to the realms of day. She prepareswith transport to comply, but observes with surprisehis averted looks. Unable to obtain an explanation,and struck to the heart by the coldness of one whohad loved her so well, she abandons herself to grief.Her husband cannot resist her tears, her complaints,and remonstrances ; he turns his eyes upon her,and, with a cry of agony, she vanishes. This is thegreat scene of the opera ; and, in dramatic powerand passionate expression, beautiful melody andfine instrumental effects, it has never been surpassed,if, indeed, it has ever been equalled. Orpheus,thus bereaved, gives way to his despair in a wild,tumultuous recitative, and then sinks into the profoundgrief which breathes in the air, " Che farosenza Eurydice." He resolves, by a voluntarydeath, to reunite himself to her for ever, and isabout to execute his purpose, when his hand is arrestedby the God of Love, who tells him that lovehas triumphed, and that his spouse is restored tohim. Eurydice appears, and the lovers rush intoeach others arms. In the last scene, Orpheus andEurydice, accompanied by Love, are surrounded bytheir old companions, who celebrate their happinessby joyous choral songs. A trio of exquisite beautyis sung by Eurydice, Orpheus, and Love ; and thepiece is terminated by a ballet, the last movementof which is danced to a most elegant and gracefulchaccmne.We have given this slight outline of Orfeo, as202 GLUCK.we believe, with some eminent continental critics,that it is the best and purest of Gluck's works, andmost strikingly characteristic of his genius. Insevere and classical simplicity of construction andstyle it appears to be unrivalled. It contains onlythree characters, besides the persons who make thechoruses; though it is easy to see, by the precedingaccount of the share which the choruses have in theaction of the drama, that they require very differentperformers from the singing machines we see rangedon each side of the stage in our opera-house. Thepart of Orfeo was originally composed for the celebratedGuadagni, who exalted his reputation by hisperformance of it in Germany and England as wellas in Italy. It demands histrionic as well as vocalpowers of the highest order. The part of Eurydice,in a musical point of view, is less prominent, thoughit requires a very great actress and singer to dojustice to the scene in the third act. The characterotLove is a little part, for which grace and eleganceonly are requisite.In order to appreciate the style of Gluck, it isnecessary to compare it with that of his predecessorsand contemporaries, and then its striking originality,boldness, and disregard of all existing models, areat once perceived. Jf many of his phrases of melody,and harmonic combinations, are familiar to ourears, it is because they have been so often and sofreely borrowed by his successors. The music ofGluck brings Mozart continually into our mind,GLUCK. 203because Mozart is better known to us than Gluck,whose ideas seem to be the property of his successor,and to have been borrowed by the older composerfrom the more modern. In thus reminding us ofMozart, too, Gluck's music suffers a disadvantage :for Mozart did not merely adopt his style, butpolished and heightened it. The melody of Mozartis not more natural, more expressive, more delicatelyadapted to every shade of feeling and passion,than that of Gluck ; but it is smoother, rounder,more rhythmical — better calculated, in short, forthe gratification of the ear. Not that the music ofGluck is wanting in that indispensable requisite,which, on the contrary, it possesses in an eminentdegree. But Gluck, and every other dramaticcomposer, must yield to Mozart in the power ofcombining this quality with the higher attributes oftruth, nature, and variety of expression. One oldcomposer is frequently brought to mind by the musicof Gluck ; one, too — so much is the fame of thegreatest English musicians confined within our ownshores — whose name he probably never heard of —our own Purcell. Their resemblance is often veryremarkable, both in their choral harmonies, and intheir short and simple airs. Take, for example,the scene already mentioned, the choruses of the infernalspirits, and the soul-subduing strains addressedto them by Orpheus ; imagine these associatedwith English poetry, and we have the verymusic of Purcell. Nor is it wonderful that this re-'204 GLUCK.semblance should exist. If Purcell composed withoutmodels, Gluck threw them away, No othercomposers were so independent of precedent, solittle indebted to conventional forms. They bothstudied in the book of nature : and it is not surprisingthat, in both, similar cultivation should haveproduced similar fruits.Orfeo was first performed in England in 1770,when the principal character was sustained by Guamits original representative. He produced agreat impression by his action, and especially bythe impassioned and exquisite manner in which hesang the air, " Che faro senza Eurydice ;" but theopera was injured by the very common practice inthis country of improving it by changes and interpolations." The unity, simplicity, and dramaticexcellence of this opera," says Burney, " whichhad gained the composer so much credit on thecontinent, were greatly diminished hereby the heterogeneousmixture of music of other composersin a quite different style ; whose long symphonies,long divisions, and repetitions of w T words, occasioneddelay and languor in the incidents and action. Adrama, which at Venice was rendered so interestingas almost to make the audience think more of thepoet than the musician, in England had the fate ofall other Italian dramas, which are pronouncedgood or bad in proportion to the talents and favourof the singers." When it was performed at Naplesin 1773, an attempt was made to substitute, in theGLUCK. 205third act, a duet by another composer for the original; but the audience would not listen to it, andloudly demanded the music of Gluck.When this opera was afterwards translated intoFrench and adapted to the Parisian stage, it wasreceived with enthusiasm. Rousseau declares thathe was so transported with it, that he did not missasingle representation; "for," he said, " if somuch exalted pleasure can be enjoyed in the spaceof two hours, it is sufficient to convince us that lifeis really good for something." Rousseau's suffragewas the stronger from his being a decided partisanof the Italian school.The brilliant success of Orfeo induced the poetand musician to produce Alceste. Its success wasequal to that of Orfeo. Gluck accompanied itspublication with the exposition, which has beenalready quoted, of the principles, now brought tothe test of experience, upon which both these pieceshad been composed. Alceste was brought out in1768 ; and for two years no other opera was performedat the court theatre of Vienna. Its publicationtook place in 1769.The third opera, jointly produced by Calzabigiand Gluck, was Pa?~ide ed Elena, which was not sosuccessful as the previous pieces had been. It waspublished, with an epistle dedicatory to the Dukeof Parma, in which Gluck complains of his principlesnot having been adopted by other composers,and defends them against the objections of critics.■200 GLUCK,I determined," he says, " to publish the musicof Alceste, simply in the hope that it might findimitators. I ventured to flatter myself that, in followingthe path I have opened, composers wouldhave endeavoured to put an end to the abuses introducedinto the Italian theatre, and by which it isdishonoured. But I grieve to confess that hithertomy endeavours have been vain. The half-learned,the pretenders to taste, unhappily too numerous aclass, and in all ages a thousand times more injuriousto the progress of the fine arts than those whoare entirely ignorant, have combined against a methodwhich, in establishing itself, destroyed theirpretensions.It was thought that judgment might be pronouncedupon Alceste after irregular, ill-directed,and worse-executed rehearsals. The effect whichthis opera would produce in a theatre was calculatedin an apartment, with the same sagacity with whichsome Grecian critics pretended to judge, at the distanceof a few feet, of the effect of statues to beplaced on lofty columns. One of these nice amateurs,who has transferred his whole soul to his ears,will find an air too hard, a passage too much marked,or not sufficiently prepared, without dreaming thatin that particular situation this air and passage arethe height of expression, and produce the happiestcontrast. A pedantic harmonist will remark an ingeniousnegligence or a deficiency in strictness, andwill hasten to denounce them as unpardonable viol207nations of the mysteries of harmony ; and forthwitha crowd of voices will join in condemning the musicas rude, barbarous, and extravagant.The other arts, indeed, are hardly more fortunate,and your highness may easily divine thereason. The more we are determined to search forperfection and truth, the more necessity there is forprecision and exactness. The traits which distinguisha Raphael from the crowd of painters arebut slightly perceptible ; slight alterations in thecontour of a head would not destroy the resemblance,but they would disfigure its beauty. I wishfor no other proof of this than my own air in Orfeo,Che faro senza Eurydice ;" make the least changein it, either in the time or the turn of expression,and it will become an air for a puppet-show.* Inawork of this kind, a note more or less sustained,increasing the tone or neglecting the time, an out of place, a shake, a passage, a roulade,may mar the effect of a whole scene."Notwithstanding Gluck's triumphant success, theacquiescence in his principles, and the applause ofhis practice, were far from being unanimous ; andthat he felt this strongly is apparent from the tenorof the above passage. When Dr. Burney visitedVienna in 1772, he found party running highamong the poets and musicians of that capital, andWe would recommend this remark to the fair vocalists whosins? this beautiful air.208 GLUCK.their adherents; Metastasio and Hasse being at thehead of one of the principal sects, and Calzabigiand Gluck leading the other. " The first," saysBurney, " regarding all innovations as quackery,adhere to the ancient form of the musical drama,in which the poet and musician claim equal attentionfrom the audience ; the bard in the recitativesand narrative parts, and the composer in the airs,duos, and choruses. The second party depend moreon theatrical effects, propriety of character, simplicityof diction and of musical execution, than onwhat they style flowery descriptions, superfluoussimiles, sententious and cold morality, on one side,with tiresome symphonies and long divisions onthe other."Burney gives an account of a visit he paid toGluck at this time, through the introduction of amusical lady of rank, the Countess Thun. Thecomposer, then about sixty, was by no means ofeasy access. " The Countess," Burney says, " hadbeen so kind as to write a note to Gluck on myaccount, and he had returned, for him, a very civilanswer ; for he is as formidable a character asHandel used to be; a very dragon, of whom all arein fear. However, he had agreed to be visited inthe afternoon ; and Lord Torment and CountessThun had extended their condescension so far as topromise to carry me to him. At five o'clock LordTorment's coach carried us to the house of theChevalier Gluck, in the Faubourg St. Mark.GLUCK. 209He is very well housed there; has a pretty garden,and a great number of neat and elegantly furnishedrooms. He has no children. Madame Gluck,and his niece, who lives with him, came to receiveus at the door, as well as the veteran composerhimself. He is much pitted with the small-pox,and very coarse in figure and look, but was soongot into good humour ; and he talked, sang, andplayed, Madame Thun observed, more than sheever knew him do at any one time."He began, upon a very bad harpsichord, byaccompanying his niece, who is but thirteen yearsold, in two of the capital scenes of his own famousopera of Alceste. She has a powerful and well-tonedvoice, and sang with infinite taste, feeling,expression, and even execution. After these twoscenes from Alceste, she sang several others bydifferent composers, and in different styles, particularlyby Traetta.When she had done, her uncle was prevailedupon to sing himself; and, with as little voice aspossible, he continued to entertain and even delightthe company in a very high degree ; for, withthe richness of accompaniment, the energy andvehemence of his manner in the allegros, and hisjudicious expression in the slow movements, he sowell compensated for the want of voice, that it wasa defect which was soon entirely forgotten. Hewas so good as to perform almost his whole operaVOL. II. p210 CLUCKof Alceste; many admirable things in a still lateropera of his, called Pride eel Elena, and in aFrench opera, from Racine's Iphigenie, which hehas just composed. This last, though he had notas yet committed a note of it to paper, was so welldigested in his head, and his retention is so wonderful,that he sang it nearly from the beginningto the end, with as much readiness as if he had hada fair score before him."Though Gluck was now a "veteran composer,"yet he was only about to enter upon the most brilliantand memorable period of his life. The operaof Iphigenie, which he had just composed, waswritten for the French stage. He had conceivedthe opinion, that, whatever might be thevocal superiority of the Italian performers, hemight find in the French theatre better actors andgreater attention to dramatic propriety and effectthan on the Italian stage. In this opinion he wassupported by M. du Rollet, a French litterateur,then attached to the French embassy at Vienna.In concert with this gentleman, he got the Iphigeniaof Racine transformed into an opera ; andhaving composed the music, received, through themeans of M. du Rollet, an invitation to Paris, inorder that it might be performed there. Hearrived in Paris in 1774. From that period hisworks cease to belong to Germany, as it was to theFrench theatre that he devoted his talents duringGLUCK. 211the latter years of his life ; and these years form amost important period in the history of the Frenchmusical drama.After a stormy residence of five years in France,Gluck, in 1779, returned to Vienna, where hespent the last years of his life in tranquil enjoymentof an ample fortune. He died of apoplexyin 1787, at the age of seventy-three.During the greatest part of the last century,though the Italian opera had established itself inmostof the cities of Germany, the national Germanopera had scarcely as yet sprung into existence.Not only was this the case at Vienna, but in everyother part of that great country. In all the musicaltheatres nothing was heard but Italian operas,composed, for the most part, by Italian musicians,and performed by Italian singers. Dr. Burney,during the whole of his tour, undertaken in 1772,for the purpose of inquiring into the state of musicin Germany, does not appear to have heard asingle German opera. When he was at Manheim,Gretry's French opera of Zemire et Azov was performedin a German translation, and by Germansingers, of whom he speaks favourably. " Thegirl," he says, "who played the part of Zemirehad not a great voice, but her manner of singing-wasnatural and pleasing. She had a good shake,and never forced her voice, or sang out of tune ;there were two of the men who had reasonablegood voices, and whose portamento and expressionp 2"212 OPERA AT DRESDEN.would not have offended such as had been long-conversantwith the best singing of Italy." — " Uponthe whole," he adds, " I was more pleased withthis singing than with any which I had heardsince my arrival on the continent. Indeed theGermans are now so forward in music, and have somany excellent composers of their own country,that it is a matter of astonishment to me that theydo not get original dramas for music written intheir own language, and set by the natives : or, ifthey must have translations, that they do not getthose translations new set." He says, indeed, thatMr. Hiller, of Leipsic, had furnished his countrymenwith a number of comic operas : but this composeris mentioned as a singular, and indeed solitaryinstance of a German musician occupyinghimself with the national opera of his owncountry.Beside Vienna, the principal seats of the Italianopera in Germany were Dresden, Munich,and Berlin. In 1719 the Italian company atDresden was so distinguished, that Handel wentthither to engage singers for the Italian opera ofLondon. In 1754, the orchestra of the Dresdentheatre, under the direction of Hasse, was celebratedas the most complete and best disciplined inEurope. Rousseau gives a particular account of itin his Dictionnaire de Musique. It was from thedispersion of this famous band, at the beginning ofthe seven years' war, that almost every great cityOPERA AT DRESDEN. 213of Europe, and London among the rest, acquiredseveral of their most exquisite and favourite instrumentalperformers. When Burney visited Germany,some of the members of the Electoral family ofSaxony possessed the attainments of first-rate musicians.The Electress Dowager had composedtwo Italian operas, Tapestry and II Trionfo deltaFidelia, which had been published, and performedwith general admiration all over Germany. Burneywas present at a concert at Munich, where thisprincess sang a scene in her own opera of Tapestry,accompanied by Naumann on the pianoforte, andher brother the Elector of Bavaria on the violin.She sang," says Burney, "in a truly fine style.Her voice is very weak, but she never forces it, orsings out of tune. She spoke the recitative, whichwas an accompanied one, very well, in the way ofgreat old singers of better times. She had been along while a scholar of Porpora, who lived manyyears at Dresden, in the service of her father-in-law,Augustus, king of Poland. This recitativewas as well written as it was well expressed : theair was an andante, rich in harmony, somewhat inthe way of Handel's best opera songs in that time."As a performer on the viol-da-gamba, Burneyfound the Elector worthy of being compared to thecelebrated Abel. At this time Dresden, in consequenceof the calamities of war, had fallen from itsformer musical greatness. The magnificent theatre,once the scene of so much splendour, was214 OPERA AT BERLIN.shut up ; and the only musical entertainment wasan Italian opera buffa, poorly performed in a smalltheatre.The Italian opera flourished at Berlin at the beginningof the last century. The cultivation ofmusic, as well as every other elegant art, was suspendedin Prussia during the iron reign of Frederickthe First. His celebrated successor, who, notwithstandingthe stern prohibition of his father,had clandestinely indulged his love of literatureand the fine arts, patronised and encouraged themon his accession to the throne. For music he hada peculiar predilection ; and, under the tuition ofthe celebrated Quant, not only acquired greatknowledge of the art, but became a first-rate performeron the flute — an accomplishment which hecontinued to exercise till the latest period of hislife.During the reign of this royal amateur theItalian opera was supported at Berlin on a magnificentscale, and its direction was the favouritepastime by which he relieved his mind from thecares of state and the anxieties of war. WhenBurney was at Berlin in 1772, the opera companycontained several eminent singers, the orchestraconsisted of fifty performers, there was a largechorus, and a numerous ballet. The king beingat the whole expense of the establishment, the entrancewas gratuitous, and any one who wasdecently dressed might have admission into theFREDERICK THE SECOND. 215pit. The king always stationed himself in the pit,standing behind the conductor, so as to have aview of the score. In this position he himselfassumed the office of conductor, drilling his musicaltroops with the strictness of a military martinet.If any mistake was committed on the stageor in the orchestra, he marked the offender andrebuked him on the spot ; and if any of the singersventured to alter a single passage in his part, hewas ordered, at his peril, to adhere strictly to thenotes written by the composer. His majesty wasequally despotic in the pit of his theatre as at thehead of his army ; and it may be supposed thatsuch severity, whatever correctness it may haveproduced, must have completely checked the feelingsand fancy of the performers.Frederick's favourite dramatic composers wereHasse, Graun, and Agricola ; natives of Germany,but composers of the Italian school. Hasse wascelebrated throughout Europe. Graun was one ofthe greatest of the German ecclesiastical musicians; but the fame of his theatrical compositionsseems to have been limited to Berlin. Between1742 and 1756 he composed a great number ofItalian operas for the Berlin theatre, and died therein1759. Agricola was a pupil of Sebastian Bach,and a great organist. His Italian operas, likethose of Graun, were confined to Berlin. He diedin 1774.It was as a member of the king of Prussia's216 MADAME MARA.operatic corps that the unrivalled Mara firstappeared as a singer of acknowledged reputation.She was born at Cassel in 1749, and was the onlychild of John Schmaling, a musician of thattown, who earned his livelihood partly by repairingmusical instruments. When a mere infant sheshowed such an aptitude for learning to play onthe violin, that her father gave her some lessons,and she almost immediately played beautifully.Her extraordinary proficiency became known, andher father's house was crowded with curious visitors.She was invited to the houses of the respectableinhabitants, and was frequently seen carried in herfather's arms through the streets, with her littleviolin in her hand. He took her to Frankfortand other places, and, in 1759, brought herto London, when she was ten years old. Sheplayed duets with him in public, and excited greatattention ; but she quitted the violin, and betookherself to singing, by the advice of some Englishladies who patronised her, but had a dislike to afemale fiddler. To her early practice of this instrument,however, she herself used to ascribe herwonderful justness of intonation and facility intakingall sorts of intervals, however unusual anddifficult.* She received lessons in singing from" In a conversation," says Mr. Bacon, in his Elements ofVocal Science, " that I lately had with Madame Mara, sheassured me that, had she a daughter, she should learn the fiddlebefore she sang a note." " For," said Madame Mara, " how canMARA. 217Parodies, an Italian master of some reputation ;but these instructions were continued for a veryshort time, and she does not appear to have afterwardshad any other teacher.On returning to Cassel, M. Schmaling endeavouredto get a situation for his child in the serviceof the king of Prussia. She was now grown up,and had been received with the utmost admirationby her town's-people. Frederick sent his firstsinger, Corelli, to hear her, and report upon hermerits. The report was what might be expectedfrom national jealousy. " She sings like a German,"said Corelli ; and the king, whose opinionof German singing was, naturally enough at thattime, very low, paid no further attention to theapplication in her favour. After this disappointmenther father took her to Leipsic, where her performanceat a concert made such an impression,that she immediately received an engagement asfirst singer at the little German theatre alreadymentioned, under the management of M. Hiller,with a salary of about £80 a year. At this periodshe applied herself to the harpsichord, on whichshe became so great a proficient that she playedseveral concertos in public.While residing at Leipsic, she attracted the noticeyou best convey a just notion of slight variations in the pitch ofa note ? By a fixed instrument ? No. By the voice ? No.But, by sliding the finger upon the string, you instantly make themost minute variation visibly as well as audibly perceptible."218 MARA.of the Duchess Dowager of Saxony, who gave heran invitation to Dresden, where her first appearanceat the opera was received with enthusiasticapplause. Her increase of reputation encouraged herfather to hope that she might yet succeed at Berlin,and they repaired thither in 1771. The king, at first,could hardly be persuaded to hear her. A Germansinger !" he exclaimed, " I should as soon expectto receive pleasure from the neighing of my horse."Curiosity to hear this extraordinary Germansinger, however, at length prevailed. MademoiselleSchmaling was sent for to Potsdam, wherethe king received her in his private room. Herspirit (of which she always possessed an ampleshare) had been roused by the king's sarcasm,which had been repeated to her, against Germansinging, and she entered the royal apartment withthe coolness which sprang from wounded pride.The king, who was sitting by the pianoforte,looked at her steadily ; but, as he said nothing,and did not, even by a gesture, invite her to approach,she turned aside, and began to look at thepictures which hung near her. At last, seeingthe king beckon to her, she made her obeisance,and stepped forward. " So you are going tosing me something?" said the king, abruptly,"As your majesty pleases," said the young singer,as she sat down quietly to the instrument. Theking listened attentively, and, when she had finishedthe air, expressed great satisfaction. He thenMala. 219asked if she could sing at sight, placing beforeher a very difficult bravura song, which she sangwith perfect correctness. He was delighted, paidher many compliments, dismissed her with ahandsome present, and made her the prima donnaof the opera.Mademoiselle Schmaling was in this situationwhen Dr. Burney was at Berlin. She was thenthree-and-twenty, and in high favour at the court.Burney thus describes his first visit to her:"Mademoiselle Schmaling received me very politelyand unaffectedly. She is short, and nothandsome, but is far from having anything disagreeablein her countenance ; on the contrary,there is a strong expression of good-humour impressedupon it, which renders her address veryengaging. Her teeth are irregular, and project toomuch ; yet, altogether, her youth and smiles takeninto the account, she is rather agreeable in face andfigure.* I found that she had preserved her English; indeed she sometimes wanted words, but,having learned it very young, the pronunciation ofthose which occurred was perfectly correct. Shewas so obliging as to sing, at my request, very soonafter my entrance. She began with a very difficultThis portrait of the youthful Schmaling recals the appearanceof Madame Mara to those who remember her in England.Her features were plain, almost to ugliness ; but her countenancewas yet striking and interesting, from the genius and sensibilityby which it. was animated.2'20 MARA.aria di bravura, by Traetta, which I had heardbefore at Mingotti's. She sang it admirably, andfully answered the great ideas I had formed of herabilities, in everything but her voice, which was alittle cloudy, and not quite so powerful as I expected.However, she had a slight cold and cough,and complained of indisposition : but with all thisher voice was sweetly toned, and she sang perfectlywell in tune. She has an excellent shake, a goodexpression, and a facility of executing and articulatingrapid and difficult divisions, that is astonishing.Her second song was a larghetto, bySchwanenburg, of Brunswick, which was verypretty in itself ; but she made it truly delightful byher taste and expression. She was by no meanslavish of graces, but those she used were perfectlysuited to the style of the music and idea of thepart. After this she sang an andante, in the partwhich she had to practise for the ensuing carnival,in Graun's Merope ; and in this she acquitted herselfwith great taste, expression, and propriety."" At the house of Mademoiselle Schmaling, 1 'Burney afterwards says, " I heard this morning M.Mara execute, with great ability, several pieces onthe violoncello. He is a young man, and the sonof a performer of the same name and upon thesame instrument, whose talents have been muchcelebrated in Germany." This man had come toBerlin a short time before, and had been engagedas a performer at the king's concerts. An intimacyMARA. 221took place between him and Mademoiselle Schooling; and although the king, who was aware ofMara's dissipated and vicious character, warnedhis young protegee against the imprudence of unitingherself with such a man, she disregarded thecaution, and soon afterwards became his wife.After remaining about seven years at Berlin,Madame Mara received an invitation to visit London,upon very advantageous terms. The offer wasnot to be slighted ; but the difficulty was, to obtainthe consent of her patron, or rather master, theking of Prussia. On being applied to, his majesty'sanswer was, " Madame Mara may go if she will,but M. Mara must stay where he is." The kingthought that this would prevent her journey, asshe was much attached to her husband. But, tothe husband, the English guineas were more attractivethan his wife's society ; and, at his desire, shewas about to set out in company with a femalerelative, when the king again interposed and prohibitedher departure. Finding themselves thusdespotically treated, Mara and his wife resolved tomake their escape ; and, with considerable difficultyand apprehension, got beyond the bounds ofthe Prussian territory, and travelled with theutmost expedition to Vienna, where they arrived inMarch 1780. The moment the Prussian despotwas aware of their escape, he despatched a messengerto the Emperor Joseph the Second, desiringhim to arrest the fugitives. The emperor, BACH.ever, good-naturedly condescended to give them ahint, that there was no resisting the king of Prussia,and that they had better get away as fast as possible,so that he might inform the king that his messengerhad arrived too late. When the alarm was over,Mara appeared publicly in Vienna, where she remainednearly two years ; and where, notwithstandingthe cabals of the Italian singers, she wasreceived, both by the court and the public, withthe greatest enthusiasm. She next went to Paris,where at first she found a rival in the celebratedTodi ; but she soon rose to a level with, and afterwardssurpassed her competitor. She now receivedanother offer of an engagement in London, whichshe accepted, and arrived in this country in 1784.Her long residence in England, which formed themost brilliant part of her career, and the subsequentcircumstances of her life, shall be afterwardsnoticed.Besides those who have been mentioned, severalother German dramatic composers flourished aboutthe middle of the last century : but they wereItalians, in so far as regards education and style.The most eminent among them were John ChristianBach, Naumann, and Misliweczek.John Christian Bach was a son of the illustriousJohn Sebastian Bach. Having, at an earlyage, lost his father, he went to Italy, devotedhimself to the study of vocal music, and soondistinguished himself as a vocal composer. InNAUMANN-MISLIWICZEK. 2'231763 he came to this country, and resided almostconstantly in London till his death in 1782. Hecomposed many successful Italian operas for ourstage ; and many of his airs continued in favourlong after the operas to which they belonged werelaid aside. Some of them, indeed, are not yet forgotten.They are simple, natural, and elegant ;and bear evident marks of the Neapolitan school,in which he studied.Johann Gortlieb Naumann was a native ofSaxony, and born of very poor parents. Whenvery young, his passion for music induced him totravel into Italy, where, after enduring great hardshipsand difficulties, he had the good fortune toattract the notice of the celebrated Martini, whonot only gave him instructions, but obtained for himthe means of studying in the best schools of Italy.After a residence of several years in Italy, he returnedto his native country, and was appointedmaestro di capella to the elector of Saxony. Hedied at Dresden in 1801. Naumann's works arevoluminous both for the church and the theatre.Some of his opera songs are still performed atconcerts.Joseph Misliwiczek was a Bohemian. In hisyouth he studied at Venice under Pescetti, and spenthis life chiefly in Italy. From about 1760 to 1780he composed many Italian operas which acquiredconsiderable celebrity both in Italy and Germany.In his latter days he appears to have outlived his224 HAYDN.good fortune, or perhaps his faculties ; for, afterproducing several unsuccessful works, he died ingreat poverty in 1781 or 1782.Haydn composed a good many Italian operas,but they seem never to have travelled beyond theprivate theatre of his patron Prince Esterhazy, andthe scores of them were destroyed by an accidentalfire in the palace of that prince.It thus appears that, down to the period at whichwe are arrived, the Germans had not a nationalmusical drama, and can hardly be said to have hada national dramatic musician. The German theatricalcomposers not only devoted themselves exclusivelyto the Italian opera, but had been educatedin the Italian school, and wrote in the Italian style;with the exception, however, of Gluck : for,though this great man's operas are Italian or Frenchin form, they are essentially German in spirit andcharacter. Gluck, therefore, may be designated asthe father of the German musical drama.CHAPTER VIII.Mozart.Gluck's successor, as a German dramatic musician,was the unrivalled Mozart. The greatest part ofhis theatrical works were Italian operas, and hisearlier pieces belonged entirely to the Italian school :but, even in his Italian operas, his style becamemore and more German ; and he was the first whoproduced a great dramatic work in the Germanlanguage and for the German stage.During his precocious childhood, Mozart, amonghis other musical attainments, became well acquaintedwith the Italian vocal music of the time.A curious instance of his familiarity with the Italianschool was exhibited during his stay in England,when he was about eight years old, and is recordedby the honourable Daines Barrington. In one ofhis visits to the youthful musician, Mr. Barringtonasked him to sing an extempore love-song, in themanner of the celebrated singer Manzoli, who wasthen in England. Mozart immediately began arecitative in the Italian style, and then sang, on theVOL. II. Q226 MOZART.single word " affetto,^ an amoroso air, which hada first and second part, and was of the ordinarylength, and on the model, in other respects, of anItalian opera song. Mr. Barrington then askedhim to sing an air expressive of rage, in the styleof the opera sera. He immediately began a properrecitative, and then sang an air on the word " per-fido Before he finished, he became so excited,that, instead of playing, he beat the keys of theharpsichord, and sometimes started from his seat asif under the influence of the passions he was expressing.When he returned home to Salzburg,and applied himself ardently to his musical studies,he is said to have taken, as his principal guides invocal composition, the operas of Hasse, Leo, Vinci,Porpora, and other old Italian masters.In the year 1768, when he was twelve years old,Mozart, by order of the Emperor Joseph the Second,composed an Italian comic opera called La PintaSemplice. It received the approbation of Hasse andMetastasio, who w T ere then at Vienna ; but in consequence,it is said, of a cabal among the singers,it was not performed. In the following year hewent to Italy, where he was received with enthusiasm,and composed several Italian operas whichwere performed at Milan and other places with thegreatest success ; a proof of the command he hadat that early age acquired of the style of dramaticcomposition then popular in Italy. Of these earlyItalian operas the names are all that survive. TheyMOZART. 227were, Mithridates, Lucia Sulla, Ascanius in Alba, IISono di Scipionene, and La Pinta Giardiniera ; — allcomposed before he was seventeen ; an age at whichit would be vain to expect music flowing from theheart as the language of passions and sentimentsnot yet developed in the youthful mind. At thatage, even in the most highly gifted, the expressionof deep feeling and strong emotion must be inagreat measure conventional and borrowed : and itmay therefore be presumed that the world has lostlittle in the oblivion of these juvenile operas, gracefuland elegant as they must doubtless have been.The first opera on which Mozart's celebrity isfounded w r as composed under the powerful incitementsof love and ambition. He had laboured,strenuously and successfully, to gain honour anddistinction, but had been sorely disappointed in hisprospects of solid advantage from his talents. Inthe capital of France, as well as several places inhis own country, he had met with neglect from thegreat, and malevolence from jealous rivals, and hadreturned, sickened and disheartened, to his nativeSalzburg, when his sovereign, the archbishop ofthat city, called him to Vienna. In the Austriancapital his prospects brightened, and a new charmwas given to his existence by the society of anamiable girl, Constance Weber, a favourite youngactress. He became passionately enamoured of her,and she returned his love : but her parents wouldnot consent to their union on account of his want ofQ 2228 TDOMENEO.a settled situation in life. At this time the Electorof Bavaria, who had already shown him distinguishedfavour, desired him to write an opera forthe elector's theatre at Munich, which was thenmaintained in a style of great splendour. Mozartwas now five-and twenty, in the full strength andvigour of his genius. He saw before him themeans of achieving an honourable independence,and of gaining the object of his affection; and,with a heart burning with love and hope, he rapidlycomposed his Idomeneo ; — a piece which he alwaysfondly regarded as the best of his works, and whichcertainly yields to none of them in tender and passionateexpression.The success of Idomeneo crowned the wishes ofthe young composer. It raised him to an eminencewhich removed the scruples of his mistress's family,and brought about the happiest event of his life,his marriage with Constance Weber.The title of this opera is, " Idomeneo Re di Creta,o asia Ilia e Idamante ; Drama Eroico." The sceneis laid in the island of Crete. Idomeneus, returningfrom the Trojan war, is shipwrecked, and hisfleet dispersed, by a tempest raised by the anger ofNeptune. His son Idamante, with Ilia, the daughterof Priam, (whose life he has saved in the storm,) anda number of Trojan captives, arrive in safety athome; but it is believed that Idomeneus hasperished. A mutual passion has sprung up betweenthe Trojan princess and her deliverer, and at theIdomeneus. 229beginning of the piece Idamante declares his love,and, in token of it, gives the Trojan prisoners theirfreedom. Idomeneus, with his ships, is driven uponthe shore of Crete, having made a vow, as a propitiation,to sacrifice to Neptune the first person heshould meet upon his landing. Idamante hastensto the port to greet his father, who perceives, withhorror, that his son is the destined victim. Unableto consummate the shocking sacrifice, he resolves tosend his son to some distant land, hoping to findsome other way of appeasing the offended deity.He therefore orders his son to convey Electra, thedaughter of Agamemnon (who had been residingat his court) to Argos, her native country. Electra(who nourishes an unrequited passion for the prince,mingled with jealousy and hatred of her rival) isfull of joy at the prospect of departing with him,while the lovers are in despair at their separation.All is prepared for the departure of Idamante andElectra ; but, as they are about to embark, a stormarises, and a dreadful monster issues from the angrywaves, spreading dismay and death among thepeople. The king and his family have retired intothe interior of the palace, the prince remaining inignorance of the cause of these horrors, when a greatbody of the people enter, with the chief priest ofNeptune at their head, who calls upon the king tolook upon the ravages of a monster sent by theangry god, and to appease him by offering up thevictim whom he demands. Idomeneus, thus Idomeneus.cured, proclaims his fatal vow, and declares Ida-mateto be the victim. While the people are expressing,in smothered accents, their grief and astonishment,joyful cries are suddenly heard without.The prince has attacked and slain the monster, andnow rushes in, to offer himself up a willing sacrificefor his country. Idomeneus is about to strike theblow, when the Trojan princess interposes, andwishes to sacrifice herself for her lover, by insistingthat she, and not he, is the victim that would bemost acceptable to the deity. While this contest isgoing on, a subterraneous noise is heard ; the statueof Neptune moves ; and an awful voice from heavendeclares, that Love has conquered — that Idomeneusis pardoned, but that he shall cease to be king, andIdamante, with Ilia as his queen, shall reign in hisstead. This denouement produces the effects whichmay be expected on the different personages ; andthe piece ends with a choral strain of general joy.This story has given room for many tragic andimpassioned scenes, which are beautifully treatedby the composer. He adhered, however, prettyclosely to the forms of the Italian opera which werestill prevalent at the time, though they were soonabandoned by himself, and became obsolete. Thedialogue of the drama is carried on in recitative,mingled with air. Each of the characters has morethan one scena, consisting of an accompanied recitativeand an air : there is but one duet, one trio,and one quartet ; and there are several choruses.1DOMENEO. 231But during all these the business of the piece standsstill : there are none of those concerted pieces inwhich the dialogue and action are carried on, as inthe modern opera. Idamante, the hero, is a mezzosoprano, a kind of voice now belonging entirely tofemale parts; Idomeneo, Arbace, (his confidant,)and even the priest of Neptune, are tenors, and thereis no bass at all among the dramatis persona. Theairs are on a very extended scale ; and, though freefrom the exploded formality of the da capo, yet theycontain a great many of the long divisions, passages,and closes, which were fashionable in the Italianmusic of the time. These are mingled with thebeautiful emanations of the author's genius — exquisitemodulations, and innumerable traits of tenderness,energy, and passion ; and the airs, with theircharming accompaniments, cannot be listened towithout delight. But they are not sufficiently dramatic.Their great length brings the action of thedrama to a stand as often as they occur, while theirartificial structure, and the elaborate style of singingwhich they require, render their performance amusical exhibition, rather than the expression of thefeelings and passions of a dramatic personage.During the performance of one of these airs, theaudience must necessarily forget the character, andsee and hear nothing but the singer ; and the necessaryeffect of the frequent recurrence of suchscenes is to deprive the dramatic action of warmth,rapidity, and interest. When Mozart composed232 Idomeneus.this opera, he appears not yet to have studied theworks of Gluck, the influence of which is so apparentin the style of his subsequent compositions.The great features of this opera are the choruses,which are full of beauty and power ; and their effectis heightened by the dramatic propriety with whichthey are introduced. In the first act, when thestorm arises which drives Idomeneus on the Cretanstrand, the people, divided into groups, upon thestage and at a distance, supplicate the mercy of thegods in the beautiful double chorus for tenor andbass voices, " Pieta, Numb, pieta!" while theraging of the tempest is imitated by the wild burstsand chromatic wailing of the orchestra. The finaleto this act consists of a brilliant chorus of rejoicing,and thanksgiving to Neptune, for the safety of Idomeneus.In the second act, when Idamante andElectra are about to embark for Argos, the peopleand mariners sing the celebrated chorus, (i Placide ilmar, animo !'• the tranquil sweetness of whichforms a fine musical picture of the scene. It isfollowed by the trio, " Pria di partir, o Dio !" inwhich Idamante and Electra take farewell of theking. At its close, and as they are departing, theorchestra begins to paint the rising storm ; soundsof dismay are heard from the people ; the war ofthe elements rages with increasing violence ; thehowling of the tempest is mingled with screams ofterror ; the sea-monster appears, and the multitudefly in confusion, their cries becoming fainter andIdomeneus. 233fainter till they are lost in the distance. We knowof no instance in which the descriptive powers ofmusic are more strikingly displayed than in thismagnificent finale. In the third act, when Idomeneusdeclares his fatal vow to the chief priest andthe people, they give expression to their grief andhorror in the chorus, " O vote tremendous !" accompaniedby the stringed instruments con sorting, andthe long, melancholy notes of the horns, oboes, andbassoons. The effect of this chorus, and of thelow and mournful march, while the people slowlydepart, is deeply impressive.* The general finale,Scena, amor," is simple, resonant, and joyous.In the instrumentation of this opera the geniusof Mozart appears in all its lustre. In some of hissubsequent pieces the score is fuller, but it maybedoubted whether, in any of them, it is morebeautiful, more varied, or more effective. Thecombination most generally used is that of thequartet of stringed instruments with two horns andtwo oboes : the flutes are frequently employed ; theclarinets very rarely, but, when they do occur, withgreat effect, j" Drums and trumpets are introducedThis chorus, and the chorus " Placid e il mar," from theirextreme beauty, are often performed at our concerts. But thegreat error is committed of calling " O vote tremendous" a quartet,and having it sung by solo voices ; thus marring the designof the composer, and losing the effect of the music, which expresses,in accents " not loud but deep, " the intense butsmothered feelings of a great multitude of people.t In the chorus " Placid e il mar," he employs the B naturalclarinet, an instrument scarcely ever used.234 Idomeneus.only in the strong parts of the choruses, and insome passages, of peculiar energy, in the part ofIdomeneo. A charming effect is produced in Ilia'sair, " Se il padre perte," by using one horn, oneflute, one oboe, and one bassoon, along with thestringed quartet ; these wind instruments havingflorid obbligato passages. One or two airs, of aparlante character, are accompanied by the stringedinstruments only. The awful voice, which declaresthe will of Neptune, is accompanied by trombonesand horns, like the words of the statue in DonGiovanni. The score of Idomeneo remains to thisday a model in orchestral writing, and is one of themost valuable studies that can be placed in thehands of a young composer.Idomeneo, with all its beauties, has not kept itsplace on the stage. It has never, we believe, beenperformed in England, and it seems to have beenlaid aside even in Germany. This has arisen fromthe circumstances already mentioned — the adherenceto the antiquated forms of the Italian opera, the introductionof the soprano voice in a principal malepart, and the action being interrupted and retardedby long undramatic airs, instead of being rapidlycarried forward by means of concerted scenes. Inconsequenceof these things, it would be cold andheavy on the stage, notwithstanding the energy ofthe recitatives, the richness and descriptive characterof the choruses, and the extreme beauty of theorchestral accompaniments.ENTFUHRUNG AUS DEM SERAIL. 235In 1782, about two years after Idomeneo, Mozartproduced his comic opera, Die JBntfuhrung lausdem Serai, or, The escape from the Seraglio ;the oldest German opera, we believe, which stilllives as an acting piece. As a drama, it is ofvery slight construction, and the story, thoughmade up of commonplace materials, is absurdly improbable.Belmont and Constance are a young-couplebetrothed to each other. The lady, in hervoyage to Sicily to be married to her lover, is takenby an Algerine corsair, sold to a Turkish pacha,and conveyed to his seraglio, along with her attendantBlonda, and Pedrillo, a servant of her lover's.Pedrillo contrives to convey to his master the tidingsof their mistress ; and Belmont, determined to attempthis mistress's rescue, arrives in disguise atthe pacha's palace, and finds means to get into hisservice. He endeavours, with the help of Pedrillo,to carry off Constance and Blonda from the seraglio,but they fail, and their affairs assume an uncomfortableaspect, as the pacha is deeply enamouredof the damsel : but, by certain discoveries whichtake place only in an opera, it appears that theTurkish dignitary and the Christian lady are brotherand sister, the pacha, in his infancy, having beencarried off by corsairs. Of course every thing endsa Variable, and the lovers are united. There is anunderplot composed of the loves of Pedrillo andBlonda, and the rivalry of Osman, a ridiculous oldTurk, who is smitten with the waiting-woman.236 ENTFUHRUNG AUS DEM SERAIL.There is a great deal of beauty, but not muchvis comic, in the music of this opera. Someof the airs are written in that concise and tersestyle which he afterwards adopted ; but thegreater number of them, though much moreoriginal in their phraseology than those of Ido-menes,are very diffuse, and filled with long roulades,flights to the very extremities of the scale, andextravagant difficulties of execution. This is thecase with the airs for all the characters, not evenexcepting Osman, the old Turk, whose bass voiceis tasked almost as heavily as the others. TheGerman singers at Vienna, for whom this operawas written, must have possessed extraordinaryvocal powers. Some of the most prominent songsin the piece, indeed, are almost entirely made upof passages of execution ; and as these are thepassages which give way most quickly to theinfluence of fashion, the most perfect execution,at the present day, could not preventthem from appearing dry, stiff, and antiquated.Some of the concerted pieces, however, areadmirable and truly dramatic ; particularly thequartet in the second act, " Each, Belmont !"where the two pairs of lovers meet for the firsttime within the walls of the seraglio. The tenderrapture of Belmont and Constance, and the comiclight-heartedness of the humbler pair, are blendedtogether with a charming yet very lively effect.The chorus of the pacha's attendants, " Sing clemENTFUHRUNG AUS DEM SERAIL. 237grosser Bassa lieder," (sing the mighty pacha'spraise,) is fine ; and the chorus of Janissaries, whichconcludes the opera, is full of barbaric splendour.This opera was received by the public with greatapplause ; but it did not escape the criticism of theEmperor Joseph the Second. At one of the rehearsals,this royal dilettante said to the composer,My dear Mozart, this is too fine for our ears;there are too many notes;" " I beg your majesty'spardon," said Mozart, with spirit, "there areno more than there ought to be." The emperormade no reply ; and, when the piece came to beperformed, joined warmly in the general applause.But Mozart, though not disposed at the time tosubmit to this criticism, afterwards acknowledgedits justice. After playing over one of the airswhich had received the greatest applause, he remarkedthat it was very well for a room, but tooverbose for the theatre. " When I composed thisopera," he added, " I took delight in what I wasdoing, and never thought anything too long."This delight in the act of composition is perhapsone of the things which ought to be most carefullyguarded against ; for the diffuseness to which it isapt to lead may effectually prevent the world fromsympathising with it.The Entfuhrung aus dem Serai is still occasionallyperformed in Germany, though it has beenseldom heard in any other country. In 1827 anEnglish version of it was brought out at Covent238 NOZZE DI FIGARO.Garden by the late Mr. Kramer, the able masterof his majesty's band, under the title of TheSeraglio. But so many liberties were taken bothwith the drama and the music — so many retrenchments,interpolations, and changes of various kindsthat it could hardly be considered the samepiece. It had a short run, but was soon laid aside,and has not again been brought forward.Le Nozzle di Figaro appeared in 1786. Beaumarchais'celebrated comedy, Le Mariage deFigaro, had attracted extraordinary attention alloverEurope ; and the Emperor Joseph, it is said,desired that it might be made the foundation of acomic opera, of which the music should be composedby Mozart. The Italian piece, accordingly,was written by Da Ponte, then the poet of thecourt theatre at Vienna, a man of considerabletalent and eccentric character, who died a fewyears ago, at the age of upwards of eighty, at NewYork, where he was a teacher of languages. Heexecuted his task very ably ; preserving, withoutobscurity, all the details of the ingenious and complicatedSpanish plot, a good deal of the distinctivefeatures of the different characters, and the pointand lightness of the dialogue. The following interestingparticulars respecting the first appearanceof this opera are given by the late MichaelKelly, then a young performer on the Viennaopera stage, and receiving from Mozart muchkindness and assistance in the pursuit of hisprofession.NOZZE DI FIGARO. 239Of all the performers," says Kelly,* " in thisopera at that time, but one survives — myself. Itwas allowed that never was an opera more stronglycast. I have seen it performed at different periodsin other countries, and well too, but no more tocompare with its original performance than light isto darkness. All the original performers had theadvantages of the instruction of the composer, whotransfused into their minds his inspired meaning.I shall never forget his little animated countenancewhen lighted up with the glowing rays of genius ;it is as impossible to describe it as it would be topaint sunbeams.I called on him one evening. He said to me,I have just finished a little duet for my opera —you shall hear it.' He sat down to the piano, andwe sang it. I was delighted with it ; andthe musical world will give me credit for being so,when I mention the duet sung by Count Almavivaand Susan, ' Cruel, perche finer farm languidcosi.' A more delicious morceau never was pennedb}r man ; and it has often been a source of pleasureto me to have been the first who heard it, and tohave sung it with its greatly gifted composer. Iremember, at the first rehearsal of the full band,Mozart was on the stage with his crimson pelisseand gold-laced cocked hat, giving the time of themusic to the orchestra. Figaro's song, ' Non piuReminiscences of Michael Kelly, 1825.240 NOZZE DI FIGARO.andrai, farfallone amoroso Benuci gave with thegreatest animation and power of voice. I wasstanding close to Mozart, who, sotte voce, was repeating' Bravo, bravo, Benuci ;' and when Benucicame to the fine passage, ' Cherubim, alia victoria,alia gloria military,' which he gave out with stentorianlungs, the effect was electricity itself; for thewhole of the performers on the stage, and those inthe orchestra, as if actuated by one feeling of delight,vociferated, ' Bravo, bravo, maestro ! Viva,viva, grande Mozart !' Those in the orchestra Ithought never would have ceased applauding, bybeating the bows of their violins against the musicdesks. The little man acknowledged by repeatedobeisance his thanks for the distinguished mark ofenthusiastic applause bestowed upon him.The same meed of approbation was given tothe finale at the end of the first act. That piece ofmusic alone, in my opinion, if he had never composedanything else, would have stamped him asthe greatest master of his art. In the sestetto inthe second act (which was Mozart's favourite pieceof the whole opera) I had a very conspicuous part,as the stuttering judge. All through the piece Iwas to stutter ; but, in the sestetto, Mozart requestedI would not, for, if I did, I should spoilhis music. I told him that, though it mightappear very presumptuous in a lad like me to differwith him on this point, I did, and was sure theway in which I intended to introduce the stutter-nozzleDI FIGARO. 241ing would not interfere with the other parts, butproduce an effect ; besides, it certainly was not innature that I should stutter all through the part,and when I came to the sestetto, speak plain ; and,after that piece of music was over, return to stuttering; and I added, (apologising at the same timefor my apparent want of deference and respect inplacing my opinion in opposition to that of thegreat Mozart,) that unless I was allowed to performthe part as I wished, I would not perform it atall.Mozart at last consented that I should havemy own way, but doubted the success of the experiment.Crowded houses proved that nothingever on the stage produced a more powerful effect ;the audience were convulsed with laughter, inwhich Mozart himself joined. The emperor repeatedlycried out, ' Bravo !' and the piece wasloudly applauded and encored. When the opera wasover, Mozart came on the stage to me, and, shakingme by both hands, said, ' Bravo, young man, Ifeel obliged to you, and acknowledge you to havebeen in the right, and myself in the wrong.' Therewas certainly a risk run, but I felt within myself 1could give the effect I wished, and the eventproved that I was not mistaken. I have seen theopera in London and elsewhere, and never saw thejudge portrayed as a stutterer, and the scene wasoften totally omitted. 1 played it as a stupid oldman, though at the time 1 was a beardless stripling.VOL. II. R242 NOZZE DI FIGARO.At the end of the opera I thought the audiencewould never have done applauding and calling forMozart. Almost every piece was encored, whichprolonged it nearly to the length of two operas,and induced the emperor to issue an order, on thesecond representation, that no piece of musicshould be encored. Never was anything morecomplete than the triumph of Mozart and his Nozzledi Figaro, to which numerous overflowing audiencesbore witness."During the four years between the production ofthe Entfiihrung aus clem Serai and of the Nozzle diFigaro, Mozart's compositions consisted chiefly ofinstrumental music ; but in this interval he entirelychanged his dramatic style. The airs in Figaroare short and simple ; entirely free from the diffuseness,repetitions, and florid ornaments which,in his former operas, he had borrowed from theItalian school. Amid great originality and freshness,his vocal phrases, in this and all his subsequentoperas, bear many traces of the study ofGluck. In the whole opera there is only one instanceof a syllable protracted upon a roulade forseveral bars : it occurs in Count Almaviva's air,Vero mentr'io sospiro," upon the words, " Egiubilar mi fa," where it is happily subservient tothe purpose of expression. And not only are theairs written without ornament, but they are somuch of a parasite character, and composed of passagesso strictly adapted to the intelligible and em-nozzleDI FIGARO. 243plastic elocution of the words, that the vocal phrasesdo not admit of being tampered with by the singer.An expressive appoggiatura — a delicate and sparinguse of the tempo rubato — a glide — a slight anticipationof the following note — a few graceful notesintroduced in a cadence, — these are all the libertiesthat a singer of taste and judgment will ever thinkof taking with the text of these melodies : theirsimple beauty rejects the aid of Italian ornament.The action of this opera is carried on, to a muchgreater extent than in any piece which preceded it,by means of concerted movements. The dramatispersonae are unusually numerous ; and as six orseven of them are frequently on the stage at once,engaged in the business of the scene, their dialogueis thrown into the form of strongly-marked musicalphrases, constructed upon the rich and brilliantsymphony of the orchestra, from which, as a background,the vocal passages stand out in distinctand bold relief. From this treatment the mostbusy and bustling scenes derive a rapidity andanimation which would have been wanting, had theperformers been made to speak in recitative : andas, ever and anon, the performers join in harmonyof from two to six or seven parts, these scenes arefull of the highest musical beauty. In this mannera large proportion of the whole opera is constructed.The dialogue is thrown into recitative occasionally,when only two persons are on the stage ; and accompaniedrecitative is used in two or three ir2244 NOZZE DT FIGARO.passion soliloquies ; as when the Countess is sadlymusing on her lost happiness, the Count indulgingin his wayward jealousy, and Figaro, betrayed, ashebelieves, by his mistress, giving vent to his-emotionsof sorrow and resentment. There are onlytwo very brief and simple choruses, introduced insituations strictly dramatic.The disposition of the voices, though it mayhave been owing to the performers for whom it wascomposed, is calculated to give great effect to theharmony of the concerted pieces. The three principalfemale parts are soprano, mezzo-soprano, andcontralto ; Bailie is a tenor, Almaviva is a barytone,and Figaro and Barton are basses. Whenall these voices are employed together, as in thefinales, the volume of harmony is magnificent. Itseems somewhat surprising that the only tenorshould be a subordinate character, who does littlemore than join in the concerted pieces, while CountAlmaviva is a barytone. This must have proceededfrom the composer having found it necessary toaccommodate himself to the voices of his performers.This charming opera, from its first appearance tothe present day, has been performed innumerabletimes in the principal Italian theatres throughoutEurope, besides having been adapted to the German,French, and English stage ; and its airs,duets, and concerted pieces are an inexhaustiblesource of delight in concert-rooms and private DI FIGARO. 245sical circles. The music is liable to but one objection— it is deficient in gaiety. The characters aretoo much in earnest, and gifted with a depth offeeling of which there are no traces in the originalplay. Figaro is about to be married to Susanna ;and the subject of the piece is, the devices wherebythis clever couple baffle the Count's attempts toprevent their marriage. To outwit his master isa mere amusement to the intriguing barber, whonever has any serious uneasiness as to the result.The spirit which animates him throughout thepiece is expressed by him when he says,Se vol ballard, Signor Continue,II chitarrino le sooner ;Se vol venire bella mia schola,La carniola le insegnero."Mozart converts the Count's transient fancy forSusanna into a serious passion. In the comedyhe is ashamed of his whim, and says that he hasbeen twenty times on the point of giving it up.Qui done m'enchaine," he says to himself, " acette fantaisie ? j'ai voulu vingt fois y renoncer.Strange effet irresolution ! si je la valais sansdebate, je la desiderata mille fois moins." Insteadof this reflection, so natural in a man of his lightand libertine character, we have the deep andalmost tragic passion expressed in the noble song,Vero, mentr'io sospiro ;" a song possessed ofevery beauty but the beauty of congruity with the246 DON GIOVANNI.person and situation to which it belongs. Thebeautiful duet, too, " Cruel, perche finora,"speaks the eloquent language of impassioned tenderness; a language which Beaumarchais does notmake the Count even think of affecting ; for thehaughty grandee talks to his lady's chambermaidcavalierly enough, even while attempting to seduceher.Though, however, Mozart has altered the colouringof this drama, and rendered it more congenialto his own tender and pensive character, nobodywould wish a note of his music other than it is.Mozart has lessened the gaiety of the original piece,but he has greatly increased its interest. In thecomedy of Beaumarchais, we find the adventuresof the inmates of the chateau of Aguas-Frescasinfinitely amusing, and we are delighted with theirlively manners, and the wit and satire of theirconversation ; but we care as little for them as theyseem to care for one another. Mozart has giventhem hearts, and made them the objects of oursympathy by inspiring them with feeling and passion.The music, too, though it has not the exuberantgaiety of the Italian opera buffa, is highlyanimated and dramatic ; and this, joined to theexcellent structure of the plot, and the rapid successionof incidents, renders Le Nozzle di Figaroone of the most attractive and delightful entertainmentsthat can be imagined.II Don Giovanni was produced in 1787. ThisDON GIOVANNI. 247opera is considered the composer's masterpiece;and is too generally and familiarly known to requiremuch remark. The subject was a favouritewith the dramatists of the seventeenth century,and many pieces, founded upon it, were producedin Spain, Italy, France, and England. Mozart'sopera was written by Da Ponte, and taken chieflyfrom Moliere's Festin de Pierre. Mozart composedit at Prague, where it was performed with themost brilliant success. Its first representations atVienna were not so well received ; but its transcendentmerits were soon recognised, and noother musical piece has ever enjoyed such generalfavour and such extensive celebrity.Don Giovanni, as a drama, owes its attractionalmost entirely to the wild horror of the principalincidents. The opening of the piece is striking ; —the nocturnal ravisher rushing into the street withhis intended victim clinging to him — the old manmeeting his death from the hand of the libertine —the agony of the daughter over the body of herparent, and the frantic eagerness with which sheadjures her lover to avenge his murder; — awakena thrilling interest, and appear to be the outset ofa tragic history. But all this leads to nothing.The character of Donna Anna, at first so full ofenergy and passion, immediately sinks into utterinsipidity ; and Ottavio, the lover, never becomesanything more than a mere walking gentleman.248 DON GIOVANNI.Their purpose of revenge, so strongly announced,is exhibited only by their dodging its object fromplace to place, much in the style of pantaloon andthe clown pursuing harlequin in a Christmas pantomime,and with as little rationality of purpose.The character of the peasant girl, Zerlina, andManette, her lover, also effectively introduced inthe beginning of the piece, dwindle, in likemanner, into nothing. All these characters areexhausted at the end of the first act ; and thesecond act is an incoherent jumble of childish buffoonery,till we arrive at. the supernatural horrorsof the catastrophe. And so entirely insignificanthave the whole dramatis ]personae, except the libertinehimself, become, that though, in the piece aswritten, they are assembled on the stage at theconclusion, yet, in performance, it is not foundworth while to introduce them again, and thecurtain falls at Don Giovanni's terrible exit.The effect of the music is often much impairedby the faults of the drama. It is, indeed, hardlypossible to repress a feeling of irritation at witnessingthe silly trash which is associated with someof the most beautiful strains imaginable. Who,that hears the lovely trio, " Ah, tacit, ingiustocore," elegantly sung in a concert-room or a privatecircle, can dream of the low buffoonery with whichit is conjoined on the stage ? And in the sestetto,Sola, sola in bubo loco," a grandeur of effect andDON GIOVANNI. 249strength of expression, worthy of the loftiest tragedy,are wasted on a scene of the merest farce,which has not even the merit of being laughable.But many parts of the opera are calculated togive full scope to Mozart's genius. The opening-scenealready mentioned — the first introduction ofZerlina, dancing joyously among her rustic companions— the masquerade scene where Don Giovanniattempts to carry her off — the moonlightchurchyard, where the statue utters the appallingYes I" in answer to the doomed libertine's invitation— and the appearance of the awful guest at thebanquet — have inspired the composer with hisfinest, grandest, wildest conceptions, and given riseto effects unparalleled in dramatic music. Theaction of the piece is carried on, in a great measure,by means of long and highly-wrought concertedpieces ; and the airs are generally very short andsimple. There are only two of a different character; " II mio tesoro," sung by Ottavio, and " Nonmi dir, bell idol mio," sung by Donna Anna ; bothof which are in the Italian style, and largely developed.They are both beautiful, and expressiveof passionate tenderness ; but both (especially thelatter) are protracted by long roulades and passagesof mere display. Both of them, indeed, are evidentlyintended to occupy the attention of theaudience while the decorations are arranging forthe statue-scene in the churchyard, and for theconcluding scene of the banquet, and this purpose250 COSI FAN Tutti.they serve very delightfully.* The voices aredisposed in the same manner as in Figaro; themale parts principally engaged in the action beingbasses and barton's, while the tenor is the insipidcharacter of Ottavio. The choruses are few andshort, but highly effective and perfectly dramatic.Mozart, as may be supposed, has failed in impartinggaiety to the comic scenes ; but this deficiencyis little felt in a work so strongly marked withbeauty, grandeur, and fantastic horror.The case is different with Cos) fan tittle, an operaIn the composition of these and other airs of a florid character,in his different operas, Mozart certainly sacrificed, by theintroduction of mere bravura passages, to the Italian taste. Butthe Italian performers of the day required from him still furthersacrifices ; for, after the first appearance of his operas, he wasobliged to compose brilliant airs to be introduced into them, forthe purpose of showing off different performers. Several ofthese airs, which were introduced at various times into theNozzle di Figaro and Don Giovanni, are inserted, by way ofappendix, in the published scores of these operas. By somemusicians of the pure German school, it has been thought thatMozart retained too much of the Italian style. Such, it appears,was the opinion of Beethoven, who, in a posthumouswork published at Vienna in 1832, entitled Studies in General-base,and containing, in addition to the studies of which itprincipally consists, a number of detached observations on musicaltopics, thus expresses himself in regard to Mozart : " Mozart'sZauberJJdte will ever remain his greatest work, for in thishe first showed himself the true German composer. In DonGiovanni he still retained the complete Italian cut and style ;and, moreover, the sacred art should never be degraded to thefoolery of so scandalous a subject."COSI FAN TUTTE. 25 1which in its subject and dramatic treatment belongsto the broadest farce. The story is briefly this.Two Venetian damsels (sisters) have each a lover,who profess unbounded confidence in the fidelityof their dulcinea. An old gentleman, a sort ofhumorist, who is a friend of the lovers, affirms thatwomen are all alike, and that their mistresses areno better than the rest of their sex. The young-soldiersare piqued into a bet, and engage to followthe directions of the old gentleman, who undertakes,on that condition, to open their eyes on thesubject of female faith. They accordingly pretendto be suddenly called away to the wars, and thelovers part with many tears and the usual protestations.Presently two strangers make their appearance,in the guise of Albanian chiefs — the lovers,of course, but so transformed by means of beards,mustachios, and other appliances, as to be unrecognisableeven by the ladies, to whose hearts theyimmediately lay violent siege. The damsels holdout a little while, but are speedily won. Thedouble marriage is fixed, and the parties are metto sign the contracts, when the gentlemen withdrawon some pretext, and the forsaken loverssuddenly appear, full of joy at having unexpectedlybeen enabled to return to the objects of their love.An explanation takes place ; the unfortunate jiltsare covered with confusion ; but the old gentlemanputs all to rights by a few scraps of convenientmorality, and advising the young folks to laugh,252 COSI FAN TUTTE.shake hands, and say no more about the matter.The advice is readily taken, and all the partiessing, in joyous chorus, the following comfortablemaxim by way of finale —Fortunate l'uom che prendreAgni cosa pel burn verso,E tra i cash e le licenceDa region guitar si fa.Quel che sole altrui far piangere,Fia per lui cation di rise,E del monde in mezzo i turbine,Bella calma trover."The incidents are extravagant to the full extentallowed in the most farcical productions, and someof them are laughable from their excessive absurdity.Of this kind is the scene where the swainspretend to have swallowed poison, in consequenceof the cruelty of their mistresses, and exhibit themselvesin the agonies of death, from which they arerecovered by the process of animal magnetismadministered by the intriguing chambermaid, disguisedas a doctor.* The artifices employed todeceive the two girls are so clumsy, that theirsuccess is impossible ; and the whole plot is toopreposterous for sober criticism.Such a subject as this was not congenial to themental temperament of Mozart, "who," as oneThis stroke of satire must have told when this opera firstappeared, animal magnetism being then in great vogue in Germanyand France. The point of the jest has been lost for manyyears, but is likely to be revived by the Mesmerism of our day.COSI FAN TUTTE. 253of his biographers says, " could never trifle withlove, which was always the happiness or the tormentof his life." Treated seriously, it is a grossand injurious libel against the female character ;and Mozart, by making his personages perfectlyin earnest, and inspiring them with sentiment,feeling, and occasionally an almost tragic depth ofpassion, has only rendered a matter of mere badinagedisagreeable and revolting. Several attemptshave been made to diminish the incongruity betweenthe levity and heartlessness of the subject,and the tender and impassioned music of Mozart ;one of the happiest of which was that made byMr. Arnold, jun., when the piece was brought out,in an English dress, about ten years ago, at theEnglish opera-house, under the title of Tit for Tat.In the original drama, Fiordiligi and Arabella,regardless of their plighted vows to their lovers,yield with very little hesitation to the solicitationsof two supposed strangers ; but, in the Englishversion, the damsels discover the trick attemptedto be put upon them, and, aware of the identity oftheir pretended new admirers, retaliate upon theirlovers by affecting to listen to their suit. This issurely a dramatic improvement ; but it is inconsistentwith the expression of many parts of themusic ; and, in particular, leaves no proper placefor the beautiful accompanied recitative and airin the second act, in which Fiordiligi gives vent tothe contending emotions of regret, shame, tenderestCOSI FAN TUTTE.ness for her old lover, and incipient passion for thenew — a morceau, which, whether we consider thebeauty of the melody, the strength of the expression,or the enchanting harmony of the accompaniments,is one of the most exquisite that has everbeen produced by the composer, and has no faultbut that of being put into the mouth of a personwho cannot be supposed capable of the feelingswhich it conveys. The subject of this piece, inshort, is congenial to the spirit of Rossini, not ofMozart. Had it been composed by the author of// Turco in Italia and LLtaliana in Algiers, themusic would have been greatly inferior in beauty,no doubt ; but it would have been more brilliantand gay, and more in keeping with the levity ofthe characters and incidents. None of Mozart'ssombre colouring would have entered into thepicture of female fickleness; and even the ladiesthemselves could have joined in the laugh againsttheir sex.It must be owing to this cause that Cost fan tuttihas been much less frequently performed thanFigaro, Don Giovanni, La Clemenza di Tito, orthe Zauberfiote, for in musical beauty it does notyield to any of them. We are not sure, indeed,if any of them exhibits such an exquisite union ofall that is sweet and graceful in Italian melody,with the richness and depth of German harmonyand instrumentation.The Zauberfiote and La Clemenza di Tito wereZAUBERFLOTE. 255produced in 1791, the last year of Mozart's life.His health, which had always been delicate, wasthen rapidly declining ; and its decay had produceda degree of morbid depression of mind, almostamounting to insanity. His forebodings of approachingdeath, and his apprehensions of thedesolate state in which that event would leave hisfamily, alternately excited him to violent effortsof industry, and plunged him into listless despondency.When engaged in composition, he labouredwith such unremitting assiduity, that his strengthfrequently gave way in the midst of his exertions,and he was carried to his bed in a state of insensibility.It was while occupied in the composition of theZauberflote that he was first seized with thesefainting fits, which, however, did not prevent himfrom completing it with great rapidity. It was,like many of his other works, a labour of benevolence,from which his family never reaped anybenefit. A manager of a theatre, who had beenruined by unsuccessful speculations, came to beghis assistance. Mozart gave him the score of theZauberflote without price, and with permission toperform it at his own theatre, but stipulating thathe was not to give a copy to any one, in orderthat the author might afterwards be able to disposeof the copyright. The opera was brought out witha success which speedily relieved the embarrassmentsof the manager, who evinced his gratitude256 ZAUBERFLOTE,and honesty by selling copies of the score to anumber of other theatres; so that poor Mozart hadthe satisfaction of hearing of its brilliant performanceall over Germany, without the smallest advantageto those on whose account his mind wasoverwhelmed with anxiety.The subject of the Zauberjidte is of that fantasticand mystical stamp which is congenial to the Germanmind, though the allegory on which it isfounded has been felt in other countries to be dry,cold, and nearly unintelligible. The Egyptian mythologyadmitted of two contending principles inthe government of the world, the one good, andthe other evil ; and the evil principle, as well asthe good, was the object of worship, and had itstemples, priesthood, and sacred rites. The priestessof the evil principle, an enchantress called theQueen of Night, has a fair daughter called Lamina,whose destiny is connected with that of Taming,a young Egyptian prince. The subject of the piececonsists of the struggle between the good and evilprinciples for the possession of the mind of Lamina.Taming is inspired by the powers of evil, with amundane and sensual love for the princess ; but,by the intervention of the principle of good, thispassion is purified and ennobled, and is the meansof guiding the destined pair through the dangersof the world to the knowledge of truth and thepossession of happiness. This is rendered allegorically,by making the Queen of Night theZAUBERFLOTE. 257priestess of the evil principle, bestow upon Taminga magic flute, gifted with the power of inspiringlove, which afterwards becomes the instrument bywhich the prince overcomes the trials and dangerswhich he and the princess encounter during theirinitiation into the mysteries of Isis, or, in otherwords, their pursuit of truth and virtue, under theguidance of Sarastro, the high-priest of Isis andOsiris, the incarnations of the principle of good.The characters and incidents employed to illustratethis piece of mystical philosophy are wild,fantastical, and (as appears from the beautiful conceptionsthey awakened in the mind of Mozart)well calculated to excite a German imagination ;though, in our apprehension, it must ever bematter of regret that his most enchanting strainsshould not have been called forth by a subjectmore fitted to rouse the feelings and sympathies ofour nature. The dramatic defects of this opera,accordingly, have always been felt in bringing iton the stage everywhere but in Germany. In theItalian version the allegorical matter is got rid of,and the piece reduced to a childish and insipidfairy tale. In 1801, an opera called Les Mysteriesd'Isis was brought out with great splendour inParis, consisting of the music of the Zauberfloteunited to a drama entirely re-written, with a viewto produce a more coherent and interesting plot ;but the French author, though he changed thepiece very materially, did not succeed in improveii. s258 ZAUBERFLOTE.ing it, and his attempt met with little success.In England, the Italian piece has been occasionallyperformed at the Opera-house, but never with mucheffect. The only attempt to adapt it to the Englishstage was made at Drury Lane last season, when it-wasbrought out under the title of The Magic Flute.The German drama was closely adhered to ; and,notwithstanding the heaviness of the piece, themusic (which was well performed) was found socharming, that it sustained a considerable numberof representations.Dramatic music, for the most part, owes its popularityto the piece to which it belongs beingattractive in the theatre ; but to this the music ofthe Zauberflote (at least in this country) is aremarkable exception ; for, though the opera isalmost unknown, yet its airs are generally familiarsome of them as much so as the most popularEnglish ballads. And not only its airs, but itsconcerted pieces and choruses, are the delight ofevery one who derives any enjoyment from thecultivation of music. The Zauberflote illustratesthe close alliance between the utmost simplicityand the highest beauties of the art. When thisopera was first produced, its melodies were instantlyheard in every dwelling, from the palaceto the cottage — they resounded in the streets, thehighways and the fields, — and it was truly saidthat Mozart had enchanted all Germany with hisEnchanted Flute. Their beauties are not of thatClemens DI TITO. 259recondite kind which are perceptible only to thepractised ear and cultivated taste of the musician; the' delight equally the learned and theunlearned ; — and " the spinners and the knitters inthe sun" will listen to them with as heartfelt pleasureas the most refined frequenters of our theatresand concert-rooms. They reach the heart at once,and the impression remains for ever.La Clemenza di Tito was the last work of Mozart,excepting what may be called his death-song, thesublime Requiem. We have already spoken ofMetastasio's beautiful drama,* and of the alterationsmade upon it when it was set by Mozart ;alterations which, however injurious to the poem,were rendered necessary by the changes which hadtaken place in the structure of the musical drama.In Mozart's time, the utmost charms of poetry andmusic would not prevent an opera, consisting ofnothing but recitatives and airs, from appearingmeagre and insipid ; the attention required to beroused and sustained by the stimulus of highly-wroughtconcerted pieces, aided by the rich andvaried effects of the orchestra ; and it was to affordroom for these that so many changes and interpolationswere made in Metastasio's poem. Thesechanges, indeed, have given rise to some of thegreatest beauties in the opera — the finale to thefirst act, in particular, in which the sounds of agitationand dismay from the persons on the stageSee ante, vol. i. p. 337.s 2260 Clemens DI TITO.are blended with the wild cry, rising at intervals,from the distant multitude ; and the grand sceneof reconciliation, gratitude, and general joy, whichconcludes the whole. In the airs the composerhas adhered to the Italian model ; and some ofthem, beautiful as they are, are more protracted,florid, and ornate, than is consistent with dramaticeffect. The airs, " Part, ma tu mio ben," andNon piu di fiori," each of which has a most elaborateand brilliant accompaniment for the clarinet,have been introduced evidently for the sake of musicaldisplay ; and the delight with which they arelistened to is attended with the sacrifice of everyvestige of theatrical illusion. These airs, therefore,are of a kind which lose nothing by beingtransported from the stage to the concert-room.In general, however, the music of the Clemenza diTito is as dramatic as it is beautiful ; and thereare no characters on the lyrical stage more calculatedto exhibit the powers of great tragic performersthan those of Vitellia, Sixtus, and Titus.It is one of the misfortunes of the stage being exclusivelyengrossed by the ephemeral productionsof the day, that this circumstance has occasionedthe neglect (for the present) of the noblest seriousopera in existence.Mozart's biography is familiar to every one whobestows any attention on musical subjects, and weshall not, therefore, repeat circumstances which arewell known. Some interesting particulars respect-mozart'swidow. 261in'g him are contained in a series of letters publishedin The Musical World* giving an accountof a visit paid to his widow and sister at Salzburg,in 1829, by an English lady and her husband.Their name is partially concealed under initials,but is evidently that of one of the most accomplishedand eminent of our living musicians, whosenoble edition of the ecclesiastical works of Mozartis a proof of his veneration for the memory of thecomposer.On arriving at Salzburg, the travellers immediatelyvisited Mozart's widow, the celebrated ConstanceWeber, who had afterwards married M.Nyssen of Salzburg, and was widowed a secondtime. She was much affected by the enthusiasmof her visitors for her first husband's memory."She is completely a well-bred lady," says theletter-writer, "and though no remains of beautyexist, except in her eyes, (such as the engravingprefixed to her biography of Mozart would indicate,)yet she keeps her figure and a certain airwell for a woman who must, I suppose, be nearlyseventy years of age. Her apartment, like mostforeign ones, was not encumbered with furniture ;and the room in which she received us opened intoa closet which contained her bed ; but this wastastefully covered with a bright green silk counterpane,which harmonised nicely with some flowersin the apartment ; while from the windows wasAugust and September, 1837.262 MOZART.spread the glorious panorama of Salzburg. Shedescribes Mozart as loving all the arts, and havinga genius for most of them. He drew a little, andexcelled in dancing. She said he was generallycheerful and in good humour ; rarely melancholy,though sometimes pensive. ' Indeed he was anangel,' she exclaimed, ' and is one in heaven now.'This was said quite simply, without the least affectationof sentiment, but probably arising from sometender recollection of bygone kindness on his part.The original paintings of those portraits she haspublished with his memoirs and letters, hung roundthe room : but the exquisite likeness of Mozart,painted in oil by her brother-in-law, she keepscarefully in a case, and refuses to have it finished,(it was left imperfect byLange,) lest some unluckytouch should spoil the divine expression. It ismuch handsomer than the lithograph ; the foreheadis high and ample in the extreme, full of genius,the mouth replete with sweetness. His hands weresmall and delicate.Madame Nyssen thinks that Don Giovanniwas his favourite opera, but is not certain ; Figarowas often preferred. He wrote Idomeneo whenonly twenty years of age, at Munich, which heesteemed the period of his life most free from cares.He played the organ delightfully, as well as thepiano, but seldom touched this last instrument incompany, unless those were present who couldappreciate him ; but he would often extemporiseMOZART. 263when alone with her. When composing he becamecompletely abstracted ; walked about the apartment,quite unconscious of what was passingaround ; but when once his conceptions were arrangedin his mind, he needed no pianoforte, butwould take music-paper, and while he wrote wouldsay to her, ' Now, my dear, have the goodness torepeat what conversation has passed, and tell meall the news.' Her talking never interrupted him ;he wrote on, ' which is more she added, ' than Ican do with the commonest letter.'His own music often affected him to tears. Hewas once so overcome while singing the quartet,Andre ramingo,'* that he was forced to quit theparty, and did not recover his composure for sometimeafterwards. Madame repeated also the anecdoteof her sitting up all night with him, while hewrote the overture to Don Giovanni. It was oftenhis practice to write until two o'clock in the morning,and rise again at four. What an exertion forone of his delicate frame !Madame told us that Mozart's voice was atenor ; his speaking tone gentle, unless when directingmusic ; that then he became loud andenergetic — would even stamp with his feet, andmight be heard at a considerable distance. Sixmonths before his death he was possessed with theidea that some of his enemies had given himaequo, lofana, and had calculated the preciseJn Idomeneo.'264 MOZART.time of his decease — ' for which,' he would exclaim,they have ordered a Requiem. Yes, it is for myselfI am writing this Requiem His wife entreatedhim to lay it aside, assuring him thatillness alone induced such ideas, and that whenhe was better he would resume the compositionwith renewed vigour. He yielded to her advice,and, to change the current of thought, composed amasonic ode, which was performed by the companyfor whom it was written, and much praised. Hewas present, and returned home quite elated. ' DidI not know that I have written better,' he said, ' Ishould think this, from the applause it has obtained,the best of my works. How absurd was my notionof having taken poison — yes, I must have been ill,but now give me back the Requiem, and I willproceed with it.'"In a few days, however, his illness returned,and he relapsed into his former idea of having beenpoisoned. He wrote the ' Recorder' and principalparts first, saying, ' If I do not live to completethe work, these are of the greatest consequence.'When he had sketched the principalparts, he sang them over with his wife and Siiss-mayer, and during the performance was severaltimes affected even to tears. Afterwards he calledSussmayer to him, to observe his directions if heshould die before the work was completed. Thefugue written at the commencement he desiredmight be repeated, and showed how he wishedMOZART. 265those parts to be filled up that were alreadysketched out. It was in consequence of this fillingup that Siissmayer afterwards falsely and ungenerouslywrote to Breitkopf and Hearted, music-sellersof Leipsic, that he had written the principal part ofthis celebrated Requiem : but, as Madame justlyobserved, any one could have supplied what he haddone, after the sketching out and precise directionsof Mozart ; and that nothing which Siissmayerever composed, either before or after, proved him topossess the least talent of a similar kind. Threedays before Mozart's death, he received from theemperor the appointment of music-director at St.Stephen's ; a situation that was of comparativecompetence, and at once removed him from thecabals of Salieri and others. He wept bitterly,and exclaimed, ' It is too late ; now that I mightenjoy a little leisure and write something worthy ofthe inspiration I feel, I must die.' It w r as hishighest, ambition to have written an oratorio in thestyle of Handel ; but it seems as if predestinedthat the composer of the Messiah and Israel inEgypt should stand alone and unrivalled in thatstyle, by the removal of the only one who couldpossibly have surpassed him"*Mozart, before he formed his attachment to ConstanceWeber, had loved and been rejected by hersister Louisa, then an admired vocal performer atSome allowance must be made here for the enthusiasm ofthe fair letter-writer.266 MOZART.Vienna. She afterwards married M. Lange, amusician of considerable talent. In 1829 she wasliving, a widow, in Vienna. "To-day," says theagreeable letter writer already quoted, " I had avisit from Madame Lange, Mozart's first love, andthe sister of his wife. She must have been verypretty in her youth, but seems now broken downwith delicate health, and the fatigue of teaching ;for necessity compels her still to give lessons. Shespoke very highly of the understanding of her sister,and with great affection of her nephews, (Mozart'ssons,) whom she declares she loves as well as herown children, I ventured to ask her how she couldhave refused Mozart. She answered very naively,He was very amiable always, but I did not lovehim then, and how could I foresee the greatness towhich his genius would elevate him ?' She spokebitterly against the Viennese for their neglect ofhis family, and their indifference to his memory,since they cannot even point out the precise spotwhere he was interred, merely saying he was buriedin St. Mark's burial-ground ;— that although theEmperor Joseph the Second gave a thousand florinstowards erecting a monument to Mozart, it hasnever been begun for want of sufficient funds; 'andthis,' she added, ' is the German enthusiasm forgood music and its composers'"Germany, though a musical land, is far frombeing, as is very commonly supposed, the paradiseof musicians. Mozart struggled all his life withMOZART. 267difficulties, and was obliged to toil incessantly, notfor fame, but for his daily bread. His widow wassaved from destitution by her second marriage witha respectable man, who became, too, a father to herdead husband's children. His sister, the celebratedgirl who shared the triumphs of his childhood, andwhose name is for ever associated with his memory,died a few years ago in old age, and such extremepenury, that she was actually supported by charity.Beethoven lived unpatronised by the great and neglectedby the public, barely able to subsist by a lifeof labour and parsimony, unknown and unheededamong his countrymen, even while his great namewas resounding through Europe ; and all becausehis transcendent genius was unaccompanied by thesuppleness of the courtier and the arts of the manof the world. Let our musicians think a little onthese things before they join in the common cryagainst their own country, and repine that " theirlot was not cast in the pleasant places" of Germany.CHAPTER X.The French opera — Rameau — Italian burlettas — Disputes —Rousseau's Devin dn Village — French burlettas — Montreville— Dunii — Favart and Madame Favart — Contemporarydescriptions of the French opera — Les adieux de Thalie.A previous chapter* contains a sketch of the progressof the opera in France down to the time ofJean Philippe Rameau.This celebrated musician was born in 1683, andspent the earlier part of his life at Clement, inAuvergne, where he was organist of the cathedralchurch. In this retirement he pursued those scientificresearches which gave birth to that famoussystem of harmony which made him so long beregarded as the Newton of the musical world. Hehad reached the age of fifty without being knownas a dramatic composer, when, in 1733, he producedhis first opera, Hippolyta et Aricie, the immensesuccess of which excited a violent feud between hispartisans and those of the school of Lullii. HeChapter II.RAMEAU. 269continued to produce new works in rapid succession,which at length overcame all opposition, completelyengrossed the stage of the serious opera in France,and gained for him, in that country, the reputation ofbeing the greatest lyrical composer that hadever existed. His last opera, Les Paladins, appearedin 1760 ; and he died in 1764, at the age of eighty-one.Rameau had the fortune, which seems to havebeen very common to musicians of distinguishedgenius in France, of undergoing a great deal offactious hostility. Because he departed from thestyle of Lullii, he was accused of depraving thepublic taste, and destroying the French opera.Almost all his works at first met with violent opposition; and, when they came to obtain favour,the composer's partisans were abused as if theywere heretics and traitors to their country. In thepresent times it is hardly possible even to imaginethe extremities to which feuds of this nature werecarried in France. When, at a later period, theItalian music began to gain popularity in Paris,Rameau's most violent enemies became his mostardent admirers. Finding it impossible any longerto maintain the cause of Lullii, they now placed thename of Rameau in opposition to those of theItalian composers. The matter was treated as anational quarrel ; and it was considered an insultto France to prefer the music of foreigners to thatof a Frenchman. According to the French fashion,270 RAMEAU.the subject was keenly taken up by the journalistsand pamphleteers, and the press groaned with dissertationsproving that Rameau was the first musicianin Europe. Europe, meanwhile, hardly know itsfirst musician's name. From his own day to thepresent, his operas, though, for a time, they keptalmost exclusive possession of the French stage,have remained utterly unknown beyond the Frenchterritory.On the subject of these once famous operas wemust plead guilty to our share of the general ignorance: but they are thus characterised by a verycompetent judge, the Baron de Grimm : " In hisoperas, Rameau has overpowered all his predecessorsby dint of harmony and quantity of notes. Someof his choruses are very fine. Lullii could onlysustain his vocal psalmody by a simple bass ; Rameauaccompanied almost all his recitatives with the orchestra.These accompaniments are generally inbad taste ; they drown the voice rather than supportit, and force the singers to scream and howl in amanner which no ear of any delicacy can tolerate.We come away from an opera of Rameau's intoxicatedwith harmony, and stupefied with the noise ofvoices and instruments. His taste is always gothic ;and, whether his subject is light or forcible, hisstyle is equally heavy. He was not destitute of ideas,but he did not know what to make of them. In hisrecitatives the sound is continually in opposition tothe sense ; though they occasionally contain happyRAMEAU. 271declamatory passages. In regard to his airs, as thepoet has never given him anything to do but to triflewith some commonplace word, such as lance, vole,triomphe, enchain, &c, or to imitate the notes ofnightingales by means of flageolets, with otherpuerilities of that sort, there is nothing to say onthe subject. If he had formed himself in some ofthe schools of Italy, and thus acquired a notion ofmusical style, and habits of musical thought, henever would have said (as he did) that all poemswere alike to him, and that he could set the Gazettede France to music. He might have created dramaticmusic in his own country : as it was, hemerely set Fully aside by being his imitator."Grimm's description of Rameau's personal characteris far from prepossessing. " He was, "says thiswriter, "of a harsh and brutal disposition, and anutter stranger to every feeling of humanity. I wasin company with him one day when he could notconceive why somebody present expressed a wishthat the young Duke of Burgundy should evincequalities worthy of the throne which he might inherit.' What is that to me ?' he said with greatnaivete, ' I shall be dead before he is kine.' —But your children V some one suggested. Stillhe did not see why a man should care about hischildren, or anything else, when he himself wasdead. His ruling passion was avarice. He carednothing for reputation, honour, or distinction. Allhe wanted was money, and he died a rich man."272 ITALIAN BURLETTAS.It would have been a pity had such a man beenideally a great musician.Though Rameau reigned in undisputed supremacyover the serious opera, a great impression wasmade upon the Parisian public by the arrival of anItalian company, who, in 1752, obtained permissionto perform Italian burlettas and interment at theopera-house, or theatre of the Academie Royale deMusique. They exhibited the Serva Padrona ofPergolesi as an interlude between the acts of Lullii'sActs et Galilee. This charming piece, representedby Signor Manilla and Signora Corelli, (who seemto have been excellent performers,) had the greatestsuccess, and, night after night, drew crowds to thetheatre. The partisans of the French school tookthe alarm, and the admirers of Lullii and Rameau,forgetting their mutual hostility, made commoncause against the Italian intruders. Ink was shedin abundance ; the literati, as usual, taking oppositesides in the fray. Among the multitude of pamphletswhich appeared was Rousseau's famous Lettre surla Musique Francaise, in which he espoused thecause of the Italian music with great strength andeloquence, though with a degree of violence andacrimony which the occasion did not call for, andwhich, in some measure, counteracted the author'sobject. " In general," says Grimm, " people ofsense do not approve of the tone of Rousseau's letter ;where there are good reasons, there is no occasionfor invective :" — an excellent maxim, too often for-diderot.273gotten in literary controversy. It was remarked,too, that Rousseau's opinions were not only carriedto an extravagant length, but were at variance withhis own conduct. While he maintained that it wasimpossible to compose music to French words, thatthe language was quite unfit for it, that the Frenchnever had music, and never would, he himself hadcomposed a great deal of music to French words,and had actually just produced a French opera,Le Devin du Village.The Chevalier de Mouhy's Justification de laMusique Francaise was the principal pamphlet onthe opposite side. Rousseau was burnt in effigy bythe opera band at the door of the theatre ; # andthe government having espoused the cause of Frenchmusic, he narrowly escaped being exiled fromFrance.Diderot was one of the warmest partisans of theItalian music. Pergolesi's delicate accompanimentsin the Serva Padrona were villanous murderedby the French performers in the orchestra ; and anew curtain having been put up in the opera-house,Rousseau was especially hated by the French orchestralplayers, of whom, in his writings, he always speaks with unmeasuredcontempt. Gretry, in his Memoirs, says, that whileRousseau was superintending the rehearsals of his Devin duVillage, he treated the band so cavalierly, that they, in revenge,hanged him in effigy. " Well," said Rousseau, " I don't wonderthat they should hang me now, after having so long put me tothe torture."VOL. II. T274 DEVIN DU VILLAGE.Diderot proposed for it the following laconic inscription,—Hie Marshal Apollinem ;"which was thus translated (or rather paraphrased)in one of the journals ;O Pergolese inimitable,Quand notre orchestre improbableT'immole sous son violon,Je crois, qu'au rebours de la fable,Marshal scorched Apollon."In 1753, Rousseau's burnett, or intercede, LeDevin du Village, was performed at the opera-house.The music consists of pleasing balladairs well suited to the rustic simplicity of the subject,though it is difficult to discover in them theItalian style to which the composer professed sostrong an attachment. This little piece had thegreatest success, and is occasionally performed, ifnot in Paris, in the provincial French theatres, tothis day.For nearly two years the Italian company (or theBuffon, as they were called) went on very successfully,performing a number of the best mariettaof their own country. But the public, whenit ceased to dispute about them, began to growweary of them. " Who would not have thought,"says a contemporary writer,* " after eighteenmonths of such marked eagerness for this entertainment,that the lot of the Buffon was decided, andHistoire de I Opera Buffon.FRENCH AND ITALIAN PARTIES. 275that they would be naturalised in France ? But ifour rage for a thing is strong, happily it is notlasting. Levity misleads us, but reason brings usback. The monotony of the scene ; the shame ofnot knowing the language, which people were tooindolent to learn ; love of novelty ; want of opposition; — all concurred to produce indifference, andenthusiasm was succeeded by ennui. Such is ourcharacter in respect to amusements ; we value aplaything only so long as our possession of it is disputed: let us have it without opposition, and wecare no more about it."Thus neglected, the Italians took their departurefrom Paris in the beginning of 1754 ; and theirdisappearance was celebrated in the journals of theday as a national triumph, which was solemnisedby a splendid performance of Rameau's chef-d'oeuvre,Castor et Pollux.During their short but important career, the mostshameful intrigues and machinations were resortedto against them. The opposite parties had differentstations in the pit of the theatre. The Frenchfaction occupied what was called the Coin du Roi ;the partisans of the Italians, the Coin de la Heine :the king and queen having taken different sides inthe dispute. When Mondonville, a composer of theFrench school, produced his Triton et Aurore, being-apprehensiveof its failure by means of the Italianparty, he procured the support of Madame de Pompadour,by whose orders the pit, before the doorst 2276 civic operas.were opened, was filled by the king's household, tothe exclusion of the usual occupants of the Coin dela Heine ; and Mondonville's piece, of course, wentoff with unanimous applause.The departure, however, of the Italian performersdid not extinguish the taste for comic operas in theItalian style. French pieces of this description,the songs of which were adapted to favourite Italianairs, were immediately brought out at the ComedieItalienne, and performed by the Frenchcompany of that theatre, with universal applause.The Serva Padrona, exceedingly well translated,under the title of La Servante Mattress, was performedwith the original music, and drew crowds tothe theatre. Richard and Mademoiselle Favart, itwas said, left nothing to regret in the loss of theItalian representatives of the master and the maid.The opening lines containing the Spanish proverb,Aspettar e non venire," &c.*are thus smartly translated ;Longtems attendre,Sans voir venir ;Au lit entendre,Ne point dormir ;Grand peine prendre,Sans parvenir ;Sont trois sujets dealer se pendre."The success of La Servante Mattress led to othertranslations of Italian burlettas. Among others,See ante, vol. i. p. 377.LANGUEDOCIAN DIALECT. 277Les Chinois, translated from II Chinese, by M . Naig6on,and Let Bohemian, translated from La Niagara byM. Favart, were performed with great applause atthe Theatre Italien, or Opera Comique, as it wasalso called.The most distinguished among Rameau's contemporarycomposers for the grand opera was Mondonville,several of whose works were very successful.One of them is entitled to particularnotice on account of the singularity of its character.It is called Daphnis et Alcimadure, and was firstperformed in 1754: both the poem and music wereby Mondonville.The piece is written in the patois of Languedoc,of which the author was a native ; and the principalperformers, Melmotte, La Tour, and MademoiselleFell, were also from the southern provinces. Thesubject is a pretty pastoral love-story, of a sufficientlycommonplace kind ; but the attraction layin the piquancy of the dialogue, and the musicalcharacter of the words, which were united to airs,in which the composer, though of the old Frenchschool, endeavoured to imitate the Italian style. Itis very curious to observe, from this piece, the superiorityof the Languedocian patois, as a poeticaland musical language, to the standard French dialect.It is much more sonorous and pleasing to theear ; terminating in a and at the words which, inFrench, end in e and er. The Languedocians, forinstance, say libertas and dans, instead of liber te278 LANGUEDOCIAN DIALECT.and danser. They have no e mute, that great sourceof cacophony in French verse. They say noubelofor nouvelle ; pen for peine ; armada for armee ; determinatefor determined. Neither have they theFrench nasal sound ; the word dein, for dans, ispronounced in the Italian and not in the Frenchmanner. They have the graceful Italian diminutives; they say, ma pastoureleto, for ma petite bergere; noun soleillet for mon petit soleil : and theirphrases are not encumbered by clusters of insignificantparticles.A few passages from this opera of Daphnis etAlcimadure will offer a specimen of this sweet andmusical language. The piece opens with a dialoguebetween the lovers. We add a Frenchversion :Alcimadure. Born-jour, " Ale. Bon-jour, jeune Daph-johne Daphnis. nis.Daph. Born-jour, below pas Doth. Bon-jour, belle ber-tour.were.Ale. Rous tenets pla mayti Ale. Vous venez bien matindin quest devour ? dans cette demeure.Daph. Helps, non dormi Daph. Helps, je ne dorspus. plus.Ale. Peccary, qual malade Pauvre enfant, quelhou ! Equi pot boys causa malheur ! Et qui peut causerpareillo languished ? pareille langueur ?Daph. Labour. Daph. Labour.Ale. Coussi labour fa tell Ale. Comment labour faitpen?" telle peine ?"LANGUEDOCIAN DIALECT. 279The following air has the sweetness and grace ofMetastasio.Poulido pastoral, " Jolie bergere,Perles cas famous, Perle des amours,De la rose noubelo De la rose nouvelleEsfacats las colour ; Effaces les couleurs ;Perdue sets boys tant below, Pourquoi eyes vous si belle,Q'yeu tan amorous ? Et moi si amoureux ?Poulido pastoral Jolie bergere,Perles cas famous, Perle des amours,Benque me seats cruel, Quoiquevousmesoyezcruelle,Yeu n'aymeray que boys." Je n'aimerai que vous."Every line shows the superiority of the patois tothe pure French. What a difference, for example,between " Benque me seats cruel," and '' Quoiquevous me soyez cruelle !" Tn short, the dialect ofLanguedoc and Gascony excels in simplicity, softness,and expression ; and it seems rather a pitythat France should have banished to her remotestprovinces a language so well adapted to the purposesof poetry and music. The singularity aswell as merit of this piece made it long a greatfavourite with the public.The works of Rameau, Mondonville, and one ortwo other composers of lesser note, together withfrequent revivals of Lullii's productions, supplied thestage of the Academie Royale de Musique, till thereign of the French school was shaken by thearrival of Gluck. The bulk of the public made it apoint of honour to support their national school,280 BALLAD OPERAS.notwithstanding the incessant attacks made upon itby the partisans of Italian music.In the mean time the Italian style found patronsand supporters at the Opera Comique, or TheatreItalien, as it was called. At this theatre the adaptationto the French stage of the Serva Padrona,and other Italian burlettas, led to the production oforiginal pieces in a similar style. Dunii (who hasbeen already mentioned as the successful rival ofPergolesi at Rome) came to Paris in 1757, in orderto compose for this theatre. His first opera was,Le Peintre amoureux, an imitation of Ilpittore inna-morato, the French words being adapted to his ownmusic in the Italian piece. This lively littledrama, joined to Dunii's sweet and graceful airs,increased the taste for Italian music ; but still itsmerits were not generally understood. The publicwere unable to appreciate the truth of the declamationand the purity of the melody, things as yetunknown in French composition. After an intervalof eight years, Dunii produced, in 1765, at thesame theatre, an opera written by Anseaume, andfounded on our play of George Farewell, calledEcole de jeunesse, ou Le Barnevelt Francis.This was one of the first specimens of the opera dvarieties, introduced about this time into France, inwhich the dialogue is spoken and intermixed withairs, like our ballad opera. This piece, comingunder the designation of a comic opera, has notthe sombre colouring of the English play. Cleon,FA V ART. 281the French Farewell, does not murder his uncle,but is forgiven by him, and is united to a faithfulfair one, who has loved him throughout all hisengagements ; a very questionable denouement onthe score of morality. It is, however, pathetic andinteresting, and had great success ; the anti-Italianparty ascribing its effect to its dramatic, not itsmusical merit.The most prolific writer of operas d varieties, orballad operas, at this period, was the celebratedFavart. His Annette et Lubin, founded on Mar-monte'stale under that title, produced in 1760,acquired great popularity. It was followed byIsabelle et Gertrude, L'amitie a Vepreuve, and manyother successful pieces, the music of which wascomposed by the most favourite musicians of thetime.Favart was born in 1710. He was the son of apastry cook, and, having a turn for the stage, becamean actor at the Opera Comique. In 1745he became manager of a strolling companywhich attended Marshal Saxe's army in Flanders,and performed dramatic pieces at head-quarters.Saxe, who was acquainted with the French character,knew the effect that could be produced uponhis troops by a well-timed song or joke. Favartwas made chansonnier to the army, and employedto celebrate every remarkable occurrence by popularsongs and ballads, which, being sung on thestage, immediately became current throughout the282 FAVART.army. The evening before the battle of Rocoux,Marshal Saxe ordered Favart to write something bywayof announcing next day's battle, as a bagatelleabout the result of which there was no matter ofdoubt. Accordingly the following couplets weresung to a popular tune, by a pretty actress, in thecourse of the evening's entertainments :Demain nous concerns reldche,Quoique le directeur seen sache.Vous voir compleat nos desire :On doit ceder tout a la gloire ;Nous ne songeons quia vos plaisirs,Vous ne songez quia la victoire."The piece was then given out for the next eveningbut one. Next clay the battle was fought ; and onthe following evening the piece which had beenannounced was performed as part of the rejoicingfor the victory.Favart married a young girl called Chantilly,who, as Madame Favart, became an eminent actress.She was a member of Marshal Saxe's theatricalcompany under Favart's management. Thegeneral fell desperately in love with her, as it iscalled : but she preferred Favart, and would notlisten to the great man's proposals. At last Favartand she made their escape together during thesiege of Maestricht. The night of their elopementwas stormy ; the bridges which formed the communicationbetween the marshal's main body and acorps on the other side of the river, were carriedFAVAHT. 283away ; and the troops thus separated ran the riskof being attacked and cut off by the enemy, whileno assistance could be given them. M. Dumesnil,one of the marshal's officers, went into his tentearly in the morning, and found him sitting on thebed in a state of the most violent grief and agitation.Dumesnil endeavoured to comfort him, bysaying that the misfortune was great, but could berepaired. " Ah, my dear friend," exclaimed themarshal, " it cannot be repaired — I am undone !"Dumesnil continued to point out that the disasterwas not so bad as the general seemed to think,while he kept bewailing his fate in broken sentences.At last he perceived that Dumesnil wasmerely occupied with the destruction of the bridges.What," cried he, " is it the bridges you aretalking about all this while ? — That is nothing — Ican put it to rights in a couple of hours. But,Chantilly — I have lost her — she has deserted me !"The hero of the age, whom the most momentouscrisis never deprived of an hour's sleep, had passedthe night in despair, because a little actress hadrun away from him. But this was not the worst ofthe story. Soon after their escape the young couplemarried ; and Marshal Saxe, enraged at his disappointment,applied for a lettre de cachet to carry offthe wife from the husband. This flagitious piece oftyranny was actually perpetrated ! The lettre decachet was granted by Louis the Fifteenth ; MadameFavart was seized and imprisoned in a convent in'284 FAVART.the country, till her firmness was overcome by longconfinement, and she consented to become themistress of this powerful oppressor. She was afterwardsa favourite actress at the Theatre Italien,and died in 1772, at the age of forty-five.Favart died in 1792. He wrote above sixtypieces for the comic opera, which have a great dealof wit and gaiety, accompanied with delicacy andelegance of style. His best works were publishedin 1809, under the title of Theatre choisi de Favart,and are well worthy of perusal.In Grimm's " Correspondance" for the year1765, there is a satirical jeu esprit, in the form ofa letter from a young gentleman of Schaffhausen,who has taken a trip to Paris to see the world, andii'ives his " dear and much honoured mother 1 ' anaive account of his experiences and reflections.Among other places he visits the theatres. Hesees, at the Opera Comique, Le Bamevelt Francis ;and is confounded by its morality, but charmedwith Dunii's music. While he is musing on whathe has seen and heard, he overhears a fat man sayto his neighbour, " I would advise the players tostrike all the music out of this piece. It is too interesting,and really, in spite of the music, onecan't help crying at it." — " This remark," says ourletter writer, " amazed me. The music had mademe cry three or four times in the course of thepiece ; I had thought all my life that nothing wasso apt to move the feelings as music ; but I foundSATIRICAL DESCRIPTION. 285it was all a mistake. So I went to the grand opera,that I might discover the true object of music."The piece was Castor and Pollux, admittedby all France to be the finest that ever appeared inany theatre in the world. All the rank and fashionof the capital crowded to see it, and whenever itwas performed it was hardly possible to get into thehouse. I did all I could to look like a Frenchmanand a man of taste, but I got so weary, the screamsof the actors and actresses affected me so much, thatI was actually in a cold perspiration, and felt everymoment on the point of being taken ill. Therewas nevertheless a splendid funeral in the secondact ; two Benedictines kept watch by Castor's bier,and a fine service in plain chant was sung for thedeceased. My only wonder was, that people shouldbe so eager to pay for a show which they could seeevery day for nothing in the churches. The wholeproceedings of the opera, besides, struck me as veryqueer and odd. The actors kept singing and dancingalternately, and never to the purpose. Thepiece ended with every act, and then had to beginagain ; till at last Castor was fairly killed, buried,brought to life again, and received into paradise.To celebrate his apotheosis, the dancers, male andfemale, took the names of stars and planets, anddanced a chaconne : and while the moon, who wascalled Mile. Pressing, placed herself between M.Vestris, who was the sun, and Mile. Ballard, who wasthe earth, the foot-lights were lowered to imitate an286 GOLDONl's DESCRIPTION.eclipse. This ingenious idea was received withgreat applause ; but still it appeared to me ratherstrange that a terrestrial eclipse should extend alloverOlympus, the scene of the piece, and darkennot only the whole planetary system but the sunitself. In short, my dear and honoured mother, Ifound myself so completely at sea, and so far removedfrom all the received notions on the subject,that had I been left to myself I should infallibly haveseton as a showy and tiresome piece of child's playathing that is looked upon here as the masterpieceof the human mind, and the honour andglory of France."Goldoni, in his Memoirs, gives an account of theimpression made upon him by a visit to the Frenchopera at this time.I seated myself in the amphitheatre, which isin front of the stage, in form of a semicircle, theseats being raised in gradations one above another.This is the best place in the house for seeing andhearing. I was content with my situation, andpitied the audience in the pit, who were standing,and closely crowded together.The piece commenced ; and, notwithstanding myfavourable situation, I could not hear a word. Iwaited, however, patiently for the airs, expectingthat I should at least be entertained by the music.The dancers made their appearance, and I foundthe act finished without having heard, as I thought,a single air. I made this remark to a gentlemanGOLDONl's DESCRIPTION. 287who sat by me ; he laughed, and assured me therehad been six airs in the scenes which we hadheard."What !" said I, " I am not deaf. The instrumentsnever ceased accompanying the voices,sometimes more loudly, sometimes more slowlythan usual ; but I* took the whole for recitative.My companion interrupted me — ' Look, look,there is Vestris, the most elegant, powerful, andaccomplished dancer in Europe.'I saw a rustic dance, in which this shepherdof the Arno triumphed over the shepherds of theSeine. A minute afterwards, three characters sano-at the same time. This was a trio, which I comprehendedas little as the recitative. The first actthen closed.As nothing takes place, between the acts of theFrench opera, the second act began immediately.I heard the same sort of music and felt the sameweariness as before. I gave up the drama and itsaccompaniments, and began to attend to the ensembleof the spectacle, which I found surprising.The principal dancers, male and female, had arrivedat an astonishing pitch of perfection, and thecorps de ballet was very numerous and elegant.The music of the choruses appeared more agreeablethan that of the drama. I recognised thepsalms of Corelli, Biffi, and Clare. The decorationswere superb, the machines well contrived and288 GOLDONl's DESCRIPTION.admirably executed. The dresses were very rich,and the stage always well filled with people.Everything was grand, beautiful, and magnificentexcept the music. At the end of the. dramathere was a sort of chaconne sung by an actresswho had not appeared among the characters of thedrama, and accompanied by choruses and dancing.This was an agreeable surprise, and might haveenlivened the piece ; but, after all, it was a hymnrather than an air.When the curtain fell, I was asked by all myacquaintances how I liked the opera. I answered,without a moment's reflection, 'It is a paradisefor the eyes, but a hell for the ears.' This impertinentand inconsiderate reply made some laughand others look very angry. Two gentlemen ofthe king's chapel thought it excellent. The authorof the music was not far from me, and perhapsoverheard what I said. I was much concerned,for he was a worthy man. Requiescat in pace.I was present some days afterwards at the representationof Castor and Pollux ; and the drama,which was exceedingly well written and splendidlyperformed, reconciled me a little to the Frenchmusic. I soon perceived the difference betweenthe music of Rameau and that which had displeasedme so much. I was intimate with this celebratedcomposer, for whose talents and learning I had thehighest respect ; but I must be sincere. RameauBURLESQUE OPERAS. 289distinguished himself, and produced a great revolutionin France in instrumental music ; but invocal music he made no essential change."A lively satire on the French grand opera appearedabout this time in the shape of a little piece,called Les Adieux de Thalie, which was performedat the Theatre Italien.The performers are assembled on the stage : acomposer enters and tells them that he will letthem hear a serious opera which he wishes tobring out.J'apporte un opera, qu'on doit trouver sublime,Car il vient de fort loin ; des cris, des passions,De labour, de l'effroi, des decorations ;Et le tout, couronne d'un ballet pantomime."What !" exclaims one of the actors — " a seriousopera at this theatre ?"Yes," replies the musician, " it is not in yourway, I know ; but I bring you something in theserious style, that you may judge of my talents inthe comic :Ce n'est que par degree qu'on peut arriver la.Malheur a qui trop tot prend son essai lyrique !Moi, pour atteindre a Opera comique,J'ai voulu m'essayer par un grand opera."The composer then explains the subject of hisgrand opera. It is in three acts, and comprised insix lines. This, he says, is the argument :VOL. II. u•290 BURLESQUE OPERAS.Un jeune prince AmericanEst amoureux dune jeune princesse.Cet amant, qui merit au milieu de la piece,Par le secours d'un dieu ressuscite a la fm.Le sujet est tout neuf ."He goes to the side, and calls on his performersto come forward :Vous, peuples, entrez, qu'on s'avance !"To the singers he says,Vous, teaches de prendre le ton'"To the dancers,•■ Vous, le jarret tend, partez bien en cadence ;Enfin, suivez tous ran baton."He flourishes his baton, the overture is played,and the piece begins.FIRST ACT.La Princesse. Cher prince, on nous unit.Le Prince. Len suis ravi, princesse.Peuples, chanted, danse, montrez votre allegresse !Choeur. Chantons, dansons, mentions notre allegresse ! "End of the First Act.ACT SECOND.La Princesse. Amour !"Here is a noise of fighting, which frightens theprincess, who goes to the side-scene to faint. Theprince enters, pursued by his enemies : after aBURLESQUE OPERAS. 291combat, lie is mortally wounded. The princessrushes in.Cher prince !Le Prince. Helps !La Princesse. Quoi !Le Prince. Expire !Le Princesse. O malheur !Peuples, chanted, danse, montrez votre douleur !Choeur. Chantons, dansons, mentions notre douleur!"The second act ends with a dead march.ACT THIRD.The composer begins by a complimentary speechto the orchestra. Then, holding his hat like abuckler, and his cane like a lance, he jumps on achair and exclaims,Pallas te rend le jour !Le Prince. Ou suis-je ?Peuples, chanted, danse, celebes ce prodige !Choeur. Chantons, dansons, celebrons ce prodige !"End of the Third Act.Then the composer, by way of epilogue, addressesthe audience, —Vous eyes enchanted ! je le lis dans vos yeux,Et e'en suis point surpris ; mais, mesdames, de grace,L'eloge, quoique du, me gene et m'embarrasse :Attendez que je sois eloise de ces lieux.Thomassin, who personated the musician, performedalso the parts of the prince and princess,u2292 BURLESQUE OPERAS.making his acting and singing a capital caricatureof the French serious opera. This jeu cC esprit producedgreat amusement.*We find the account of this performance in the AnnatesDramatists. In Weber's eccentric satirical work, publishedafter his death, entitled Tonkunstlers Leben, (The Life of aComposer,) it is said that the jeu esprit appeared in 1670, inone of the Paris Journals. It appears to have suggested toWeber two others of a similar kind, by way of satire on theItalian and the German opera. The Italian opera is caricaturedin the following grand scena, " previous to which," saysWeber, " a noise is made in the orchestra merely for the purposeof procuring silence; — this in Italy is called an overture.GRAND SCENA.(Remit.) Ohio! actio !(Arioso.) Oh ! non hanger, mio bene !Ti lascio, idol mio !Time I(Allegro.) Gia la tromba suona ;Per te mourir io voglio.(Pin stretto) O felicity ![On the td a trill of a dozen bars ; the public applaudfuriously.]DUETTO.Caro !Care !(A due.) Sorte amara ![On the amara, for the sake of the a, a series of arpeggiopassages of the sweetest kind.](Allegro.) O barbara torment !BURLESQUE OPERAS. "293[Nobody notices this passage, till one of the cognoscenti criesout bravo ! brava ! when instantly the whole audiencechime in fortissimo]"Weber then gives us a whole German opera, sufficiently brief,but quite alia Teresa. While writing, he must have been indulgingin a sly laugh at the subject of his own Freischiitz. Theopera is entitledAgnes Bernstein,A romantic national melodrama. Dramatis personae, asmany as are necessary. Scene, the heart of Germany.First scene — Scenic transformations.SECOND SCENE.Agnes. Alas ! my soul is enfeebled, and my spirits spent.Brunhilde. O, madam, attempt not to fathom the unfathomabledepths of human suffering. If you noble ladies take it intoyour heads to fall in love with misery and distress, you mustexcuse us for our dulness in not being so susceptible.Agnes. Let us repair to the castle garden. The gloom of itsbower will better accord with the dismal anticipation of my destiny,for I must anticipate it. [Exit.Scene changes. Duke and followers.Duke. Follow me, sir knight, to the castle hall. There, amidthe festive pomp, shall she give you her hand. Should sherefuse, in the gloom of the donjon-keep shall vipers and serpents,according to custom — you understand me— \ Exeunt.Scene changes. Albrecht appears.Albrecht. Caspar, follow me.Scene changes. A Spirit appears in a warning attitude.Albrecht. What art thou, mysterious being ?294 BURLESQUE OPERAS.Spirit. I have power to do all things. Hasten, noble youth ;fear not— depend upon it I shall save you. Away !Albrecht. To save her or die !Two Minstrels appear.Minstrels. Wait, noble lord. We come to sing you the historyof all this.Finale.[Rocky forest scenery. To the left, in the background, a.castle ; opposite, a vineyard ; more in front, a hermit'scell. To the left, in the foreground, a cavern, somewhatfurther a bower ; in the centre two hollow trees ;further on, a subterraneous passage']Hermit enters, singing a prayer. Agnes sings an air in thecastle, united vjith which is a chorus of vintagers fromthe opposite side. Albrecht is seen slumbering in thebower, and sings in his dream in interrupted tones.Caspar, through fear, sings a polonaise from the hollowtrees. Robbers in the cavern sing a wild chorus. Protectinggenii hover in the air over Albrecht. Variousnoises heard from behind the scenes. Warlike tumult.A distant march from the opposite side — of course alltogether. Ttvo thunderbolts fcdl at opposite sides, andare heard to crash something or other. ~\All. Ha!The curtain falls.ACT SECOND.[A Funeral March. Agnes is conducted over the bridge ofStraining ; in the middle of the bridge her clothes arecaught by a nail, and she remains hanging over thestreamedAlbrecht enters with travellers.[Here an occasional air is introduced.]BURLESQUE OPERAS. 295(Recite.) Hasten, my friends, lose not a single moment;If we delay, she may be lost for ever !Swear !Chorus.) We swear !(Albrecht) O oath !allegro. Though rocks should oppose me,Though seas should enclose me,I never would waver,But hasten to save her.Fate threatens to severHer life-thread, but neverThat prize shall he get ;Ah, grave ! thou art waitingTo take this sweet bait in,But she'll cheat thee yet.(Arioso.) O sweet little flower,Though fate o'er thee lower,Yet soon shall my powerRestore thee,And o'er theeRaise up thy fallen bower.Chorus.) See the hero wildly raving !See the maid his succour craving!(Albrecht.) In solemn mood how I delightTo trace the passions' mystic flight ;As o'er my soul they dance in turn,While now I freeze and now I burn.(Phi slreUo.) But I will not waver ;I'll hasten to save her.Chorus.) Hasten !(Albrecht.) I never will waver.Chorus.) No !(Albrecht.) I hasten to save her.To save her I hasten,I hasten to save her !296 BURLESQUE OPERAS.(On the word " save" a cadence of a quarter of an hour.)Chorus.) On to death or victory !They all swim through the water. The Chancellor dashesout his brains against a stake. Albrecht rushes in withhis mistress in his arms. Enter the Duke in a rage.~\{Albrecht.) Father !(The Duke is instantly touched, and blesses the kneeling pair.)Final Chorus. This bridge, an arch of glory,Shall flourish famed in story.Now is an end of grief and pain.And every thing's set right again.End of the Drama."This spirited translation is taken, with a few slight alterations,from the Harmoniconon.2.97CHAPTER XLSedaine — Gretry — Arrival of Gluck — Patronised by the Frenchparty — Arrival of Picking — His Roland — The Gluckists andPiccinists — Operas by Gluck and by Picking — MademoiselleLaguerre — Rebellion at the Opera — Musical Feuds.About the year 1761, Sedaine began to distinguishhimself as a writer of comic operas. HisOn rie savise jamais de tout, Le Hoi et le Fermier,Hose et Colas, and Le Deserter, are charminglittle comedies. They were all set to music byMonsigny, who, though a shallow musician, wasable to produce pleasing and elegant airs in thestyle of the Italian burlettas. Philidor, the celebratedchess-player, was also a favorite composerin the same style and during the same period. Heproduced many pieces for the Opera Comique ; oneof which, Le Mareschal, performed in 1760, had morethan a hundred representations. Dunii, Monsigny,and Philidor, may be looked upon as the foundersof the French comic opera, which was supportedby their compositions till they were thrown intothe shade by the appearance of Gretry.298 GRETRY.Gretry was born at Liege in 1741. His father,who was a teacher of music, placed him, at sixyears old, in the choir of the cathedral, where helearned the rudiments of music, and afterwardsreceived instructions from some of the masters ofthe place. When he was eighteen, he travelledon foot to Rome, and obtained admission into aseminary there, where he became the pupil ofCasali, one of the most eminent teachers of thetime. At Rome he pursued his studies for eightyears, and composed some theatrical pieces whichwere performed with the applause of the public,and (what he valued still more) the approbation ofPicking.Having finished his studies at Rome, Gretryrepaired to Paris, in quest of fame and fortune.For two years he had to struggle with the difficultiesto which a young and unfriended artist isexposed. Having, after many disappointments, obtaineda poem to work upon, he composed themusic; and the Prince of Conti, having heard itfavourably spoken of, ordered a trial of it to takeplace at his house. Gretry copied all the partshimself, not being able to afford the expense ofemploying copyists. On the morning of the dayof performance, he attended a rehearsal of the choruses.The singers were cold and sullen ; theydid not choose to take any trouble with the musicof a raw lad from the country ; and when he attemptedto animate them by voice or gesture, theyG Retro. 209only laughed in his face. In the evening a brilliantparty assembled to judge of the music, whichpoor Gretry had the mortification to hear performedwith apathy, and listened to with indifference. Theprince spoke kindly to him when it was over, butgave him to understand that his music was notwhat he had been led to expect.Gretry was on the point of leaving Paris indespair, when some men of letters, who had takenan interest in him, prevailed on Marmontel towrite a piece for him. Marmontel accordinglywrote Le Barons founded on Voltaire's well-knowntale. The words and music were finished in sixweeks. The Count de Crests, the Swedish ambassador,who, notwithstanding Gretry's failure,patronised him warmly, and of whose benevolentand enthusiastic character Gretry, in his memoirs,gives many pleasing traits, had the composer, alongwith Cailleauau, the celebrated singer, to dinner athis house. Gretry sang over his opera, andCailleauau, who had nearly declined to meet him,could hardly believe his ears when he heard suchmusic from a man who had been described to himas destitute of merit. Cailleauau introduced him tothe other performers of the Theatre Italien, atwhich theatre it was brought out in August 1768,admirably performed, and received by the publicwith enthusiasm.Gretry gives an amusing account of the changewhich this one night made in his condition. " Next300 GRETRY.morning," he says, " a friend called upon me, andasked me to go with him, as he had something toshow me that would please me. — 'Well, let us go,'said I, ' for I am tired already with hearing newpieces read to me this morning.' — 'What, already?'' To be sure — why I have already had the offerof five pieces which have been accepted at thetheatre ; and the poets who have honoured me withtheir visits are the very men whom I have so long-beenvainly beseeching to give me something.' —'Ah!' said my friend, 'how I was amused lastnight while your opera was going on ! I had aperfect crowd of these gentlemen about me ; andat the end of every air, they were crying, Ah! heshall do my piece —you shall see, gentlemen, what Ishall give him! If the air was a comic one; Ah!cried somebody, / have comic airs in my piece too ;bravo, bravo! he is my man! But,' added myfriend, 'have you agreed with any of these gentlemenV — ' O no; I have told them that Marmontelshall have the preference, as he was willing to takehis chance with me.' My friend and I went outtogether ; he took me to a little street behind theItalian theatre, where he showed me a snuff-shopwhich had got above the door ' The great Huron ;N , tobacconist.' I went in and bought apound, which, of course, I found super-excellent."Gretry's next opera was Lucile, also written byMarmontel. It appeared in January 1769, andhad great success, though the piece was severelyGRETRY. 301criticised as being affected and unnatural. Thecharacter of the music strengthened an impression,which had been made by Le Huron, that Gretry,with all his genius, wanted gaiety ; and the journalslaid it to his charge as matter of reproach, that hehad made the audience cry at the comic opera.The subject of Lucile is very touching. Two young-loversare about to be married with the consent oftheir parents. On the wedding-day, the bride'sfoster-father makes his appearance, and reveals toher that she is not the daughter of her supposedparents, but had been substituted in her infancyfor their child, who had died at nurse. The poorgirl's distress and conduct, on a discovery whichat once destroyed her happiness, excited muchinterest ; and the piece, notwithstanding the objectionsof the critics, enjoyed great and permanentfavour. By his third piece, Le Tableau Parlant,a lively farce, written by Anseaume, which appearedin the autumn of the same year, Gretryvindicated his claim to the possession of vis comic,Zemire et Azov, one of Gretry's most celebratedoperas, appeared in December 1771. It was writtenby Marmontel, who took the subject from thewell-known fairy tale of Beauty and the Beast.Its extraordinary success was at first owing to theadmirable manner in which the character of Azovwas represented by Larval ; but its permanentfavour arose from the romantic interest of thepiece, and the charms of the music. It was not302 GRETRY.only performed in every theatre in France, butadapted to the Italian, German, and English stage.Our English opera, Selimaa and Azor> is a versionof this piece, with some beautiful music added byLinley. Gretry, from his Italian education, waslooked upon with dislike by the partisans of theFrench school ; and the success of Zemire et Azovexcited the jealousy of the supporters of the grandopera. Rameau's Castor et Pollux was got upwith great splendour, in express opposition to it,at the Academie Roy ale de Musique, and all theamateurs of the old school crowded to it, manypeople coming even from distant parts of thecountry.Cephale et Procris, produced in 1774, was lesssuccessful than any of Gretry 's previous operas.The subject is the well-known mythological tale,prettily and ingeniously treated by Marmontel, butwith a good deal of his affected and artificial style.The scene in which Cephalic makes Procris a greatmany apologies for having committed the gaucherieof killing her, seemed laughable even to the Parisianaudiences of that day. The following colloquytakes place between the dying nymph andher lover — la politesse Practise, on both sides,can no farther go."Cephale. Et tu meurs de ma main !Procris. Je cherish encore cette main ;Donne la moi.Ceph. Non.GLUCK. 303Proc. Donne, donne.Ccph. Pardonne, helps ! pardonneA l'erreur de ma main.Proc. Tu m'aimais, je pardonneA l'erreur de ta main."It was at this period that Gluck, in consequenceof circumstances which have been already mentioned,# arrived at Paris. He obtained the patronageof the young queen, the unfortunate MarieAntoinette, formerly his pupil at Vienna ; and herwhole influence was necessary to support himagainst the hostility of the musicians and amateursof the French school, who used all the resources ofcabal and intrigue to prevent his new opera frombeing heard. After six months spent in preparation,and in contending with obstacles, Iphigenieen Aulide was at length performed on the 19th ofApril 1774, by the express command of the queen.On the day which had been appointed for the firstrepresentation, Gluck was informed that the principalsinger was suddenly taken ill, but that anotherwould perform his part for that evening.Gluck, suspecting a new manoeuvre, replied, thatthe piece must be postponed. This was declaredto be impossible, as it had been positively announcedto the public and the royal family. " Iwill sooner," Gluck declared, resolutely, "throwmy opera in the fire than submit to its beingmurdered in the way you propose." All remonstrancewas vain ; and the royal family, beingSee ante, chapter viii.304 GLUCK.appealed to, allowed the performance of Gluck'spiece to be postponed.The success of Iphigenie was triumphant, notwithstandingall the opposition it met with ; andGluck's triumph was still greater on the appearance,in the autumn of the same year, of Orphee — hisOrfeo adapted to the French stage by M. de Mo-lines."The transport," says Grimm, writing atthe time,* " with which this piece has been received,in spite of the old cabal of the partisansof Lullii and Rameau, proves the progress whichthis celebrated composer has already caused in thenational taste : it proves that we need not despairof our ears, and that by dint of patience and geniusthe most respectable prejudices may be got rid of."Gluck next brought out his Alceste in 1776,and Armide appeared in 1777. While he wasengaged in this last work, Picking arrived inParis, tBy this time Gluck had overcome the oppositionhe had at first met with, and for more than threeyears had obtained undisputed possession of theFrench opera. The partisans of Rameau transferredtheir allegiance to him ; and the principalreason, apparently, for their espousing the cause ofhis music, was, that as it was not Italian music,(for which their hatred was unabated,) it might beconsidered as akin to the French music which theyused to extol. The bulk of the public attachedCorrespondence, August 1774. f See ante, p. 138.GLUCK. 305themselves to this party, while the partisans of theItalian music were comparatively few. They, however,as well as their opponents, agreed in representingGluck's music as being quite French,though less natural in its melody than Lullii's, andless pure in its style than Rameau's. It was thusfor the same reason that the one party applaudedGluck, and the other abused him. The Italianparty said that Gluck had sacrificed all the resourcesand all the beauties of his art to the singleconsideration of dramatic effect — a sacrifice, theyadded sarcastically, which was no doubt quite tothe taste of a people who were insensible to thecharms of melody, but had the nicest discernmentin regard to theatrical propriety. Observe, theysaid, the conduct of a French audience at a newopera — their praise or censure is always directedto the style of the poem or the conduct of the plot,while the music is slightly attended to, and producesnothing but vague, common-place remarks,showing merely that they neither comprehend norfeel it. Alceste narrowly escaped condemnationthe first night, owing to the awkwardness of theplot and the flatness of the catastrophe. It was alittle improved in these respects, and immediatelyextolled to the skies. And this, exclaimed theItalian party — this is the love we bear to music inFrance !The adherents of Gluck, on the other hand,defended themselves on the principles expresslyVOL. II. x306 piccini.adopted by Gluck himself in the composition of hisoperas. They maintained that the music of an operaconstituted, as well as its poetry, the language ofthe piece ; and that, consequently, the one, as wellas the other, ought to be subservient to dramatictruth and propriety. If pretty and well-soundingverses afford no excuse for a nonsensical subject andabsurd or incoherent incidents, why should melodiousmusic reconcile us to such absurdities ? It isdoing small honour, they argued, to the art ofmusic, to consider it, as the Italians do, a merephysical luxury, a gratification to an organ ofsense.The violence of factious animosity, as usual, ledboth parties into extremes. Each exaggerated theopinions of their adversaries, fastening only upontheir errors, without observing or admitting thetruth with which they were mingled. It was nomore true that Gluck had sacrificed the charms ofmelody to a rigid observance of theatrical effect,than that Pergolesi and Galuppi had thought ofnothing but rendering their music agreeable tothe ear.Such were the disputes which agitated the musicalworld when Picking arrived at Paris.This great composer, then in the zenith of hisfame, was eagerly patronised by the partisans ofItalian music, and particularly by Marmontel, whonot only supported him with all his influence, butoffered to act as his poet and his instructor in thepiccini. 307French language, of which Picking understood notaword. Marmontel modernised Quinault's beautifulopera of Roland, and then, with friendly zeal,set to work to teach Picking to read and understandit. " Imagine," says Marmontel in his Memoirs,the trouble I had in giving these lessons. Lineby line, word by word, I had everything to explain ;and when he had laid hold of the meaning of apassage, I recited it to him, marking the accent, theprosody, and the cadence of the verses. He listenedeagerly ; and I had the satisfaction to seethat what he heard was carefully noted down. Hisdelicate ear seized so readily the accent of the languageand the measure of the poetry, that in hismusic he never mistook them. It was an inexpressiblepleasure to me to see him practise before myeyes an art of which I had till then no idea. Hisharmony was in his mind. He wrote his air withthe utmost rapidity ; and when he had traced itsdesign, he filled up all the parts of the score, distributingthe traits of harmony and melody just asaskilful painter would distribute on his canvass thecolours, lights, and shadows of his picture. Whenall this was done, he opened his harpsichord, whichhe had been using as his writing-table ; and thenI heard an air, a duet, a chorus, complete in all itsparts, with a truth of expression, an intelligence,a unity of design, a magic in the harmony, whichdelighted both my ear and my feelings."The rehearsals of Roland threw Picking into tex2308 piccini.spain. The singers and the band could make nothingof the music, and were not even able to keep thetime for a dozen bars together. During this confusion,Picking sat in a corner in a state of utterdismay and helplessness, while Gluck, who kindlyassumed the task of conductor, exerted himself toproduce something like order. Marmontel, standingin great agitation at Picking's elbow, keptconstantly endeavouring to rouse him : " Nowpray get up and show them the proper time of thatmovement — you see they have no notion of it."But Picking merely shook his head, and ejaculatedfrom time to time in his Italian French, " Ah !toute va male, toute." One day, in particular,when it was proposed that the parts should be rehearsedby the doubles, Marmontel, angrily declaringthat his friend's opera should not be performed bydoubles, snatched the part out of the hand of theyoung man who was to be the substitute for LeGros. This was taken as a high affront by thewhole body of doubles ; and one of the chorus-singersprotested with great emphasis that he, to besure, had not the honour of being a double, butthat if M. Marmontel had used such language tohim, he should have waited for him at the door tochastise him for his impertinence. At last, after aworld of pains, the performers began to see theirway, and at last entered so much into the spirit ofthe composition, that it was performed to the airthor's entire satisfaction.piccini. 309The music of Roland was severely criticised bythe anti-Italian party. The Gluckists maintainedthat it was very pretty concert music, and nothingmore ; that it tickled the ear, but did not touch theheart ; that it was calculated to please, but couldnever excite the enthusiasm, the emotion, producedby the sublime strains of Alceste and Orpheus. Thefeeble remnant who still stood up for the glory ofthe old French opera, exclaimed against the poetand musician who had laid their profane hands onthe masterpieces of Quinault, and had attempted tosever the bond which united his name with that ofthe venerable Lullii. Where the energy and dramaticeffect of some of the passages was undeniable,as in Roland's soliloquy in the third act, "Ah,j'attendrai longtemps, la nuit est loin encore," theadverse party consoled themselves by saying, thatin these passages Picking had imitated the Frenchstyle ; and the unconcerned part of the publiccrowded night after night to listen to music whichtheir unblessed judgment and taste told them wasadmirable and delightful.Picking's success gave strength and confidence tothe Italian party, and the musical war raged moreviolently than ever. Pamphlets, lampoons, epigrams,articles in the journals, appeared in multitudes.The Abbe Arnaud, M. Suard, the Bailli duRollet (the author of Iphigenie) headed the Gluckparty, while Picking's chief supporter among the literatiwas Marmontel. The violence of faction actually310 MUSICAL DISPUTES.broke up the ordinary intercourse of society. Allother grounds of discord, even religious intoleranceitself, were forgotten. The question no longer was,Is he a Jansenist, a Colonist, an Encyclopedia,a philosopher, a good Catholic, a free-thinker ?"one question only was thought of — " Is he a luckiest— is he a Piccinist ?" and on the answer to thismomentous inquiry depended the peace of families,and the duration of intimate and long-establishedfriendships.It must be admitted, however, that (at least inthe beginning of the contest) the partisans of Gluckwere more violent and unreasonable than those ofPicking. Gluck himself (it must be mentionedwith regret) had the bad taste to mingle in the fray.Two or three letters, with his signature, appearedin the journals, containing sarcasms against Pickingand his friends, which came from Gluck with a verybad grace, and would create an unfavourable impressionof his character, were it not probable thathis literary partisans made free with his name ingiving vent to these spiteful effusions.It does not appear that Picking, who was a mildand good-natured man, ever took any personal sharein these hostilities.Marmontel wrote a pamphlet entitled, Essai surles Revolutions de la Musique en France, in a tone ofgreat moderation and good sense, which ought tohave been an example to the other disputants. Inthe following passage he liberally did justice to theMUSICAL DISPUTES. 311merit of Gluck, and put the question in its properlight. " M. Gluck," he said, " has been well receivedin France, and deserved to be so. He hasincreased the rapidity, force, and energy of musicaldeclamation ; and, even in exaggerating its expression,he has at least saved it from one excess by anexcess of a contrary kind. He has produced greateffects by means of harmony ; he has obliged ourperformers to keep time in singing ; he has giventhe choruses a share in the action of the drama,and connected the ballet with the subject of thescene. His style, in short, is of a composite order,in which the German taste prevails, but whichshows how the characters of the French opera maybeaccommodated to the Italian music Let us givehim rivals worthy to equal him in the part in whichhe is distinguished, and to surpass him in the partin which he does not excel. Let him maintain hisground, if he can, by the strength of his orchestraand the vehemence of his declamation ; let his competitorsdistinguish themselves by a style of musicas impassioned as his, and more touching, and by aharmony as expressive, but more pure and transparent; and let the nation, after having deliberatelybalanced the character of both kinds of music andthe effects they produce, form their own judgmentrespecting the pleasure they have derived from theone and the other."For several years Gluck and Picking continued toproduce operas, while the war among their adherentswent on without intermission. The success of their312 GLUCK AND PICCINI.works was pretty nearly balanced. Each was supportedby a numerous party, and both were supportedby that portion of the public who were disposedto enjoy good music, whether it came fromGluck or Picking. Gluck produced Armide, Iphigeniaen Tauride, and Narcisse. The two first metwith brilliant success ; but Narcisse was coldlyreceived. It was the last work of Gluck, who soonafterwards left France.Picking produced Atys, which was not lessfavourably received than Roland ; and he then composedIphigenie en Tauride, which, though bearingthe same title, was a different drama from thatwhich had been composed by Gluck. It was imprudentin Picking to take a subject which had beenalready successfully treated by his rival.Gluck's Iphigenie en Tauride made a stronger andmore general impression than any of his formeroperas. The poem was the first production of ayoung dramatist, M. Guillard, who followed theplan of the tragedy by M. de la Touche. Thesubject is simple and pathetic, the action rapid, andthe effect very interesting. The music was not admittedby the Piccinists to possess melody ; but itwas so powerful and dramatic, that one of them(Baron de Grimm) said, " I don't know if this issinging ; but perhaps it is something much better"*When I hear Iphigenie" adds Grimm, " I forgetA precisely similar compliment, we have been told, was paidby a great Italian cantatrice to Moore's singing, or rather musicalrecitation, of his own Irish ballads.MADLLE. LAGUERRE. 313that I am at the opera ; I think I am listening to aGreek tragedy, with music composed by Le Kainand Mademoiselle Clairon."Picking's Iphigenie en Tauride was a bad rifaci-mente of De la Touche's tragedy. The Gluckistswere very indignant at Picking's presumption intakingthis subject after it had been treated by theGerman composer. Picking's music is beautiful,but it had indifferent success. On the second nightMademoiselle Laguerre, who performed the part ofIphigenie, appeared on the stage in such a state ofelevation that she could not walk without staggering,and was held up by the attendant priestesses. Thislady, who had risen from t\\epave, and had afterwardscontrived to ruin a prince of the blood anda wealthy farmer-general, was, nevertheless, a greatfavourite of the public, and, on this occasion, wastreated with singular indulgence. The audienceneither laughed nor hissed — suppressed murmursonly were heard in the parterre. In the intervalbetween the first and second acts the fair heroinerecovered herself, and went through the remainderof the piece with tolerable decency. She did not,however, entirely escape ; for the king, hearing ofthis exhibition, ordered her to the prison of Fortl'Eveque, where she remained two days, and wasliberated on the intercession of some men of rank,and of Picking himself. When her friends came tofetch her out of prison, she was, or pretended to be,314 PARTY SPIRIT.much ashamed, and repeated with great pathos thefirst two lines of her part —O jour fatal, que je valais en vainNe pas compter parmi ceux de ma vie !"On her re-appearance she was welcomed with acclamationsloud and long, and sang more delightfullythan ever.*Gluck's departure from France did not put an endto the feuds between his partisans and those ofPicking. An amusing instance of the still subsistingparty spirit occurred in 1781.After the burning of the opera-house, the AcademieRoyale de Musique gave concerts twice a weekin the Tuileries. At first they were well attendedby both parties, till the Gluckists were driven awayby an unlucky blunder made by themselves. Theconcert bills announced an Italian air by the ChevalierGluck. When it came to be performed, allthe Piccinists pretended to rise and leave the room,or gather in knots for the purpose of chatting roundthe fireplaces. The Gluckists, left masters of thefield, listened with profound attention, and encoredthe air with shouts of applause. To their discomfiture,however, some good-natured Piccinist beganMademoiselle Laguerre died, in 1783, of the effects of dissipation,after a brilliant but profligate career of seven or eightyears. Grimm, in his notice of her death at the time it happened,says she left one million eight hundred thousand livres, or seventy-fivethousand pounds sterling !AFFAIRS OF THE OPERA. 315to whisper among them that there had been a smallmistake, the air not being Gluck's, but Jomelli's,and one, too, that had been hissed in Italy. ThePiccinists triumphed unmercifully; and the mortifiedGluckists returned no more to the concerts ofthe Academie Royale de Musique. They had, indeed,a ground of consolation, had they been aware of it ;for Jomelli, though an Italian, imbibed the Germanstyle during his long residence in Germany ; andit was because his latest and best compositionsactually had a resemblance to those of Gluck, thatthey were applauded in Germany and hissed by hisown countrymen.During the period while Gluck and Picking werecomposing for the French opera, its affairs flourishedunder the liberal administration of M. de Vismes.There were performed serious operas by Gluck,Picking, and Rameau ; Italian burlettas by Picking,Sacchini, Anfossi, and Paesiello; and ballets got upwith great splendour ; and all these performanceswere well attended. The Italian music was muchapplauded, but the old French school still drewthe greatest audiences. When Castor et Polluxwas revived, it set aside, for a time, everything else.It was remarked that there was little applause ; butthe public made a point of showing their attachmentto the good old French school, and thetwentieth representation was as crowded as thefirst.The prosperity of the opera under M. de Vismes316 REBELLION AT THE OPERA.came to a sudden termination. In March 1779,a spirit of disaffection seized the whole corps dramatique,the result of which was a rebellion, still memorablein the annals of the French stage. Actors,singers, and dancers, all joined in the mutiny.Loud complaints were raised against the despotismof the manager, and nothing was heard behind thescenes but high-sounding demands of their rights,liberties, and independence. A congress was formed,(La Fayette was just returned from America,) andthe illustrious Vestris, the " Diou de la danse," declaredthat he should be its Washington. Thisassembly evinced a determined spirit of resistance ;and the patriots obtained the support of the Princede Soubise, and other men of rank and influence.The manager was obliged to have recourse to theauthority of government, in order to reduce themutineers to obedience ; but even official ordersfailed in their effect. " The minister orders me todance," said Mademoiselle Gurnard ; " well — hehad better look to himself, lest I make him dance[out of office, she meant] one of these days." ThisMademoiselle Gurnard had demanded a new andsplendid dress for her part in Castor et Pollux,which the manager refused as a piece of unnecessaryextravagance. The fair danseuse immediately senthim the dress she had, cut into a thousand pieces ;and the manager had great difficulty in getting herto resume her part, after having given her the dressshe demanded. Her amusing threat to turn out theREBELLION AT THE OPERA. 317minister was talked of one evening at the king'scoucher. " It is all your own fault, gentlemen,"said the good-natured young sovereign ; "if youpaid these ladies fewer attentions, they would not beso insolent."The great Vestris having given M. de Vismes avery insolent answer, that gentleman said wi throneirritation, " Do you know to whom you speak?M. Vestris?" — " To whom I speak," said Vestris ;why, to the farmer of my talent" At last matterscame to a crisis. The younger Vestris, forsome gross act of rebellion, was arrested and sentto Fort l'Eveque. His parting from his father wassublime. " Go, my son," said the Diou de la danse,in the presence of all the performers assembled inthe green-room to see the departure of this youthfulvictim of arbitrary power ; — " go — this is theproudest day of your life. Take my carriage, anddemand the apartment of my friend the king ofPoland ; I shall pay every expense"* The samenight, Dauberval, another dancer, was sent toprison for some very seditious language. TheseThis amusing trait brings to mind another of the same sort.When the younger Vestris made his debut, the Diou de la danse,in a magnificent and accurate court dress, with a sword at hisside and his hat under his arm, advanced to the front of the stage,leading his son by the hand ; and after having addressed theaudience on the sublimity of his art, and the brilliant promisegiven by the august heir of his name, he turned with a majesticair to the young debutant, and said, " Now, my son, show thepublic your talent — your father beholds you !"318 REBELLION AT THE OPERA.strong measures, however, only made matters worse.There were nothing but meetings, deliberations,remonstrances to the court, deputations to Versailles,and other proceedings of a similar kind ; while thebusiness of the theatre was at a stand. The performersunanimously demanded their own dismissionor that of the manager. A long negociation tookplace, conducted with all the forms of diplomacy,and in which the first persons in the state took part ;and its result was, that the supreme direction of theopera was committed to the Prevot des Marchands,and M. de Vismes was, reduced to the situation ofhis deputy. During this period France sufferedgreat political misfortunes— the loss of Pondicherry,the disastrous expedition to St. Lucie, and the destructionof her commerce by the enterprises of theEnglish navy : but these things were looked uponwith comparative indifference by the Parisians,whose minds were engrossed by a subject whichcame home more closely to their business and theirbosoms — the great rebellion in the opera-house.*The chief cause of this rebellion appears to havebeen the encouragement given by the manager toItalian music and Italian performances. And itseffect was, that the government ordered the performanceof Italian operas to be discontinued bothThe public found consolation for the loss of St. Lucie, asusual, in a joke. It was said that if ever M. testing receivedthe baton of a marshal of France, it should not be made ofbois de St. Lucie."MUSICAL FEUDS. 319at the Academic Royale de Musique, and theCome die Italienne, and all the Italian performersto be dismissed, to the regret of a portion of theParisian public, but to the satisfaction of the greatmajority, who seem to have been more enamouredthan ever of Rameau and Gluck ; the German composersharing their favour, because, having beenaccustomed to put him, as well as their countryman,in opposition to the Italians, they chose very absurdlyto class Rameau and Gluck together, asbelonging to the same school.The quarrels between the Gluckists and Picci-nests, at this time, had risen to the highest pitch.Some moderate men endeavoured to reconcile thecontending parties, especially D'Alembert, and theChevalier de Castellum, (an eminent critic,) whowrote an article with this view in the Mercure.But these endeavours had no effect. Themissiles of pamphlets, lampoons, and epigramsflew thicker than ever. Marmontel havingwritten a poem on this musical war, M. Suard senthim word, very civilly, that if he published it, he(Suard) would inflict upon him manual chastisement.This did not hinder Marmontel from readingit in all companies, but it does not appear thatthe promised drubbing was bestowed. The Gluckparty, however, annoyed Marmontel with songsand squibs of various kinds. The following smartepigram by the Abbe Arnold had great vogueamong his party : —320 EPIGRAM ON MARMONTEL.Ce Marmontel, si lent, si lourd,Qui ne parle pas, mais qui beugle,Juge la peinture en aveugle,Et la musique comme un sourd.Ce pedant a si sotte mine,Et de ridicules barce,Dit qu'il a le secret des beaux vers de RacineJamais secret ne fut si bien garde."CHAPTER XII.Sacchini — Tribute by Picking to Gluck's memory — Their rivalryand its consequences — Gretry's operas — D'Hele — DalayracGossec — Salieri — Beaumarchais — Mehul — Cherubini —Catel, Berton, and Le Sueur — Boieldieu — Herold — Auber —Meyerbeer — Halevy — French singing.Gluck had left Paris in 1779 ; but Picking found anew rival in his celebrated countryman Sacchini,who arrived in 1781. They were old friends; andSacchini came to France in consequence of theadvice of Picking, who exerted himself in his behalf,and rejoiced in his success, little suspectingthat the Gluck party would set up Sacchini in oppositionto him. Sacchini was immediately surroundedby a cabal, who persuaded him that pickingwas jealous of his success, and wished to depresshim ; and this produced an estrangement betweenthem. A new sect arose, that of the Sacchinists, asort of " mitigated Gluckists," (as a French writercalls them,) who resembled the Gluckists, however,chiefly in their jealousy of Picking. The friendly intercourseof the composers, however, though inter-vol.II. y322 SACCHTNI.rusted, was not broken off; and when Sacchini diedin 1786, a memoir of him, by Picking, appeared in thejournals, containing a warm and affectionate tributeto his character, both as a musician and as a man.Sacchini's Renaud, or Rinaldo, was produced inthe beginning of 1783, after every possible impedimenthad been thrown in its way by the intriguesof the opposite party, who would have succeededin preventing its performance, had it not been forthe special interference of the queen. It had completesuccess, to which the performance of MadameSt. Hubertii in the character of Armide greatly contributed.In the same year he produced his Chi-men,the drama of which, founded on Corneille'sCid, was written by Guillard. Picking, on theother hand, was equally active. He produced Atys,Le Dormer Neville, and Dion ; which last washis greatest triumph, and is generally consideredhis chef d'oeuvre. It met with unanimous applause.Even the Gluckists were its most zealous partisans,because, they said, Picking himself had become aLuckiest. There is no doubt this opera produceda greater dramatic effect than any of Picking's previousworks in the serious style ; partly owing tothe structure of the poem, (which was by Marionand partly to the superior variety, richness,and energy of the music. It was not, therefore,without some appearance of reason that the admirersof Gluck gave him credit for having causedan improvement in the style of Picking. MadameSACCHINI. 323de St. Hubertii was very great in the character ofDido. This lady was such a favourite of thepublic, that, one evening, at the Theatre Italien,when she got up to leave her box, the audience roseand applauded her in the same manner as if shehad been a royal personage. " If the public,"says Grimm, who mentions this circumstance,had known that, the very same day, Madame St.Hubertii had reconciled Picking and Sacchini, whohad quarrelled we do not know why, their enthusiasmwould have been still greater. The address,feeling, and grace which she has shown in reunitingthese two illustrious rivals, do her as much honour,in the eyes of alt who know her, as even her extraordinarytalents."Sacchini's greatest work, Oedipe a Colonne, wasbrought out in 1787, after his death. The dramawas written by Guillard, and founded on Ducis'tragedy. This opera was received with enthusiasm,not only in France, but in Italy and Germany, inwhich last country it is still occasionally performedalong with several other chef deceives of the oldschool. A few years ago it was brought out withgreat splendour at Berlin, under the direction ofSporting. Sacchini's last opera, Evening, was alsoproduced after his death, but was not successful.The piece, the subject of which was taken fromMason's Caractacus, was pronounced heavy, thoughthe music was admitted to be admirable.On the death of Gluck in 1787, a noble tributey 2324 GLUCK AND PICCINI.to his memory by his great rival Picking appearedin the Paris journals. Picking proposed a subscription,not for the erection of a statue, but for theestablishment of an annual concert to take place onthe anniversary of Gluck's death, and to consistentirely of his compositions ; "in order to transmitto posterity the spirit and the character of his works,that they may serve as a model to future artists ofthe true style of dramatic music."The appearance of this article surprised bothPicking's partisans and those of Gluck. The formerfound themselves unwillingly obliged to believe, inopposition to all that they had so industriouslywritten and printed, that Gluck, after all, mighthave been a man of genius, since Picking himselffrankly yielded him that title ; while the Gluckparty felt mortified that his most formidable rivalhad done him a much greater honour than theyhad been able to do, with all their clamorous support.The leaders of both parties — men who hadbeen chiefly actuated by literary vanity or self-interest,affected not to know that these great menalways did each other justice, even while thosewho presumed to criticise them denied to each ofthem the very merits by which he was peculiarlydistinguished. Gluck always admired his rival'sfelicitous and charming melodies, the clearness ofhis style, the elegance and truth of his expression ;while Picking, with equal readiness, admitted thatGluck's new views of dramatic action, his mannerGLUCK AND PICCINI. 325of intermingling the choruses with the dialogue ofthe principal personages, the rapid march of hisscenes, and the power of his musical language inconveying sentiment and passion, had contributedgreatly to the progress of the opera. Picking said,and said truly, that the French lyrical stage owedas much to Gluck as French tragedy had doneto Corneille ; and it may well be supposed, thatGluck, had he been the survivor, would, with equalliberality, and equal truth, have said that theFrench lyrical stage had owed as much to Pickingas French tragedy to Racine. We may add in thewords of a French critic, that " as the great Corneillewas never more nobly eulogised than in thediscourse delivered by Racine before the Frenchacademy, so it was from his competitor and rivalPicking that Gluck received the tribute which hasdone the greatest honour to his memory."Though the favour which these great rivalsenjoyed in their own day was equally divided, yetthe works of the German composer have withstoodthe effects of time better than those of the Italian.The beautiful music of Picking is now confined tothe concert-room or the chamber, and rarely (toorarely) heard even there. But the operas of Gluckkeep their places on the stage, both in France andGermany. Amid the profusion of ever-changingnovelties, no old works can he frequently performedanywhere : but the Orfeo, the Alceste, the Iphigeniaen Aulide, and the Armide, are, at intervals,326 GLUCK AND P1CCINI.produced at Berlin, Dresden, &c, as well as atParis. Armide was splendidly revived at Paris in1826, and enthusiastically received by the audience." The powerful choruses," says a Parisianjournal of the day, " were executed with spiritand correctness, particularly that of the attendantsof Hate in the first act, on which the energeticcharacter of Gluck's sublime genius is so powerfullystamped. In justice to their taste, we must mentionthe marked homage which the public spontaneouslyrendered to the composer. The orchestrahad scarcely finished the first bars of the symphonyto the famous duet, " Esprit de haine et de rage"in the incantation scene, when the loudest applauserang through every part of the house." This operawas again revived in 1831, when it was judiciouslycurtailed from five acts to three. On this occasionthe celebrated Nourrit produced a great effect byhis action and singing in the part of Rinaldo; butthe piece, on the whole, was somewhat coldlyreceived ; the long scenes in recitative, even thoughcurtailed, having been found tedious.The long warfare between the partisans of Gluckand those of Picking, notwithstanding the absurdviolence with which it was carried on, had a greatand beneficial effect on the state of music in France.It was of a different character from the musicalfeuds which had taken place in England — betweenthose, for instance, caused by the rivalry of Handeland Buononcini, of Faustina and Cuzzoni, or of Fari-GLUCK AND PICCINI. 327nelli and Senesino. These were the frivolouswhims of people of fashion, without any aim orobject beyond the gratification of vanity. TheGluck and Picking parties numbered among theirchampions the most distinguished names in theliterature and society of France. The dispute itselfwas based upon principles of dramatic and musicalcriticism, and carried on with a degree of wit,learning, eloquence, and critical acumen, whichstill give an interest to the controversy, though itssubject has long since passed away ; — an interest,too, rather, heightened than otherwise by theextravagant vehemence of the disputants, theirarrogant dogmatism, and self-satisfied ignorance ofthe practical details of the art. A contest so conductednecessarily attracted a large share of publicattention ; and the powerful support and eloquentencomiums bestowed upon each description of musicby its partisans, convinced the unblessed part of thepublic that each was worthy of support and eulogy,as being possessed of its own peculiar beauties.Even during the heat of the controversy, the loversof music flocked to hear the operas of Picking aswell as of Gluck. Each had the support of a greatneutral body, as well as of his own partisans ; andwhen the violence of the dispute at length subsided,the French public were well able to appreciate andenjoy the excellencies of every school of dramaticmusic, and to give welcome and encouragementto those Italian and German composers who, from328 GRETRY.that time to the present, have devoted their talentsto the French lyrical stage.While, in the serious opera, the suffrages of thepublic were divided among the works of Rameau,Gluck, Picking, and Sacchini, all parties continuedto be delighted with the comic operas of Gretry.Among his fifty pieces there are only two seriousoperas, or tragedies, neither of which was successful; Cephale et Procris, which has been alreadymentioned, and Andromache, which was Racine'stragedy converted into an opera by a play-wrightof the name of Petra. The dramatist and composerattempted to make this piece grand and imposing,by stuffing it full of noisy choruses There is achorus in every scene ; every dialogue and evensoliloquy is delivered, and every incident takesplace, in the presence of the multitude of confidentialpersons who fill the stage ; — an absurdity whichwas ridiculed by the critics of that day, but nowpasses current on the Italian opera boards.Gretry 's operas appeared in regular successionfrom the year 1767 to 1791 ; and a few were producedat long intervals, down to the year 1797.His last opera was Anacreon, a work which hadconsiderable success. He died in 1813.Gretry has enjoyed a popularity in France,equally extensive and durable as that of Lullii orRameau, and better merited. His principal operasare very charming productions. He was fortunatein having men of genius for poets, and his musicGRETRY. 329is melodious, spirited, and dramatic. His Zemireet Azov and Richard Coeur de Lion were successfullyadapted to the English stage, and these,with several others, were translated into German,and, even within these few years, have been performedat different German theatres. In 1829,Guillaume Tell was brought out at Paris withgreat care and splendour. Some alterations weremade in the poem (which was originally written bySedaine,) and M. Berton enriched the score by theaddition of parts for wind instruments in the modernstyle. The piece was received with acclamations,and drew crowded audiences for many nights.The public, in their enthusiasm, called for theauthors ; a demand which could not well be compliedwith, as they had both been many years intheir graves : but the bust of Gretry was broughtupon the stage, attended by the principal performers,who crowned it with laurel, while threerounds of applause were given by the audience.Notwithstanding the success of this experiment,the constant influx of novelties seems to have preventedits repetition. *Gretry's principal operas were written by Mar-monte,Sedaine, and D'Hele. This last dramatistSee (in the Gazette Musicale for February 1837) an articleby Berlioz, a highly distinguished composer and critic, containingsome excellent observations on Richard Coeur de Lion, andan appeal in behalf of the works of Gretry, thrown aside tomake room for a multitude of paltry productions of the day.330 d'hele.was Thomas Hales, an Englishman, whose namewas thus gallicised. He is much spoken of, andwith great respect and kindness, in the literarymemoirs of the day. He had resided for ten yearsin Paris, and was always in difficulties and distress,spending part of his life among the coffeehouses,and the remainder in the Fort l'Eveque.All that was known of his history was, that hewas of Gloucestershire ; had entered young intothe English navy, and served in the West Indies ;had afterwards travelled all over Europe, and liveda long time in Switzerland and Italy. His mannerswere those of an accomplished gentleman, andit was supposed that he had lost his patrimony byimprudence and extravagance. Even when in themost destitute condition, his demeanour was alwaysdignified, and his habits regular ; his whole deportmentwas that of a man of respectable birthand station. After his circumstances had beenimproved by his success as a dramatic writer, hebecame passionately enamoured of Madame Branch,a favourite performer of sureties at theTMatre Italien; and so much was he engrossedby this attachment, that it estranged him fromthe society of all his friends. When the Italiancompany was suppressed, Madame Bianchi returnedto Italy in spite of his endeavours to prevailon her to remain in France ; and it wasbelieved that his grief for this separation shortenedhis days. He died of consumption, a few monthsDALAYRAC. 331after her departure, before he had reached the ageof forty.* He wrote three of Gre try's operas,Le Jugement de Midas, L 'Amant Jaloux, and LcsEvenness Impress ; pieces not only of considerabledramatic merit, but remarkable for the spiritand purity of their style.Gretry's most popular contemporary, as a composerof comic operas, was Nicholas Dalayrac.He was of a noble family, and served in the gardesdu corps. His admiration of Gretry induced himto study music, and attempt dramatic composition.He made his debut in 1782 by U Eclipse Total, alittle burnett written by Chabaussierre, a fellow-guardsman.The subject is amusing; — an astronomerhas a young girl for a ward, who elopeswith her lover while the guardian is observing aneclipse, and the old gentleman tumbles into a wellwhile running after the fugitives. The music ofthis lively trifle was found very pretty, and muchapplauded.In 1786 Dalayrac produced his most celebratedopera, — Nina, ou La Folle par Amour. This piece,and several others on the same subject, are foundedon a real incident.! A young girl of a villagenear Rouen was betrothed to a young sailor whomGretry, in his Memoires, gives an interesting account ofthis singular person.+ Paesiello's beautiful opera of Nina was produced after thatof Dalayrac, and the Italian piece is closely copied from theFrench.332 DALAYRAC.she loved, and who was to marry her on his returnfrom a long voyage. The lover informed her ufthe day on which he was to arrive, and asked herto meet him at an inn a few miles from the village.She repaired to the place of meeting. After waitinga long time, she saw her lover's comrades maketheir appearance ; she sprang to meet them, and atthe moment when she expected to find herself inhis arms, she was told he had perished the daybefore by an unhappy accident. She fell senselessto the ground ; and, when she revived, her reasonwas gone. After that fatal day, the poor girlrepaired daily to the same inn, desired a tableto be covered for two, went to the spot where shehad hoped to meet her lover, sat down on theground and wept for a few minutes, re-entered theinn, and, after saying to the people of the house,with a sigh, "He will not be here to-day — I shallcome back tomorrow," returned home withoututtering a word.M. Marsolier, the author of the drama, hasgiven great effect to this little story. It was performedat the Comedie Italienne, and Mile. Duga-son's pathetic representation of Nina dissolved theaudience in tears. The music is pretty, simple,and expressive. The chorus while Nina sleeps,and the romance sung by her, are its most remarkablefeatures.Dalayrac's most successful operas, beside theabove, are Adolph et Clara, Maison a vendre,gossec. 333Pharos et Diego, Une heure de Mariage, Gidistan,and Camille. He died in 1809.Another contemporary of Gretry was Gossec, agreater musician, though not so popular a composer.He was born in Hainault about the year 1733,and, between the years 1766 and 1786, produced anumber of successful operas, both for the Academiede Musique and the Comedie Italienne ; the principalof which were Le Faux Lord, Les Pecheurs,Toinon et Toilette, Sabines, and These. Allthese are now forgotten ; and it is upon his ecclesiasticalmusic, which is of the highest order, thatGossec's permanent fame will rest.This distinguished composer died in 1829, at theage of ninety-six. During his whole life he enjoyedhigh consideration both as a man and anartist. At the beginning of the French Revolution,he was made director of the band of the nationalguard, and composed the music of many of thepatriotic songs and hymns of that period. Whenthe Conservatoire de Musique was established in1795, he was, jointly with Mehul and Cherubini,placed at the head of that great institution, in themanagement of which he took an active share untilwithin a short time of his death. For the lastthree or four years of his life he lived, in comfortableretirement, in the village of Pass, enjoyingthe society of his friends and his favourite amusementof the opera. "All Paris," says a Frenchmemoir of him, "remembers the venerable com-334 gossec.poser, bent beneath the weight of years, quittinghis lodgings precisely at five, to repair to the TheatreFeydeau. He always halted half way, at theCafe des Varieties ; and, after taking his coffee,resumed his course, and was to be found, immediatelyafter the opening of the doors, in his accustomedcorner of the pit. Like a veteran, he continued,to the last, faithful to the post of his earlyglories." A few months before his death, as hewas on his way to his favourite place of amusement,he was seized with a sudden weakness, andfainted in the street. Some passers-by hastenedto his assistance, and, upon his recovering hissenses, inquired where he wished to be taken.His reply was, "To the Opera Comique." Heappears to have been singularly free from narrowor selfish feelings. He lived to see a long train ofcomposers rise in succession, from G retro to Rossini,many of whom acquired a popularity greaterthan he had ever enjoyed ; but, in place of envyingtheir celebrity, he admired them as artists, andregarded them as friends. And, in return, he waslooked up to by all of them with sentiments ofesteem and veneration, as the patriarch of the art,the Nestor of French musicians.After Gluck's departure from Paris, he wasengaged by the directors of the French opera tocompose the music for a piece called Les Danaides.Gluck, now old and infirm, entrusted this task toSalieri, then a young man residing at Vienna, andSalter. 335receiving his instructions. Salieri composed theopera according to the plan which Gluck hadsketched out, and under his superintendence. Salieriwent to Paris in 1784, and the piece wasbrought out as Gluck's, with the exception of thethird act, which was said to have been completedby Salieri. It was received with the utmost applause,and the Parisian critics discovered in itall the beauties of Gluck's style. After its successwas confirmed by several representations, Gluck,in an address to the French public, announced thatSalieri was the sole composer of the opera. Thepublic took the deception in good part, and LesDanaides was received with undiminished favour.In 1787 Salieri composed the music to Beaumarchais'opera of Tarare. Beaumarchais hadalready produced an extraordinary impression byhis celebrated comedies, Le Barbier de Seville andLe Mariage de Figaro ; the latter of which, independentlyof its dramatic merit, was suited to thetemper of the time by the boldness with which theauthor exposed the vices of the great and the abusesof the government. Tarare was equally in unisonwith the spirit of the age, its object being to exhibitthe emptiness of artificial distinctions of rank, forwhich purpose the author places a reptile upon athrone, and draws his hero from the lowest class ofthe people. The moral is conveyed in the concludinglines of the piece : —336 BEAUMARCHAIS.Mortel, qui que tu sois, prince, Brame, ou soldat,Homme ! ta grandeur sur la terreN'appartient point a ton eat ;Elle est toute a ton character."The appearance of this opera was long expectedwith intense interest. Beaumarchais had read itin private circles for three years ; and when hefound that public curiosity was fully excited, herefused invitations to read it from persons of thehighest distinction. He accepted that of the Countartois only on condition that several individualsof high rank, whom he had previously refused,should be admitted to the reading. Even thepolitics of that stirring time were forgotten for themoment, and less excitement was produced by themeetings of the Notables, and the daily changes inthe ministry, than by Beaumarchais and his opera.At last it was performed, in June 1787, with extraordinarysuccess, and continued for a long time todraw immense crowds ; but it was remarked thatthese audiences consisted of a different class ofpeople from the usual frequenters of the theatre ;that there was little or no applause ; and that thespectators listened in silence, and with an air ofgravity quite unexampled in theatrical exhibitions.They received it, not as an entertainment,but as a political lecture — as a vindication of thoserights of man" to which their minds were nowawakened ; and it did its part, undoubtedly, inSalter. 337accelerating a movement, the destructive rapidityof which was as yet foreseen by no one.The story of this opera, which is interesting, isevidently founded in part on the well-known easterntale of Sadak and Kalasrade. It was translatedinto Italian, and produced at Vienna under thetitle of Amur Re d'Ormns; and such was the tasteof the fashionable society of that capital, that itwas preferred to the Don Giovanni and Figaro ofMozart. Salieri, notwithstanding the inferiorityof his genius, stood higher than Mozart in thefavour of the court and the aristocracy, and succeeded,by his intrigues, in preventing the manwhom he presumed to rival, from obtaining therewards and employments to which he was entitled.The music of Tarare, however, is possessed of considerablemerit. This opera has long been a stock-piecein Germany, where it is still occasionallyperformed, both in its Italian and German dress.An English version of it was produced at ourEnglish opera-house in 1825, with some success.In this version the story is much altered, andnothing remains of the political spirit of theoriginal.Another of Gluck's disciples, but possessed ofa higher order of genius than Salieri, was thecelebrated Mehul. This great composer was aBelgian, and was born in 1763. After havingpursued his musical studies with ardour, he wentto Paris, at the age of sixteen, in 1779. Gluck'sVOL. II. z338 Mell.Iphigenie en Tauride was then on the eve of representation,and the young stranger was carried bya friend to the general rehearsal of the piece. Helistened with transport, and eagerly desired towitness the performance, which was to take placethe following evening ; but, being too poor toafford the price of admission, he determined tohide himself in one of the boxes, and there to waitfor the time of representation. At the end of therehearsal, however, he was discovered in his placeof concealment by the servants of the theatre, whoproceeded to turn him out very roughly. Gluck,who had not left the house, heard the noise, cameto the spot, and found the young man, whosespirit was roused, resisting the indignity withwhich he was treated. Mehul, finding in whosepresence he was, was ready to sink with confusion ;but, in answer to Gluck's questions, told him thathe was a young musical student from the country,whose . anxiety to be present at the performanceof the opera had led him into the commission of animpropriety. Gluck, as may be supposed, wasdelighted with a piece of enthusiasm so flattering tohimself, and not only gave his } 7 young admirer aticket of admission, but desired his acquaintance.From that time Mehul became the friend andpupil of the veteran musician, under whose instructionshe devoted himself to the study of dramaticcomposition. It was not till after ten yearshad elapsed that he came before the public as aMell. 339composer, his maiden opera, Euphrosyne et Co-rain,having been produced in 1790: but he hadpreviously written three or four entire operas underthe direction of Gluck, not with a view to performance,but solely for the sake of improvement.Euphrosyne et Coran had great success : and hisnext opera, Strategic, which appeared two yearsafterwards, completely established his reputation.The French critics describe this work as beingequally admirable in melody, orchestral accompaniment,and dramatic effect.For several years afterwards, during the worstperiod of the Revolution, Mehul did not produceany work of consequence. In 1799 he broughtout Le Jeune Henri, the overture to which is wellknown as an admirable piece of descriptive music.At this period some of the Parisian critics havingmaintained that Mehul was too dry and Germanin his style, he had recourse to a stratagem in orderto repel this charge. He composed an opera calledIrate, which was announced as a French dramaadapted by him to the music of an Italian piece.It was favourably received, and the critics discoveredhow much the style of the music differedfrom Mehul's own ; on which he declared himselfthe author. In his next opera, Une Folie, he alsovindicated his claim to the character of a melodiouscomposer ; — to the great mortification (say hiseulogists) of his splenetic critics.But there must have been some foundation forz 2340 Mell.the strictures of these critics : for it is admittedthat Mehul soon afterwards fell into the error withwhich they had charged him. Being a follower ofthe principles of Gluck, he appears to have carriedthese principles to excess, and, for a time, to havesacrificed musical beauty to the pursuit of dramaticeffects. In 1806 he produced his opera of Thaliawhich he took it into his head to exclude theviolins from the orchestra, supplying their place bythe violas. This expedient, which, introduced forthe sake of variety in a single air, might have agood effect, was insupportable when employedthroughout the whole piece. Gretry, who waspresent at the first performance of this dull andmelancholy music, whispered to the person nexthim, " I would give a louis to hear a cricket chirpjust now." He composed several other operas, thesuccess of which (notwithstanding their many beauties)was injured by the erroneous views he continuedto entertain. His repeated failures seem tohave induced him for a time to abandon dramaticcomposition ; for it was after an interval of severalyears that he produced his chef d'ceuvre, the operaof Joseph, which appeared in 1816; a work equallyremarkable for the noble simplicity of its style, andthe pathetic beauties of its melodies. Joseph hasbeen repeatedly performed in this country, whereonaccount of its spiritual subject) it is given, notas an opera, but as an oratorio.Mehul died in 1817, at the age of fifty-three.CHERUBINI. 341He left an unfinished opera, Valentine de Milan,which was completed by another hand, and producedwith great success. This opera, as well asJoseph, continues to be performed in Germany.Cherubtni, though an Italian, belongs to theannals of French music. He was born at Florencein 1760. After having acquired considerable reputationby his dramatic works in his own country,he settled at Paris, in the year 1786, at the age ofsix-and-twenty : and that city, notwithstanding afew short visits to Italy, Germany, and England,has been, ever since, his permanent residence.His first French opera was Xenophon, producedat the theatre of the grand opera (or AcademieRoyale de Musique) in 1788. The principaloperas which he has since produced are, Lodoiska,Eliza, Medea, U Lovelier ie Portuguese, Les DeuxJourneys, Anacreon, Faniska, and Les Beverages,the last of which appeared in 1813. The successof these operas, which combine the grace and delicacyof Italian melody with the strength and richnessof German instrumentation, contributedgreatly to the improvement of the French nationaltaste ; and several of them have obtained permanentpossession of the stage in various parts ofGermany. In England the admirable overtures toAnacreon, Les Deux Journeys, L Lovelier ie Portuguese,and Les Beverages, are in constant use atourconcerts, and known to every amateur of instrumentalmusic.342 CHERUBINI.Notwithstanding, however, the excellence ofCherubini's dramatic works, it is in his sacredmusic that the greatness of his genius is most fullydisplayed. His numerous masses, motets, andother compositions for the church, entitle him to aplace among the greatest ecclesiastical composers.Cherubini's intellectual powers, and the dignityof his character, have contributed, as well as theexcellence of his works, to the influence which hehas long enjoyed in the French musical world ;an influence of which the persevering malevolenceof Bonaparte was unable to deprive him.Bonaparte had some love for the arts, and affectedmore. In the early part of his career, and evenafter he had achieved the rank of chief consul, headmitted several distinguished artists, and Cherubiniamong others, to a good deal of familiaritywith him. One evening, during the performanceof one of Cherubini's operas, Bonaparte, who wasin the same box with the composer, said to him,My dear Cherubini, you are certainly an excellentmusician, but really your music is so noisy andcomplicated that I can make nothing of it." — "Mydear General," answered the composer, "you arecertainly an excellent soldier, but, in regard tomusic, you must excuse me if I don't think it necessaryto adapt my compositions to your comprehension."Bonaparte, with the vindictive littlenesswhich formed a part of his character, never forgavethis spirited reply, and during his whole reignCHERUBINI. 343withheld his favour from the offending musician.Many years afterwards, on a vacancy occurring inthe post of maestro di capella to the emperor, Napoleonintimated to Mehul his intention of bestowingthe office upon him. Mehul, between whomand Cherubini there subsisted a warm friendship,respectfully intimated his wish that he might beallowed to share the office with his distinguishedbrother composer. Napoleon, instead of appreciatingthe generous feeling which prompted thiswish, took great offence at it ; and saying haughtily," I want a maestro di capella who will makemusic, and not noise," instantly appointed M. LeSueur to the office.Cherubini has been for many years director ofthe Conservatoire de Musique, an institutionwhich mainly ow T es to his exertions its greatnessand efficiency. At the age of seventy-eight he isstill active and vigorous, performing his dutieswith zeal and assiduity, and taking an undiminishedinterest in everything that relates to theprogress of his art. He has recently published anelaborate treatise on harmony and composition, awork of infinite value to the musical student.Among the French composers who flourished atthe beginning of the present century, Catel wasone of the most distinguished. His principal operais Semiramis, produced in 1803. His music ispure, elegant, and melodious. Along with himmay be classed Berton and Le Sueur, who BOIELDIEU.sessed similar merit, and a similar degree of reputation.The works of these composers are nolonger performed.Boieldieu, who was their contemporary, hasobtained a much greater and more lasting popularity.He began to be known as a dramatic composerabout the year 1800, when his reputation wasestablished by Le Calife de Bagdad, an operawhich is still a favourite with the French public.He has since produced a great number of operas,of which Jean de Paris, Beniowski, Ma TanteAurore, Le Petit Chaperon , La Dame Blanche,and Les Deux Nuits, appear to be the most popular.He died in 1834, in the sixty-fourth year of hisage.Two of his operas, Jean de Paris and La DameBlanche, have been successfully performed on theEnglish stage. The latter is the best of Boieldieu'scompositions. The drama, which is written byScribe, is founded on Scott's Monastery , thoughthe story is so altered, that little of the originalremains but the names of some of the characters.Like the generality of Scribe's pieces, it is writtenwith spirit, and well calculated for the productionof musical effects. The music was composed in1825, after an interval of many years, duringwhich it was supposed that Boieldieu had retiredfrom the field, and was no longer disposed to contendwith younger aspirants to fame. But it appearsthat, during that period, he had not been inatten-Harold, tXC. 345time to the progress of music, and, in particular,to the increasing influence of the German school :for La Dame Blanche is characterised by a greatersolidity of style, both in the concerted pieces andin the instrumental accompaniments, than is to befound in his previous operas.Herold, a young composer of genius, whosecareer was closed by an untimely death, distinguishedhimself by two operas ; Marie, producedin 1826, and Zampa, in 1831. The latter is awork of merit, and gained great popularity. Thesubject of the drama bears a close resemblance to thatof Don Giovanni. The hero, Zampa, is a libertine,who, after a course of wickedness, is at last draggedto the infernal regions by the statue of a betrayedmistress, on whose marble finger he has, in a momentof levity and bravado, placed a ring. Thiscatastrophe must have cost the composer no smalldifficulty to avoid coming into collision with Mozart;but he succeeded in treating the subject with considerableoriginality. Zampa appeared in anEnglish dress at one of our theatres ; but it waspoorly got up and performed, and, consequently,had little success.The principal composers of the present time whodevote their talents to the French stage, are Auber,Meyerbeer, and Halevy.Auber was first brought into notice in 1823 byhis opera La JVeige, which became very popularnot only in France but in Germany, and is freeAUBER.quietly performed in the principal German theatres.His Fra Diavolo, and his most celebratedpiece, La Muette de Portico, (or Masaniello,) arewell known all over Europe. In Auber's earlierworks there is a palpable imitation of Rossini ; buthe gradually acquired greater independence ofstyle ; and, in his later compositions, his manner,both in the cast of his melodies, and the dispositionof his accompaniments, is decidedly his own. Hispeculiarities, indeed, are so marked, and so constantlyperceptible, that they give his music toogreat a uniformity of character, and lay him opento the charge of mannerism. His music is notmarked by depth of thought, or strength of feeling.His combinations are ingenious, but not profound ;and his melodies, though often sweet and sometimestender, are very rarely pathetic. But hismusic is brilliant, sparkling, exhilarating, and remarkablefor the clearness and simplicity of itsdramatic effects, even in scenes of the greatestbustle and confusion. These are the beautieswhich have rendered Masaaiello so generally attractive.Every auditor, learned or unlearned, isanimated and delighted by the charming barcarole,the market chorus, the chorus of fishermen, thebeautiful finale to the third act, (in the originalpiece.) the bacchanalian song, and the air sung byMasaniello. Beauties of a similar kind, thoughinferior in degree, are to be found in Fra Diavolo.Among Auber's minor productions, a comic operaMEYERBEER. 347called Le Philtre, written by Scribe, and broughtout at the Academie Roy ale in 1831, is probablythe most agreeable.Meyerbeer, the son of a banker of Berlin, wasborn in 1794. His first musical studies were conductedby the Abbe" Vogler, who filled his head withthe rules of the old school ; the consequence ofwhich was, that when he produced an opera atVienna, the dryness of its style caused a completefailure. By the advice of Salieri he visited Italy,and became a convert to the style of that country.He remained in Italy for several years, and broughtout several operas at Padua, Venice, and Milan,with distinguished success. The principal of thesewere Marguerite anjou, and II Crociato in Egitto.Notwithstanding his success in Italy, Meyerbeer'schange of style did not. please the German critics.His friend and fellow-student Weber, in particular,in several of his letters, grievously lamented Meyerbeer'sbacksliding, and remonstrated with him onthe subject ; but still, notwithstanding his objectionsto the style of his friend's operas, he had themcarefully performed at the Dresden theatre, of whichhe was then the musical director.77 Crociato, which was first performed at Venicein 1825, raised the composer's reputation to thehighest pitch, and rivalled, in the greatness andextent of its popularity, the most successful operasof Rossini. The universal opinion was, that, in this348 MEYERBEER.fine opera, Meyerbeer had effected a happy amalgamationof the German with the Italian style ;that he had combined the graceful, smooth, andflowing melody of Italy with the severer beautiesof the German school ; that his vocal passages wereas expressive and impassioned as his instrumentationwas striking and descriptive ; and that thewhole piece was marked by dramatic propriety andtruth. The composer was fortunate in the choiceof his poem, which is by Signor Rossi, a modernItalian dramatist of considerable talent. It is aninteresting tale, in which European chivalry andeastern romance are blended with much effect ; thereis force as well as elegance in the dialogue ; and thesongs possess no small share of poetical beauty.*II Crociato was brought out at our English opera-housein July 1825 (a season when that theatre wasunder the able management of Mr. Ayrton) with astrong cast and great care in every particular, andreceived with a degree of applause amounting toenthusiasm. It was soon afterwards brought outat Paris under the direction of the composer himself,who received an invitation from M. de laRochefoucauld to visit the French capital for thatpurpose. It was stated in the French journals atthe time, that Rossini, then manager of the Italianopera, w r as about to bring forward this piece in aSee, in particular, the graceful romance, " Giovinetto Cavalier,"the poetry of which is as elegant as the music.MEYERBEER. 349manner which would have endangered its success,but was prevented by the interposition of a higherauthority.This visit to Paris, and his reception there, appearto have induced Meyerbeer to make that city hispermanent residence, and to turn his attention tothe French opera. His marriage in 1827, and thesuccessive loss of two infant children, suspended foratime his musical pursuits. His first opera for theFrench stage, Robert le Diable, was performed atthe Academie Royale de Musique in 1831. It wasgot up with extraordinary splendour, and receivedw r with an enthusiasm which has rarely been surpassed.For several successive seasons the public crowdednightly to see it ; and, even to this day, the frequencyof its performance shows that its attractionis not greatly diminished.In the season of 1832 Robert le Diable was performed,in its original form, at the King's Theatrein London, then under the management of Mr.Monck Mason, whose zeal and spirit meritedgreater success than he met with. He not onlyengaged the composer himself to superintend, inperson, the preparation of the piece, and to conductits performance, but he imported nearly the wholedramatis personae, and the costly decorations, costumes,and properties of the Parisian theatre. Hisobject was to transport, for the time, the grandopera of Paris into the Hay market; but he failedin the accomplishment of this spirited attempt.350 MEYERBEER.Delays and impediments occurred in the preparationof the opera, and Meyerbeer departed beforeit was ready for performance. It was not broughtout till the middle of June, and even then, thoughit was splendidly got up and admirably represented,the performance bore marks of imperfect preparation.It was received at first with expressions ofgreat applause; but the public were wearied by theexcessive length of an opera in five acts, — a thingwholly unprecedented in England. From theseand other causes, its production was, on the whole,a failure, and made a heavy addition to the ruinouslosses of the season.*The drama of Robert le Diable, which is byMessrs. Scribe and Delavigne, making allowancefor the wildness and extravagance of the subject,has considerable poetical merit. In the music,which is original and powerful, Meyerbeer has forsakenhis Italian style. The melodies have a gooddeal of the French national character ; and theharmonies, both vocal and instrumental, have theThe production of Robert le Diable at the opera-house wasforestalled by the two great winter theatres, the managers ofwhich, though not possessed of Meyerbeer's score, contrived,each of them, to bring out a spurious piece bearing his name,but vamped up by English composers employed for that purpose,from the piano-forte arrangement which had been publishedat Paris ; - a most reprehensible proceeding, as it wasknown that Mr. Mason had paid the composer a large sum foracopy of the score, and the exclusive right of performing it inLondon.MEYERBEER. 351depth and fulness (frequently carried to excess) ofthe German school. The powers of the brass instrumentsof the orchestra are so unsparingly used,as, in the course of so long a piece, to fatigue andoppress the ear.Les Huguenots, the last of Meyerbeer's productions,was first performed at the grand opera inFebruary 1836, and has had an almost incessantrun ever since. The drama, by Scribe, is foundedon the massacre of St. Bartholomew, the horrors ofwhich are strongly represented. This piece is aninstance of the change in the French taste in regardto spectacles of bloodshed and horror. These wereformerly excluded, and their frequent occurrenceon the English stage was a fruitful theme of censureand ridicule to the French critics : but the modernFrench public appear now to have a morbid appetitefor horrid and revolting theatrical exhibitions.This opera terminates with the massacre, in thepresence of the audience, of the chief protestantpersons of the drama, who are shot by the furiousCatholic soldiers, and their bodies left in a heap onthe stage, while the murderers depart in search offresh victims, singing in chorus, byway of finale, —Frappons, pursuivant l'heretique ;Dieu le veut, Dieu veut leur sang !"This opera presents another feature, now commonon the French stage ; the indecorous introductionof prayers, hymns, and the most solemn rites andceremonies of religion One of the means of dragHALEVY.magic effect is the frequent repetition of one ofLuther's psalms : and a hymn to the Virgin, sungby a choir of young girls, in a religious procession,is blended with the profane accents of a jovial ditty,in praise of women, wine, and plunder, roared bya party of drunken Calvinists. These circumstancesare a bar to the performance of Les Huguenotson the English stage ; and it is owing tothem, doubtless, that no attempt of the kind hasbeen made ; for, in other respects, this opera couldbe clothed in an English dress as easily as Robertle Diable. Its music, like that of its precursor, isfull of powerful effects, but fatiguing to the ear fromthe almost incessant force of the accompanimentsduring five long acts ; and the great quantity of religiousmusic (as it is called) appears very heavy,except to Frenchmen, who seem to have a greaterrelish for this description of music in the theatrethan in the place where it is most appropriate.The same vitiated taste for the horrible and therevolting, and the same propensity to profane themost sacred things, now so prevalent on the Frenchstage, are exemplified in two of the most popularoperas of the day, La Juice, and La Tentation,both composed by Halevy, a musician of talent.The former of these pieces, shorn of some of itsmost disgusting features, and, in particular of itsinsufferable catastrophe (which consists in the heroinebeing plunged alive into a boiling caldron,)was lately got up at Drury Lane with great splendourLA TENTATION. 353«and some degree of success, though it was found tobe still too highly seasoned with horrors for anEnglish palate. As to the latter, its daring impietyhas no parallel since the days of the Mysteries;while it has not the excuse which may be made forthem, of being the production of a semi-barbarousage.La Tentation is founded on the Catholic legendof the Temptations of St. Anthony. In the outseta hermit appears in his cell, murmuring at the austeritiesof his solitary life. A storm rises, and afemale pilgrim, half dead from cold and wet, begsfor shelter in his cell. He gives her wine to restoreher, and, to encourage her, partakes of the cup heoffers. Under the influence of wine and beauty,the monk, whose previous repining show him to beanexcellent subject for the devil to work upon,forgets his sanctity so far as to offer violence to hisguest, regardless of the image of the Virgin underwhich she has sought protection, when he is struckdead by a thunderbolt. A troop of angels, headedby the archangel Michael, rush in at one side, anda troop of devils, headed by Belial, at the other.They contend for possession of the hermit's soul ;but the dispute is compromised by an agreementthat he shall be restored to life in order to undergothree more temptations, on the result of which shalldepend his final doom. The hermit awakes as froma swoon, and believes all that has passed to havebeen a dream ; till, seeing the beautiful pilgrimVOL. II. A A354 LA TENTATION.still lying senseless on the floor, he rushes out ofhis cell, to avoid further danger from her charms.The scene now changes to hell, where Ashtaroth andhis legions of inferior spirits are sitting in conclaveon the case of the hermit. They resolve to tempthim by means of female beauty, and set about manufacturinga temptress by the help of diabolicalincantations. A cat, a magpie, a peacock, a goat,a viper, a monkey, and some other animals, (verygallantly chosen as emblems of womankind,) arethrown into a flaming caldron, and the hell-brothis made " thick and slab" by the infusion of bloodand tears. The charm at first fails — instead of abeautiful woman, there rises from a caldron amonster of an aspect so horrible as to frighten thedevils themselves. This abortion is thrown backinto the caldron : by way of mending the charm,a devil more knowing than his fellows adds to theingredients jewels, shawls, and other articles offemale finery ; and the wished-for production appearsin the form of a most beautiful and gracefulwoman, represented to the life by the celebratedMademoiselle Duvernay. In a chorus of demoniacaljoy, the fiends give their new creation thename of Miranda, and depart with her in search oftheir intended victim. The scene of the third actis a gothic castle, occupied by the demons in theguise of a feudal baron and his servants and retainers.The hermit, now an outcast, and exhaustedwith cold, hunger, and fatigue, begs forLA TiSNTATION. 355shelter at the gate, but is refused admittance, unlesson condition of his destroying a crucifix. Herejects the proposal, and is left exposed to the storm,while the windows blaze with lights, and joyoussongs announce the revelry within. Miranda issuesfrom the castle, and endeavours, by her persuasionsand blandishments, to induce him to renounce hisvows ; but he remains firm, and she is retiring,when her steps are arrested by the choral hymns ofa company of pilgrims. She listens ; and, movedby their pious accents falls on her knees, and endeavoursto join in their prayers ; then, hasteningto the castle, returns with provisions, which sheplaces before the hermit and the pilgrims. Thedevils, enraged at the treachery of their slave,rush out, and are about to maltreat her, when thepilgrims are suddenly transformed into a companyof angels, who spread their wings around thehermit, while the castle vanishes, and the demonsfly from their presence. The hermit, in the fourthact, is transported into the harem of an easternsovereign, where he undergoes fresh temptationsand dangers, from which he is saved by Miranda,who, in place of his tempter, becomes his protectress.The last act presents a tableau in action,copied from the celebrated engraving of Callot.The demons strive, by means of terror, to overcomethe firmness of the hermit, but in vain : atlength the celestial host, led by Michael, descend tohis protection ; a conflict takes place, which ends inaa 2356 FRENCH SINGING.the defeat of the army of hell, and the holy man isborne away to heaven amid the choral songs of theconquerors.The painful impression which such a representationis calculated to make on English feelings isincreased by the irreverent parodies of the prayersand hymns of the church, which occur in almostevery scene. There is, it must be admitted, muchbeauty in the music : some of the choruses, in particular,exhibit the hand of a master. The splendourof the spectacle, as got up at Paris, is unparalleled,the scenic illusion almost magical, and some of thesituations powerful and impressive. And yet, withallits beauty, splendour, dramatic effect, and variedattractions, we are well assured that, were such ajumble of horrors, profanity, and voluptuousness,exhibited before an English audience, it wouldnever receive a second representation.It remains to add a few words respecting theFrench school of singing. Till within a recentperiod, the badness of French singing has been constantlyremarked by all (except the French themselves)who have had occasion to speak of themusic of that country. Rousseau, in his celebratedLettre sm* la Musique Franchise, and, indeed, inall his musical writings, speaks of the French singingwith unmeasured ridicule and contempt, characterisingthe voices as harsh and screaming, thestyle as vicious, and the expression as affected andunnatural. Burney, describing the music whichFRENCH SINGING. 357he heard in Paris in 1770,* makes several remarksto a similar effect. " In the evening,"he says, " I heard two musical dramas at theTheatre Italien, in which the singing was the worstpart of the performance. Though the modernFrench composers hazard every effect that has beentried by the Italians, yet, from being ill executedand ill understood, it seldom makes an impressionupon the audience." — On another occasion lie says,Several of the songs would have been admirable,if they had been sung with the Italian expression.But the French voice never comes further thanfrom the throat ; there is no voce di petty, no true•portamento, or direction of the voice, on any of thestages." He says at a later period, t " A singing-schoolis now established at Paris, with Pickingfor principal master: but if his assistants are notItalians, and the music upon which they form thevoice is not Italian, and set to Italian words, it maybesafely predicted that many ages will elapsebefore any scholars will be produced that foreignerswill hear with pleasure ; and that the period isstill more distant when the national taste in singingwill be so meliorated by their performance as toescape censure from the rest of Europe."Since that period, however, the French style ofsinging has improved with as much rapidity as theother branches of the art. Even at that time,singers began to imbibe the purity and grace of thePresent State of Music in France and Italy.\ History of 31 u sic, vol. iv. published in 1789.358 FRENCH SINGING.Italian style. The celebrated Marat, one of thegreatest vocalists that France has produced, attractednotice so early as 1784. He was the sonof an advocate of Bordeaux, and delighted thefashionable world by his wonderful talents as anamateur. He was then about twenty, and did notknow a note of music, but sang with surprisingexecution and exquisite taste. Picking and Sac-china,who were charmed with his singing, advisedhim to abstain from the study of rules from whichnature seemed to have given him a dispensation.He was able to sing a whole opera, from the overtureto the finale, inclusive, giving all the obbligatopassages of accompaniment and other instrumentaleffects, and not even omitting the airs de ballet ;and all this he did as easily as another would singan air. He afterwards embraced music as a profession,and was for many years the greatest tenor-singerin France. His contemporary, Chardin,also a tenor-singer, was equally distinguished forpurity of style. Lais, who, at the beginning ofthe present century, was not less eminent as achurch than as a theatrical singer, was consideredequal to the celebrated Italian singer David instyle and expression ; and Elleviou, who flourishedsomewhat later, was possessed of similarqualities.These singers have obtained a place in musicalhistory from the possession of qualities, which, intheir day, were rare among their countrymen.FRENCH SINGING. 359But the familiarity with the best models, the excellentsystem of education in the Conservatoire,and the improved taste of the public, have graduallyeradicated the vices of the French school ; andthe favourite vocalists of the present time, amongwhom may be enumerated Nourrit, Levasseur,Dupes, Madame Conti Moreau, MademoiselleFalcon, and Madame Doris Gras, are pure andelegant singers, as well as excellent dramaticperformers.CHAPTER XIII.Italian opera to the present time — London opera-house — Winter'soperas — Mrs. Billington — Madame Grassini — Mr.Bran am — Madame Catalans — Introduction of Mozart's operasBertinotti — Tramezzani and Naldi — Vestris — Fodor —Remarkable season of 1817 — Camporese — »Ambrogetti —Rossini.In the brief view which it remains for us to take ofthe progress of the Italian opera since the beginningof the present century, we shall adopt, as the mostconvenient, the method of giving some account ofthe transactions of the London Italian opera-house,in so far as regards the pieces which have beensuccessively produced, and the performers whohave appeared at that theatre. The principal works ofevery eminent composer who has flourished duringthe above period have been brought forward inLondon ; and every performer who has acquireddistinction abroad has aspired to the favour of theEnglish public.At the beginning of this period the principaloperas performed were those of Cimarosa, Paesi-WINTER. 361elle, Guglielmi, Gluck, Salieri, Bianchi, andother composers of that day, who have been alreadymentioned. The year 1803 was renderedremarkable by the arrival of Winter, and the performanceof his Calypso. Winter, on the death ofMozart, had been left without a rival in Germany,and, when he came to England, was the mosteminent composer of the time, for the Italian aswell as the German stage.Winter was born at Manheim about the year1755. He became, at an early age, maestro dicapella to the Elector of Bavaria, after having distinguishedhimself by many excellent compositions.He went to Italy, and composed several operas forthe theatres of Venice and Naples ; after whichhe fixed his residence at Munich. He produceda great number of German operas for differenttheatres, among which the Untcrbrochene Opferfest,(The Interrupted Sacrifice,) first performed atVienna, has been generally considered the mostexcellent. In 1802, while on a visit to Paris, heproduced his French opera of Tamerlane ; and itwas immediately after the successful performanceof that piece that he came to London. He remainedin England till the end of 1804 ; during whichperiod he composed, for our King's Theatre, theopera of Calypso already mentioned, Zaira, Proserpina,and Castors e Pollute.The season of 1804 was one of the most splendidin the annals of our Italian opera. It was MRS. Wellington.able, not only for the production of the chefsdeceives of Winter, but for the simultaneous appearanceof Billington, Grassini, and Braham.Mrs. Billington had returned to England in1801, in the zenith of the fame she had acquiredduring her residence in Italy.* She had lost herhusband, who had died suddenly at Naples; andshe had soon afterwards married a Frenchman ofthe name of Felissent, retaining, however, the nameof Billington. On her return, she betook herselfto the English stage, and astonished as well asdelighted the public by her performance of her oldcharacters, Mandane, Rosetta, Clarissa, &c. Onthe departure of Banti, at the end of the season of1802, Mrs. Billington was engaged at the Italianopera. She was at this time about thirty ; andher personal charms, still great, were impaired by adegree of enbonpoint which deprived her action,too, of the elegance and grace which had formerlydistinguished it. Her features were beautiful ;but her countenance, though full of good humour,was incapable of varied expression, and she hadno talents whatever as an actress, the effects sheproduced on the stage being attributable entirelyto her vocal powers. Her voice was a pure soprano,not remarkable for volume, but very sweet andflexible, and of extraordinary compass in its upperextremity. Her rapidity was amazing, and nothingcould exceed the finish and delicacy of her executedante, p. 185.MADAME Grasping. 363tion. She was, too, a thorough musician, havingbeen in her youth a great performer on the pianoforte; and her knowledge of the art furnished herwith an inexhaustible variety of beautiful embellishments.So much were the public struck bythe novelty and singular beauty of her vocal gracesand ornaments, that her favourite songs were publishedas nearly as possible in the way she sangthem, her Jiorituri being taken down, as she gavethem, by the most experienced musical professors.Of the date of Madame Grassini's birth we donot find any record. She was prima donna ofthe opera at Venice in the year 1797 ; and in 1800was invited to Paris by Bonaparte, who had heardher with great admiration during his Italian expedition.Lord Mount Edgecumbe says, that hervoice, which was originally a high soprano, had bysome accident been reduced to a low and confinedcontralto. It was, indeed, a contralto of verylimited extent; but, within its proper compass, itwas of so perfect a quality, and of such volume andpower, that it is not easy to believe that it couldhave been merely the wreck of a voice of a quitedifferent register. She was strikingly beautiful.Her figure was tall and commanding ; and hergait and attitudes had the exquisite grace of thefinest models of Grecian statuary. Her head wasnoble ; her features of the most classical beauty ofform ; her hair and eyes of the deepest black ;364 MADAME Grasping.and her whole appearance had an air of singularmajesty and greatness. She was a highly accomplishedmusician, and her talents as an actresswere very considerable.Notwithstanding these gifts of nature and art,Grassini was not at first popular in England. Thefemale contralto voice, though now well knownand highly appreciated, was not at that time familiarto our audiences, who missed the clear andbrilliant sounds, the flexibility of organ, the rapidpassages and florid embellishments which theyconceived essential to female singing. She firstappeared in La Verging del Sole, an opera byMayer; but, though her beauty and her acting-weremuch admired, her success as a vocalist wasby no means decisive. Her reception, indeed, wasso equivocal, that, when her benefit was to takeplace, she feared to venture it alone, but applied toMrs. Billington for her assistance. On this occasionWinter's Proserpina was performed for thefirst time, Ceres being represented by Billington,and Proserpine by Grassini. The music of each ofthe parts was adapted with consummate skill to thedifferent powers of the performers; and Grassini,if she did not carry away the palm from her rival,at least divided it with her. Her plaintive accentsin the little simple air, " Page fui," in which Proserpinemourns her happy days of childhood spentby her mother's side, subdued and melted everyheart, and its impression was evinced by the tears,BRAHAM. 365even more than the applause, of the audience. Forthis, and the two following seasons — as long asBillington and Grassini remained upon the stagethis opera drew crowds to the theatre ; and theairs of these singers were to be found on the pianoforteof every lady who numbered among her accomplishmentsa knowledge of Italian music.In Winter's Castors e Pollute, Braham performedalong with Mrs. Billington. He had alreadyappeared on our Italian stage in the year1796, when he was only nineteen ; and had afterwardsacquired, in Italy itself, the reputation of agreat Italian singer. He had previously made amost brilliant debut, not only on the English stage,but at the oratorios, where he had, even at that earlyage, given proof of his transcendent talent, by theunrivalled expression with which he delivered thefamous soliloquy of Naphtha, ei Deeper and deeperstill," which to this day remains the greatest ofhis efforts. The road to fame and fortune wasnow open before him ; but he wisely consideredthat his great object, in the first place, ought to beto render himself a thoroughly accomplished artist.Declining, therefore, the most tempting pecuniaryoffers, he set out for Italy, in which country heremained for four years ; and, during this period,he not only applied himself assiduously to thestudy of his art, but appeared at the principaltheatres with great distinction. During the Carnivalseason of 1799, he was engaged to sing at366 BRAHAM.the Scala theatre of Milan, along with Mrs. Wellington; and they were to appear together in anopera by Nasolini, a composer who then enjoyedsome reputation. The applause which Brahamreceived during the rehearsals, excited the jealousyof Billington, or rather of her husband, M. Felis-sent, for jealousy formed no part of her character.The intriguing Frenchman contrived to procurethe omission, on the first representation, of a grandaria for the tenor voice, in which Braham's powerswere advantageously displayed. The affair, however,had been talked of, and the public did justiceto Braham by giving strong marks of disapprobation.Next day it was announced in the bills thatBraham's scena should be performed, and, on thesecond night, the piece was received with theutmost applause. Mrs. Billington's concern in thismatter, and her conduct in some other respects,had given Braham cause of umbrage ; and he resolvedon a kind of revenge which probably nobodybut himself could have taken. Mrs. Billington'sbeautiful embellishments were always elaboratelyprepared and studied beforehand ; and, whenonce fixed on, seldom changed. Braham, whosefirst great air in the opera preceded that of Mrs.Billington, listened to her roulades at the rehearsals,acquired them perfectly, and at the firstrepresentation, introduced into his own air everyoneof the well-studied graces that the lady hadthus prepared for her own. Billington, thus plun-BRAHAM. 367tered of lier property, had very little to substitutefor it, and astonished the audience by the unaccustomedmeagreness of her style. The husband blusteredand threatened, and Mrs. Billington refused,in the next opera, to sing a duet with Braham.But her good nature got the better of her spleen,and the two great English singers became, andalways continued, very good friends. It was atthis time that the elder David, the greatest Italiansinger of his time, exclaimed on hearing Braham,"There are only two singers in the world, I andthe Englishman !" At Venice, Braham was one ofthe performers in Cimarosa's unfinished opera ofArtemisia, which being completed by Mayer, andbrought out after the author's death, was stoppedby the audience before the conclusion, as they didnot choose that any other music should be mingledwith that of their lamented composer.On Braham's return to this country in 1801, hedevoted himself chiefly to the English stage. Hisonly appearances at the Italian opera were duringthe seasons of 1804, 1805, and 1806 ; and, for ashort time in the season of 1816. The threebrilliant seasons just mentioned were distinguishedby the performance of the beautiful operas ofWinter, and some of the masterpieces of Cimarosa ;and the last of them (1806) was rendered still moreremarkable by the first introduction into Englandof the music of Mozart — the Clemenza di Titohaving been chosen by Mrs. Billington for her368 BRAHAM.benefit. It was said that this occurrence was owingto the taste and knowledge of his late majesty,George IV., (then prince of Wales,) who not onlysuggested the choice, but supplied the score of theopera from his own library. The experiment,however, was made too early. The characters ofVitellia and Sexto were finely performed by Wellingtonand Braham ; but the Italian part of thecompany neither relished nor understood the musicand found the study of one of Mozart's concertedpieces a more laborious task than that of half adozen whole operas of the Italian school. Nor didit appear that the audiences of that day were moreenlightened than those performers ; so, after a fewrepetitions, this noble opera was laid aside to makeway for some of the established favourites of theday, and Mozart remained as unknown at theking's theatre as ever.At the close of the season 1806, Madame Gras-sinquitted England, Mrs. Billington retired fromthe stage, and Braham withdrew from the opera-house.With them, good music and good performancedisappeared also ; and this brief but memorabletime was succeeded by a long period of barrennessand insipidity, — a period which we have nohesitation in thus designating, though it was thenthat Catalans was in the meridian of her course,and the full effulgence of her splendour. Hersplendour, unhappily, while it extinguished everyother light, threw no radiance around, and onlyCATALANI. 369thickened the darkness which covered our Italianstage.Angelica Catalans was a native of the Romanterritory, and born in 1780. She appeared at anearly age as a theatrical singer, at Venice, Florence,Rome, and other places in Italy. She afterwardswent to Lisbon and Madrid ; and, while in thePeninsula, was married to M. Valabreque, an officerin the army of Juno. Her fame soon reachedEngland, and produced an engagement at theKing's Theatre, where she made her first appearancein December 1806, in the character of Semiramis,in an opera of that name, composed for her byPortugal, a composer whose music she broughtinto temporary vogue, but who is now deservedlyforgotten.It is not wonderful that the public were captivatedby Catalans. She was in the bloom of hersurpassing beauty, and her vocal powers hadreached full maturity. Her form was a model ofsymmetry, and her face, which beamed with intelligenceand animation, was capable of every shadeand variety of expression. The natural gifts of hermind were not unworthy of those of her person.She possessed energy and spirit, blended withgreat sensibility, sweetness of temper, and warmaffections. These qualities gave an irresistiblecharm to her manners ; and it was impossible to bein her society without being fascinated by herunaffected good humour, and exuberant yet per-VOL. II. B B370 CATALANI.fectly delicate vivacity. The general admiration,too, which she inspired, was heightened by her domestichabits, simplicity of character, and uniformpurity and propriety of conduct. Where blamewas incurred in consequence of the transactions towhich she was nominally a party, it was very wellknown that no part of it attached to her. She wasalmost entirely uneducated, even in music ; a misfortunewhich prevented her from attaining thatheight, as an actress and a singer, which hersingular gifts of nature ought to have placed withinher reach.*Of the generosity of Madame Catalans's disposition manyinstances are remembered. When she performed for the benefitof musicians, she frequently returned the whole or a largeportion of the sum for which she was engaged ; and she oftenacted in the same manner towards public charities. When agreat musical performance took place for the benefit of theWestminster hospital, in 1821, she was solicited to contributeher services, but declined on the ground that her own concerts,then announced, might be injured by her previous appearanceelsewhere. But, on the day after her first concert, she transmittedto the committee the whole proceeds of that performance,amounting to about £300, as a gift to the hospital.When she visited Cracow in the height of her fame, she wasengaged, for a very large sum, to sing in the theatre. Whenthe amount was tendered her, she returned more than the halfof it as a contribution towards the fund for erecting a statue tothe memory of Kosciusko.Her want of literary attainments, joined to her vivacity inconversation, sometimes produced ludicrous scenes. When atthe court of Weimar, she was placed, at a dinner-party, by theside of Goethe, as a mark of respect to her on the part of herCATALANI. 371During several seasons that Catalans remainedat the King's Theatre, it was her policy (or ratherroyal host. The lady knew nothing of Goethe, but, beingstruck by his majestic appearance, and the great attention ofwhich he was the object, she inquired of the gentleman on herother side what was his name. " The celebrated Goethe,madame," was the answer. " Pray, on what instrument doeshe play ?" was the next question. " He is no performer,madam — he is the renowned author of Werter." — " Oh, yes,yes, I remember," said Catalans ; and, turning to the venerablepoet, she addressed him, — " Ah, sir, what an admirer I am ofWerter !" A low bow was the acknowledgment for so flatteringa compliment. " I never," continued the lively lady, — "I neverread any thing half so laughable in all my life. What a capitalfarce it is, sir !" — " Madam," said the poet, looking aghast —the Sorrows of Werter a farce ?" — " Oh, yes ; never was anythingso exquisite) ridiculous !" rejoined Catalans, laughingheartily as she enjoyed the remembrance. And it turned outthat she had been talking all the while of a ridiculous parody ofWerter, which had been performed at one of the minor theatresof Paris, and in which the sentimentality of Goethe's tale hadbeen unmercifully ridiculed. The poet did not get over hismortification the whole evening ; and the fair singer's credit atthe court of Weimar was sadly impaired by this display of herignorance of the illustrious Goethe and the Sorrows of Werter.Kelly, in his Reminiscences, says of Catalans, — " I couldrelate numberless traits of her goodness ; no woman was evermorecharitable or kind-hearted, and as for the quality of hermind, I never knew a more perfect child of nature. At Bangorshe heard the Welsh harp for the first time. The old blindharper of the house was in the kitchen ; thither she went, andseemed delighted with the wild and plaintive music which heplayed. But when he struck up a Welsh jig, she started upB B 2372 CATALANI.that of her husband) to allow no other star to appearin the firmament. The public were enraptured withher vocal powers and various attractions ; and,provided that they saw and heard her, everythingelse became a matter of indifference. People nolonger thought of going to the theatre to see agood opera well represented, or to hear the musicof a good composer : Catalans was the sole object ofcuriosity and interest. It is not surprising thatthe shrewd M. Valabreque turned this infatuation toaccount. If Catalans was the single object of attraction,she was the only person entitled to recompense; and if the public crowded, not to see operas,but to hear her, other performers were superfluous.During her first season, there were several goodperformers — Siboni, Rovedino, and Naldi ; the firstan excellent tenor, and the others good basses. But,when Catalans came to make her engagement for thesecond season, her husband demanded a sum so extravagant,that the manager represented that sucha salary to one singer would absolutely disable himfrom procuring any other performer of talent."Talent!" said M. Valabreque, "have you notMadame Catalans ? What would you have? If youwant an opera company, my wife, with four or fivebefore all the servants in the kitchen, and danced as if she werewild. I thought she never would have ceased. At length,however, she finished ; and, on quitting the kitchen, gave theharper two guineas."Catalan. 373puppets, is quite sufficient"* During the seasonof 1808, accordingly, Catalans actually was thewhole company, the other performers being literallypuppets. She appeared chiefly in operas,composed expressly for her, in which the partfor the prima donna was carefully adapted tothe display of her various powers. Her Semiramide,in particular, made an extraordinary impressionon the public. The part afforded room forthe finest tragic action, and the music, though it wasnothing in itself, enabled her to exhibit all thewonders of her voice and execution. Her famousscena in the last act, " Son regina," will never beforgotten by those who heard it. She appearedalso in some comic operas, (particularly La Fras-catania of Paesiello,) in which she delighted thepublic by the graceful lightness and gaiety of hercomedy. But in them, as well as in her tragedies,she stood alone ; the whole attraction being centeredin herself.This system succeeded for a time : but the publicgradually became weary of seeing and hearingnobody but Catalans ; and, before the end of thesecond season, she often performed almost to emptybenches.The following season, M. Valabreque, not discouragedby this falling off, made a demand of so" Ma femme et quatre ou cinq pope's — voila tout ce qu'ilfaut." Such, it is said, were the precise words of the knowingFrenchman.374 BERTINOTTI.exorbitant a nature, that the manager refused tocomply with it. Tram ezzani, a tenor-singer of reputation,was engaged, and appeared with success ;but the company was bad, and the performanceswretched. In 1810 the manager was fain to haveCatalans on her own terms, along with Tramezzani ;and these two singers, performing the ephemeralproductions of the day, drew large audiences.The music of 1811 was of a very superior qualityto that of many previous seasons. Catalans wasstill the principal singer, but no longer the undividedobject of attraction. There were, besides,Madame Bertinotti, with Tramezzani and Naldi.This season was memorable for the first performancein England of a comic opera of Mozart. Thoughthat illustrious composer had been dead for almosttwenty years, only one of his operas (La Clemenzadi Tito) had as yet been performed in England,and that only some five or six times, at long intervals.Madame Bertinotti had the taste and spiritto bring out Cosi fan tutti for her own benefit :and though it was by no means well got up, yet itwas received with delight by the public, and its productionformed a new era on our Italian stage. Catalans,who ought to have been the Fiordiligi, didnot appear in it ; and Bertinotti's voice and executionwere not equal to the two bravura airs in thatpart, which, accordingly, she omitted, substitutingfor them things that were easier. Similar expedientswere adopted to cover the defects of the otherMRS. Dickens. 375performers. The success of this opera inducedNaldi to bring out, for his benefit, theFlautoMagico :but the strength of the company was quite inadequateto this difficult piece; the audience couldmake nothing of it, and it had only two representations.Such was now the taste for the music of Mozart,that in the following season (1812) Catalans herselfwas constrained to give way to it. She appeared intwo of his operas ; as Vitellia in La Clemenza diTito, and as Susanna in Le Nozzle di Figaro ; andpersonated, with equal felicity, the arch and livelywaiting-woman, and the lofty and impassioned patriciandame of ancient Rome. She sang the musicexquisitely ; and neither character, probably, hasever had so charming a representative. Our countrywoman,Mrs. Dickens, was engaged to performthe character of the Countess Almaviva ; and thishighly gifted singer (who had long held a most distinguishedplace on the English stage) rivalled Catalansin the excellence of her performance, and(in the duet " Sul aria" in particular) received anequal share of the applause of the audience. Tramrefused the part of Count Almaviva, on theground that it was beneath his dignity to appear inacomic opera ! Had he said that the music of thepart was unsuitable to a tenor voice, he would havegiven a good reason for refusing a part that oughtnot to have been offered him. It was actually performedby Fischer, a good singer with a bass voice.376 CATALANI.In the Clemenza di Tito, the part of Sexto, writtenfor a soprano voice, was performed by Tramezzani ; agreat dramatic improvement, though unquestionablyto the detriment of the music.The year 1813 was the last season of Catalans'sregular engagement on the opera stage. Tito andFigaro continued to be performed ; but Catalansreturned to the show-pieces of her favourite composers,entertaining the public, by way of novelty,with variations, composed for the violin, on popularairs, God save the King, Rule Britannia , Cease yourfunning, and other English songs, which were receivedby the public with the most extravagantmarks of astonishment and delight. Towards thebeginning of the season, she failed to make her appearanceone evening on which she had beenannounced to perform. Another opera was substituted,and played in the midst of symptoms of irritationon the part of the audience, which, on thefollowing evening (on which she was still absent)broke out into a violent uproar. Chandeliers werebroken, musical instruments destroyed, and so muchdamage done that the house was shut up for a week.She had been induced by her husband to offer thispiece of disrespect to the public, in consequence ofher salary having fallen somewhat into arrear ; nor,till this matter was put to rights, did she return tothe theatre.At the end of this season Catalans may be saidto have abandoned the dramatic part of her pro-catalans.377Cession, and entered upon a wandering life, in thecourse of which she visited all parts of Europe, exhibitingherself as a concert singer, and, wherevershe w T went, astonishing the world by her amazing displaysof vocal power. As soon as she had, in oneplace, exhausted her slender stock of things got upfor exhibition, she removed to another ; andwherever she went she was received with unexampleddistinction. Persons of the highest rankvied with each other in their attentions to the wonderof the age. Princesses treated her as a companion,and crowned heads attended her with obsequiousgallantry. The enormous sums which she receivedfor her performances were augmented by the costlypresents showered upon her by the great and thewealthy in every country which she visited ; andshe was probably much more richly rewarded forher extraordinary, but frivolous and unmeaningexhibitions, than even the most gifted of those who,by their legitimate efforts, have ennobled and extendedtheir art. In the midst, however, of themost trying circumstances in which a beautiful andcaptivating woman could be placed, surroundedwith all the changes and temptations of such a floodof prosperity, she pursued her course with undeviatingpropriety. At all times her conduct wasabove suspicion, and not even the faintest breath ofcalumny has ever tarnished her fair fame.After an absence of ten years, Madame Catalansreturned to England in 1824, when she entered378 CATALANI.into an engagement to perform at the opera-housefor a certain number of nights. She appeared inMayer's comic opera II Fanaticoo per la Musica,which she converted into a mere vehicle for hervocal displays. Almost all the music of her partwas cut out, to make room for a series of her usualbravuras, and she did not think it worth while evento assume the semblance of representing a character,but walked on and off, and went through her songsas if she were alone, hardly appearing to acknowledgethe presence of the " puppets" about her.The house was crowded in the extreme the firstnight, and her reception was enthusiastic. ButM. Valabreque soon found that " ma femme etquatre ou cinq pope's" would no longer do. Thedays of Pucitta and Portugal had passed away,and the public required, in an opera, concertedmusic well executed by all the principal performers.After the Fanaticoo per la Musica hadbeen murdered a few times "to audiences gettingthinner and thinner every succeeding night, Catalanswithdrew from the theatre, and never again,we believe, appeared on the stage.Catalan i's almost unrivalled gifts of nature, bothmental and physical, ought to have raised her to agreater height as an artist than she ever attained.Her education was extremely superficial, and shebecame the object of universal admiration as asinger, without ever having become a musician.She never acquired any exalted notions of the ob-catalans.379sects of her art. As she advanced in her career shedeviated farther and farther from the right road,till at length her whole ambition lay in surprisingthe world by displays of vocal power. It was nomatter how unmeaning or preposterous these displayswere ; it was quite enough if they were astonishing.Had she remained upon the stage, andassiduously cultivated the dramatic part of her profession,such was her intelligence, her sensibility,her gaiety, — such were the powers of her voice,her sense of the beautiful, and the irresistible charmsof her person, that she might have been the greatestactress that the musical drama ever possessed. Butthe wonder of the multitude was more flattering toher ear, and (it may be added.) more substantial inits results, than the approbation of the judicious ;and the latter part of her career was spent in mereexhibitions of vocal strength and agility, bearingthe same relation to genuine art that the feats ofMadame Saqui on the tight rope bear to the exquisitemovements of Taglioni. In seeking for themeans of making these displays, it was no matterto her how unsuitable her songs were to a femalevocalist. One of her favourite performances wasthe martial song for a bass voice, " Non piu andrai,"in Figaro, in which it was her delight to bear clownand overpower, by the force and volume of herorgan, the whole brazen instruments of the orchestra; an achievement for which she was alwaysrewarded by the acclamations of wondering crowds.It was these crowds — these acclamations — this sensesMADAME Vestries.less admiration, which unfortunately turned asidethis highly-gifted being from the path to the summitof greatness in her art, and rendered her abeacon, rather than a model, to her successors.The opera season of 1816 is worthy of notice,from the appearance of Madame Vestris and MadameFodor.Madame Vestris is the grand-daughter of thecelebrated Bartolozzi, the engraver ; and, at thistime, was the wife of Arian Vestris, one of thedancers of the King's Theatre. She was then veryyoung, but of exquisite beauty, and already possessedof those dramatic talents, those graces ofattitude and action, and that fine contralto voice,which still continue to charm the public. She performedthe parts ofZaira and Proserpina in a mannerworthy of their original representative, Grassiniherself ; and she evinced her comic powers by herdelightful representation of Lille in La Cosa Mar a,and Susanna in Figaro; and whether in the seriousor comic opera, her singing was equally characterisedby truth of expression and Italian purity ofstyle. Madame Vestris remained only two seasonson the opera boards, and has since been occasionallyengaged for short periods ; but it is on theEnglish stage that she has gained her great popularity.In 1817 a spirited attempt was made by Mr.Ayrton, to whom the management of the King'sTheatre had been committed by Mr. Waters, thethen proprietor, to effect some important reformsMADAME CAMrORESE. 381in its administration : and this gentleman, thoughhe failed in his immediate object, produced a greatand permanent benefit, by the impulse he gave tothe public taste. He was aware that the obstacles tothe production and proper performance of the bestoperas arose, not from the public, but from the performersthemselves, whose arrogance and capricewere permitted to over-rule the proceedings of themanager. It was the object of Mr. Ayrton tobreak through the trammels of singers and dancers,and, by the uncontrolled exercise of his own judgmentand taste, to present the public with the masterpiecesof the great German as well as Italiancomposers. For this purpose he engaged one ofthe most efficient companies that had ever beenassembled on the opera stage. The principalsingers consisted of Madame Camporese, MadameFodor, and Signors Crivelli, Ambrogetti, Naldi,and Angrisani. Madame Pasta was also ena'aa'ed,and appeared this season ; but she was then(though married) a mere girl, and made no impressionon the public, though she discovered talentswhich gave promise of her subsequent greatness.Madame Camporese had never before appearedon the stage. She was a lady of birth and education,and married to a member of the noble Romanfamily of Justinian, but constrained by familymisfortunes to make use professionally of her musicalaccomplishments. Before her arrival in Englandshe had sung only at the concert spirituel (or382 MADAME Odor.oratorio) at Paris. She was a handsome and elegantwoman, with dark eyes, hair, and complexion ;and her fine Roman countenance fitted her especiallyfor the performance of serious and dignifiedcharacters. As an actress she was not very impassionedor powerful, but always judicious and correct.Her voice was a soprano of good quality andcompass ; and her style and execution were refined,polished, and free from ambitious display.Madame Fodor was little known before her appearanceat this time in England. Her education,however, had been in the best school ; and herbeautiful and flexible voice, the lightness anddelicacy of her execution, and the simplicity, animation,and tenderness of her manner as anactress, raised her at once to the height of publicfavour. She remained in England only during theseasons of 1816, 1817, and 1818 ; but has since attainedthe highest reputation in France, Italy, andGermany.Signor Naldi had been an eminent lawyer atBologna, but had been obliged to abandon the professionin consequence of the political convulsionsof the period. He was a well-educated and veryaccomplished man. He remained several years inEngland, where he was deservedly a great favourite.In 1821 he met his death at Paris, in a verystrange and tragical manner. One day, beforedinner, at the house of his friend M. Garcia, thecelebrated singer, he was showing a method ofAMBROGETTI. 383cooking by steam, with a portable apparatus forthat purpose ; when, unfortunately, the lid of astewing-pan, blown off by an explosion of steam,struck him on the head, and killed him on thespot.Ambrogetti, though by no means distinguishedfor his vocal attainments, was possessed of a degreeof genius and enthusiasm, with a versatility of dramatictalent, which raised him to a high rank inhis profession. He was highly esteemed as anactor during his residence in England, which continuedfor several years. Of his subsequent history,little seems to be known. It has been said that,soon after his departure for England, he wasinduced by religious motives to retire from theworld, and enter the monastic order of La Trappe.With this excellent company the managerbrought out, for the first time in England, the DonGiovanni of Mozart, a piece already well knownto, and earnestly desired by, the real amateurs ofmusic. Its impression on the public was instantaneous.It was performed twenty-three timesduring the season to overflowing audiences, and eachnight was hailed with acclamations. Such was theenthusiasm it excited, that it might have have beenperformed, night after night, without intermission ;but the manager produced also the Figaro andClemenza di Tito of Mozart, the Penelope of Cima-rosa, the Agnesee and Griselda of Paer, and the384 AMBROGETTI.Molbxara of Paesiello ; a variety of excellence unparalleledin any other season, either before orsince.Ambrogetti, who performed the character ofDon Giovanni with unequalled truth and spirit,exhibited a still greater degree of power in hisrepresentation of the distracted father in Paer'sAgnesee, the story of which is that of Mrs. Opine'sFather and Daughter. It is said that, in order toqualify himself for this part, he had studied thevarious forms of insanity in the cells of bedlam ;but unfortunately, in seeking to render his representationtrue, he made it too dreadful to be borne.Females actually fainted, while others endeavouredto escape from so appalling a picture ; and, after afew nights, the performance of this opera was discontinued.Ambrogetti's tremendous exhibitionwas injudicious and unnecessary, as has beenproved by the equally natural and pathetic butmuch softer delineation of the character which hassince been given by Tamburini.Though the efforts of the manager were rewardedby the fullest approbation of the public, yet hefound himself unable to continue them. Duringthe whole season he had to contend with the oppositionof the performers, who were too often supportedby their aristocratic patrons, and by theproprietor of the theatre, in their cabals, intrigues,and refusal to perform their duty. Finding it im-rossini.385possible to make head against such obstacles, Mr.Ayrton, at the end of the season, retired from themanagement : and, it is proper to add, after themost splendid and profitable season that had beenknown for many years, was forced to have recourseto an action at law for the remuneration due tohimself for his services.* This season was attendedwith a great effect on the English musical stage.The popularity now gained by the operas ofMozart, especially Don Giovanni and Figaro, suggestedtheir production in an English dress. Theywere accordingly arranged by Mr. Bishop in aform suited to the capacity of our native performers,and in this form attracted crowds in every theatreof the kingdom. Thus originated the practice ofadapting to our stage the principal works of foreigncomposers, which has since been carried to such anextent, and has had such an influence on our nationalopera.The season of 1811 was remarkable for the introductioninto this country of the music of Rossini,through the means of Signor Garcia, who madehis debut, in England, in the character of CountAlmaviva in the Barbiere di Siviglia.The report of this action, which appeared in the publicjournals of the time, is curious as giving a peep behind thescenes of an Italian opera-house ; and a fuller view of the samekind is to be found in Mr. Embers's entertaining little book, calledSeven Years of the King's Theatre.VOL. II. C C386 rossini.Rossini was then, at the age of twenty-six, in theheight of his celebrity. Besides several otheroperas, he had produced his Tancredi, and theBarbiere di Swiglia, both of which were now-receivedwith enthusiasm in every Italian theatrethroughout Europe. The latter drama is the samewith that which had been previously set by Paesiello,and the brilliancy and spirit of Rossini's musicimmediately laid that of Paesiello on the shelf, tothe great mortification, it is said, of the veteranmaestro, whose opera, however, contains somethings, the grace and beauty of which have notbeen equalled by his successor. Rossini's operawas admirably performed, the principal charactersbeing sustained by Garcia, Madame Fodor, ,and Naldi, and was received as it hadbeen in all parts of the continent ; and for a numberof years Rossini's pieces obtained almost exclusivepossession of our theatre, as they did of everyother.Rossini himself visited London in 1824, in consequenceof an engagement at the opera-house, bywhich he was to act as director of the music, tosuperintend the performance of his own operas, andto compose a new one for the theatre. His wifewas also engaged as principal singer. This ladyhad acquired great celebrity and a large fortuneas a tragic actress and singer, and Rossini had latelymarried her at Naples. Most of his operas hadrossini. 387been previously performed here ; and the publiccuriosity respecting him had been still furtherexcited by the publication of Stendhal's memoirs ofhis life.The most remarkable incidents in the life of Rossinihave been so often repeated, that it would besuperfluous to introduce them here ; but his biographer'sdescription of his course of life while ramblingfrom place to place, bringing out in rapidsuccession the operas which raised him to celebrity,is not merely characteristic of himself, but gives alively picture of the state of the Italian stage."After his success at Bologna," says Stendhal,' which is considered as the chief seat of Italianmusic, Rossini received offers from almost everytown in Italy. Every manager was required tofurnish his theatre with an opera from the pen ofRossini. The sum he generally received for anopera was a thousand francs, (40/. sterling,) and hegenerally wrote from four to five in a year."The mechanism of an Italian theatre is as follows.The manager is frequently one of the mostwealthy and considerable persons of the little townhe inhabits. He forms a company, consisting of aprima donna, tenore, basso cantata, basso buffo, asecond female singer, and a third basso. He engagesa maestro, or composer, to write a new opera, whohas to adapt his own airs to the voices and capacitiesof the company. The libretto, or poem, is purchasedat the rate of from sixty to eighty francsc c 2388 Rossini.(three or four pounds) from some unlucky son ofthe Muses, who is generally a half starved abbe, thehanger-on of some rich family in the neighbourhood.The character of the parasite, so admirablypainted in Terence, is still to be found in all itsglory in Lombardy, where the smallest town can boastof five or six families with incomes of three or fourhundred a year. The manager, who, as has beenalready said, is generally the head of one of thesefamilies, entrusts the care of the financial departmentto a registrar, who is generally some pettifoggingattorney who holds the situation of hissteward. The next thing that generally happens is,that the manager falls in love with the prima donna ;and the progress of this important amour gives ampleemployment to the curiosity of the gossips."The company, thus organised, at length givesits first representation, after a month of cabals andintrigues, which furnish conversation for the wholeperiod. This is an event in the simple annals ofthe little town, of the importance of which thepeople of large places can form no idea. Duringmonths together, a population of eight or tenthousand persons do nothing but discuss the meritsof the forthcoming music and singers, with theeager impetuosity which belongs to the Italianclime. This first representation, if successful, isgenerally followed by twenty or thirty more of thesame piece ; after which the company breaks up.This is what is called station or season ; the last androssini. 389best of which is that of the carnival. The singerswho are not engaged in any of these companies areusually to be found at Milan or Bologna, where theyhave agents, whose business it is to find themengagements, or to manoeuvre them into situationswhen opportunity offers.From this little sketch of theatrical arrangementsin Italy, some idea may be formed of thelife which Rossini led. From 1810 to 1816 hevisited in succession all the principal towns inItaly, remaining from three to four months in each.Wherever he arrived, he was received with acclamations,and entertained by the dilettanti of theplace. The first two or three weeks were passedamong his friends, dining out, and shrugging uphis shoulders at the nonsense of the libretto givenhim to work upon. At length, about three weeksbefore the first representation, having acquireda competent knowledge of the voices of theperformers, he begins to write. He rises late, andpasses the clay composing, amid the conversationof his new friends, whose politeness will not sufferthem to leave him a moment. The day of performanceis fast approaching, and yet he cannotresist the pressing invitations of these friends todine with them at the tavern. This, of course,leads to a supper; the champagne circulates freely;the hours of morning steal on apace. At length acompunctious visiting shoots across the mind ofthe truant composer. He rises abruptly ; his friends390 ROSSINI.insist on seeing him home ; and they parade thesilent streets bareheaded, shouting in chorus whatevercomes uppermost, perhaps a portion of amiserere, to the great scandal and annoyance ofthe good Catholics in their beds. At length hereaches his lodgings ; and, shutting himself up inhis chamber, is at this, to every-day mortals mostungenial hour, visited by some of his most brilliantinspirations. These he hastily scratches down onscraps of paper, and next morning arranges them,or, in his own phrase, instruments them, amidst thesame interruptions as before. At length the importantnight arrives. The maestro takes his placeat the pianoforte. The theatre is overflowing,people having flocked into the town from tenleagues' distance. Every inn is crowded, and thosewho are unable to find accommodation are encampedround the theatre in their various vehicles.All business is suspended, and during the performancethe town has the appearance of a desert. Thepassions, the anxieties, the very life of a wholepopulation, are centered in the theatre."The overture commences; and so intense isthe attention, that you may hear the buzzing of afly. On its conclusion there is a perfect uproar :it is either applauded to the skies, or hooted withoutmercy. It is not in Italy as in other countries,where the first representation is seldom decisive,and where vanity or timidity prevents each manfrom expressing his individual opinion, lest itROSSINI. 391should be found at variance with that of the majority.In an Italian theatre, people shout, scream,stamp, belabour the benches with their sticks, as ifthey were possessed. At the close of each air thesame uproar is renewed ; the roaring of a tempestuoussea could give but a faint idea of itsfury.Such, at the same time, is the tact of an Italianaudience, that they at once discern whether themerit of an air belongs to the singer or the composer.The cry is either, ' Bravo, David ! Brava,Pisaroni !' Or the theatre resounds with ' Bravo,maestro !' Rossini then rises from his place at thepiano with a very grave countenance, an unusualthing with him ; — he makes three bows, which arefollowed by rounds of applause, mingled with briefand energetic phrases of approbation. When thisis over, the piece proceeds.Rossini presides at the pianoforte during thethree first representations; after which, he receiveshis thousand francs, is invited to a grand farewelldinner given by his friends, that is to say, by thewhole town, and then he sets off by the diligence,with his portmanteau fuller of music-paper than ofother effects, to begin a similar course in someother town fifty miles distant. It is usual for himto write to his mother after the three first representations,and to send her and his aged father two-thirdsof the little sum he has received. He setsoff with ten or a dozen sequins in his pocket, the3U*2 " ROSSINI.happiest of men, and doubly happy if chancethrow in his way some ridiculous fellow-travellerwhom he can make game of. On one occasion, ashewas travelling from Ancona to Reggio, hepassed himself off for a musical professor, a mortalenemy of Rossini, and amused himself with singingthe most execrable music possible to the wordsof his own best airs, to show his superiority to thatanimal Rossini, whom ignorant pretenders to tastehad the folly to extol to the skies."This and other accounts of the far-famed maestrohad stimulated the public curiosity to witness hisappearance in the orchestra of the King's Theatre,which took place on the 24th of January, the firstnight of the season, when his own opera of Elmirawas performed for the first time. Every part ofthe house was crowded. When Rossini enteredthe orchestra, he was received with loud plaudits,all the persons in the pit standing on the seats toobtain a view of his person. He continued for aminute or two to bow respectfully to the audience,and then gave the signal for the overture to begin.He appeared stout, and rather below the middleheight, with rather a heavy air, and a countenancewhich, though intelligent, betrayed none ofthe vivacity which distinguishes his music : and itwas remarked that he had more the appearance ofa sturdy beef-eating Englishman than a fiery andsensitive native of the south.Elmira, which had been originally brought outrossini. 393at Naples two years before, was by no means successfulwhen now performed in London. Thelibretto, written, as well as several other of Rossini'spieces, by Tottola, who appears to have belonged tothe class of poets described by Stendhal in the passageabove quoted, is exceedingly feeble and absurd,though the music has great merit, and containssome of the composer's happiest efforts. MadameRossini did not gain the favour of the public, notwithstandingthe beauty of her face and figure,and the greatness of her style both as an actressand a singer. But being no longer in the bloomof youth, she was pronounced passee both in personand voice, and so coldly received that, afterappearing a few nights, she withdrew, and neveragain appeared on the stage.After this failure Madame Catalans was engaged,and made her appearance for a few nights, but (ashas been mentioned) with little success. MadamePasta then appeared in several of Rossini's principaloperas, and was the chief support of the theatretill it closed. The season was attended with enormousloss ; and Rossini left England without havingproduced the opera which formed part of hisengagement. His visit to this country, however,was a profitable one to himself. His brilliant reputation,pleasing manners, and vocal talents, madehim the idol of the fashionable world ; and hereaped a golden harvest from the extravagantsums given him for appearing at private musical394 rossini.parties, and from the profits of subscription concertsat Alack's rooms. Since that time he hasresided chiefly at Paris, and has composed two orthree operas, only one of which, Guillaume Tell,written for the French stage, is worthy of hisname.Rossini is entitled to a very high rank as adramatic composer. Now that the tide of fashionis ebbed, and he begins to be looked upon asbelonging to the past, and not the present time, itis found that though a number of his inferior productionshave passed away, yet his great worksstand higher than they even did at first in theestimation of musicians : and it may be concludedthat Tancredi, II Barbiere di Siviglia, Othello, LaGazza Ladra, Most in Egitto, La Donna delAgo, Semiramide, and Guillaume Tell, will probablykeep possession of the stage much longerthan the productions of the Italian composers whoare the fashionable favourites of the day.CHAPTER XIV.Madame Pasta — Veluti — Mademoiselle Sontag — Madame Malibran— Present Italian performers — Present State of theItalian Opera.Madame Pasta, whose juvenile debut in 1817had been unnoticed, made a powerful impressionwhen she re-appeared in 1824. During the greaterpart of the interval she had spent her time, notupon the stage, but in retirement and the assiduousstudy of her art. She returned to the stage in1822, and chose Paris for the place of her seconddebut; and such was her success, that her reappearancein London was preceded by a brilliantreputation. Even then she was only four-and-twenty.She was below the middle stature, butfinely proportioned, with a noble head and beautifulfeatures. The serious cast of her expressivecountenance, and the simple majesty of her air,indicated a genius and disposition for the highestwalk of tragedy. Her voice was a mezzo soprano396 PASTA.of a rich and sweet quality and extensive compass,but apparently very liable to external influences,which frequently impaired its clearness and flexibility: and to the same cause may be ascribed anuncertainty in her intonation, which, though notperceptible in her earlier years, has been distressinglyremarkable in her later visits to this country.Madame Pasta appeared on our opera stagealmost every season from 1824 to 1833. Herrange of characters was limited. The principalparts which she performed were, Desdemona, Tancredii,and Semiramide, in Rossini's operas ; Romeo,in Zingarelli's Romeo e Giulietta ; Paesiello's Nina ;and Mayer's Medea. In all these characters sheexhibited tragic powers of the highest order, and acommand over the passions and sympathies of theaudience which has rarely been equalled, and probablynever surpassed, by the greatest tragediansof any age or country. She was what a musicalperformer ought to be, but is so very seldom — acomplete impersonation of the character she assumed.We thought not of admiring the greatvocalist; we even forgot that it was Pasta whostood before us, while we were thrilled with horrorby the frenzy of the desperate Medea, or weptfor the sorrows of the love-lorn Nina. MadamePasta, though still in the period of life whenthe physical and intellectual powers are in alltheir vigour, appears to have finally withdrawnVELLUTI. 397from the stage : and of her it may well be said,thatTake her for all in all,We ne'er shall look upon her like again."Signor Veluti, the last singer of a class nowextinct, the male soprano, appeared at the King'sTheatre in 1825. A voice of this description hadnot been heard in England for thirty years ;and this circumstance, along with Veluti's greatcelebrity on the continent, made his debut anoccurrence of no common interest in the musicalworld. From the year 1805, when he first appearedat Rome at the age of seventeen, he had beenreceived with enthusiasm not only at all the principaltheatres of Italy, but also at Vienna, wherethe public admiration of him amounted to a rage —so much so, that his name was attached to articlesof dress, and everything fashionable was said to beala Veluti. The manner in which he had beenspoken of by the lively biographer of Rossini,and the influence which his singing was said tohave produced on that composer's manner of writing,added to the general curiosity.Veluti appeared in Meyerbeer's beautiful opera,// Crociato in Egitto, in the character of Orlando,the christian knight, the part which he performedwhen this opera was originally brought out atVenice in the preceding year. We shall avail VELLUTI.selves of Lord Mount Edgecumbe's account of thisappearance ; this noble amateur, in addition to hisunimpeachable taste and judgment, having hadthe advantage of being able to compare the impressionproduced by Veluti with those which he hadreceived from the great singers belonging to thisclass — the Pacchierottis and Rubinellis — of a formerday."I. have now," says Lord Mount Edgecumbe,to record an event which excited great curiosityin the musical world, and for a time was of considerableadvantage to the theatre, closing the seasonwith great eclat. This was the arrival of amale soprano singer, the only one left on theItalian stage, who has for many years, perhapsonly from having no rival in his line, been lookedupon as the best singer of his country. He cameto this with strong and numerous recommendations,but under no engagement for the opera, andhe had been here for some time before the managerdared to produce so novel and extraordinarya performer. No singer of this description hadappeared here for a quarter of a century, so thatthe greater part of those who formerly were delightedwith Pacchierotti, Marchesii, &c, were nowno more, and a generation had sprung up who hadnever heard a voice of this sort, and were stronglyprejudiced against it. His first reception at concertswas far from favourable ; the scurrilous abuseVELLUTI. 399lavished on him before he was heard, cruel andilliberal ; and it was not till after long deliberation,much persuasion, and assurances of support,that the manager ventured to engage him for theremainder of the season. Even then, such wasthe popular prejudice and general cry raisedagainst him, that unusual precautions were deemednecessary to secure a somewhat partial audience,and prevent his being driven from the stage on hisfirst entry upon it, which seemed to be a predeterminedmeasure. At length the first appearance ofSignor Veluti was announced to take place, on anunusual night, for his own benefit, granted him, itwas said, on account of the great trouble he hadtaken (to use a theatrical phrase) in getting up thenew opera ; which indeed was true, for as he hada perfect knowledge of the stage, he entirely directedall the performances in which he took apart. As he had brought me a letter of introductionfrom a friend at Florence, and my curiositywas a good deal raised by the representation givenme of his talents, I was induced once more to entera theatre, and was present on that occasion. Atthe moment when he was expected to appear, themost profound silence reigned in one of the mostcrowded audiences I ever saw, broken on his enteringby loud applause of encouragement. Thefirst note he uttered gave a shock of surprise,almost of disgust, to inexperienced ears ; but hisperformance was listened to with attention and400 VELLUTI.great applause throughout, with but few audible expressionsof disapprobation speedily suppressed.The opera he had chosen for his debut was77 Crociato in Egitto, by a German composer namedMeyerbeer, till then totally unknown in thiscountry. The music was quite of the new school,but not copied from its founder, Rossini : it wasoriginal, odd, flighty, and might even be termedfantastic* but at times beautiful ; here and theremost delightful melodies and harmonies occurred,but it was unequal. Solos were as rare as in allthe modern operas, but the numerous concertedpieces much shorter and far less noisy than Rossini's,consisting chiefly of duets and terzettos, withbut few choruses and no overwhelming accompaniments.Indeed, Meyerbeer has rather gone toofar into the contrary extreme, the instrumentalparts being frequently so slight as to be almostmeagre, while he has sought to produce new andstriking effects from the voices alone. The firstwoman's part was filled by Caradori, the onlysinger left who could undertake it, Pasta's engagementhaving terminated ; and her performancegave great satisfaction. Though from want of powerThese are not exactly the remarks that would now bemade on the music of this opera, which is not considered eitherodd, flighty, or fantastic. But they are interesting as showingthe impression which it made upon a refined and accomplishedcritic of the old school, who had been so long conversant withthe masterpieces of a former age.VELLUTI. 401she is not to be ranked in the first line of primadonnas, it may truly be said she is without a fault.Her voice is sweet but not strong, her knowledgeof music very great, her taste and style excellent,full of delicacy and expression. In a room she isa perfect singer. Her genteel and particularlymodest manner, combined with a very agreeableperson and countenance, render her a pleasing andinteresting, though not a surprising, performer.*The young Garcia also appeared to advantage inthis opera.To speak more minutely of Veluti. Thissinger is no longer young, and his voice is in decay.It seems to have had considerable compass,but has failed (which is extraordinary) in its middletones, many of which are harsh and grating to theear. Some of his notes are still exquisitely sweet,and he frequently dwells on, swells, and diminishesthem with delightful effect. His lower notes, too,are full and mellow, and he displays considerableart in descending from the one to the other by passagesingeniously contrived to avoid those whichhe knows to be defective. His manner is floridwithout extravagance, his embellishments (manyof which were new to me) tasteful and neatly executed.His general style is the grazioso, withinfinite delicacy and a great deal of expression, butnever rising to the grand, simple, and dignifiedA most correct description of this charming singer,f Afterwards Madame Malibran.VOL. II. D U402 VELLUTI.cantabile of the old school, still less to the leastapproach towards the bravura. He evidently hasno other, therefore there is a great want of varietyin his performance, as well as a total deficiency offorce and spirit. Of the great singers mentionedbefore, he most resembles Pacchierotti in oneonly, and that the lowest of his styles, but cannotbe compared to him in excellence. He is alsosomewhat like him in figure, but far better looking; in his youth he was reckoned remarkablyhandsome. On the whole, there is much to approveand admire in his performance, and I can readilybelieve that in his prime he was not unworthy ofthe reputation he has attained in Italy. Even hereunderso many disadvantages, he produced considerableeffect, and overcame much of the prejudiceraised against him. To the old he broughtback some pleasing recollections ; others, to whomhis voice was new, became reconciled to it, andsensible of his merits, while many declared that tothe last his tones gave them more pain than pleasure.However, either from curiosity or real admiration,he drew crowded audiences, and no operabut the Crociato was performed to the end of theseason"*It is no small recommendation of Lord Mount Edgecumbe'selegant book, that though he is (and with good reason) a " laudatorytemporis act," his admiration of the great works and greatperformers of a former day has not rendered him unjust to themerits of the moderns. His opinions of the principal singers ofVELLUTI. 403In consequence of Veluti's success, and his experiencein theatrical affairs, he was, during thefollowing season (1826) entrusted with the managementof the opera-house. But he was nolonger an object of attraction, and the theatre wassupported almost entirely by the splendid performancesof Madame Pasta. Public feeling, too, becameadverse to Veluti, in consequence of chargesof sordid and grasping conduct in the course of hismanagement ; and a dispute between him and thefemale chorus singers, which came to be decided inacourt of law, gave the final blow to his popularity.While he was getting up an opera for hisown benefit, a letter from him to the chorus singerswas read to them in the green-room by thechorus-master, promising them a guinea each inaddition to their salaries if they performed theirparts well. The opera was performed, and themale choristers received their guinea each, but notthe females, who, after ineffectual attempts to obtainpayment, at length asserted their claim in theMiddlesex county court. Veluti's defence was,that his promise had been made only to the men ;our own time, those to which his readers can apply the test oftheir own observation, are marked with so much liberality, taste,and discrimination, as to induce a conviction of the soundness ofsuch of his judgments as cannot now be subjected to a similartest. His descriptions of Catalans, Camporese, Pasta, Veluti,and Braham, may be considered as vouching for those of Rubs •nelli, Pacchierotti, Marchesii, and Banti.D D 2404 Containsupport of which he referred to the terms of hisletter, which began, " Signori Corinth," or, inother words, "Gentlemen choristers;" and headded that he did not know of the ladies being engagedin the choruses in question, this having beendone contrary to his wish and express direction.It was replied, that the phrase " Signori Corinth"was addressed to the choristers in general,and that the chorus master, in reading the letterto them in English, interpreted it " Ladiesand gentlemen ;" and further, that Veluti couldnot have been ignorant of the employment of theladies, as he superintended the rehearsals of thechoruses, in which, moreover, female voices wereindispensably necessary. The magistrate gave judgmentin favour of the claimants, observing thatSignor Veluti had brought forward " a trumperydefence." This trial, which was reported at lengthin the newspapers, excited great amusement, particularlyfrom the shrewdness and spirit with whichone of the young women pleaded her own causeand that of her companions. At the end ofthe season Veluti performed to empty houses,till the theatre was abruptly closed. He immediatelyleft England, and, we believe, withdrewentirely from the stage.The appearance of Mademoiselle Sontag, inApril 1828, excited extraordinary interest, fromthe celebrity which this young singer had acquiredon the continent. She is a native of Prussia, andSONTAG. 405made her debut at Berlin, where she created a sensationquite unexampled. It was not merely admirationand delight which she inspired, but adegree of enthusiasm which manifested itself,whenever she appeared, in the most extravagantdemonstrations of rapture. The Prussian publicseemed to have fallen deeply in love with the fairsiren ; and the passion was not without its usualattendant jealousy : for, when her admirers foundthat, tempted by some other engagement, she wasabout to leave them, they vented their spleen invery unequivocal marks of resentment, accompaniedby a show of preference for a rival singer.She was obdurate enough, however, to leave them ;and, after a brief sojourn in Paris, where she wasthe object of scarcely inferior idolatry, she arrivedin London. The reports of her personal charms,her matchless talents, her irresistible fascinationsof every kind, had wound up public curiosity to thehighest pitch ; and her first appearance as Rosinaain the Barbiere di Siviglia drew together one ofthe most crowded audiences ever assembled in theKing's Theatre. Such highly-raised expectationscould not fail to be injurious to her, however greather merits. The audience sat in breathless suspense,preparing to be dazzled by the effulgence ofa^ second goddess of love, and to be " last in elysium"by sounds of more than human beauty ; andcould hardly persuade themselves that the prettyand simple-looking girl who stood before them,406 SONTAG.and sang " so sweetly and so well," and yet solike a mere mortal, was the all-peerless Sontag.Her vocal exertions, nevertheless, were much applauded,though less than they deserved ; and thepublic disappointment was apparent in the disparagingremarks of the diurnal critics, by one ofwhom she was compared to an English nurserymaid.She speedily, however, got over the effectsof this unfavourable reaction, and came to belooked upon as a pretty and engaging youngwoman, a pleasing actress, and a finished and accomplishedsinger. She was then about one-and-twenty; of the middle stature, and round andplump in her figure, with beautiful hands andarms, and a foot not unworthy of the admiration ithad met with. She had light hair, a fair complexion,and blue eyes, which made her altogethervery English-looking. She had a pretty mouth,embellished with a fine set of teeth, and a sweetand good-humoured countenance, though her featureswere by no means striking, and incapable ofstrong expression. Her demeanour was artless,unaffected, and ladylike, and her whole appearanceexceedingly attractive. As a singer she had highclaims to admiration. She had an extensivesoprano voice, not remarkable for volume or power,but clear, brilliant, and singularly flexible ; aquality which seems to have led her (unlike Germansingers in general) to cultivate the most floridstyle, and even to follow the bad example set byMALIBRAN. 407Catalan!, of seeking to convert her voice into aninstrument, and to astonish the public by executingthe violin variations on Rode's air, and other thingsof that stamp. In singing Rossini's music she indulgedin the utmost luxuriance of embellishments ;but, in doing so, she always showed herself a goodmusician, never falling into the common fault offlorid singers — that of introducing ornaments atvariance with the style of the air or the harmonyof the accompaniments. It was observed, too, that,when she sang the music of Mozart or Weber, sherestrained the exuberance of her fancy, and respectedthe purity of the composer's text. She didnot display, either in her action or in her singing,any greatness of conception or depth of feeling, andshe therefore failed in tragic and impassioned parts ;but in the walk of light and elegant comedy, whetheras an actress or a singer, she has rarely beenexcelled.Mademoiselle Sontag, at the close of a successfulseason, left England, and did not return. Shewould no doubt have done so, and have receivedan undiminished welcome, had she continued hertheatrical career. But her marriage with CountRossi removed her to a higher sphere, which shecontinues to adorn by her talents and virtues.The next remarkable occurrence in our operaannals was the appearance of Madame Malibran,in the beginning of 1829, in the full splendour ofher wonderful powers. She had previously MALIBRAN.feared, four years before, in the Crociato in Egittoand the Barbiere di Siviglia ; but she was then amere girl, and only gave a promise of her futureexcellence. She was the daughter of Garcia, theeminent tenor-singer, and was born at Paris in1808. At eight years old she was brought to England,where she remained without intermission foreight or nine years, and thus acquired that knowledgeof the English language which afterwardsenabled her to make so great an impression on theEnglish stage. Garcia was a man of a brutal temper,but a thorough musician. His treatment of hisdaughter was harsh and tyrannical, and his instructionswere rendered a penance by his unkindnessand even cruelty ; but she was indebted to them forthe high cultivation of her genius, and for an extentand solidity of musical knowledge in which probablyno vocal performer ever excelled her.After her debut at the opera-house in 1825, shewas prematurely engaged as one of the principalsingers of the York Festival of that year, where sheexhibited surprising ability, considering her youthand inexperience. She then went to America withher father, who carried with him a small companyof performers, for the purpose of giving Italianoperas in the United States, They commencedtheir performances at New York, and MademoiselleGarcia appeared in several of Rossini's operas.The Americans were captivated with her voice,beauty, and vivacity ; but, except her father andMAL1BRAN. 409herself, the company was wretched, and the public,notwithstanding the novelty of the entertainment,soon discovered the inefficiency of the performers.The speculation accordingly failed, and Garcia fellinto difficulties and distress. In these circumstanceshis daughter was induced to accept thehand of M. Malibran, a merchant and banker ofreputed wealth, but more than double her age. Themarriage was a most unhappy one. Malibran hadeither deceived her as to his circumstances, or theyspeedily changed. His affairs became involved ;and after his wife had vainly endeavoured, by professionalexertions, to retrieve them, he was madebankrupt and thrown into prison. In these circumstancesMadame Malibran at once, and unsolicited,resigned for the benefit of his creditors thewhole of the provision which had been made uponher by the marriage settlements ; a noble act, whichgave rise to strong manifestations of favour and approbationon the part of the American public.A separation having taken place between her andthis unworthy husband, Madame Malibran returnedto Europe, and made her first appearance at Paris,in the beginning of the year 1828, in the characterof Semiramide.One of the Paris journals gives a graphic accountof this debut. " The singer, at her entrance, wasgreeted with warm applause. Her commanding-figure,and the regularity of her features, bespokethe favour of the public. The noble and dignified410 MALIBRAN.manner in which she gave the first phrase, " Fratante regi e populi," justified the reception she hadobtained: but the difficult phrase, " Frema ilempio" proved a stumbling-block which she couldnot surmount. Alarmed by this check, she did notattempt the difficult passage in the da capo, but,dropping her voice, terminated the passage withouteffect, and made her exit, leaving the audience indoubt and dissatisfaction. The prodigious talentdisplayed by Pisaroni in the subsequent scenes gaveoccasion to comparisons by no means favourable toMadame Malibran. On her re-entrance she wascoldly received ; but she soon succeeded in winningthe public to her favour. In the andante tothe air, " Bel reggio lusinghier," the young singerthrew out such powers, and displayed a voice so fulland beautiful, that the former coldness gave wayto applause. Encouraged by this, she hazarded thegreatest difficulties of execution, and appeared soinspired by her success that her courage now becametemerity. Madame Malibran Garcia is onlynineteen ; she is just arrived from North America,where she has been precluded from profiting by anymodels of excellence, and therefore she requiresthat finish which can be learned only from experience,and by profiting by the counsels of soundcriticism." From that time Malibran became theidol of the Parisian public. She appeared as Des-demon,Rosinaa, and Romeo in the Romeo eGiulletta of Zingarelli — characters as different fromMALIBRAN. 411each other as can well be imagined ; and two ofthem, moreover, among the masterpieces of Pasta.It was remarked by a French critic, that " if Malibranmust yield the palm to Pasta in point of acting,yet she possesses a decided superiority inrespect to song." Since that time the superiorityof Malibran to Pasta, in respect to song, becamemore and more evident ; while, in respect to acting,though no vocal performer has ever approachedPasta in her own peculiar walk of terrible grandeur,yet none has ever surpassed Malibran in intelligence,originality, vivacity, feeling, and those•' tender strokes of art" which at once reach theheart of every spectator. Her versatility was wonderful.Pasta, it has been truly said, is a Siddons;Malibran was a Garrick.On the 21st of March, 1829, she appeared at theKing's Theatre in the character of Desdemona, andwas received with acclamations by the audience.During the season she performed all her principalcharacters with unvarying success, though hermanner of personating two of them, — Ninetta inthe Gazza Ladra and Zerlina in Don Giovanni, —gave rise to a good deal of controversy among thecontemporary critics. She represented them asshe imagined they would have been in real life —coarse country girls, with awkward demeanour andhoydenish manners. She thus made them ridiculousinstead of being (as they were intended tobe) interesting ; one of them being the heroine of412 MALIBRAN.a deeply pathetic story. Nor were these new readingsjustified on the score of adherence to dramatictruth. A country girl, even in real life, is notnecessarily rude and boisterous ; it is by no meansrare to discover, in the humblest walks of life, aninborn grace and delicacy of nature's own implanting; and such assuredly is the model from whichcharacters like Ninetta or Zerlina ought to becopied.From this time to the end of her life, Malibran'scareer consisted of a series of unremitting exertionsand unparalleled triumphs. The Italians appear atfirst to have looked a little askance on an artist whohad achieved greatness without having breathedthe air or been warmed by the sun of Italy. Thiswas especially the case at Naples, where her reception(in the autumn of 1832) was so cold that thefirst intelligence of it represented her as havingcompletely failed. But the Neapolitans, with theimpetuosity of their country, speedily correctedtheir first mistake. " Madame Malibran's performancein this city," says an article from Naples in amusical journal of the day, " has been one continuedand splendid triumph. At first the cognoscentiof Naples were inclined to question the justiceof the unbounded praises which have been lavishedon this astonishing songstress, and to receive herwith sangfroid, and weigh her pretensions with allthe coolness of determined critics : but she had nosooner opened her mouth than all this was instantlyMALIBRAN. 413converted into an enthusiasm of applause and admiration,to which the oldest frequenters of theopera remember no parallel. For seventeen nightsthe theatre was crowded at double prices, notwithstandingthe subscribers' privileges were on most ofthose occasions suspended, and although Othello, LaGazza Ladra, and pieces of that description, werethe only ones offered to a public long since tiredeven of the beauties of Rossini, and proverbial forits love of novelty. But her grand triumph of allwas on the night when she took her leave of theNeapolitan audience in the character of Ninetta.Nothing can be imagined finer than the spectacleafforded by the immense theatre of San Carlo,crowded to the very ceiling and ringing with acclamations.Six times after the fall of the curtainMadame Malibran was called forward to receive thereiterated plaudits and adieus of an audience whichseemed unable to bear the idea of a separation fromits new idol, who had only strength and spirits leftto kiss her hand to the assembled multitude, andindicate by graceful and expressive gestures thedegree to which she was overpowered by fatigueand emotion. The scene did not end within thewalls of the theatre : a crowd of the most enthusiasticrushed from all parts of the house to the stage-door,and as soon as Madame Malibran's sedancame out, escorted it with loud acclamations to thePalazzo Barbara,* and renewed their salutations asAnglice, the house of Barbara, the manager.4J4 MALIBRAN.the charming vocalist ascended the steps." Whatfollowed shows how completely Malibran engrossedthe attention of the public ; for the piece performedafter her departure, Donizetti's Esule di Roma, wasreceived with the most frigid indifference, though itwas a standing favourite at Naples, though Lablachemade his first appearance in it after his return tohis native city, and though Madame Ronzi diBegnis* performed the principal female character.In 1833 Malibran appeared at Drury Lane in thepart of Mina, in an English version of La Son-nebula; and drew crowds to the theatre, duringa large part of the season, by her charming singing,and the deep interest she imparted to the character.She then returned to Italy, where she was as muchidolised as before. In 1835 she was again in Englandfor a short time, during which she excited anextraordinary sensation by her performance, atDrury Lane, of the part of Leonora in the Englishversion of Beethoven's Fidelia.In 1836 she obtained, in the law-courts of Paris,a regular divorce from M. Malibran. This man,Madame Ronzi di Begnis arrived in this country, with herhusband, in 1821, and was greatly admired, during severalseasons, while she remained on our opera stage, as an excellentsinger and a delightful actress in the buffo style. After a longretirement from the stage she reappeared at Naples, and, at thetime mentioned above, was a great favourite in that city. Sheappears, however, to have again withdrawn from the stage.Signor di Begnis, who is now resident in London, though not onthe stage, is a buffo actor and singer of the first class.MALIBRAN. 415soon after her return to Europe, hearing of her successin the French capital, had followed her thither,and demanded a share of her professional emoluments.This demand she properly refused to comply with.Malibran had obtained her hand by means of a deception; and she had, moreover, acquitted herselfof any claim he might have had as her husband, byhaving voluntarily resigned, in favour of his creditors,the property which had been settled on herself.After being long persecuted by his unwarrantabledemands, she at length got rid of them : and, onobtaining a dissolution of this ill-starred marriage,she was united to the celebrated violinist M. deHeriot.During the summer of this year she again appearedat Drury Lane. She repeated her charactersof Mina and Leonora with undiminished eclat ;and, by the astonishing energy of her performanceof the heroine in Balfe's Maid of Artois, mainlycontributed to the great popularity of that opera.She had always been remarkable for the activity ofher habits ; but her professional efforts during thisseason excited the wonder, and even the alarm, ofthose who witnessed them. While engaged in herarduous theatrical duties, she sang at concertsalmost daily, and very often gratuitously, (and shenever exercised her talents more cheerfully andeffectively than when conferring a favour on somebrother or sister of the profession) : and, after aday of unremitting exertion, she was to be found416 MALIBIIAN.singing at an evening party, or making herself thelife and soul of a circle of her friends. Her customof taking much exercise, on horseback or on foot,in the open air, with a lightness of heart whichenabled her to enjoy simple and playful amusement,contributed to mitigate the effects of such fatigueand exhaustion. But they produced at length theirinevitable consequences.In September, 1836, she went to Manchester tofulfil her engagement at the musical festival of thattown ; and there, as will long be remembered, herenfeebled frame sank under her exertions. Thefollowing particulars respecting the sad catastrophewhich robbed the musical world of one who was itschief grace and ornament, were given by a writerwho was at Manchester when the event occurred.' Those who were near the late lamented vocaliststate the closing scene of her existence to have beenmelancholy in the extreme. Though the hand ofdeath was on her, she would not spare herself, froma fear that she might be accused of capriciously disappointingher admirers. On her way to her last,or last but one performance, she fainted repeatedly,yet still adhered to her resolution. In the evening-priorto the first day's performance at the collegiatechurch, she sang no less than fourteen pieces in herroom at the hotel, among her Italian friends. DeBeriot cautioned her against exerting herself, butMalibran was not to be easily checked in her career.She was ill on Tuesday, (the day of the firstCaliban. 417performance,) but she insisted on singing bothmorning and evening. On Wednesday her indispositionwas still more evident ; but she gave thelast sacred composition she ever sang, ' Sing ye tothe Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously,' withelectrical effect ; and on that evening, the 14th ofSeptember, her last notes in public were heard. Itwas in the duet with Madame Caradori Allan,Vanne se alberti in petty,' from Me re ad ante'sAntonio. Her exertions in the encore of thisduet were tremendous, and the fearful shake at thetop of the voice will never be forgotten by thosewho heard it. It was a desperate struggle againstsinking nature ; it was the last vivid glare of theexpiring lamp ; she never sang afterwards. Thehouse rang with animated cheering ; hats and handkerchiefswere waving over the heads of the assembly; but the victim of excitement, while theechoes were yet in her ears, sank exhausted afterleaving the stage, and her vocal career was ended.She was bled, and removed home ; and her agonisingcries that night will not be erased from thememory of the writer of this article, who was withina short distance of the room in which she expired. "The greatness of Madame Malibran's genius,and the extent and variety of her attainments as anactress and a vocalist, may be gathered from thisbrief sketch of her splendid career. As a woman,she possessed, in an uncommon degree, the affectII. E E418 MALIBRAN.tion and esteem of those who knew her ; and wespeak from our own knowledge, as well as in accordancewith the general voice, when we say, that fewwomen have been more richly endowed with thehighest virtues of the female character. Flung-edat a tender age into circumstances of deep adversity,her sacrifices to integrity were heroic, and she remainedwholly uncorrupted by the prosperity of herlatter days. Her feelings retained their primitivewarmth — her tastes their primitive simplicity. Notwithstandingthe seductions of her profession, herpleasures lay in the occupations of domestic life,and in acts of generosity. Large as was the revenuewhich she derived from the exercise of hertranscendent talents, it was as worthily employed aswell deserved. Perhaps there never was an incomeearned by the exertions of a public performer —exertions which broke her constitution and broughther to an early grave — of which so large a portionwandered, heaven-directed, to the poor." Shewas devoid of ostentation, and her beneficent deedswere known to few. But they were of dail T occurrence,for they constituted the greatest happiness ofher life. Living; among; the sons and daughters ofpleasure, her only luxury was the luxury of doing-good; and, in the midst of wealth, her only profusionconsisted in beneficence. The regret felt bythe world for the loss of an admired and cherishedartist was unquestionably feeble compared with theMALIBRAN. 419grief with which many an humble family lamentedthe untimely death of their benefactress.*The following traits, among many others, may serve to illustrateMadame Malibran's character. They are taken fromthe memoir of her which appeared in The Musical World.A poor Italian chorus-singer in the King's Theatre, havinglost his voice by a severe cold, applied to Madame Malibran forpecuniary assistance to enable him to return to his native country.Having ascertained the truth of his destitute condition, she gavehim five sovereigns, telling him that his passage was paid toLeghorn, and from thence to his native place. The poor man,on hearing these glad tidings, exclaimed in the fulness of hisheart, " Ah, madam, you have saved me for ever !'' — " No," shereplied with a benevolent smile ; " the Almighty alone can dothat. Pray tell nobody."An Italian professor of music gave a concert in London theyear before her death. He had engaged her to sing for him, onher usual terms of twenty guineas. The concert was verythinly attended, and was a loss to the poor musician. He calledto pay her, or rather to offer her a moiety of her terms, whichshe refused to accept, saying she must have the full stipulatedamount. The Italian doled it out very slowly ; and when hehad counted twenty sovereigns, looked up as if to ask if thatwould not do. " No — another sovereign," she said ; " my termsare twenty guineas, not pounds." He put down the other sovereign,saying to himself with a sigh, " My poor wife and children !"Malibran took up the money ; and then saying, with greatearnestness of manner, " I insisted on having my full terms thatthe sum might be the larger for your acceptance," put the goldinto the hand of the astonished professor, and hastily wiping atear from her eye, hurried out of the room.She performed an act of the same nature when at Venice.The proprietor of the Teatro Emeronittio had requested her tosing once at his theatre ; " I will," answered she, " but on thecondition that not a word is said about remuneration." TheE E 2420 VOCAL PERFORMERS.Among the other performers who have appearedat the London opera-house during the last tenpoor man was saved from ruin. The character she took wasAmino, ; she was visited by throngs, and the storm of applauselasted a full half hour. A vast multitude afterwards followedher home with expressions of boundless enthusiasm. The TeatroEmeronittio is now called the Teatro Garcia.While she was at Milan, in the autumn of 1835, the news arrivedof the death of Bellini, the composer. Affected by thepremature loss of that clever musician and very amiable man,she set on foot a subscription for the purpose of paying a tributeto his memory. By her exertions the donations swelled to aconsiderable amount, and at the head of the list her own nameappeared for twenty pounds.M. de Beriot incurred great obloquy in consequence of havingleft Manchester immediately on his wife's death, instead of remainingto take care of her funeral, and accompany her remainsto the grave. We are unwilling to revive the painful discussionswhich took place at the time ; but a circumstance which producedso strong and general a sensation cannot be entirelypassed over. The following extract of a letter, which appearedin the public journals, from Dr. Bellarmine, the physician whoattended her in her last illness, and the intimate friend of bothhusband and wife, gives an explanation which acquits M. deBeriot of the heartlessness laid to his charge ; a heartlessness,we may add, which would have been strangely inconsistent withthe whole tenor of his conduct towards her while living.It may have been wrong," says Dr. Bellarmine, " to haveacted as M. de Beriot did, according to the custom existing inEngland ; but it cannot be wrong as a foreigner to have followedthe custom established on the greater part of the continent.Besides, to every rule there is an exception. Poor De Beriot,who during nine days had almost neither slept nor ate, amidstthe most poignant anxiety, found himself in such a state of depressionof body r and mind when his dear wife expired, that IVOCAL PERFORMERS. 421years, and before the arrival of those who form thepresent admirable company at that theatre, themost distinguished have been Madame Pisaroni,prevailed on him to quit immediately a place where everythingcontributed to augment his trouble. He followed my advice,and I sent for Mr. Beale, his friend of three years' standing, torequest him to take charge of everything necessary for the funeral.Mr. Beale, a merchant of Manchester, a very respectableand estimable man, undertook the charge, and gave anassurance that he would acquit himself of the commission withallthe zeal the circumstances required. Poor Charles, almostbeside himself, was only able to put his signature to a few linesof authority which Mr. Beale asked from him, and which werewritten by another gentleman. I saw that if De Beriot remainedat Manchester, he would be dead there also, or fall intoa dangerous sickness. This is the reason wiry, considering myselfresponsible for his life to his relatives, and seeing myselfalmost the only person capable of giving him any consolation,I determined to carry him away with me, and to send him asspeedily as possible to Brussels, to seek consolation in the bosomof his family. If, then, to have quitted Manchester so soonwere a reprehensible act, the blame must entirely fall on me.but in nowise upon De Beriot, who at that moment was too muchdepressed to examine coldly what would be the best course totake to please the English public. On his arrival at my house heinstantly sent an order, that, after the performance of the ceremoniesof the church, his wife should not be interred, becausehe was going to take measures to have the body transferred toBrussels."Madame Malibran was interred at Manchester with every demonstrationof respect and sympathy. But, in consequence ofan application by her mother, who came to England for thatpurpose, permission was granted by the proper authorities todisinter her remains, which were re-interred by her husband inthe church of the village of Lacked, near Brussels.422 MODERN ITALIAN OPERA.Mademoiselle Basis, Madame Conti Moreau,Signor Donzelli, and Signor Zuchelli ; all of whom,by their vocal and histrionic talents, acquired alarge share of public favour.For the last four or five seasons, the boards of theItalian theatres, both of London and Paris, havebeen occupied by a company, which during thattime has undergone little change, and which,taken collectively, is of unprecedented strengthand efficiency. Its members are the elite of theItalian vocal performers of the present time : andthough each of them may have been rivalled, orexcelled, by some of their predecessors, yet somuch talent of the highest order has probablynever before been concentrated in one theatricalcorps. At the time we write, this splendid assemblageconsists of Madame Giulietta Grisi,Madame Persian, Madame Albertazzi, SignorRubini, Signor Tamburini, and Signor Lablache :*artists whose names and characters are familiar toevery musical reader of the present day, andwhose history it will belong to some future writerto record.The Italian opera, both in England and France,receives a greater share of public support, andforms the habitual amusement of a larger portionof the community, than it seems ever to have doneM. Ivanoff, though not at present a member of the Londoncompany, is entitled to be set down as one of the stars of thisbrillkmt constellation.MODERN ITALIAN OPERA. 423at any former time. In this sense of the word theItalian opera is in a flourishing state : but, viewingits situation with reference to the quality of the presentproductions of the Italian musical stage, it isanything but flourishing. The pre-eminence solong maintained by Rossini, whose pieces for aseries of years held almost exclusive possession ofthe Italian stage, appears to have checked thegrowth of original genius, and to have renderedhis successors merely his imitators ; and, as usualwith imitators, they have been much more successfulin imitating his peculiarities of manner, and evenhis faults, than his beauties. They have copied,and even exaggerated, the loud and boisterousstyle of instrumentation adopted by him in hislater works, without being able to imitate theadmirable effects produced by his skill in combination,and his thorough knowledge of the powersand properties of instruments. He was occasionallyclumsy, crude, and incorrect in his harmonies,from the haste and carelessness of an impetuoustemperament. They habitually combine theirvoices and instruments in a way which, in an earlierday, would have been held disgraceful to a tyro,from their shallow and superficial knowledge oftheir art. As an emphatic proof of this, it may be.observed, that no Italian composer since Rossinihas been able to produce a single opera overturewhich has been thought worthy to be transferred tothe concert-room : and so much do they seem to424 MODERN ITALIAN OPERA.feel their inability to stand this test of their skill asartists, that they have given up writing overturesaltogether, thus depriving the opera of what hasalways been a beautiful and interesting feature.Such, we will venture to predict, is the light inwhich the fashionable Italian composers of the day —Pacing, Mercadante, Bellini, Ricci, Donizetti, andothers — will be viewed before many years shallhave elapsed. Their works, especially those ofBellini,* contain graceful melodies ; but their airsin general are of a trivial and commonplace character,and have derived their popularity from theexquisite manner in which they are sung by thefavourite performers who have just been mentioned.Concerted pieces, like those of Mozart and Rossini,in which a busy and animated dialogue is blendedwith beautiful combinations of harmony, and emberswho died in 1835, at the age of six or seven-and-twenty,excited an interest derived more from his amiable characterand untimely death, than from any great superiority ofgenius. His first opera, II Pirata, composed when he was veryyoung, gave a promise which his subsequent efforts did not fulfil,for it is the best of his operas. The attraction of La Sonnam-bull, (as anybody who has ever seen it may have observed) liesin the interest excited by the poor girl's perilous descent. Feebleprettiness is the characteristic of the music. I Puritanaffords Madame Grisi room for that touching representation ofthe mind of a young girl, full of hope and happiness, crushedand blighted in a moment by sudden calamity, which is perhapsher finest display of dramatic talent. Her malacca, " Son vergingvezzcsa," is a pretty piece of execution, akin to Catalans'svariations on " lode's air," or " O dolce concerto."MODERN ITALIAN OPERA. 425wished by a rich and varied instrumental accompaniment,are never met with in the works of thesecomposers ; but, in place of them, we have a successionof meagre and monotonous choruses, inwhich the shouts and screams of the singers aredrowned by the deafening and incessant accumulationof all the noises that can be produced fromthe orchestra.The poetry, too, of the Italian opera is at a lowebb. After a perusal of most of the pieces whichhave acquired celebrity during the present century,we have not found one which is worthy of notice asaliterary work. So little value is attached to thedramatic portion of a musical piece, that it is seldomthought worth while to attach to the libretto(as it is called) the name of its author, who isgenerally a hanger-on or dependent upon somemusical theatre — a sort of playwright of all work,ready to manufacture, to order, anything that maybewanted — a person who is not only destitute ofreputation and importance, but is an object of ridiculeand contumely to managers, composers, andperformers.* Among these authors, doubtless, thereare men who do not belong to this despicable class ;but none of them appear to have attained any con-seethe account of an Italian opera poet in the passage fromStendhal's Vie de Rossini quoted ante, page 888. See also thescene between Rossini and the poeta Tottola, the author of thelibretto of 3Iost in Egitto, described in the same work, chapterxxvi.426 MODERN ITALIAN OPERA.miserable degree of literary distinction.* Where amodern Italian opera, whether serious or comic, ispossessed of any dramatic merit, — such as Agnesee,Tancredi, La Gazza Ladra, II Pirata, or L'Elisir<P Amove, it has generally been taken from someforeign (chiefly French or English) drama orromance ; and its merit will be found to consist inthe borrowed incidents and situations, not in theworkmanship of the Italian playwright. Indeedthe present form of the Italian opera is more unfavourableto dramatic excellence than it has everbeen before. The eternal introduction of noisychoruses, not, as formerly, in situations only wheregroups of people could be supposed to be assembledwith propriety, but in almost every scene, andmingling their vociferations with the most privatetransactions of the characters, renders the constructionof a rational drama absolutely impossible.On the modern Italian stage, in short, the musicis everything, the drama nothing. The principlesso philosophically developed, and so beautifullyillustrated by Gluck, have fallen into oblivion ;and it is only in the co-operation of a second Gluckwith a second Calzabigi that we can hope for therestoration of the Italian musical drama.The most esteemed Italian musical dramatists of the dayseem to be Signor Rossi and Signor Romani.CHAPTER XV.The English opera since the time of Arne — Linley — SheridanThe Duenna — Linley's operas — Jackson — Mrs. Crouch —Dr. Arnold — Dibdin — Shield — Storage — Billington, Mara,Incledon, Braham, Kelly, and other vocal performers — Bishop'Adaptations of foreign operas — Recent English operas —Vocal performers — Present state of the opera.Dr. Arne was succeeded by several dramaticcomposers, who appeared nearly about the sametime, and flourished till almost the close of the lastcentury. Linley, Jackson, Arnold, Dibdin, andShield, were the men of genius who threw lustreover this period of our musical history.The music of The Duenna, which first raisedThomas Linley into notice as a composer, was producedby him late in life, after his daughter, ElizaLinley, the celebrated " Maid of Bath," had becomethe wife of Sheridan, the author of thedrama. Linley passed the earlier part of his lifeas a musical professor at Bath, where he conductedthe oratorios and concerts then carried on in that428 LINLEY.city ; and he was residing there when his daughter'smarriage with Sheridan, attended with suchromantic circumstances, took place.When Sheridan wrote The Duenna, he called inthe aid of his father-in-law as the composer of themusic. Everything relating to this admirable operais interesting ; and we shall therefore extract fromMoore's Life of Sheridan a few passages from theletters written by the dramatist to the composer,while the piece was in preparation to be broughtout at Covent Garden theatre.In October, 1775, a few weeks before the operawas performed, Sheridan wrote to Linley : " Wereceived your songs to-day, with which we are exceedinglypleased. I shall profit by your proposedalterations, but I'd have you to know that wearemuch too chaste in London to admit suchstrains as your Bath spring inspires. We dare notpropose a peep beyond the ankle on any account ;for the critics in the pit at a new play are muchgreater prudes than the ladies in the boxes. Betsyintended to have troubled you with some music forcorrection, and I with some stanzas ; but an interviewwith Harris to-day has put me from thethoughts of it, and bent me on a much more importantpetition. You may easily suppose it isnothing else than what I said I would not ask inmy last. But in short, unless you can give us threedays in town, I fear our opera will stand a chanceto be ruined. Harris is extravagantly sanguine ofTHE DUENNA. 429its success as to plot and dialogue, which is to berehearsed next Wednesday at the theatre. Theywill exert themselves to the utmost in the scenery,&c, but I never saw any one so disconcerted as hewas at the idea of there being no one to put themin the right way as to the music. He entreated meinthe most pressing terms to write instantly to you,and wanted, if he thought it would be of anyweight, to write himself. Is it impossible to contrivethis ? Could not you leave Tom [ThomasLinley, the composer's son] to superintend the concertfor a few days ? If you can manage it, youwill really do me the greatest service in the world.As to the state of the music, I want but three moreairs, but there are some glees and quinces in thelast act, which will be inevitably ruined if we haveno one to set the performers at least in the rightway." He continues to urge Linley to come toLondon ; and there is a postscript by Mrs. Sheridan ;"Dearest father, I shall have no spirits or hopes ofthe opera, unless we see you. — Eliza Ann Sheridan."Linley having signified his intention of not comingto London till the music was put in rehearsal,Sheridan, in several subsequent letters, gives him anumber of hints and suggestions respecting themusic, which show much taste and knowledge oftheatrical effect. It is very interesting to observe,from the opera as it stands, the use that was madeof them by Mr. Linley. It will be remarked, that430 THE DUENNA.Sheridan was anxious that the music should bemelodious, and that it should be dramatic."My intention," says Sheridan, in one of the letters," was to have closed the first act with a song,but I find it is not thought so well. Hence I trustyou with one of the enclosed papers ; and at thesame time you must excuse my impertinencein adding an idea of the cast I should wish themusic to have ; as I think I have heard you say younever heard Leonii, and I cannot briefly explain toyou the character and situation of the persons on thestage with him. The first (a dialogue betweenQuick and Mrs. Mattocks) I would wish to be apert, sprightly air ; for though some of the wordsmayn't seem suited to it, I should mention that theyare neither of them in earnest in what they say.Leonii takes it up seriously, and I want him to showhimself advantageously in the six lines beginningGentle maid.' I should tell you that he singsnothing well, but in a plaintive or pastoral style ;and his voice is such as appears to me always to behurt by much accompaniment. I have observed,too, that he never gets so much applause as whenhe makes a cadence. Therefore my idea is, thathe should make a flourish at 'shall I grieve thee,'and return to ' Gentle maid ;' and so sing that partof the tune again. After that, the two last lines,sung by the three, with the persons only varied, mayget. them oft" with as much spirit as possible. Thesecond act ends with a slow glee, therefore I shouldTHE DUENNA 431think the two last lines in question had better bebrisk, especially as Quick and Mrs. Mattocks areconcerned in it. The other is a song of Wilson'sin the third act. I have written it to your tune,which you put some words to, beginning 'Prithee,prithee, pretty man.' I think it will do vastly wellfor the words : Don Jerome sings them when heis in particular spirits ; therefore the time is not toolight, though it might seem so by the last stanza —but he does not mean to be grave there ; andI like particularly the returning to ' O the dayswhen I was young!' We have mislaid the notes,but Tom remembers it. If you don't like it forwords, will you give us one ? but I must go backto ' O the days,' and be funny. I have not donetroubling you, but must wait till Monday."In his next letter Sheridan says : — " Sundayevening next is fixed for our first musical rehearsal,and I was in great hopes we might have completedthe score. The songs you have sent up of ' Anna'sbanks,' and ' Deil take the wars,' I had words forbefore they arrived, which answer excessively well ;and this was my reason for wishing for the nextin the same manner, as it saves so much time.They are to sing ' Wind, gentle evergreen,' justas you sing it, (only with other words,) and Iwanted only such support from the instruments, orsuch joining in, as you should think would helpto set off and assist the effect. I enclose the wordsI had made for 'Wind, gentle evergreen,' which432 THE DUENNA.will be sung as a catch by Mrs. Mattocks, Bellamy,and Leonii. I don't mind the words notfitting the notes so well as the original ones. ' Howmerrily we live,' and ' Let's drink and let's sing,'are to be sung by a company of friars over theirwine. The words will be parodied, and the chiefeffect must arise from their being known ; for thejoke will be much less for these jolly fellows tosing anything new, than to give what the audienceare used to annex the idea of jollity to. For theother things Betsy mentioned, I only wish to havethem with such accompaniment as you would putto their present words, and I shall have got wordsto my liking for them by the time they reach me.I want Dr. Harrington's catch, but as the sensemust be the same, I am at a loss how to put otherwords. Can't the under part ('A smoky house, &c.)be sung by one person, and the other two change?The situation is — Quick and Bellamy, two lovers,carrying away Father Paul (Remold) in greatraptures, to marry them ; — the friar has beforewarned them of the ills of a married life, and theybreak out into this. The catch is particularly calculatedfor stage effect, but I don't like to takeanother person's words, and I don't see how I canput others, keeping the same idea, ('of sevensqualling brats,' &c.) in which the whole affair lies.However, I shall be glad of the notes, with Reinhold'spart, if it is possible, as I have mentioned."The enclosed are words for 'Wind, gentleTHE DUENNA. 433evergreen,' a passionate song* for Mattocks, andanother for Miss Brown, which solicit to be clothedwith melody by you, and are all I want. Mattocks'sI could wish to be a broken, passionate affair, andthe first two lines may be recitative, or what youplease, uncommon. Miss Brown sings hers in ajoyful mood ; we want her to show in it as muchexecution as she is capable of, which is prettywell; and, for variety, we want Mr. Simpson'shautboy to cut a figure, with replying passages, &c,in the way of Fischer's ' Miami, bel idol mio,' toabet which, I have lugged in ' Echo,' who is alwaysallowed to play her part."The Duenna was performed for the first time onthe 21st November, 1775, and its run was probablywithout a parallel in the annals of the drama.Sixty-three nights," says Mr. Moore, "was thecareer of the Beggar s Opera; but the Duenna wasacted no less than seventy-five times during theseason, the only intermissions being a few weeksat Christmas, and the Fridays on every week ; —the latter on account of Leonii, who, being a Jew,could not act on those nights."The Duenna is partly a pasticcio, consisting oforiginal music mingled with popular airs, glees,&c, adapted to new words ; and it appears from theabove passages in Sheridan's letters, that he himselfhad a hand in the selection and adaptation of theold music. Several of the original pieces werecontributed by Thomas Linley, the composer'sVOL. II. F F434 THE DUENNA.eldest son. These were, the overture ; the songs,Could 1 each fault remember," " Friendship isthe bond of reason," and " Sharp is the woe ;" theduet, "Turn thee round, I pray thee;" and thetrio which concludes the first act. These are allcharming things, and do honour to the genius of ayoung musician, who, but for his untimely fate,would undoubtedly have achieved the highesttriumphs in his art.*The principal singing parts in this opera areamong the least important in a dramatic point ofThomas Linley, at an early age, discovered so remarkable agenius for music, that his father gave him a careful education.After receiving the instructions of Dr. Boyce, he was sent toItaly to pursue his studies ; and, while at Florence, became theintimate friend of Mozart, then a young musical student likehimself. The great German, in after life, always spoke withaffection and regret of his young English friend. In addition tothe beautiful pieces which he contributed to the Duenna,Thomas Linley composed some new music for the Tempest,when it was revived at Drury Lane, consisting of a fine chorusof the spirits who raise the storm, and the airs " O bid yourfaithful Ariel fly," and " Ere you can say, come and go ;" compositionsquite worthy of being joined to the older music ofPurcell and Arne. In 1778 he perished by an unhappy accident,at the age of two-and-twenty. While on a visit to theDuke of Lancaster at his seat in Lincolnshire, he was amusinghimself, with some other young people, with sailing on a lake inthe duke's grounds, when the boat overset ; and Linley, whohad reached the shore, lost his life in endeavouring to save someof his companions. This calamity threw his father into a brainfever, from which he recovered, but never regained his formerhealth and spirits.THE DUENNA. 435view. Don Carlos is a mere superfluity; andDonna Clara is an insipid personage, without thespirit of Louisa, her sister heroine. These twoparts, accordingly, were performed by singers —Leonii and Miss Brown ; the other principal charactersbeing represented by Mrs. Mattocks, Mrs.Green, Quick, and Wilson, excellent comedians,but not professed vocalists. It has been all alongan impediment to the improvement of the Englishopera, that our singers have not been actors, norour actors singers.* Leonii, when the Duennaappeared, held the highest place as a tenor-singeron the English stage. He was a Jew, and firstattracted notice by his singing in the synagoguein London, where people of the greatest distinctionwent to hear him ; but he was afterwards, itis said, dismissed from the service of the synagoguebecause he sang in Handel's Messiah, and at thetheatres. Of Miss Brown little is known ; but shemust have possessed considerable vocal ability, fromher successful performance of the celebrated air,"Adieu, thou dreary pile," a difficult and verybeautiful bravura, the execution of which has triedAmong the many awkward shifts to which this circumstancehas given rise, even at recent periods, was the deviceadopted in the English adaptation of Mozart's Figaro, of introducinga personage called Fiorillo, quite unconnected with theplot, and with nothing to do but to sing some of Count Alma-viva'smusic, the Count's representative being unable to sing.Our vocalists, however, are improving as actors.F F 2436 LINLEY.the powers of the principal female singers sinceher time. #Soon after the appearance of the Duenna, Mr.Linley became a joint patentee of Drury Lane theatre,with his son-in-law, Mr. Sheridan, and consequentlytook up his residence in London. Forseveral years he conducted the musical departmentof that theatre, and was induced, from the successof the Duenna, to continue his course as a dramaticcomposer. He produced, in quick succession, TheCarnival of Venice ; Selimaa and Azor ; The Camp,written by Sheridan ; The Spanish Maid ; TheStranger at Home ; Love in the Least ; and severalworks of lesser note. All these pieces gainedpopularity, especially The Carnival, and Selimaaand Azor, which is an adaptation of GreysZSmire et Azor, containing some charming musicby Linley, and, among other things, the song,"No flower that blows," which still delights thelovers of English music. It may be added, thatLinley composed the orchestral accompanimentsto the songs in the Beggars Opera, which havebeen always used since his time. He produced agreat quantity of chamber music, consisting of songs,madrigals, elegies, &c— beautiful specimens of theWhen two of our best theatrical singers at present, Wilsonand Miss Rome, made their debut at Covent Garden, on thesame evening, in October 1830, they appeared in the charactersof Don Carlos and Donna Clara, which they performed with asuccess that established them in the favour of the public.^A/ ' yMRS. CROUCH. 437genuine English style, which, however, now meetwith a neglect which is most discreditable to ournational taste. He died in 1795.William Jackson (the celebrated " Jackson ofExeter") wrote comparatively little for the theatre ;but his principal dramatic piece, The Lord of theManor, (written by General Burgoyne,) gained avery high degree of popularity ; and several ofthe songs in this opera are still valued by thosewho love pure and expressive melody.*The production of The Lord of the Manor, in1780, brought into notice Mrs. Crouch, who madeher debut in that opera. This distinguished actressand singer was the daughter of a Mr. Phillips,and was born in 1763, so that she made her firstappearance at the age of seventeen. She immediatelybecame a favourite of the public, and performedthe principal characters in the Beggar sOpera, Lionel and Clarissa, The Carnival of Venice,and the other operas then in vogue.In 1784, Miss Phillips went to Ireland, whereher uncommon loveliness of person and captivatingsweetness of manners attracted many admirers, andgave rise to some singular and romantic occurrences.A young gentleman, whose passion for her roseto actual madness, not being able to gain her affectedtender and beautiful air, " Encompass'd in an angel'sframe," and " When first this humble roof I knew," are in TheLord of the Manor.438 MRS. CROUCH.tons, endeavoured to terrify her into a return ofhis passion, by threatening to destroy both her andhimself if she persisted in refusing him, and declaredhis determination to shoot her from the pitwhen she was on the stage, and then to shoot himself.The next night she was to perform, after shehad heard this desperate resolution, she was toldhe was in the pit, and stationed near the stage.Officers were sent for, and the unfortunate youngman was removed from the theatre. His familyafterwards prevailed on him to leave the country.She had another lover, who was heir to a titleand a large fortune, and for whom his family, ofcourse, had high matrimonial expectations. Shelistened to his addresses, and allowed herself to beprevailed on to marry him clandestinely. Accompaniedby her brother and her maid, she went withher lover to the altar of a Roman Catholic chapel;but, when the young man declared his name, thepriest refused to perform the ceremony withouthis father's consent. Another priest was tried, butalso in vain ; as the gentleman's name was so wellknown in Ireland that no priest would venture tomarry him while he was under age. Thus disappointed,the lovers set off to a seaport town, intendingto take their passage to Scotland ; but theyhad to wait for some time till a vessel was ready tosail. When they were about to embark, the youngman's father, accompanied by Mr. Phillips, arrivedat the inn with a large body of attendants ; andMRS. CROUCH. 439the lovers were separated, never to meet again.This catastrophe was caused by Mr. Phillips himself,who appears to have been too honourable aman to permit his daughter to enter clandestinelyinto a family who would think themselves degradedby an alliance with an actress. He had observedthe attachment which his daughter had formed ;and, on discovering her elopement, conjecturedwho was her companion. He immediately wentand communicated the circumstance to the youngman's father, whom he also accompanied in pursuitof the fugitives. This unhappy occurrencedeeply affected Miss Phillips's mind, and threw herinto a state of melancholy, from which it was long-beforeshe recovered.Some time afterwards she married Mr. Crouch,a lieutenant in the navy, a very handsome youngman, of a gay disposition and expensive habits.The marriage was not a happy one, and after someyears they separated by mutual consent. Mrs.Crouch continued to hold a principal place on ourmusical stage till within a short time of her death,which took place in 1805. Her vocal powers werenot highly cultivated, nor was her musical knowledgegreat; but she possessed a voice of exquisitesweetness, much flexibility, and considerable extent.A natural delicacy and refinement of tastemade up, in a great measure, for the deficiency ofartificial polish ; and her beauty and grace, with440 ARNOLD.the mingled spirit and sensibility of her manner,gave a charm to everything she did, which neverceased to captivate the public.Dr. Samuel Arnold was an excellent as wellas a voluminous composer for the theatre ; thoughhis pieces, many of which were hastily produced,are of very unequal merit. In 1763, when he wasonly about three-and-twenty, he was chosen ascomposer to Covent Garden theatre, for whichhouse he wrote his earliest operas. In 1776 hewas engaged by Mr. Colman to fill the same situationat the Haymarket ; and, for many years, producedthe chief musical pieces which were performedat that theatre. He was connected withthe theatres, and continued to compose for them, tillthe end of his life ; though he held several importantsituations, the duties of which he performedwith equal attention and ability. He was for manyyears organist of the Chapel Royal, director ofthe concerts of ancient music, and organist ofWestminster Abbey. He died in 1802.Between 1765 and 1802 Arnold composed forty-threeoperas and other musical pieces. Many ofthese are trifling and ephemeral productions ; buthis principal works are calculated to secure to hima lasting reputation. Among these may be reckoned,The Castle of Andalusia, Inkle and Yarico,The Battle of Hexham, The Children in the Wood,and The Mountaineers. These pieces are all — SHIELD. 441sessed of dramatic merit. The Castle of Andalusiais written by O'Keefe, The Children in the Woodby Morton, and the others by the younger Colman.Charles Dibdin began to distinguish himselfas a dramatic composer about the year 1768, whenhe produced the operas of Lionel and Clarissa (themusic of which is partly original and partly selected)and The Padlock. He wrote for the stagefor more than twenty years, during which time heproduced more than a hundred operas and musicalpieces of various kinds. His principal works areThe Padlock, The Quaker, and The Waterman,which are full of beautiful airs, the produce of astrong though uncultivated musical genius.William Shield began to compose for the stagein 1778, when he produced the music of The Flitchof Bacon, a piece written by Sir Henry BateDudley. His best works were Rosinaa and Marian,two very beautiful pastoral dramas, written by Mrs.Brooke, wife of the Reverend John Brooke, rectorof Coney in Norfolk, a lady of great talents andaccomplishments ; and The Flitch of Bacon, TheWoodman, The Farmer, and The Poor Soldier(the two last written by O'Keefe) contain manybeautiful songs. Shield's music is not marked byforce or energy, but it is perfectly suited to thesubjects of his pieces, which are sweet and simplepictures of rural life. His melodies, in style, character,and adaptation to the accents of our nativespeech, are perfectly English ; though, in their442 Storage.smoothness, grace, and refinement, they bear marksof the composer's intimate acquaintance with theItalian school. The air in Hosina, "Whilst withvillage maids I stray," is a brilliant and difficultbravura ; and in Marian there is an air with anoboe accompaniment, of still greater extent andcomplication : and yet these airs are so natural andexpressive, that they do not appear out of placeeven in the mouths of the village girls who singthem.Shield died in 1829, at the age of eighty, aftera life spent in the tranquil exercise of his art, andthe exemplary performance of every social and domesticduty. As a musician, he is to be consideredas one of the greatest ornaments of the Englishschool ; — equal to Arne, and inferior only to theunrivalled Purcell.The operas of these contemporary composers,who were the immediate successors of Arne, aresimilar in form and structure. They are littledramas, generally of a comic cast, with a mixtureof serious scenes, and frequently of considerablemerit : their musical portion consisting of songsand duets, with occasionally a very slight introductoryor concluding concerted piece or chorus.The first decided step to the modern form of theopera was made by Stephen Stomach, who, thougha native of England, was of Italian parentage, andreceived the whole of his musical education inItaly. At a very early age he was placed in theSTORACE. 443Conservatories of St. Onophrio at Naples : and itwas not till after he had finished his studies, andobtained some reputation both in Italy and Germany,that he came to England in 1787, at theage of twenty-four. Soon afterwards he obtainedan engagement as composer to Drury Lane theatre,and commenced his short but brilliant career as anEnglish musician.His earliest production was an adaptation of theGerman opera of The Doctor and Apothecary,which contains some beautiful airs by him, not yetforgotten. But his first English opera was TheHaunted Tower, brought out at Drury Lane in1789. This admirable piece, which was writtenby James Cobb, had the utmost success. It wasperformed fifty times the first season ; and not onlyestablished Storage's reputation as a composer, butintroduced his sister, the celebrated Anna Storage,to the favour of the public as a vocalist. In 1790the entertainment of No Song no Supper, writtenby Prince Hare, was produced at Drury Lane,after having been at first rejected by the managementof that opera. From that time his worksappeared in quick succession during the few remainingyears of his life. The Siege of Belgradeis an English version, by Cobb, of Martini's Italianopera, La Cosa Rara, in which a portion of theoriginal music is blended with new compositionsby Storage. The Pirates was written by Cobb ;444 STORACE.and the music, with a few slight exceptions, is original.Lodoiska was translated from the Frenchby John Kemble ; and the music was selected fromthe two French operas of the same name byKreutzer and Cherubim, with several new pieces byStorage himself.*In March, 1795, The Iron Chest, written byColman, with Storage's music, was performed atDrury Lane. His exertions in bringing out thispiece cost him his life. Though labouring underill health at the time, after having been confinedto bed for many clays, he insisted, notwithstandingthe entreaties of his family, on being wrapped inblankets and carried to the theatre to attend thefirst rehearsal. The consequence was fatal ; hereturned to his bed, from which he never roseThis opera, as well as the others which have been mentioned,was performed with great success. In the last scene avery natural and striking effect was produced by an accidentwhich placed Mrs. Crouch in imminent danger, when she appearedin the blazing castle. The wind fanned the flames toonear the place where she stood ; and, though she felt their heat,she would not mar the effect of the scene by deserting her post.Kelly, who saw her danger, flew to her assistance, but, in hishaste, his foot slipped, and he fell from a considerable height.Recovering himself, he caught her in his arms, and, scarcelyknowing what he did, hurried her to the front of the stage.This excellent piece of acting, as the audience thought it, producedpeals of applause ; and the performers ever after endeavouredto imitate the manner in which they had involuntarilyproduced such an effect.STORACE. 445again, but expired a few days after the successfulperformance of the play, in the thirty-third yearof his age.Storage's education having been entirely Italian,his style was formed upon the works of the greatmasters of the Italian school : but having the advantageof a thorough acquaintance with the Englishlanguage, his strong sense and judgmentenabled him to unite pure Italian melody to theprosody and accent of English poetry with a felicitywhich has never been excelled by any other composer.His airs have the flowing smoothness andgrace of Paesiello, while they are free from theslightest appearance of outlandishness — permittingthe singer to deliver the words with perfect distinctnessof utterance and propriety of pronunciationand emphasis. In this important particularthe music of Storage may still serve as a model toEnglish composers : for the Italian and Germanphrases, of which our vocal melody is now so full,are used with such disregard of the words to whichthey are joined, that our own vocalists, even whensinging English music, appear like foreignerssinging in broken and unintelligible English.The operas of Storage have the further charm toa modern ear, that they are embellished with thosebeautiful concerted pieces and finales which hewas the first to introduce upon the English stage.His orchestral accompaniments are light and elegant,in the Italian style of his day. And, upon446 STORAGE.the whole, it certainly cannot be said that theneglect into which these charming pieces havefallen within these few years is any proof of theprogress of our musical drama.At the time of his death he was engaged in thecomposition of Mahmoud, written by Prince Hare.He had engaged Braham (who had some time beforeappeared at Bath) for Drury Lane, and wrotethe music of the principal vocal part, so as toexhibit the young singer's powers. He left thework in an unfinished state, but, with the assistanceof Mr. Kelly, it was prepared for the stage, andperformed, for the benefit of his widow and child, afew weeks after his death. It was completely successful,and had a great run. Mahmoud, consideredwith reference to its music, is probably the finestof Storage's operas. Beside the airs composed forBraham, and which are of extraordinary brilliancyand difficulty, it contains a great deal of music of avaried as well as beautiful kind : but the piece as awhole wants clearness of design, and is encumberedby too great a number of characters. Since its firstrun was over, therefore, it has been less frequentlyperformed than the rest of Storage's principaloperas.For a number of years after the death of Storage,the stage was supplied, partly with the works ofthe composers who save been mentioned fromArne downwards, and partly by the ephemeral productionsof Kelly, Reeve, Mazzinghi, Davy, Braham,Wellington — MARA. 447and others; none of whom have any claim, as composers,to a place in the records of music. Thebest of their pieces were merely agreeable trifles,which owed their popularity to a certain degree ofprettiness in the airs, which were generally in theballad style, and to the manner in which they wereperformed by the comedians and singers of thatday. But still it is difficult to imagine how suchjejune compositions could have satisfied a publicwho were not only familiar with the beautiful andexpressive airs of a series of composers, from Arneto Storage, whose pieces were in full possession ofthe stage, but had learned, through the medium ofStorage's operas, to enjoy the rich and harmoniousconcerted music of the Italian school.Among the vocal performers of that day, Billing-tonand Mara have already been mentioned. Mrs.Billington, after her return from the continent in1801, appeared alternately at the theatres of DruryLane and Covent Garden, to which she drewcrowds by her performances in Artaxerxes, Love inaVillage, Lionel and Clarissa, and other standardEnglish operas ; but she never appeared in any ofthe new pieces which were brought out. After thattime Mrs. Billington sang at the Italian opera, theconcerts, and provincial music-meetings, till herretirement in 1809. She died in 1817 at an estatewhich she possessed in the neighbourhood ofVenice.Madame Mara appeared with great success in448 MARA.several English operas ; and, in particular, exhibitedthe extraordinary versatility of her talents bythe exquisite manner in which (notwithstandingher personal disadvantages) she performed the characterof Polly. From the year 1784, when thisgreat singer first came to England, she made thiscountry her chief residence till she left it. in 1802.Her career during this period was of almost unexampledsplendour : in the church, the theatre, andthe concert-room, her performances were listenedto with unbounded admiration and delight. Atthe time of her departure from England in 1802,she was in the height of public favour. Her farewellconcert produced above seven hundred pounds,and the audience testified their admiration and regretby repeated acclamations. Her subsequentlife was very unfortunate. She purchased a propertyat Moscow, where she was living in retirement,when the invasion of Russia by the French,and the destruction of that city, in 1812, reducedher to poverty. Her Russian friends and patronswere dispersed ; and she retired to Revel, whereshe was almost wholly supported by those who hadknown her in the days of her glory and prosperity.In 1819 she returned to London, where, with theview of improving her circumstances, she gave aconcert in the Opera-house, which unfortunatelynot only failed in its object, but produced, on herpart, a melancholy exhibition of the wreck of heronce transcendent powers. She returned to Revel,INCLEDON — BRAHAM. 449where she died in January 1833, in the eighty-fourthyear of her age.At the period above referred to, the celebratedIncledon was in the height of his popularity. Asamusician he was almost uneducated, having spenta considerable part of his youth at sea ; but he possesseda tenor voice of unrivalled beauty and power,and a genius which, with cultivation, would haveraised him above every other English singer. Hefirst appeared in London in the year 1790, in thecharacter of Heriot, in The Poor Soldier, and atonce established himself in public favour. Thestyle in which he excelled was the English ballad,and his favourite characters were those of the operasin that style, such as Macheath, Young Meadows,Melville, &c. His action was clumsy and awkward,and his elocution coarse and vulgar; but, in singing,the effect produced by his voice, energy, and feeling,was irresistible. After enjoying, for manyyears, the unbounded favour of the public, hepassed his latter days in retirement, and died atWorcester in February, 1826.At the same period, Braham, in the vigour of hisyouthful but matured powers, divided with Inchesthe general applause, and, in the opinion of themore discerning, enjoyed that supremacy as a singerwhich soon became undisputed, and which, to thisday, he continues to hold. Leaving to his rival theolder English ballad, Braham devoted his attentionto a more modern style. His debut in London, inMahmoud, a part composed expressly for him byVOL. II. g G450 KELLY.Storage, exhibited the extent and high cultivation ofhis voice, and the amazing brilliancy of his execution.His favourite parts were in operas byMazzinghi, Reeve, and other composers of the day,and more especially by himself. And it was bythe incomparable manner in which he sang the airscomposed by himself, in The Cabinet, The EnglishFleet, Rais, and The Devil's Bridge, that thesepieces acquired a degree of popularity to which,from their intrinsic merits, they had no pretension.Michael Kelly was a favourite singer, and aprolific composer of the musical pieces of that day.It has been truly observed, that a joke of Sheridan's,which has been quoted ever since, has undulydepreciated Kelly's services to the music of thestage. When he embarked in trade as a wine-merchant,Sheridan proposed that the inscriptionabove his door should be " Michael Kelly, composerof wine and importer of music." Kelly, though ashallow musician, had a highly cultivated taste.His own airs, though slight, are always elegant ;and his knowledge of the Italian and Germanschools, not very general among the English musiciansof his day, enabled him to enrich his pieceswith many gems of foreign art. The popularity,therefore, of Kelly's numerous pieces had avery favourable influence on the taste of thepublic. As a singer, his powers were by no meansgreat, bu t his intelligence, experience, and knowledgeof the stage, rendered him very useful.Among the female vocalists of that period wereBISHOP. 451Mrs. Crouch, Signora Storage, Mrs. Jordan, MissDe Camp, (afterwards Mrs. C. Kemble,) MissPoole, (afterwards Mrs. Dickens,) and Mrs.Bland. Several of the comedians, — Bannister,Suet, Sedgwick, and others — were able to singcomic ballads agreeably, and contributed by thistalent, as well as their acting, to the popularity ofthe musical pieces in which the 7 appeared.The excellence and popularity of the numerousworks of Bishop have contributed greatly to improvethe English taste in vocal music. His geniuswas cultivated by a regular education under Bianchi;and his compositions afford evidence of an assiduousstudy and thorough knowledge of the great mastersof the English school. Hence his music, from thevery outset, presented a remarkable contrast to theflimsy productions to which the public had beenaccustomed. His first opera, The Circassian Bride,was produced with great success at Drury Lane, inFebruary 1809; but, on the following night, thetheatre was burnt to the ground, and the score ofthe new piece consumed in the flames. It laid thefoundation, however, of Bishop's reputation. Heimmediately afterwards was appointed composer anddirector of the music of Covent Garden, for whichtheatre, we believe, the whole of his dramatic musichas been written. The Maniac appeared in 1810.This opera, though probably the finest of his works,has been one of the least popular. The drama wasfound heavy, and the principal character is not ag g 2452 bishop.very successful imitation of Octavian in The Mountaineers.Probably, too, the very excellence of themusic was at that time no recommendation to it.The public did not sufficiently understand and appreciatethe highly wrought choruses and concertedpieces, the fine orchestral combinations, and thedepth and solidity which characterise this opera.Bishop, however, continued to write in this style,and certainly taught the public to admire it. Thebest of his subsequent operas, especially The Virginof the Sun, The Knight of Snowdon, The Millerand his Men, and The Slave, are, in many respects,worthy of the greatest masters of the Germanschool, and justify the title, which was bestowedon him, of " the English Mozart."When the performance of Don Giovanni, andother operas of Mozart, at the King's Theatre madeso great an impression in 1817, Mr. Bishop conceivedthe idea of adapting them to the Englishstage. Accordingly The Libertine (an Englishversion of Don Giovanni) appeared at Covent Garden,and was followed by The Marriage of Figaro,and Rossini's Barber of Seville. These pieces wereso mutilated, and so full of interpolations to suitwhat was then considered the taste of an Englishaudience, that they gave but a faint notion of theoriginals. But the public was captivated by thegraceful and beautiful strains of the great foreignmasters, and by the charming manner in which theywere sung by Miss Stephens. By introducing theseWEBER. 453pieces to the frequenters of the English theatres,Mr. Bishop created a demand for foreign dra rmagic music, and gave rise to the practice whichhas prevailed ever since, of supplying the Englishstage, to a considerable extent, with the musicalproductions of Italy, Germany, and France.The taste for foreign music, especially that of theGerman school, was prodigiously increased by theappearance, in an English dress, of the celebratedDer Freischutz. It was first performed, on 23rdJuly, 1824, at the English Opera-house, and receivedwith acclamations. It was got up at both the greatwinter theatres, as soon as they opened ; and in ashort time it was performed, to crowded and enthusiasticaudiences, in every theatre in the unitedkingdom. No dramatic production ever made amore sudden, a greater, or a more lasting impressionon the public. Two of Weber's minor productions,Anon Hassan and Precious, were brought outduring the following season. The first was successful,but the second failed entirely, in consequence,no doubt, of the weakness of the drama,(though it is founded on the interesting tale ofCervantes,) for the music is beautiful, and itsromantic Spanish character shows the attention paidby Weber to what may be called musical costumein his compositions.The immense popularity of Weber's name in thiscountry led to his engagement to compose hisopera of Oberon for Covent Garden. The drama,454 WEBER.which is founded on Wieland's poem, was writtenby Mr. Planche; and is one of the few instances ofthe dramatic part of a musical piece being worthyto employ the genius of a great composer. Weberarrived in London in February, 1826, in order tosuperintend the preparation of the piece ; and itwas performed for the first time on the 12th ofApril. In one of his interesting letters to his wife,written while the opera was in rehearsal, he giveshis opinion of the performers. " And now, myclear love," he says, " I can assure you that youmay be quite at ease, both as to the singers and theorchestra. Miss Paton is a singer of the first rank,and will play Reiza divinely. Braham not less so,though in a totally different style. There are alsoseveral good tenors, and I really cannot see whythe English singing should be so much abused.The singers have a perfectly good Italian education,fine voices, and expression. The orchestra is notremarkable, but still very good, and the chorusesparticularly so. In short, I feel quite at ease as tothe fate of Oberon." — On the night of its performancehe thus described the result: " My bestbeloved Caroline, through God's grace and assistanceI have this evening met with the most completesuccess. The brilliancy and affecting nature of thetriumph are indescribable. God alone be thankedfor it ! When I entered the orchestra, the whole ofthe house, which was filled to overflowing, rose up,and I was saluted by huzzahs and w T having of hatsWEBER. 455and handkerchiefs, which I thought would neverhave done. They insisted on encoring the overture.Every air was interrupted twice or thrice withbursts of applause." — "So much for this night,dear life," he adds in conclusion, Ci from yourheartily tired husband, who, however, could notsleep in peace till he had communicated to you thisnew blessing of Heaven. Good night!"Oberon had been carefully prepared, was splendidlygot up, and (in its principal characters, sustainedby Braham, Miss Paton, and MadameVestris) admirably performed. Its reception wassuch as Weber described, and it is not surprisingthat it gave him such fulness of contentment. Buthe was little aware of the hollowness of much ofthe applause which a new piece receives in anEnglish theatre. The excitement, a great deal ofwhich was produced more by his name and hispersonal presence than by the excellence of hismusic, speedily subsided ; and though Oberon continuedto run, (as it is called,) } 7 et the houses becamethinner and thinner, the defalcation first becoming-apparentin the boxes. Meanwhile the composer'slamented death took place on the 4th of June ;and, on the 17th of the same month, when theopera was performed for the benefit of his widowand children, the proceeds scarcely cleared theexpenses of the theatre. It was soon afterwardslaid aside, and has never been revived. Its fatein Germany has been very different. It was456 ALADDIN.immediately brought out at Dresden, where Weberhad lived, and received with an enthusiasm whichattended its subsequent performance in almostevery German theatre from Hamburgh to Vienna.And this enthusiasm has not yet subsided ; thepublic flock to see it whenever it is performed, andwonder at the neglect it has met with in England.At the same time that Oberon was brought outat Covent Garden, the rival theatre of Drury Laneproduced Aladdin. This opera was composedunder great disadvantages. The well-known andrather too familiar Arabian tale was but indifferentlydramatised, arid Mr. Bishop seems to havelaboured under a feeling of the weight of his competitor,which apparently gave rise to a frequentbut unconscious imitation of his style. The attentionof the public, too, was for the moment whollyengrossed by Weber; and Bishop's opera, whatevermight have been its merits, had no chance ofattracting notice. After having been performedfor a few nights, accordingly, it was withdrawn.As a whole, it was not to be compared to Oberon ;but, had it not been forced into this comparison,the many beautiful things which it contains wouldhave received greater justice from the public.For several years after this time, the Englishmusicians withdrew entirely from the field of dramaticcomposition, and the stage was suppliedentirely by importations from abroad. To showthe extent to which this was carried, we subjoin aFOREIGN OPERAS. 457list of the principal foreign operas which wereadapted to the English stage, and performed atDrury Lane, Covent Garden, and the EnglishOpera-house, from 1827 to 1833, both inclusive;during which period no English composer produceda single musical piece of the smallest importance,their utmost efforts being limited to afew songs, occasionally introduced into sometrifling farce or masterpiece.The Interrupted Sacrifice : Winter's Unterbrochene Opferfest.The Turk : Rossini's Turco in Italia.The Seraglio : Mozart's Entfuhrung aus dem Serai.The Freebooters : Paer's Fuorusciti.Tit for Tat: Mozart's Cost fan tutti.The Pirate of Genoa : Weigh's Amor Mariners.love in Wrinkles : a French piece by Fetes.The Casket: a French piece, with music from Mozart'soperas.The Maid of Judah : the music from Rossini's Semiramide.The Robber s Bride : Ries's Rauberbraut.The Night before the Wedding : Boieldieu's Les Deux Nights.Masaniello : Auber.The National Guard: Auber's Fiancee.Ninetta : Rossini's Gazza Ladra.William Tell: Rossini's Guillaume Tell.Cinderella : Rossini's Cenerentola.Don Giovanni., newly adapted.The Vampyre : Mariner's Der Vampyr.Azor and Semina : Spohr's Zemire mid Azor.The Emissary : Onslow's Colporteur.The Love Charm : Auber's Philtre.Fra Diavolo : Auber.458 FOREIGN OPERAS.Robert the Devil : Meyerbeer's Robert le Diable, brought outat the same time at both the winter theatres.The Alchymist : the music from Spohr's operas.During* the last few years, however, the Englishcomposers have shown greater activity, and theirexertions have been attended with success. Variousoperas, the productions of native talent, havebeen well received by the public, and have, to aconsiderable extent, occupied our musical stage ;and the consequence has been, that the amountof importation from abroad has greatly diminished.Since the year 1833, not more than six or eightforeign operas have been performed in the Englishtheatres. The principal of these was the Fideliaof Beethoven, in which the charming character ofLeonora was performed, both by Madame Malibranand Madame Schroeder Detriment, in different styles,but with equal ability, though Malibran's thoroughcommand of our language gave her an advantageover her German rival. The Magic Flute (Mozart'sZauberfldte) was lately carefully brought out,and, on the whole, well performed at Drury Lane;and the musical taste of the public was evinced bythe numerous representations which this piecesustained, notwithstanding the disadvantage of aheavy and unintelligible drama. These two arethe only foreign operas, the production of which,during several years, has made any impression onthe public. The Eliza and Claudio of Mercadante,ENGLISH COMPOSERS. 459the Norma of Bellini, the Brazen Horse of Auber,and the Zampa of Herold, were total failures.On the other hand, Barnett's elegant opera, TheMountain Sylph, had an almost uninterrupted runof above a hundred nights, and is still frequentlyperformed. Lower's Nourjahaal was favourablyreceived, and the music of Thomson's Hermann,which contains beauties of the highest order, wasappreciated by the public, though the success ofboth these pieces was injured by their want ofdramatic merit. The same cause prevented thesuccess of several other productions, especially thatof Barnett's Fair Rosamond, a work, musicallyspeaking, of the highest class. It is, indeed, thechef d'amvre of this gifted composer, and containsmany things worthy of the greatest masters of theGerman school. The principal operas of Balfe,The Siege of Rochelle, and The Maid of Artois,have gained a popularity rarely surpassed. Rooke'sAniline has had a great run during the last season ;and the favourable reception of The Outpost, anoperetta lately produced by Hullah, augurs wellfor the future career of this young musician. Allthese circumstances confirm an observation whichwe have made in another place, and induce us torepeat it, — that " we do not know an instance of aforeign opera, produced in an English dress, havinggained unmerited popularity, or of an Englishopera having suffered unmerited neglect."460 CONCLUSION.Our theatrical singers deserve the favourableopinions which were entertained of them by Webertwelve years ago. They have " a good Italian education,fine voices, and expression;" and some of themhave considerable dramatic talent ; though in thisrespect, generally speaking, they are still deficient.Among them the most distinguished are, Mrs.Wood, (formerly Miss Paton,) Madame Vestris,Miss Rome, Miss ShirrefF, Miss Rainforth, Mrs.Seguin, Mr. Braham, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Templeton,Mr. Phillips, Mr. Balfe, Mr. Seguin, and Mr.Giubilei. These performers, if united, as theyought to be, in one great theatre, dedicated, as inParis, to the performance of the national musicaldrama, would be able to do justice to the works ofthe greatest composers ; but, at present, no operacan be adequately performed while they are dividedamong all the theatres of the metropolis.On the subject of the present state of the opera,in this as well as in other countries, it may beremarked in general, that, in proportion as themusical part of this entertainment has acquiredan ascendancy, the poetical and dramatic part hasdeclined ; a fact which our readers must havegathered from the preceding narrative. " Whenevermusic aspires to the pre-eminence over poetryin a drama," says Metastasio, " she destroys boththat and herself." — " Modern music," he adds,has rebelled against poetry ; and neglectingCONCLUSION. 461true expression, and regarding all attention towords as downright slavery, has indulged herself,in spite of common sense, in every sort of capriceand extravagance ; making the theatre no longerresound with any other applause than that whichis given to displays of execution, with the vain inundationof which she has hastened her own disgrace,after having first occasioned that of themangled, disfigured, and ruined drama. Pleasureswhich are unable to gratify the mind, or touch theheart, are of short duration ; for though men maysuffer themselves to be easily captivated by unexpectedphysical sensations, they do not for ever renouncethe use of their reasoning faculties." Whatwas the case in Italy, in Metastasio's time, is thecase in England, as well as in Italy, now. Sense issacrificed to sound. Music is degraded into a gratificationof the ear, instead of being regarded as alanguage capable of exalting the sentiment, anddeepening the passion of the drama. No man ofgenius will suffer his poetry to be made the vehiclefor unmeaning sing-song ; hence the opera is leftin the hands of play wrights, and, with few exceptions,is looked upon by people of sense and reflectionas a slight and frivolous amusement, unworthyof serious notice. What can show more clearly thefalse position in which the opera is placed than thepractice of encores ? An air or duet may be a soliloquy,or a dialogue of strong passion or deep in-462 CONCLUSION.terest ; and who, that enters ever so little into thespirit of the scene, would think of having such asoliloquy or dialogue over again ? Who would callon Macbeth to clutch a second time the air-drawndagger, or on his sleeping wife again to show thefearful workings of remorse in her distemperedmind, because, in the one case or the other, theactor exhibited a fine piece of declamation ? Andyet there is hardly a tragic opera in which suchabsurdities do not pass current. Such absurdities,however, have not always passed current on theopera stage. What would Gluck have said, afterthe pathetic parting scene between his Orpheusand Eurydice, had they been called upon to gothrough it again, or had Orpheus been desired torecommence, for the gratification of the audience,his passionate lamentations for the loss of his beloved? Far from considering such an encore as acompliment, the great composer would either havereproached himself with the feebleness of his musicalexpression, or else set down the audience asgreater brutes than those which Orpheus was ableto move by the sound of his lyre. In regardto the performers, an encore, especially in aninteresting and impassioned scene, if a complimentto the singer, is truly a reproach to theactor.The restoration of the opera to its place asan important as well as a delightful branch ofCONCLUSION. 463the drama requires the co-operation of a musicianpossessed of sound views respecting theobjects of his art, and capable of rendering allits resources subservient to the purposes of dramaticexpression and effect, with a poet of congenialspirit, gifted with distinguished genius,and yet not afraid to commit himself by an associationwith a genius equal to his own. If it issupposed that music, by being thus employed asone of the dialects of the drama, will lose its ownpeculiar charms, that apprehension may be relievedby considering whether the music of the Orfeo ofGluck, the Don Giovanni of Mozart, the Fidelia ofBeethoven, and the Oberon of Weber, is moreor less beautiful then that of the St?*aniera, theAnna Bohea, the Lucia di Lammermoor, the Pari-sin,and the other pretty productions of the day.The dramatic pieces at present set to music by ourcomposers are generally trash ; and our composersare aware that it is so, but say, in self-defence, thatthey cannot get anything better. But let themshow that good poetry runs no hazard of beingdegraded or destroyed in their hands, and it canhardly be doubted that they will obtain it. As toour musical performers, they will perforce becomeactors as well as singers, when they find that goodacting, as much as good singing, is essential to theirsuccess.There is no want either of dramatic talent or464 CONCLUSION.of musical talent in England. But it requiresthe co-operation of these two kinds of talent,in a degree which does not exist at present, toproduce results which will be at all satisfactoryto the growing taste and intelligence of thepublic.THE END.LONDON:IBOTSON AND Pamper, SAVOY STREET, STRAND