THE RURAL LIFE OF ENGLAND.THE RURAL LIFE OF ENGLAND:BYWILLIAM Hewitt,AUTHOR OF "THE BOOK OF THE SEASONS, ETC.IN TWO VOLUMES.— VOL. ILLONDON:Hangman, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS.1838.LONDON:PRINTED BY MANNING ANU SMITHSON,IV V LANE, Paternoster ROW.^2,3^U ^CONTENTS.VOLUME II.— PART I.CHAPTER I.Love of the Sublime and Beautiful in Nature more eminentlydeveloped in Modern than in Classical Literature TheFact striking, that the Love of Nature is so conspicuous inour Literature, more faint in that of the Continent, stillmore in that of the Ancients —This Affection only developedin proportion to the Intellectual Culture of our Nature—The same objects pursued in Art as in Literature, the Sublimeand Beautiful— The Greek. Poets more cognizant ofthe Amenities than the Sublimity of Nature Homer thegreatest Exception — Instances of his higher PerceptionsHesiod nearly destitute of it — Theocritus most alive to thePicturesque— His Picture of the Two Fishermen, of KingAnycus, of a Drinking-cup— His luxurious sense of Outsof Door Enjoyment— Love of Nature amongst the RomansOne Cause of the continuance of their Simplicity of LifeInstanced in Virgil, Horace, and Cicero— Modern Literaturea New World of Feeling and Sentiment — Differencebetween Longinus and Burke — Love of Nature in theAncients, incidental — Ours a perpetual Affection — Instancedin Wordsworth, Shelley, and Byron — Originatingcause to be found in Christianity — Development of it inthe Hebrew Literature— Completion of it in the ChristianRevelation — Proofs of this - - - . . 1CHAPTER II.Development of the Love of the Country greater in Englishthan in Continental Literature — Comparison of our Literature,in various Departments, with the Continental — GermanVI CONTENTS.PageLiterature kindred to the English — The Idylls of Voss —Testimony of a French Writer to our greater Love ofNature — 'Ie Influence of the Writings of John Wilson inBlackwood's Magazine, and of Bewick's Wood-cuts --26CHAPTER III.Influence of Wood-engraving on the Love of the Picturesque inthe Country — Introduction of Stereotyping Wood-cuts inthe Cheap Magazines — Probable Results from the Use ofthe Art — In what respects Wood is superior to Copper orSteel — Causes that prevent the Successors of Bewick equallinghim in Knowledge of Nature — How this Defect is tobe remedied-50PART II.THE FORESTS OF ENGLAND.CHAPTER I.The Forests of England — Our Forests amongst our most interestingObjects — Scenery of England as we may supposeit in the Feudal Ages, and as it is now — Charms with whichour Imaginations and Town Restraints have invested theFeudal Times — Antiquity of our Forests — Derivation ofthe name — New Forest created by the Conqueror; Sixty-sevenForests previously existing — Various opinions respectingthe Origin of New Forest — The Ravages of William,and the Death of his Two Sons and Grandson in it. — Numberof Forests, Chases, and Parks formerly belonging to theCrown — Forest System an Imperium in Imperio — ItsCourts, Laws, and Officers — Consequences of the fewJudges, and long Intervals between Trials — Severity ofV)oth Laws and Oaths on the Officers — Freeholds grantedin Forests subject to the Forest Laws — Forest-boundariesof a peculiar Description — Drifts of the Forest — BarbarousPenalties for killing Deer decreed by the Norman Kings —These softened by successive Monarchs — Preamble of theAssise of the Forest of Edward I. — Law of Attachment ofOffenders in the Forest expressed in an old Rhyme —Laying of Dogs ; in what it consisted — Other curious Provisionsof the Assises of the Forests — Regarded appointedby Henry II. — Their Duties — Inquisitions into the state ofForests by Elizabeth — The Forest Laws disused after theRevolution — List of the Ancient Forests - - - - 59CONTENTS. VllCHAPTER II. PageNew Forest — Retains more of its Forest Character than anyother — Boundaries now nearly the same as in Charles II's.time — Places in the Forest — Its Features as you passthrough it — As compared with other Forests — Not theruin of a Forest, but a Forest in its prime — The Cause ofthis — Picturesque Style of the Cottages and small Enclosuresin its Neighbourhood — A Day's stroll through it bythe Author — Feelings inspired by its Solitude and Air ofAntiquity — Forest Farms, Swine, Cattle and their Bells —Spot where Rufus was killed, near Stony-Cross— The Descendantsof Turkish, who conveyed the Body of Rufus toWinchester — Tradition of the Cart-wheel — Gilpin's Parsonageand School — His Opinion of the Origin of the NewForest Horses — Wild Population of the Forest — Adventureof a Physician with them — Forest Walks and Lodges —Stirrup of Rufus preserved at Lyndhurst — The Forest Courta singular Scene, as described by Mr. Stewart Rose - - 83CHAPTER III.Sherwood Forest— In a very different state to New Forest —Celebrated as the Scene of Robin Hood's Exploits — TheNorman Kings, especially John, fond of Hunting there —Formerly of great extent ; containing Nottingham, Mansfield,Annesley, Newstead, etc. — Its Constitution and AffairsCurious Fact regarding the Byrons and Chaworths —Present Extent of the Forest — Bilhaghe an unique and impressiveRemains of a portion of it — Birkland a beautifultract of Birch Woodland— Its Fairyland Character — ConcludingRemarks -. 99CHAPTER IV.Forest Enclosures — Injuries to the Arts, Manufactures, and theIntellectual Taste of the Public to be apprehended from suchEnclosures — Logic of Lawyers and Land-surveyors — OpenLands needed for Public Enjoyment — That Open Lands areUnproductive, shewn to be a very false notion — Unchristianprinciple on which Enclosures have been conducted — Enclosuresinimical to our National Interests — Numbers whoseek the refreshment of Summer Visits to our Forests,Coasts, Moors, and Mountains — The Utilitarian Enclosuresof certain Lands recommended . . 110CHAPTER V.Wild English Cattle — Places where they still exist — Bewick'sDescription of them — The Author's Visit to GillinghamPark in 1836, to see the great Herd - - - - 119vni CONTENTS.PART III.HABITS, AMUSEMENTS, AND CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE.CHAPTER I. PageCottage Life — Wide space between the Life of the Hall and thatof the Cottage — The Routine of the Labourer's Life — ABlow aimed at Iii Domestic Security — A Highland Hut —A Night passed in one — Abodes of Poverty called RookeriesThe Beauty of English Cottages in some parts of EnglandA Thought on seeing such by Professor Wilson — Delightfulnessof some of the Cottages of the Wealthy and Refined 126CHAPTER II.Popular Festivals and Festivities — Sketch of their History —Of Catholic origin — The great Change in the Public Tasteregarding them traced to the Reformation — Subsequentco-operating Causes pointed out— The Intellectual Characterof the Popular Taste still Progressive - - - 142CHAPTER IlMay-day Festivities — Formerly celebrated with more Gaietythan any others — Came down from Pagan Antiquity in alltheir Arcadian Beauty — It was the Festival of the Poets —None now more entirely obsolete — Washington Irving'sDelight at seeing Plough-bullocks and May-poles in theNeighbourhood of Newstead— Great Decline of these thingsduring the last Thirty Years even there — A few May-polesstill to be found in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire — May-dancesquite gone by — May-day celebrated with enthusiasmby the Poets — European observance of May derived fromthe Roman Festival of Flora — Saxon Customs of this periodof the Year— Druid Customs— Blowing of Horns at Oxfordand other places — Custom mentioned by Erasmus, of placinga Deer's Horns on St. Paul's Altar— Custom of the HindusBeltane in Ireland and Scotland — May-feast of Northumberland— Fishing for the Wedding-ring— Roman Feast ofFlora imitated in France and England — Various Additionshere of Robin Hood, Maid Marian, Friar Tuck, etc. — Spenserand Herrick's description of May-day Festivities— HenryVIII., Elizabeth, and James I. 's going a-Maying— Sheriffsand Aldermen of London going a-Maying— Congratulatedby Lydgate the Poet— In 1644, all May-poles pulled downIn 1654 Maying again, in presence of the Lord ProtectorGreat May-pole in the Strand raised again at the RestorationAubrey's Account of the May-booms in Holland —Complaints of Aubrey and Evelyn of Injury done to theWoods by Layers— May Customs that yet remain - -. 152CONTENTS. IXCHAPTER IV. PageEaster Festivities — May the Festival of the Young, Easter thatof the Church — Celebration of Easter in Catholic CountriesRoyal distribution of Alms on Sunday Thursday atWhitehall, still kept up — Easter at Moscow, Jerusalem,Rome, and other Places — Eating Hot-crossbows, andgoing to Church the sole remaining Ceremonies in England— Easter Morning as described by Goethe — StrangePlays acted in Churches by the Monks at Easter — Churchwardens'Accounts at Reading for such Expenses — PaschalLights — Lighting the Annual Fire at the Holy Sepulchreat Jerusalem — Easter Customs in various Countries — PaschalEggs — ^ Peculiar Privileges attached to their Presentationin Russia — Courts shut, and Business suspendedformerly in London — Still a time of great Recreation toMechanics there — Less observed in Country Towns — Pace-eggsstill given in some Countries — Heaving, or Lifting—Ball-Play 166CHAPTER V.Whitsuntide Festivities — Sole Religious Festival that continuesa Popular one — This partly owing to Friendly SocietiesJoyous Aspect of this Village Fete— Whitsuntide VillageProcessions as seen by the Author in his Youth — Fine subjectfor a Painter — These Love Feasts of the People veryappropriate to this Period, being that of the Agapai, orLove Feasts of the early Christians— Objections to theirbeing held at Public Houses — This remediable — Whitsuntideas witnessed at Warsop in Nottinghamshire— ConcludingRemarks 183CHAPTER VI.Christmas Festivities — The Festival of the fireside — Its AncientUsages made familiar by our Popular Writers — Burton'sAccount of Christmas Games — Withers' Poetical Descriptionof Christmas 200 years ago — Scott's View of them asseen in the past — Pageants at this season in Catholic Countries,as at Rome, Naples, and in Spain — Interesting DomesticCustom in Germany — Christmas as now passed by thePoor, and by the Middle and Higher Classes — The WaitsChristmas Visiting and Country Games — ChristmasCarols, as sung about Manchester, collected iby the lateMiss Newbury— Christmas Customs still kept up — Georgeand the Dragon — Blessing Orchards, etc. — ConcludingRemarks on the Present Slate of the Popular Festivals - 192CHAPTER VILThe Fairy Superstitions — Fairies all vanished from the CountryGone in Chaucer's Days — Bishop Corbett's Farewell tothem — Hogg their last Poet — Fairies of Maldon-Low —X CONTENTS.PageMade Immortal by Milton and Shakspeare — Belief of themyet lingering in Wales — Robin Bedfellow and the Lubber-fiendof Milton thrown out of Employ by the — Fairies' Waterfall at Aberpergum — MorganLewis, the Neath Guide's account of their positive Departure. 219CHAPTER VIII.The Village Inn — The Old-fashioned Village Inn a very differentplace to the New Beer-shop — Its General Aspect — Its OldTree — Remarkable Tree of this kind at the Golden Grove,near Chertsey — The Country Inn Kitchen — Description ofLandlords by which such Inns arc kept — Their Cleannessand Rural Plenty — Patronised by all Classes, from theSquire downwards — Humorous Characters often foundthere — Curious Scene once witnessed by the Author at aCountry Inn in Yorkshire — The New Beer-Shops a universalNuisance . .-. . 228CHAPTER IX.Popular Places of Resort — Wakes, Statutes, and Fairs — TheWake, the Feast of the Dedication of the Parish Church,now dwindled into a Village Holiday — Anticipation of itby the Rural People — Wake Festivities — The Wake, insome places yet connected with Church-rites. — Statutes :Meetings by Legal Statute for the Hiring of Servants —Attendance of Farmers, their Wives, and Men and WomenServants — Their Appearance — Shepherds, Ploughmen,Milkmaids, and their Insignia — Earnest Money — AfternoonJollification — In the Northern Counties the Bondage-girlshired at similar Meetings. — Fairs: Places of bothBusiness and Pleasure to all classes of Country People —Nottingham great October, or Goose Fair taken as a specimen— Preparations for its Attendance — Fair Scenery andCharacters — Proclamation of the Fair — Corporation Procession— Gig Fair — Peculiar Tastes and Pleasures of Fair-goers— Good subjects for the Painter presented - - 245CHAPTER X.Sports and Pastimes of the People — History of their Changesand Present State — Sports generated by the Feudal HabitsSports introduced by the Catholic Church — The mereBrutal portion of both these remaining in the last Century— Many of these now abolished, and a better classencouraged — Sports and Pastimes prevalent in FarmingDistricts and obscure Hamlets — Prevalence of Cricket —Description of a Cricket-match between Nottingham andthe Sussex Club — Auguries drawn from the present PopularTaste - - 257CONTENTS. XICHAPTER XI. PageWrestling : its History and present Practice — This Exerciseformerly so general, now confined to a few Counties —Cornwall and Devon, Lancashire, Cumberland and Westmorland— these Counties possessing Practices peculiar tothemselves — Grand Annual Wrestling in Clerkenwell, formerlyattended by the Lord Mayor and Corporation ofLondon — Curious Anecdote of a minister of the Society ofFriends of that day — West of England and Westmorlandand Cumberland Clubs in London — Attempt of Sir ThomasParkyn to establish Wrestling in Nottinghamshire — CornishWrestling — Fuller's Opinion of it — Account of it by anEye-witness — Champions of Cornwall and Devon — Gamesestablished at St, Ives in Cornwall by John Kill — TheCanns of Dartmoor, and Widdicombs of the moors — Descriptionof a Match at the Eagle Tavern Green, City Road,in 1826, between Devon and Cornwall - . . 279CHAPTER NilFavourite Pursuits of English Cottagers and Workmen — TheGenius of the Working Class — Its Effects on the Happinessof that Class — Almost every Man his Hobby — Pigeon-fancies,Dog-fanciers, Lovers of Music, Singing, Bell-ringing,Poaching, Bird-stuffing, Bird-catching — A Caveatagainst kidnapping of Nightingales — Interior of a Bird-catcher'sHouse — Anecdote of a Bird-catcher — Angling, itseffect on the Spirits — Lovers of Gardens and Bees — Anecdoteof a Bee-lover and the Abbess of Caverswall — Florists —Entomologists — Crabbe's Description of some known to himArtizans' Gardens — Account of 5000 of these at Nottingham— Happiness to be diffused through the Working-classby sound Legislation - - , - - - - - 293CHAPTER XIII.Sunday in the Country — Goethe's Description of a Sunday inGermany — Applicable in a great degree to Sunday here —Trip to Richmond by the Steamer, and its result — Passingof Sunday by many Inhabitants of large Towns — TheStreet Preacher — The Sailor's Chapel — The Irvingite Street-preacher— A Camp-meeting— Profound Air of Repose inthe Country on this day — The Farmer and his HouseholdGroups going Churchyard — The Country Church a placecongenial to Worship — Social Pleasures of Sunday EveningMillions who enjoy the Blessings of a day of Rest —Holy Influence of Sunday — Evening Walk - - . 312CHAPTER XIV.Cheap Pleasures of Country Life — No great Events needed bythe Lover of Nature to render him happy — Recollections ofearly Delight in the Country — Objects of Pleasurable Observationas they present themselves in the course of theXU CONTENTS.seasons— Splendid Pictures presented by Nature — TheSpirit of Peace and Gladness inspired by Nature, whichrenders so delightful the Writings of White, Evelyn, Walton,etc Testimonies of Coleridge and Sir Henry Wotton tothe profound Satisfaction to be found in Country Life - 338CHAPTER XV.Lingering Customs — Rapid disappearance of Old EnglishCustoms — The Beautiful custom of Hanging Garlands inVillage Churches at the Funerals of Young Maidens nearlyextinct — Character of the Primitive Times lingers in theVillage Church — Old-fashioned Congregations — Genuineold Village Clerk — Circumstances occurring to the Authorin Village Churches — Their Superstitions — Village notionsof Angels and Cherubim — Country Customs at FuneralsClosing of Churchyards of late years — Richard Hewitt'sRemarks on this practice — What Education is doing, andleaving undone in the Poetry of Village Life — PeculiarSocial Condition of Surrey — Its Effect on the Peasantry —Need of Schools — Mr. Allen's School of Industry at Lind-fieldin Sussex .-. 343CHAPTER XVI.Concluding Chapter — An extensive Observation of our ownCountry recommended — Every part presents some varietyof Beauty, Custom, or other Object worthy of notice —Some of these to be found on a Summer's Route from Londonto Devon and Cornwall — Others in Routes of the SolitaryPedestrian through the Western, Midland, and NorthernCounties — The wide growth of the Spirit of Enjoyment insuch Exclusions — Numbers which throng to all our Placesof Natural Beauty, or Historic Interest — Concluding Remarks369nJ' ^^1 ^f^i J'^^'^ ^f^!' ■'' Jjduyij/Tj/ jrjjvrJTJ/uj JTWJnj ij^^SW^^W^liy^ '^^ gX^/-:^-'A-'/^JKPART I.CAUSES OF THE STRONG ATTACHMENT OF THE ENGLISHTO COUNTRY LIFE.CHAPTER I.THE LOVE OF THE SUBLIME AND BEAUTIFUL INNATURE MORE EMINENTLY DEVELOPED IN ModernLITERATURE THAN IN THE CLASSICAL.One of the most conspicuous features of Englishliterature, is that intense love of the sublime andbeautiful in Nature, which pervades, with a livingspirit, the works of our poets; gives so peculiar acharm to the writings of our naturalists ; possessesgreat prominence in our travellers ; is mingled withthe fervent breathing of our religious treatises ; andVOL. II. B*2 THE SUBLIME ANDeven finds its way into the volumes of our philosophy.If we look into the literature of the Continentalnations, we find it existing there, more or less, but inalower tone than in our own ; if we look back intothat of the ancients, we find it there too, but stillfainter, more confined in its scope, and scattered, asit were, into distant and isolated spots. I thinknothing can be more striking than the truth of this ;and it is a curious matter of observation, that thereshould be this great distinction, and of inquiry whenceit has arisen. The love of the beauty and sublimityof Nature is an inherent principle in the human soul;but like all other of our finer qualities, it is later in itsdevelopment than the common ones, and requires,not repression, but fostering and cultivation. It islike the love of the fine arts; it slumbers in the bosomthat passes through life in its native rudeness. Itlies in the unploughed ground of the human mind, — aseed buried below the influence that alone can call itinto activity.Yes, like unfolded flowers beneath the sea ;Like the man's thoughts, dark in the infant brain ;Like aught that is, which wraps what is to be;there it lies, deep in the soil of common events andcares, and untouched by the divine atmosphere ofknowledge which a more easy and advanced conditionbrings with it. In others, it is partially vivified, butcannot flourish; it is choked with the cares of theworld, and the deceitfulness of riches ; but in mindsthat are fed with substantial knowledge, and have theirintellectual power reached, and their affections kindledbv the blessedness of refined and Christian culture, —BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 3then it grows with their growth, and strengthens withtheir strength. It daily enlarges its grasp, and its appetite; it expands perpetually the circle of its horizon.The love of the fine arts, is but a modification of thisgreat passion. Their objects are the same — the sublimeand the beautiful; and the same purity and elevationof taste accompany them both. This is theoriginal and legitimate passion. In our love of thefine arts, our attention is occupied with human imitationsof what is beautiful in nature ; — in this, we fixour admiration at once on the magnificent works ofthe Great Artist of the Universe.We might, therefore, reasonably expect to find inthe literature of the ancients, what is actually the case,a less refined, less expanded, less penetrating and absorbingexistence of this affection. Everywhere thelove of nature must exist. In all ages and all countries,so is the outward universe framed to influencethe inward, that men must be impressed by the grandeurof creation, and attracted by its beauty, so faras the human is at all advanced beyond the limits ofmere animal existence. But in the ancient worldeducation was never popular; it extended only to a few;and of these few, a majority were occupied in thepursuits of art, or the speculations of philosophy; andpoetry, and especially the poetry of nature, had scantyfollowers. The great poets of all ages, even of thosebut semi-civilized, must necessarily have minds sosensitive to the influence of all kinds of beauty thatthey could not help being alive to that of nature ;and this was the case with the great poets of Greece.We put out of the present question the dramatic andlyrical ones ; for to them the passions and interests ofVOL. II. c?^4 THE SUBLIME ANDmen were the engrossing objects ; but in Homer,Hesiod, and Theocritus we may fairly expect to discoverthe amount of the ancients' perception of naturalbeauty, and their love of it. But in these howfar is it behind what it is in the moderns. They wereoften enraptured with the pleasantness of nature, butit was seldom with more than its pleasantness. TheirElysian Fields are composed of flowery meads, withpleasant trees and running waters, where the happyspirits led a life of luxurious repose. Their celebratedArcadia is faithfully described in such Idyllsas those of Sion and Roscius ; — youths and damselsfeeding their flocks amid the charms of a pastoralcountry, to whose beauties they were alive in proportionas they ministered to luxurious enjoyment. Beyondthis they seldom looked ; — seldom described thesublime aspects and phenomena of the universe.Homer, indeed, is the greatest exception, — his soul wascast in a mighty mould. His beautiful description ofa moonlight night is known to all readers. He speakstoo, of the splendour of the starry heavens; and he describestempests with great majesty; but this rather asthey are terrible in their effects on men, than as sublimein themselves. Minds even of the noblest class hadnot arrived at that full comprehension of nature whichsees sublimity in the gloom and terror of tempests,independent of their effects ; the grandeur of beautyin desolation itself; in splintered mountains, wild wildernesses,and the awfulness of solitude. They hadnot become tremblingly alive to all the lesser tracesand shades of beauty in the face of nature, for theyhad not reached either of the extremities of perceptionthe vast on one hand — minute perfection on theBEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 5other. They did not pursue the forms of beauty intoleaf and flower; into the cheerful culture of the field,or the brown tinges of the desert. They did notwatch the growing, or fading lights of the sky, andthe colours, as they lived or died on the distant mountaintops ; — the passing of light and shadow overearth and ocean. Their acquaintance with the subtlespirit of the universe had not become so intimate.They abode most in the general ; they admired in themass ; for they had not arrived at the refinement ofvery delicate, or extensive analysis ; and they did notgo out to admire as the moderns; their admiration ofnature was not advanced, as with us, into an art and apassion. Beauty rather fell upon their senses thanwas inquired after. They were pleased, and did notalways seek out the operative causes of their sensations.Their mention of their delight was, therefore,generally incidental. They were in the condition andstate of mind of the old man in Wordsworth's ballad,who says —Think you, mid all this mighty sumOf things for ever speaking,That nothing of itself will come,But we must still be seeking ?That Homer had an eye for the sublime features ofearth, the nobler forms of animal life, and phenomenaof nature, his bold and beautiful similies, scattered allthrough the Iliad, of storms, of overflowing rivers, offorests on flame, of the lion, the horse, and others,sufficiently testify ; that he had a most exquisite senseof the picturesque, is shewn in almost every page ofthe Odyssey ; in the cave of Polyphemus, in good old6 THE SUBLIME ANDking Laertes occupied in his farm ; and in the wholeepisode of Ulysses at the lodge of Eumeus, the goatherd.But yet it is, after all, only in contemplatingsome scene of delicious rural beauty, something akinto Arcadian sweetness, that he breaks out into anythinglike a rapture. The abode of Calypso, as seenby Hermes on his approach to it, is an exact instance.Then, swift ascending from the azure wave.He took the path that winded to the cave.Large was the grot in which the nymph he found.The fair-haired nymph, with every beauty crowned.She sale and sung ; the rocks resound the lays ;The cave was brightened with the rising blaze ;Cedar and frankincense, an odorous pile,Flamed on the hearth, and wide perfumed the isle.While she with work and song the time divides.And through the loom the golden shuttle guides.Without the grot a various sylvan sceneAppeared around, and groves of living green ;Poplars and alders, ever quivering, played,And nodding cypress formed a grateful shade ;On whose high branches, waving with the storm.The birds of broadest wing their mansion form ;The chough, the sea-mew, and loquacious crow.And scream aloft, and skim the deeps below.Depending vines the delving caverns screen.With purple clusters blushing through the green.Four limpid fountains from the clefts distil ;And every fountain forms a separate rill,In mazy, winding wanderings down the hill :Where bloomy meads with vivid greens were crowned.And glowing violets threw odours round —A scene, where if a god should cast his sight,A god might gaze and wander with delight !Joy touched the messenger of heaven ; he stayedEntranced, and all the blissful haunt surveyed.Odyssey, B. v.In Hesiod, the perception of even the delights ofBEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 7the summer field were far fainter. Though he fedhis flock at the foot of Mount Helicon, he has littleto say in praise of its aspect ; and though he givesyou great insight into the state of agriculture, and thesimple mode of life of the country people, a very fewverses furnish almost all the praise of nature which hehad to bestow. His mind seemed occupied in tracingthe genealogy of the gods, and framing grave maximsfor the regulation of human conduct.Of all the Greek writers, Theocritus is the onethat luxuriates most in natural beauty. His sense ofthe picturesque is keen, and his pencilling of suchsubjects is most vigorous and graphic. His twofishermen remind us of Crabbe ; nothing can be moreexquisite.Two ancient fishers in a straw-thatched shed —Leaves were their walls, and sea-weed was their bed,Reclined their weary limbs ; hard by were laidBaskets and all their implements of trade ;Rods, hooks, and lines composed of stout horse-hairs.And nets of various sorts, and various snares,The seine, the cast-net, and the wicker maze.To waste the watery tribe a thousand ways ;A crazy boat was drawn upon a plank ;Mais were their pillow, wove of osiers dank ;Skins, caps, and coats, a rugged covering made ;This was their wealth, their labour and their trade.No pot to boil, no watch-dog to defend.Yet blessed they lived with penury their friend ;None visited their shed, save, every tide.The wanton waves that washed its tottering side.Idol, xxi.Then again, nothing can be more picturesque,nothing more boldly graphic and solemnly poetical,than the situation in which he makes Castor and8 THE SUBLIME ANDPollux find Anycus, the king of Bebrycia; nothingmore striking than the image of that chief.Meanwhile, the royal brothers devious strayedFar frown the shore, and sought the cooling shade.Hard by, a hill with waving forests crowned.Their eyes attracted ; in the dale they foundA spring perennial in a rocky cave :Full to the margin flowed the lucid wave ;Below small fountains gushed, and murmuring near.Sparkled like silver, and as silver clear.Above, tall pines and poplars quivering played.And planes and cypress in dark greens arrayed ;Around balm-breathing flowers of every hue.The bees' ambrosia, in the meadows grew.There sate a chief, tremendous to the eye,His couch the rock, his canopy the sky ;The gauntlet's strokes his cheeks and ears around,Had marked his face with many a desperate wound.Round as a globe, and prominent his chest.Broad was his back, but broader was his breast ;Firm was his flesh, with iron sinews fraught.Like some Colossus on an anvil wrought.Id. XX ii.His description of an ancient drinking-cup appearsto me to have no rival in all the round of literature,ancient or modern, except Keats' description of anantique vase. It is life and beauty itself. The figuresstand out in bold relief, cut with an energy andprecision most wonderful, and with a grace that makesitself felt to the very depths of the spirit.A deep, two-handled cup, whose brim is crownedWith ivy, joined with helichryse around ;Small tendrils with close-clasping arms upholdThe fruit rich speckled with the seeds of gold.Within, a woman's well-wrought image shines,A vest her limbs, her locks a call confines ;And near, two neat-curled youths in amorous strains.With fruitless strife communicate their pains ;BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE, 9Smiling, by turns she views the rival pair ;Grief swells llieir eyes, their heavy hearts despair.Hard by, a fisherman, advanced in years,On the rough margin of a rock appears ;Intent he stands to enclose the fish below,Lifts a large net, and labours with the throw ;Such strong expression rises on the sight,You'd swear the man exerted all his might;For his round neck with turgid veins appears —III years he seems, yet not impaired by years.A vineyard next with intersected lines, —And red, ripe clusters load the bending vines.To guard the fruit a boy sits idly by,In ambush near, two skulking foxes lie ;This, plots the branches of ripe grapes to strip.And that, more daring, meditates the scrip ;Resolved, ere long, to seize the savoury prey,And send the youngster dinnerless away ;Meanwhile on rushes all his art he plies.In framing traps for grashoppers and flies ;And earnest only on his own designs,Forgets his satchel, and neglects his vines./(/. i.What a glorious subject would this be for one ofour modern sculptors. Were I one, I would not losean hour ere I attempted it.But in Theocritus, as in Homer, they are Arcadianamenities that engross almost all his passion fornature. They are flowery fields, running waters,summer shades, and the hum of bees ; all the elementsof voluptuous dreaming and indolent entrancement;the most delicious of all idleness, lying abroad withthe blue sky above you, and the mossy turf beneathyou, and the bubble of running waters, and thewhisper of forest branches near, to lull you to repose.Is it not so? When is it that he invites you to out-of-doorenjoyment?10 THE SUBLIME ANDNow when meridian beams inflame the day jNow when green lizards in the hedges lie;And crested larks forsake the fervid sky.Id. vii.And whither would he lead you at this sultry,blazing hour ? Ah ! hear him !Here rest we : lo ! cyprus decks the ground,Oaks lend their shade, and sweet bees murmur roundTheir honeyed hives; here, two cool fountains spring;Here merrily the birds on branches sing ;Here pines in clusters more umbrageous grow,Wave high their heads, and scatter cones below.Id.Ah ! cunning Sicilian ! well didst thou know wherelife shed its most delicious dreams. Anacreon at hiswine, and Tibullus in the rapture of one of hissweetest love-visions, was a novice in true enjoymentto thee. Hark ! to the very sounds which he conjuresup ! There is nothing startling — nothing exciting. —No ! there is enough of excitement already in theclimate, in the summer heat, in the very scenes andpersons from whose city revels he has just withdrawn.The true secret now is, to summon up only images ofluxurious rest ; of calm beauty ; of refreshing coolness ;that the blood, already running riot, may flow in theveins like the nectar of the gods, and send up to thebrain images and trains of images of the very poetryof Elysium. Hark to the sounds about you !Sweet low the herds along the pastured ground ; ,Sweet is the vocal reed's melodious sound;Sweet pipes the jocund herdsman.But I will give one more extract from him, whichseems to combine all the fascinations he loved topaint as existing in the summer woodlands.BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 11He courteous bade us on soft beds recline,Of lentesch and young branches of the vine ;Poplars and elms above their foliage spread,Lent a cool shade, and waved the breezy head.Below, a stream, from the nymphs' sacred cave.In free meanders led its murmuring wave ;In the warm sunbeams, verdant shrubs among,Shrill grashoppers renewed their plaintive song;At distance far, concealed in shades alone,The nightingale poured forth her tuneful moan:The lark, the goldfinch, warbled lays of love,And sweetly pensive cooed the turtle-dove;While honey-bees, for ever on the wing,Hummed round the flowers, and sipped the silver spring.The rich, ripe season gratified the senseWith summer's sweets and autumn's redolence.Apples and pears lay strewed in heaps around.And the plum's loaded branches kissed the ground.Id. vii.Well, we must pass over from the Greeks to theRomans, and I have found it so difficult to escapefrom Theocritus, that we must make short work otit here. Of Cicero, Seneca, the Pliny, — I will saynothing. We all know how they delighted in theircountry villas and gardens. We all know how Cicero,in his Treatise on Old Age, has declared his fondnessfor farming; and how, between his pleadings in theForum, he used to seek the refreshment of a walk inagrove of plane-trees. We know how, during thebest ages of the Commonwealth, their generals anddictators were brought from the plough and theircountry retreats — a fine feature in the Roman character,and one which may, in part, account for theirso long retaining the simplicity of their tastes, andthat high tone of virtue which generally accompaniesa daily intercourse with the spirit of nature. All thisc312 THE SUBLIME ANDwe know; but what is still more remarkable is, thatHorace and Virgil, two of the most courtly poetsthat ever existed, yet were both passionately fond ofthe country, and perpetually declare in their writingsthat there is nothing in the splendour and fascinationsof city life, to compare with the serene felicity of arural one. Horace is perpetually rejoicing over hisSabine farm ; and Virgil has, in his Georgic, describedall the rural economy of the age with a gustothat is felt in every line. His details fill us with admirationat the great resemblance of the science ofthese matters at that time, and at this. With scarcelyan exception, in all modes of rural management, inall kinds of farming stock — sheep, cattle, and horses,he would be now pronounced a consummate judge;and his rules for the culture of fields and gardens,would serve for studies here, notwithstanding thedifference of the Italian and English climates. But itis only in that celebrated passage beginning —O fortunatus nimium, sua si bona norint,Agricola !in his second Georgic, so often quoted, that he seemsto get into a rapture when contemplating the charmsof a country life. We may take this as a sufficientexample, and as very delightful in itself.Oh happy, if he knew his happy state.The swain who free from business and debate,Receives his easy food from Nature's hand,And just returns of cultivated land.No palace with a lofty gate he wants,To admit the tide of early visitants,With eager eyes, devouring as they pass,The breathing figures of Corinthian brass ;BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 13Xo statues threaten from high pedestals,No Persian arras hides his homely wallsWith antic vests, which, through their shadowy fold,Betray the streaks of ill-dissembled gold.He boasts no wool where native white is dyedWith purple poison of Assyrian pride.No costly drugs of Araby defile,With foreign scents, the sweetness of his oil :But easy quiet, a secure retreat,A harmless life that knows not how to cheat,With home-bred plenty the rich owner bless,And nn-al pleasures crown his happiness.Unvexed with quarrels, undisturbed by noise,The country king his peaceful realm enjoys.« » « »Ye sacred Muses ! with whose beauty fired.My soul is ravished, and my brain inspiredWhose priest I am, whose holy fillets wear —Would you your poet's first petition hear ;Give me the ways of wandering stars to know,The depths of heaven above, and earth below.« • * »But if my heavy blood restrain the flightOf my free soul, aspiring to the heightOf nature, and unclouded fields of light —My next desire is, void of tare and strife.To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life —A country cottage near a crystal flood,A winding valley, and a lofty wood.Some god conduct me to the sacred shadesWhere Bacchanals are sung by Spartan maids ;Or lift me high to Hemus' hilly crown,Or in the plains of Tempe lay me down.Or lead me to some solitary place,And cover my retreat from human race.Turn now to the modern world of literature; andwhat a blaze of light, what a warmth, what a spirit,what a passion bursts upon us ! We step, indeed,into a new world. All here is glowing, clear in view,tender in feeling ; full of a new, profound, popular,14 THE SUBLIME ANDand yet domestic sentiment, — a sentiment befitting-thelarge utterance of the early gods," and yethallowing and making more brotherly the bosoms ofmen. We are, in fact, as far advanced beyond theancients in our knowledge of nature, as we are inthat of " the life and immortality brought to light bythe gospel." With all the admiration of the ancientsfor the loveliness of nature, with all their enjoymentof its amenities, what is there in them like thehungering and thirsting, the yearning after her, ofsuch hearts as those of Byron, Wordsworth, Coleridge,Shelley, and a thousand other lights of modernliterature? The mighty difference is, indeed, moststrikingly manifested by comparing Longinus andBurke, The Palmyra secretary, amongst his fivesources of the sublime, does not even include theinfluence of natural objects. His treatise is, indeed,more truly a treatise on writing strongly and elegantly,than on the sublime. Like the poets, heperceives the amenities of the country; but there isonly one passage in his whole work in which hespeaks out plainly of the sublimity of external nature.The impulse of nature inclines to admire not a littletransparent rivulet that ministers to our necessities ;but the Nile, the Sister, the Rhine, or still more, theOcean, We are never surprised at the sight of asmall fire that burns clearly, and blazes out on ourprivate hearth; but view with amaze the celestial fires,though they are often obscured by vapours andeclipses. Nor do we reckon anything in nature morewonderful than the boiling furnaces of Etna, whichcast out stones, and sometimes whole rocks from theirlabouring abyss, and pour out whole rivers of liquidand unmingled flame."BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 15See how Burke has expanded and worked out thisglimpse of the true view. He is full of the mightyinfluence of Nature's sublime features. Her heightsand depths, her horrors and glooms, the demonstrationsof her grandeur and power in storms, earthquakes,and volcanoes. Infinity and Eternity are allbefore him in their awful majesty, and furnish himwith some of his deepest sources and most splendidillustrations of the sublime.But the fact must be evident to every one. Asingle france from the ancients to the moderns, andwhat a contrast! Throughout all the writings of themost enthusiastic ancients, where are the burning,passionate longings after nature that are transfusedihrouofh all our modern literature ? Nature is notwith us a thing incidentally alluded to, — a thing tobe voluptuously enjoyed when we find ourselves inthe flowery lap of May ; ours is a living, permeating,perpetual affection. We seek after communion withlier as one of the highest enjoyments of our existence;we seek it to soothe the ruffling of our spirits ; tocalm our world vexed hearts ; to fill us with thedivine presence and overshadowing of beauty. Thelove of her is with us as a daily attraction ; the knowledgeof her a daily pursuit : we have advanced hercoy-nuisance and admiration into a science. Ournaturalists feel the breathing of a celestial spiritcome from her secret shrines, even while they areseeking after and arranging her lesser forms and productions.Our romance writers dip their pens in herhues to cast a fascination upon their narratives ; andour travellers climb every mountain, traverse everysea, explore every distant region, to catch fresh16 THE SUBLIME ANDglimpses of her beauty. True, many of these maynot, and do not, feel all the attachment they profess —there are thousands who do but affect it, as they doany other fashion ; but their very imitation, and theirvery number, do homage to the great worship of theage.But it is through our poetry that the admiration ofnature is diffused as one great soul. From Chaucerto the most recent poet, it is the universal spirit. Itwould seem a contradiction now, to say that a man isa poet, but that he has no ardent feeling for nature.In fact, a new language, a new kind of inspiration,distinguish the modern poets from the ancientsaltogether. Great as each may respectively be, theirobject, their vision, and their tone in this particularare widely opposed. When do we find one of theclassical writers, speaking thus of his youth ?Like a roeI bounded o'er the mountains, by the sidesOf the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,Wherever nature led ; more like a manFlying from something that he dreads, than oneWho sought the thing he loved. For nature then,To me was all in all — I cannot paintWhat then I was. The sounding cataractHaunted me like a passion ; the tall rock,The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,Their colours and their forms, were then to meAn appetite, a feeling, and a love.That had no need of a remoter charmBy thought supplied, or any interestBorrowed of the eye. — fror/lsivoj-tk.We should be startled to hear an ancient exclaim,like Shelley :Magnificent !How glorious art thou earth ! And if thou beBEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 17The shadow of some spirit lovelier still,Though evil stain its work, and it should be,Like its creation, weak yet beautiful,I could fall down and worship that and thee.Even now my heart adore. Wonderful !What would be our astonishment, if we were tostumble, in an ancient poet, upon stanzas like these ?I live not in myself, but I becomePortion of that around me ; and to meHigh mountains are a feeling, but the humOf human cities torture ; I can seeNothing to loathe in nature, save to beA link reluctant in a fleshly chain.Classed among creatures, when the soul can flee.And with the sky, the peak, the heaving plainOf ocean or the stars, mingle and not in vain.And thus I am absorbed, and this is life !I look uix)n the peopled desert past.As on a place of agony and strifeWhere for some sin, to sorrow I was cast.To act and suffer, but remount at lastWith a fresh pinion; which I feel to spring,Though young, yet waxing vigorous, as the blastWhich it would cope with, on delighted wingSpurning the clay-cold bonds which round our being cling.And when, at length, the mind shall all be freeFrom what it hates in this degraded form.Reft of its carnal life, save what shall beExistent happier in the fly and worm, —When elements to elements conform.And dust is what it should be, shall I notFeel all I see, less dazzling, but more warm 1The bodiless thought, the spirit of each spot,Of which, even now, I share at times the immortal lot ?Are not the mountains, waves, and skies a partOf me and of my soul, as I of them ?Is not the love of these deep in my heartWith a pure passion ? Shall I not contemn18 THE SUBLIME ANDAll objects, if compared with these ? and stemA tide of suffering, rather than foregoSuch feelings, for the hard and worldly phlegmOf those whose eyes are only turned below.Gazing upon the ground, with thoughts that dare not glow?To quote all that bears evidence of this wonderfulrevolution in the very heart of literature would be,not to quote indeed, but to take the whole mass ofmodern poetry. Powerfully as the spirit of the ancientswas attracted by the sublimity of mortal passionand mortal fortunes; by the strife of familiesand nations, by the strife of emotions in the soul,and the out-bursting of a blasting a beneficentsublimity in the deeds of men ; and magnificentas are the monuments of tragic or heroic grandeurthey have erected on this foundation, — so powerfullyis the spirit of the moderns drawn, excited, and inflamedby the sublimity of nature, and beautiful andendearing are the strains it has elicited. And whenceis this mighty change? Ay, that is the question.Whence is it that the love of Nature has, in thelatter ages, become so much more passionate, intense,engrossing, refined, elevated, etherealized ? Is it becausewe see nature with different eyes ? Is it thatwe see something in it that the classics did not? It is!It is to that omnipotent principle that has so utterlychanged the whole system of human philosophy,morals, politics, literature, and social life — the hopes,the fortunes, the reasonings of men, that we owe it.It is to Christianity ! The veil which was rentasunder in the hour that its Divine Founder consummatedhis mission, was plucked away not only fromthe heart of man, not only from the immortality ofhis being, but from the face of Nature. A mysteryBEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 19and a doubt which had hung athwart the sky like avast and gloomy cloud, was withdrawn, and man beheldCreation as the assured work of God : saw aparental hand guiding, sustaining, and embellishingit : and immediately felt himself brought into a nearkinship with it, and into an everlasting sympathy withallthat was beautiful around him, — not simply for thebeauty itself, but because it was the work of the oneGreat Father — the one Great Fountain of all life andblessiiio;.The very introduction to the Hebrew literature inthe Old Testament, must have produced a deep anddelightful change in human feeling. The contrastbetween the sentiment and the very language of nature,as addressed to man in the literature of theGreeks and that of the Hebrews was startling, warming,and wonderful beyond measure. The beauty ofnatural objects was no longer a thing apart; — a thingto be admired on its own account ; it was allied to adeep sentiment, it became linked to the life of ourinner nature. Waters were beheld as the bountifulblessing of Him " who giveth rain upon the earth,and sendeth waters upon the field." They becamethe emblem of that inward purity of which the noblestpagan could form no adequate conception, but whichthe God of the Hebrews required. They symbolizedmany of the evils, as well as the refreshments of life.Now they typified, " brethren that deal deceitfully asabrook, and as the stream of brooks that pass away ;which are brackish by reason of the ice, and whereinthe snow is hid:" now, they were as the billows ofaffliction, — scenes of trouble — " all thy billows havegone over me : " and now they were as the refreshesTHE SUBLIME ANDment of a thirsty soul. The greenness of the grassand of the branch pointed to the beauty, the fleetingbeauty of life ; and now to the insecure prosperity ofthe unjust: — ''He is green before the sun, and hisbranch shooter forth in his garden; his roots arewrapped about the heap, and he seeth the place ofstones. If he destroy him from his place, then itshall deny him, saying I have not seen him. Beholdthis is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shallothers grow."Every thing in nature, the flower — the wind— thespider's web — darkness and light — calm and tempestdrought and flood — the shadow and the noon-dayheat — a great rock in a weary land— every thing aboutus, and above us, acquired in this splendid and inimitableliterature, a new and touching meaning; a meaningbound up with our lives ; a worth coequal withour highest hopes, or most fervent desires. Everythingbecame a moral and a warning. They weremade to illustrate not only the operations of providence,but to cast a new light upon our intellectualbeing. They did not, indeed, speak out as to theexact value stamped upon man by the Deity, butthey gave intimations more profound and startlingthan anything in the whole round of pagan philosophy.And then, there was an undertone of sorrow,a voice of plaintive regret over man— a delicacy andtenderness of phrase that wonderfully attracted andendeared. What ineffable melancholy is there inthese following sentiments ! What an intense longingafter life, and yet, what a longing for death ! Whata vivid feeling of the grinding evils of mortal being ;and what images of the fulness of peace in the grave !BEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 21Why died I not from the womb ? For now shouldI have lain still, and been quiet ; I should have slept :then had I been at rest. With kings and counsellorsof the earth, which had built desolate places forthemselves ; or with princes that had gold, Mho filledtheir houses with silver ; or, as a hidden, untimelybirth, I had not been ; as infants which never saw thelight. There the wicked cease from troubling; andthere the weary are at rest. There the prisoners resttogether, they hear not the voice of the oppressor.The small and the great is there ; and the servant isfree from his master. Wherefore is light given tohim that is in misery ; and life unto the bitter in soul?Which long for death, but it cometh not ; and dig forit, more than for hid treasures ? Which rejoice exceedingly,and are glad when they can find thegrave ? " Job iii. 1 1 — 22.But this new alliance with nature ; this new andspiritual beauty cast upon everything, was not all.The magnificence of Creation and its phenomenawere made tenfold conspicuous ; and still beyond this,men were no longer left to suppose, or even to contendthat the world was the workmanship of Deity.They were no longer left to bewilder themselvesamongst a host of imaginary gods, — the universe inits majesty and God — the one sublime and eternalfounder and preserver of it, were flashed upon thespiritual vision in the broadest and brightest light.Here was seen the clear and continuous history ofCreation : — God, the sole and immortal, sate uponthe circle of the world, and its inhabitants were asgrashoppers before him. The sun, moon, and starswere of his ordaining and appointing ; night and day,22 THE SUBLIME ANDtimes and seasons revolved before him ; his were thecattle on a thousand hills ; his all the swarming tribesof humanity. The prophetic writings proclaimed hisdeity, his power and attributes, in language unparalleledin splendour, and with imagery which embracedall that is glorious, resplendent, beautiful and soothing,or dark, desolate and withering in nature.Such was the effect of the Old Testament ; — andthen came the New ! — then came Christ ! The oldshewed us the Deity in unspeakable majesty; — hiscreation as beautiful and sublime ; — Christ proclaimedhim THE Father of Men ; and in those wordspoured on earth a new light. The words whichguaranteed the eternity of our spirits, chased a dimnessfrom the sky which had hung there from thedays of Adam : they rent down the curtains of deathand oblivion, and let fall upon earth such a tide ofsunshine as never warmed it till then. The atmosphereof heaven gushed down to earth. From thathour, a new and inextinguishable interest was givenus in nature. It was the work of our Father : it wasthe birth-place of millions of everlasting souls. Itshills and valleys then smiled in an ethereal beauty,for they were then to our eyes spread out by amighty and tender parent for our happy abodes. Thewaters ran with a voice of gladness ; the clouds sailedover us with a new aspect of delight ; the wind blew,and the leaves fluttered in it, and whispered everywhereof life — eternal consciousness — eternal enjoymentof intellect and of love. Through all things wefelt a portion of the divine, paternal spirit diffused,and "the wilderness and the solitary place " thenceforthhad a language for our hearts full of the holyBEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 23peace and the revelations of eternity. Then themusing poet felt what it has been reserved for one inour day only fully to express : —A presence that disturbed him with the joyOf elevated thoughts ; a sense sublimeOf something far more deeply interfused,Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,And the round ocean, and the living air,And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:A motion and a spirit that impelsAll thinking things, all objects of all thought,And rolls through all things. Therefore is he stillA lover of the meadows and the woodsAnd mountains ; and of all that we beholdFrom this green earth : of all the mighty worldOf eye and ear, both what they half createAnd what perceive ; well pleased to recogniseIn nature and the language of the sense.The anchor of his purest thoughts; the nurse,The guide, the guardian of his heart, and soulOf all his moral being.Thus, then, is dissipated the mystery of the moreintense love of Nature evinced by the moderns thanthe ancients. It is but part of that gift of divinerevelation which has endowed us with so many otheradvantages over those grand old philosophers of antiquity,who in the depth of their hearts, darkened andabused by many an hereditary superstition, yet foundsome of the unquenched embers of that fire of loveand knowledge originally kindled there by the Creator,and cherished and fanned them into a noble flame.Had they heard from heaven these living words pronounced— God is Love ! — had they seen the greatladder of revelation reared from earth to heaven, andbeen permitted to trace every radiant step by whichman is allowed to ascend from these lower regions24 THE SUBLIME ANDinto the blaze of God's own paradise, their spiritswould have kindled into as intense a glow as ours,and their vision have become as conscious of surroundingglories. God is Love ! These are wordsof miraculous power. Once assured that the veryprinciple and source of all life is love, and that it isdestined to cast its beams on our heads througheternal ages, we become filled with a felicity beyondthe power of earthly evil. All those intimations thatcreation itself had given us, are confirmed. We feelthe influence of the great principle of beneficence inthe joy of our own being; in the cheerfulness of surroundinghumanity ; in the voices and songs of happycreatures; in the face of earth, and the lights ofheaven. Seas, mountains, and forests, all becomeimbued with beauty as they are contemplated in love;and their aspects and their sounds fill us with sensationsof happiness. When we read in the Phaeton of Plato,the few and feeble grounds, as they now appear to us,on which that good old Socrates raised his argumentsfor the immortality of the soul; when we hear hisexultation on discovering in Anaxagoras the principlelaid down, that " the divine intellect was the cause ofall beings," we feel with what deep transport he wouldhave witnessed the gates of eternity set wide by thedivine hand; and in what hues of heaven the verycircumstance would have invested all about him. Yes !the only difference between modern literature and thatof the ancients, lies in our grand advantage over themin this particular. It is from the literature of theBible, and the heirship of immortality laid open to usin it, that we owe our enlarged conceptions of naturalbeauty, and our quickened affections towards theBEAUTIFUL IN NATURE. 25handiwork of God. We walk about the work as itstrue heirs, and heirs of far more than it has to give.We walk about in confidence, in love, and in peacefulhope ; for we know that we are the rightful sons ofthe house; and that neither death nor distance caninterrupt our progress towards the home-paradise ofthe divine Father.CHAPTER II.THE PRE-EMINENCE OF THE LOVE OF NATURE IN THEENGLISH LITERATURE OVER THAT OF ALL OTHERMODERN NATIONS. THE PROMOTION OF THISPASSION BY THE WRITINGS OF PROFESSOR WILSON,IN Blackwood's magazine; and by the woodcutsOF BEWICK. means OF STILL FURTHERencouraging it.In the former chapter I have endeavoured to pointout the existence of a striking difference as it regardsthe love of nature between the classical and modernliterature, and to explain, and I hope successfully, theprincipal causes of it. But it is not the less true, thatalmost as great a difference exists in this same respectbetween our British literature, and that of almost allother modern nations. I do not intend to go aboutvery laboriously to attempt to prove this fact, for Ithink it stands sufficiently self-evident on the face ofall modern literature. In science, in art, in history,philosophy natural and moral; in theological, philologicaland classical inquiries, the continental nationshave attained the highest honours. In biography theFrench are unrivalled, in autobiography the Germansare equally so. In some species of poetry the GermOF THE COUNTRY. 27mans contest the palm with us ; in mathematical industry,and historical research, they are greatly oursuperiors; but with the solitary exceptions of Gesnerand St. Pierre, where have they any writers to rangewith our Evelyn, Whites, and Walton ? or poets,with our Thomson and Bloomfield? or indeed withthe whole series of our poets who do not professedlywrite on the country, but are irresistibly led to it ;and from whom the love of it breaks out on all occasions? In the French, the social feeling is the moststrongly developed ; in the Italian, passion and fancy ;in the German, the metaphysical. The Germans,indeed, most strongly resemble the English in theirliterary tastes. There seems to be a fellow-feelingbetween them, resulting from ancient kinship. Theyhave a similar character of simplicity ; they are alikegrave, solid, and domestic, and prone to deep andmelancholy thought. They have a love of naturedeep as ours, for the tone of their minds makes them,in everything they do attach themselves to, earnestand enthusiastic. In everything relating to the affections,their literature is unrivalled ; their feelings areprofound, tender, and spiritual ; and while a false andsuperficial taste has made rapid strides amongst us oflate years — a taste for glitter, shew, and fashion, thenatural accompaniment of wealth and luxury, a growing:fondness for German literature must be hailed asagood omen ; as likely to give a new infusion ofheart and mind to our writings ; to re-awaken ourlove for the simple, the domestic, — the fireside love; infact, to bring us back to what was the ancient characterof the English; high-toned in morals, simple inmanners, manly and affectionate in heart. Their28 LOVE OFlove of nature is as deep as ours; but it is not soequally and extensively diffused. The solemn andspeculative east of their genius has tended to link itwith the gloom of forests and tempests, and with thewild fictions of the supernatural, rather than to scatterit over every cheerful field, and cause it to brood overevery sunny cottage garden, amid the odour of flowersand the hum of bees. There is something wonderfullyattractive in their descriptions of the old-fashionedhomeliness of their rural and domestic manners; inthe bustling quietness of their lives, and in the holystrength of their family attachments. Such writingsas that Idol of Voss, describing the manner of life ofthe venerable pastor of Grenau, the autobiographiesof Goethe and Stilling, seem to carry us back into thesimple ages of our own country. That which characterizedthem, seems to be preserved to the presenthour in Germany ; and then, the affectionate intellectualityof their minds, and their very language, sohomely, and yet so expressive, cause them to aboundin such touches of natural pathos as are nowhere elseto be found. Yet, when their love of nature exhibitsitself in descriptions of country lifcj amid all thesecharms, we are often tempted to exclaim with thepastor's wife in Voss, when in a pic-nic party theydiscovered, while taking tea under the forest trees,that they had forgotten the tea-spoons, and had tosubstitute pieces of stick for them — " O, dear nature,thou art almost too natural !"But the aspect of the different countries is sufficientlyindicative of the natural feeling. Instead ofthe solitary chateau, or baronial castle, amid darkforests, or wide unfenced plains ; instead of the greatTHE COUNTRY. 29landed proprietors crowding into large towns, and thevery labourers Imddlino^ themselves into villages, andgoing, as they do, in some parts of France, seven oreight miles on asses to their daily work in the fields,the hills and valleys of England are studded all overwith the dwellings of the landed gentry, and the cottagesof their husbandmen. Villas amid shrubberiesand gardens ; villages environed with old-fashionedcrofts; farm-houses and cottages, singly or in groups —a continuous chain of cultivation and rustic residencesstretches from end to end and side to side of theisland. Our wealthy aristocrats have caught a fatalpassion for burying themselves in the capital in a perpetualturmoil of political agitations, ostentatiousrivalry, and dissipation, — a passion fatal to their ownhappiness and to the whole character of their minds ;but the love of the country is yet strong enough inlargeclasses to maintain our pre-eminence in thisrespect. The testimony of foreigners, however, isstronger than our own ; and foreigners are alwaysstruck with the garden-like aspect of England; andthe charms of our country houses. A number of aFrench literary paper, " Le Panorama de Londres,"has fallen accidentally into my hands, while writingthis, which contains an article, De la Poesie Anglaiseet de la Poesie Allemande, from which I transcribethe following passages.'* England has produced her great epic poet, hergreat dramatic poet ; and the last age gave her reasoningpoets in abundance. The time for the one andthe other is past. By a revolution, the causes ofwhich it would be difficult to trace, her poetry haschanged both its character and object ; and, strangeVOL. II. D30 LOVE OFenough, under the reign of a civilization the mostadvanced, her poetry has returned to nature. Atfirst, the fact strikes us as an unaccountable anomaly ;for what country ovi^es so much to art as England ?The very aspect of the country sheets everywhere thehand of man. A scientific culture has changed itswhole face. The forests have ceased to be impenetrable;the rivers to be wild torrents; the mountainsthemselves to be savage. Human industry has appropriatedeverything; fire, air, earth, everything is subjected,everything is tamed. The very animals seemto submit themselves voluntarily to the service of man.The horse himself, the English horse, so swift andpowerful, scarcely neighs with impatience, or caperswith eagerness ; his very impetuosity is docile. TheEnglishman is in one sense the king of the world. Itis for him that everything is in motion around him :yet he himself is bound by unchangeable customs. Hefears change. He has even a religion of an establishedorder. One would think nothing could be moreprosaic than a country thus laboured; yet, nevertheless,all Europe resounds with the songs of her poets.Amid the miracles of industry, the profusion of riches,the refinement of luxury; in the face of steam-engines,suspension bridges, and railroads, imagination has lostnothing of its ancient empire; on the contrary, duringthe last thirty years, she has acquired more : she hasbeen borne, as by an irresistible influence, towardsthe description of natural objects, and simple sentiments.She has revelled in the charms of a poetrywhose freshness seemed to belong to another age.The fact is, if we regard England more attentively,we shall discover her under a different aspect to whatTHE COUNTRY. 31has been usually ascribed to her ; and shall be lessastonished to find her poetic in seeing her picturesque.That agriculture so marvellous is far from having givenup everything to the useful ; its object seems rather tohave been to embellish than to fertilize the earth.Those fields so well tilled, are green and riant; thosequiet streams flow brimful through rich meadows ;and, thanks to beautiful trees and living hedges, thevery plains are charming. Those seats where opulenceparades all its splendour, are environed by greenswardpastured by abundant cattle ; and the art whichdesigns those immense parks, seems to have no objectbut to put into a frame a beautiful landscape. Thetaste is no longer to dig lakes, to cast up mounts, toplant thickets ; but to inclose whole rivers, woods, andmountains. Everywhere you discover the sentimentof the beauty of nature. You find it in every class.Neither riches nor poverty have been able to extinguishit. We observe in other countries that thesentiment is unknown to the peasantry. They arethe towns which they admire : to them the country ismerely useful. But in England everybody loves thecountry ; even those who cultivate it. The mosthumble cottage is a proof of it. The taste whichrarely distinguishes the architecture of the Englishtowns, is reserved, I think, for the country houses.The little gardens which lead to them ; the orchardswhich surround them; even the very bushes of jessamineor of rose, which crown their porches, or tapestrytheir walls, seem designed to delight the eye.Amid the treasures of an admirable vegetation —gothic ruins, the towers of an old manor, the archesof an abbey, the ivy which clothes the walls of a32 LOVE OFparish church ; the tree scathed and decaying', whichhas no value but its age ; all these things are respectedby every one as the monuments of the past, or theornaments of the country. The whole populationinterests itself in everything which adorns its abode ;and this nation, the queen of commerce and industry,seems to recollect with affection, that it is to the earththat she owes her wealth, her glory, and her greatness.An analogous sentiment pervades the poetry ofthe English. The verses of their good poets seem tohave been composed in the open air; all external objectsare by them faithfully portrayed ; the impressionsthey produce are faithfully rendered. Simple sentiments,those of a domestic nature, so well protectedby a country life, in them preserve all their force andall their purity. Their recitals are often the mosttouching and familiar; when they turn upon great adventures,they are related as they would be on a winter'sevening before the fire of an ancient castle, or ofa humble cottage. Scarcely an English poet is wantingin descriptive talent, not even the least celebratedamongst them. It shines with great eclat in Burns,in Crabbe, in Walter Scott. Lord Byron, who hasso many others, possesses none perhaps in a greaterdegree than this."It is to be hoped that the English poetry will alwaj'^smaintain this character ; Mill always remain the powerfulally of the love of the country : one great meansof preserving those features of English rural life sodelightfully described in the foregoing extract. Amidthe fascinations and temptations to a corruption oftaste, from the mighty wealth and political influenceof this country, it is to the combined effect of realTHE COUNTRY. 33simple Christianity, the love of nature, and of thatliterature which is in alliance with those great conservativepowers, that we must look for the maintenanceof a sound national heart and intellect; andconsequently, of that great moral ascendency, andgenuine glory, that as a nation we have obtained. Ilong with a most earnest longing, for our stability inthis respect ; for the preservation of those pure, simple,holy tastes which have led our countrymen in allages, since reading and civilization came upon them,to delight in the pleasant fields, in the pleasant countryhouses, in the profound peace of noble woods, sofavourable to high and solemn musings; and in allthose healthful and animating sports and pursuits thatbelong to such a life. It has been through the influenceof these tastes, and of these home-born but exaltedpleasures, by the strong human sympathies engenderedby living amongst our manly and high-minded peasantry— the hardy sons and bold defenders of theirnatal soil, — the strong-hearted old fathers, — the fairand modest daughters of uncorrupted England ; byliving amongst them as their leaders, counsellors, andprotectors ; by musing over the inspiring annals of thepast days of England ; on the solid tomes of our legislators,our divines, philosophers and poets, in the calmtwilight of ancient halls, or in the sunny seats of theirbroad, bay windows, looking out on fields purchasedby the blood of patriots, and hoary forests that havewitnessed the toils of their ancestors, or perhaps receivedthem to their dim bosoms in times of danger;it is by such aliment that the British heart has beennourished, and grown to its present greatness, when itspulsations are felt to the very ends of the earth, and34 LOVE OFby millions of confiding or submissive men, whosedestinies depend upon its motions. Our arms mayhave been wielded in many a mighty battle for theaccomplishment of this magnificent end, but it washere that the power of victory grew ; our counsels mayhave, wearily, and stroke by stroke, worked out thisample breadth of glory ; but it is here, and it was thus,that the wisdom, and the prudence, and the irresistiblefortitude sprung, increased, and gave to thosebrave men and high measures their vigour and stability; here that they were born, and fostered to theirbeneficent fulness.Therefore would I have everything which may tendto keep alive this genuine spirit of England, maykeep open all the sources of its strength and its inspiration,encouraged : every taste for the sweetserenity, the animating freshness, the preserving purityof country life, promoted; everything which canembellish or render it desirable. For this cause Idelight in the every-day spreading attachment to allbranches of Natural History; in the great encouragementgiven to all books on country affairs; and in theadvancing love of landscape-painting, by which themost enchanting views of our mountains, coasts, wildlakes, forests, and pastoral downs will be brought intoour cities, and spread in sunshine and in poetry alongtheir walls. For this I am thankful with a deepthankfulness, for the mighty strains of poetry thathave been poured out in this age, brimmed and gushingover with the august spirit of nature : — for Wordsworthand Coleridge; Rogers and Campbell; forShelley and Byron and Keats, and for many anothernoble bard; for the Romances of Scott, which haveTHE COUNTRY. 35pre-eminently piled quenchless fuel on this socialflame, by sanctifying many of the most beautifulscenes in the kingdom with the highest historical remembrances:and not less, for that wonderful seriesof articles by Wilson, in Blackwood's Magazine, — intheir kind, as truly amazing, and as truly glorious, asthe romances of Scott, or the poetry of Wordsworth.Far and wide and much as these papers have beenadmired, wherever the English language is read, Istill question whether any one man has a just idea ofthem as a whole. Whatever may be our opinion ofthe side which this powerful journal has taken inpolitics, it must be admitted that while it has foughtthe battles of Toryism with vigour, it has fought themin a noble spirit. There was a day when a foul influencehad crept into it; when it was personal, rancorous,and apt to descend to language and detailsbelow the dignity of its strength ; but that day is goneby, and it has been seen with lively satisfaction by allparties that it has purged itself of this evil nature, andas it has become peerless in fame, it has become moreand more generous, forgiving, and superior to everypetty nature and narrow feeling. Its politics areultra, but they are full of intellect; and they who desireto see what can be said on the Tory side, see itthere. But the great attraction to literary men haslong been, that splendid series of ample, diffuse, yetfull and overflowing papers, in which everything relatingto poet and nature find a place. These aresingly, and in themselves, specimens of transcendentpower ; but taken altogether, as a series, are, in thesure unity of one great and correct spirit, such atreasury of criticism as is without a parallel in the36 LOVE OFannals of literature. For, while they are full of thesoundest opinions, because they are the offspring of adeeply poetical mind — a mind strong in the guidinginstincts of nature ; they are preserved from the drynessand technicality of ordinary criticism by this verypoetic temperament. They come upon you like someabounding torrent, streaming on, amid the wildestand noblest scenes; amid mountains and forests andflowery meadows ; and bringing to your senses, atonce, all their freshness of odours, dews, and livingsounds. They are the gorgeous out-pouring of awild, erratic eloquence, that, in its magnificent rushthrows out the most startling, and apparently conflictingdogmas, yet all bound together by a strong bondof sound sense and incorruptible feeling.They are all poetry : — sometimes, in its weakestand most diluted form ; again, gushing into the mostmelting pathos ; and then again playing and frothinglike a happy boy, half beside himself with holidayfreedom and sunshine; then vapouring, and rhodomontade,and reeling along in the very drunkennessof a luxuriant fancy, intoxicated at the ambrosia-fountainsof the heart ; and then, like a strong man,all at once recovering his power and self-possession —if self-possession that can be called, which, in the nextmoment, gives way to a new impulse, and soars upinto the highest regions of eloquence, pouring forththe noblest sentiments and most fervid imaginations,as from an oracle of quenchless inspiration.It is in this manner, and this spirit, that the writerhas — reviewed shall I say? no, not reviewed, but proclaimed,trumpeted to the farthest regions, idealized,etherealized, and made almost more glorious thanTHE COUNTRY. 37they are in their own solemn grandeur, the poems ofWordsworth, of Milton, of Shakspeare, of Spenser,of Homer, and of many another genuine bard. Andit is thus that he has led you over the heathy mountainsand along the fairy glens of the north, to manya sweet secluded loch, into many a highland hut. Itis thus that he loves to make you observe the noblepeasant striding along in his prime of youth — in hissedate manhood — in his hoary age, more beautifulthan youth, for then he is crowned with the wisdomof his simple experience of the trials and vanity oflife, and of the feeling that he draws near to eternity.It is thus that he bids you stand, and mark the fairyoung maiden busied about the door of her parentalhut, more graceful and happy in the engrossment of hersimple duties, beneath the sun and the blue heavens,than the very daughter of the palace in the lap of herartificial enchantments. It is thus he shews you theyoung mother tossing her laughing infant in the openair, while her two elder children are rolling on thesunny vizard, or scrambling up the heathy brae ; andher mother sits silently by the door, in the baskingtranquillity of age. It is thus that he fills you withthe noblest sympathies, with the purest human feelings; and then astonishes you with some sudden featof leaping, running, or wrestling; and as suddenly isgone with rod in hand, following the course of a clear,rapid stream, eagerly intent upon trout, or salmon.And then he is the poet again, every atom of him,meek as a bard of nineteen, or of ninety ; all tenderness,purity, and holiness ; the poet of the City of thePlague, or of the Children's Dance, forcing you toforget that he ever swaggered in an article, or holds38 LOVE OFlocked in a Notes. He is now basking in the shineof a May-day, amid the sparkling dews, the wavingflowers, the running waters, and all the delights ofearth, air, and the blue o'er-spanning sky.These are papers that have already done infiniteservice to the cause of poetry and nature : and thereforedo I rejoice in their existence, and addition to allthat sublime accumulation of fervid poetry and prosein the praise and love of the country, with which ourEnglish literature, above all others, is enriched.But there is one person to whom I must still give aseparate mention ; an individual to whom we owe asignal increase of country delight, — Thomas Bewick.Every painter of landscape is a friend to the bestfeelings and tastes of humanity ; but Bewick has, in amanner, created a new art. He has struck out apeculiar mode of embellishing books with snatches ofrural scenery, that will, if pursued in the true spirit,do more to diffuse a love of the country than all othermodes of engraving put together. To see what maybedone, let us only see what he has done. Throughhis revival of the art of wood-cutting, we have nowhundreds of wood-engravers, and thousands of wood-embellishedbooks : yet lay your hands on any one ofthese volumes, and, with all deference to the greattalent evinced, the great beauty produced, — till youopen Bewick you shall not know what wood-cuttingis capable of doing for books on the country.I have heard some wood-engravers speak with contemptof Bewick, and say—" Why, he was very wellfor his time of day, but we have scores that can excelhim now." To such men 1 have only one reply —you don't understand the country. I grant youTHE COUNTRY. 39there are many who can produce a more showy print;but it was not show which Bewick aimed at, —it was truth: and if you will know which is mostexcellent, take the one and the other ; and let thembe both opened before some country family of taste,and you will see that your print will dazzle the eyefor a moment; it will be a moment of surprise anddelight ; but when the moment is past, the eye willfall on Bewick, and there it will be riveted; and there,the longer it dwells the stronger will be its fascination,and it will be the beginning of an everlasting love."And why is this? Simply because we have in one,splendour of style ; in the other, Nature ! pure, faithful,and picturesque Nature, — Nature in her mostfelicitous, or most solemn moments. I have heardthose who loved the country, and loved it becausethey knew it, say, that the opening of Bewick was anew era in their lives. I have seen how his volumesare loved, and treasured, and reverted to, time aftertime,in many a country house ; the more familiar, themore prized; the oftener seen, the oftener desired.And why should it not be so? It is not so muchas a triumph of art, as a triumph of genius, that theyare love-worthy. Yet as specimens of art they haveeminent merit. See, in what a small space he givesyou a whole landscape — a whole wide heath, or stormycoast, with their appropriate objects. See, with asingle line, a single touch, what a world of effect hehas achieved ! But it is the spirit of the conception,and the sacred fidelity to Nature, which stamp theirvalue upon his works. They are the works of an eyewhich sees in a moment what in a scene advancesbeyond common-place ; what in it has a story, a moral,40 LOVE OFa sarcasm, or touch of transcendent beauty. Theyare the works of a heart bound by a bond of indissolublelove to the sweetness and peace of nature ; richin recollections of all her forms and hues; and of aspirit which cherished no ambition, no hope on earth,superior to that of throwing into his transcriptions theexpress image of his beloved Nature.This is the great secret of the delight in his woodcuts.They are full of all those beauties, those fineyet impressive beauties, that arrest the gaze of thelovers of nature; and they are so faithful that theynever deceive, or disappoint the experienced eye.The vignettes of his Natural History are in themselvesa series of stories, so clearly told that they require noexplanation ; and are full of the most varied humaninterest. He delights in the picturesque and beautifulin nature, and the grotesque in life. Whatever heintroduces, its genuine characteristics are all about it;beast or bird, there it is in the very scenery, and amidthe very concomitants that you see it surrounded byin nature. You miss nothing that you find in thesame situation in the real scene and circumstance;and, what is of more consequence, you never see asingle thing introduced which has no business there.He is the very Burns of wood-cutting. He has thesame intense love of nature ; his bold freedom ofspirit; his flashes of indignant feeling; his love ofsatire ; and his ridicule of human vanity and cant. Inhis landscapes, he gives you every thing the mostpoetical : wide, wild moors ; the desolation of winter ;the falling fane, and the crumbling tower ; wild sceneson northern shores, with their rocks and sea-fowl,their wrecks and tempests. In his village scenes youTHE COUNTRY. 41have every feature of village life given with a precisionand a spirit equally admirable. He delights to seizehold on humanity even in some of its degradations, asdrunkenness and gluttony, and Hogarth-like, to exciteyour disgust against the abuse of God's good things andman's high nature. He delights equally to exhibit thoseragged rapscallions that abound in the streets of towns,and the purlieus of villages; uncultivated, neglected,and therefore graceless, reckless — vulgarity and wickednessstamped on their features, and even in their strong,close-cut, thick-set heads of hair; full of mischief andcruelty from top to toe. There you have them, justinthe commission of those barbarities or depredationsthat speak volumes for the necessity of better populareducation : and as for beggars, strollers with bear andmonkey, lame soldiers, and all the groups of tatterdemalionsthat are scattered all over this country, thereare no end of them. At times he is full of whim ; atothers half in jest, and half in solemn earnest. Again,he touches you with pity for the aged and forlorn ;and often rises into a tone of deep moral warning,and into actual demonstrations of the sublime andbeautiful.The elements in their majesty are made to laughto scorn the inflated vanity of man. A stately churchhas sometime been reared on a pleasant and commandingmount near the sea. You are made to callto mind the pride and the granulation in which it waserected in the palmy days of the Catholic faith.You see it in its newness, with all its fair proportionsand noble completeness, — a beautiful temple to theChristian Deity. You see how the country peoplecome in awe and wonder to behold it ; into what a42 LOVE OFsilence of veneration they drop as they approach; withwhat a prostration of astonishment of heart theyenter, while the new and merry bells sound abovetheir heads ; and all abroad the glad sunshine ofsummer is pouring, and casts its light into theglorious interior : and the sea-breeze comes flutteringwith a full delight ; and everything seems to speakof triumph, stability, and enduring joy. You knowwith what solemn pomp the prelate, in full canonicals,and followed by his train of clerical brethren in theirbecoming robes, and surrounded by the powerful andthe beautiful of the neighbourhood, proceeds to performthe rites of consecration. And with what pridethe great family, who have given the land to God,and expended the revenues of ample estates for manyyears in erecting this goodly fabric, see all, hear all,and find hard work to conceal the inward swell ofgratified ambition. How they look on all the accomplishedmiracle of the place ; the lofty, arched roofabove ; the stately columns along the aisles ; thepriest in his pulpit ; the people in their seats. Withwhat proud granulation they hear the voices of thechoristers break forth, and fill " this house whichthey have built." With what a high, elating, intoxicatingfeeling, with what a proud joy they kneeldown on the silken cushions, and open the goldenclasps of their richly painted missals; all this wesee ; and then the dream of strength and glory andendurance is gone ; — is gone from them and you.There stands the ancient church ! Ancient ? Yes itis now ancient. All that dream of delight, all thatthrong of wondering people, have long passed away.Yes ! the very founders, whose hearts beat in pride,THE COUNTRY. 43are now dust and ashes beneath your feet; — ay, andtheir children and children's children to the sixth orseventh generation. That noble fabric, then so fairof hue; so admirable in its workmanship; so sharpin all its mouldings, and delicate in its tracery ; thattemple, in which so many prayers were put up for themariner tossed on that wilderness of mighty waterson which it looked — is a ruin ! The winds and thetempests of ages have blown and beaten upon it.The ocean has come in fury, and rent away itswestern front, that so gloriously used to fling back thesplendours of the setting sun ; and the very moundof the dead is rifled by the billows. What is thatwhich I read upon a fallen stone, over which thewaves, at every returning tide wash with insultingstrength ? " This stone is erected to perpetuate thememory of" . O pride ! O vanity and swellingconfidence of " man that is a worm" — what a rebuke !But what is this ? Another stone fallen — and fallenyet lower; — " Custos Rotulorum, of the County of"And have time and tide not spared even thisgreat man ? Is the very keeper of the Rolls gone,and his monument after him? Where then is humanstability ? The waves, and that ransacked monument,and that stately ruin of a church, all say, not onearth; not in the works of man. The very housewhich he had raised, the very ground which he hadconsecrated, are pulled down by the elements ; andeven the bones of himself and children are swept intothe great deep. I do not know, in the catalogue ofthe paintings with which this country is enriched, onethat speaks with a more sublime power to the imaginationthan this wood-cut of the littleness of human44 LOVE OFpride ; and of the only sure hope of honour andendurance, in the eternity of virtue.There is another sketch of a similar class, but ofan opposite inculcation. While that strikes at thevaunting spirit of human pride, this speaks a sad consolationto the struggling and miserable. It is amoon-light view of a solitary burial-ground. It islike one of those in Scotland, distant from the placeof worship ; perhaps on a lonely heath. There is notabuilding in view to give the least feeling of proximityto human life. It is still — far off — and alone.The moon pours a melancholy light on the wild,grassy turf, and the foliage that overhangs the enclosingwall ; and here and there, stoop the heavyheadstones of the dead. On one in the foreground isinscribed — "Good times, bad times, and allTIMES GET over."His churchyard scenes, indeed, are ail full of themost beautiful and truly human sentiment. In one,you have an old man reading a headstone, — " Vani-TAS, VANITATUM, OMNIA VANiTAS." It is a Sentimentwhich strikes down to the bottom of his soul, as avoice of warning from heaven, and the voice ofmemory from the days of his past life. The old manstands propt on his staff, and you cannot misinterpretthe thoughts which throng upon him. He is carriedback through all his days ; his days of boyhood andbuoyant youth; his days of manly ardour and triumph;his days of trial and decay — to the very hour in whichhe stands here. The wife of his youth lies in thedust at his feet ; his very children are all gone beforehim, or remain to neglect him; his friends havedropped away, one after another ; he alone is left, aTHE COUNTRY. 45shattered remnant of other and happier times : left inanoisy and a crowding world. Truly it is — " vanityof vanities, all is vanity."But see, here comes a boy driving his hoop. Hebounds over the very ground, past the very stonewhich has conjured up in the old man's heart such ahost of sad thoughts. But none of them come to him.To him all is new ; the world is fair ; the present isParadise. He scarcely looks around him, and yet heenjoys all nature. The sunshine plays upon his head;the air visits his cheek ; the earth is green beneathhim. He thinks not of the dead under his feet ; ofthe awful stones around him. He does not evensee the old man himself, — a more striking memorialof mortality and the vanity of life, than all the rest.This is true human life : age, sad and observant ofevery solemn memento; youth, in the reckless happinessof its own charmed existence.There is but a slight step and hardly that, from hissatire to his humour, for one commonly partakes ofthe other. But in humorous incidents he abounds.Here is a good woman hanging out her clothes. Agipsy-like beggar-woman, with a child at her back,is going out of the garden, and in true beggar recklessnessleaves the gate open. While the unconsciousdame is busy at her line, in come the hens.One of them is already strutting across her cleanwhite linen, that lies on the grass-plot, and leavingconspicuous marks of her dirty feet ; and in aremarching a whole drove of young pigs, with the oldsow at their heels. In another place is seen the snuggarden of some curious florist, with auriculas bloomingin pots, and some choice plant under a large glass;46 LOVE OFand here too a mischievous sow has conducted herbrood ; and some of them have made their waythrough the paling, and are in full career towards theauriculas. Another moment, and glass, flowers, allwill be one piece of destruction. The old sow, shutout by her bulk, and a yoke upon her neck, the tokenof her propensities, stands watching from beneath herhuge slouch ears, with the utmost satisfaction, thisscene of devastation.Here again, is a country lad mounted on a shaggypony, and doubtless sent on some important errand;but a flight of birds has captivated his attention, andso engaged is he in watching, that the pony haswandered out of the way, and has reached the precipitousbrink of a river. The lad still gazing afterthe birds, finding the pony halt, bangs him with hiscudgel ; the pony hangs back, and the little dogbehind with uplifted foot wonders what the lad canmean. There are two men fetching a tub of waterfrom a water-cask, but they are so lost in gossip, thatthe water is running all away. A countryman toavoid paying toll at a bridge, is fording the riverbelow, holding the tail of his cow. But his hat isblown off", and he dare not let go his hold to save it.He will get a good wetting, and suffer greater loss thanthe toll ; while the tollman and a traveller on the bridgewitness and enjoy his dilemma. Another countrymanis crossing a river in a style grotesque enough. Theold man is wading; on his back is his wife, on her's achild; and on her head a loaded basket. If the oldman's foot slip, what a catastrophe ! In one place isan old dame going to the village spring, and finding awhole flock of geese frothing in it. Her looks ofTHE COUNTRY. 47execration and her uplifted stick, are infinitely amusing.In another, is an old dame about to mount astile, and a tremendous bull presenting himself on theother side. Notwithstanding the bold bearing andprotruded cudgel of the old dame, one knows notwhether it be most dangerous to fight or flee. Andhere is the string of a kite, caught on the hat of acountryman crossing a stream on horseback. It wouldbe difficult to decide whether the distress of the manorthat of the boys is the greater. On goes the horse,and the rider tries in vain to get rid of the string.His fate is to be pulled backward off the horse, or thatof the boys to be dragged into the stream, or to losetheir kite.There is another class of vignettes, in which crueltyto animals is held up to abhorrence. There is theman with his cart, striking his horse on the head witha bludgeon ; his hat has fallen off in his passion.Ragged lads are belabouring an ass with a gorse bush.A hardened lad has a cat and dear harnessed to a littlecart in which is a child ; the cat is nearly terrified todeath at the dog, the child is crying amain ; and thelad is trying to force the whole team into the water.In most of these cuts a gallows is seen in the distance,as the probable goal of the career.Another class is that of country accidents, full ofappropriate spirit ; men crossing streams by means ofthe long boughs of trees, which are breaking andletting them fall. A blind man led by his dog, crossinga narrow foot-bridge, where the hand-rail isbroken down, and his hat is blown away by the wind.Old people caught in storms on wide, open heaths;old, weary people far away from any town, as indiesLOVE OFdated by a mile-stone marked XI. miles on one side,and XV. on the other. But they are endless, andof endless variety. There are some, as I have said,truly sublime. A shipwrecked man on a rock inmid ocean, praying; the waves leaping and thunderingaround him ; no single vessel in view, his onlyhope in God. The hull of a vessel lying stranded ona solitary coast. It is evident that it has been thereforyears ; for its ribbed timbers are laid bare, and itspeaks both of human catastrophe, and solitude, anddecay. A fine contrast — a circle of men on a villagegreen witnessing a fight, all vulgar eagerness andtumultuous passion; the rainbow, that circle of heaven,spanning the sky beyond them in such pure beauty —in the profound calm and holiness of nature.Through all these representations, the spirit of thepicturesque is poured without measure. Such winterscenes ! such summer scenes ! all the occupations andfigures of rustic existence; fishermen, hunters, shooters,ploughmen, all in their peculiar scenery and costume.There are anglers in such delicious places, by suchclear, rapid, winding waters, with such overhangingrocks and foliage, that one longs instantaneously tobe an angler. We have all the spirit of Izaak Walton'sbook, in two square inches of wood-engraving :his descriptions of natural beauty, his deep feelingof country enjoyment, and his single and thankfulcontentment in his art. There are men and boyssleeping on sunny grass, or beneath the shade of summertrees. O ! so luxuriously, that Me long to besleeping there too. There are such wild sea-shores,and covered rocks, with boys climbing up to get atthe sea-fowls' eggs, and such stormy waters, that weTHE COUNTRY. 49are wild with desire to wander by those rocks andwaves. The sedgy water-sides, such as are foundon moors where the wild ducks, and snipes, andherons haunt, are inimitable. Nature is everywhereso gloriously, yet so ostentatiously portrayed, asnone but the most ardent and devoted of her loverscan portray her. There is nothing gaudy, shewy,or ambitious ; she is most simple, and therefore mostbeautiful.CHAPTER III.THE PRESENT STATE OF WOOD-CUTTING AS ITREGARDS RURAL SUBJECTS.Unmeaning glitter, unprecedented softness, unprincipled novelty,shall sometimes set aside for awhile the truth and simplicity of nature,and the approbation of ages. — Life of Roland.From what has been said in the last chapter, it isobvious that had Bewick been but one of a series ofwood-cutters during the established period of the art,his merit would have been eminent and peculiar ; butwhen it is recollected that, at one stride, he broughtit to comparative perfection, our obligations to himare wonderfully increased.The direct consequence of his revival of the art is,that we have now tens of thousands of volumes embellishedwith wood-cuts, and upwards of two hundredengravers in this department. The Penny Magazinealone is said to pay for its wood-cutting '2000/. perannum. This magazine and some of its cheap contemporarieshave made a peculiar application of this art,which is, in itself, a great national blessing. Bystereotyping wood-engravings, they are enabled toINFLUENCE OF WOOD-ENGRAVINGS. 51Strike off any number of copies of them with theirletter-press, and by this means, prints of a large size,and of great strength of effect, are made to circulateamongst the people, even to an extent to which theonly limits must be those of education. Thus aremany pictorial subjects placed before the eyes of tensof thousands who could otherwise never have seenthem. Subjects from the paintings of the old masters ;landscapes from every country on the globe, withtheir peculiar characteristics; prints of ancient andmodern buildings ; of ancient and modern sculpture ;of animals, plants ; in fact, every subject of natural orhuman history, all brought livingly to the sight, andat such an amazingly trivial expense, that the desire ofknowledge is, at once, quickened and gratified in adecree of which our fathers had not the most distantidea ; nor of the effect of which have we, perhaps, anyadequate conception. We feel, however, that it mustbe full of virtue and happiness. Throughout thousandsand tens of thousands of cottages shall the eyes which,without these blessed facilities, would never haveglanced on anything beyond the objects surroundingtheir daily life, now gaze in living delight, on themagnificent scenes, the beautiful productions of everyland and climate ; on the stern or fantastic splendourof foreign towns and cities, domes and minarets ; onthe forms and costumes, the dwellings and implementsof the most distant nations ; on the animal natures ofair, earth, and ocean ; on the faces of men who havebeen the lights, or terrors of the world ; of those whohave fought for, and thought for, sung for, and diedfor man and his cause ; the spread of knowledge andreligion ; in fact, for that social and illimitable INFLUENCE OFpines of which these things are the precursors ; a happinessthat shall be brought to every house, in city orindesert, to every fireside, however humble.This is a great and beneficent result, from theunion of two noble arts ; for, whatever tends to embellishhuman life ; to give to toiling men a refiningpleasure ; to bring them from base excitementsand public haunts, to the pure and peaceful enjoymentsof home ; to draw them to their own angles ; toinduce them to sit among their children, and delighttheir eyes with objects of beauty, and feed theirgrowing spirits with those natural facts, in which thewisdom and goodness of God are made so sensible toyoung minds ; whatever does this, does the work oflove ; the work of human happiness and nationalgreatness. To enlighten the general mass, and atthe same time to kindle the noblest feelings of thesoul of man, is the sure means to build up the statewith true citizens : to protect the people from despotism,and government from popular caprice.This, 1 say, is one great result ; yet even this doesnot seem to me the highest legitimate province of theart. It is obvious that prints of the kind described —of buildings, portraits, or historic scenes, must, afterall, come from metal with greater perfection thanfrom wood. To most subjects metal gives a richnessand delicacy that wood can never equal. Wood cangive great strength and boldness, but accompaniednevertheless with something of hardness and constraint.It is only the power of striking off printswith the letter-press which gives wood that admirableadvantage over metal of which I have been speaking.It becomes, in that case, a substitute for metal, whereWOOD-ENGRAVINGS. 53metal could not be used without defeating the ultimateobject by its expense. There it is merely agood substitute for metal. But there is one departmentin which it is superior even to metal ; and thatis in such vignette representations of rural life andscenery as Bewick has used it in. Here it triumphsover metal ; for it does not here require so muchbrilliance, or richness, or extreme delicacy, as a certainhomely beauty belonging to rustic objects. Thebeauty of nature does not consist in shortness anddazzling lustre, so much as in pleasing colours, a simplegrace of form, and a certain roughness and opacityof surface, on which the eye can rest longerwithout fatigue than on more polished substances.Now it is in these qualities that Bewick's engravingsabound. He is sacredly faithful to Nature. Hecatches at once the spirit of the country and of its wilddenizens. He is simple, beautiful, but not glaring; —nature is never so.Yet amongst all our wood-engravers, — and many ofthem are continually employed on rural subjects, —it is as true as it may seem astonishing, that there isnot one of them who can bear a moment's comparisonwith Bewick as a delineator of rural life. Thisis owing to no deficiency of talent — we have manyartists of the highest talent — it is owing to othercauses. If it seem surprising that no one from thetime of Bewick's restoration of the art, to the presentmoment, should have equalled him in the representationof nature, it is not more surprising than that fromthe time of Milton to that of Cowper no one wrotegood blank verse; that with Milton's free and naturalmajesty as a model before them, we should have hadVOL. II. E54 INFLUENCE OFnothing better than the stilted stiffness of Akenside,and the pompous inflations and ungrammatical distortionsof Thomson. The same causes in both caseshave produced the same effect. Our artists, like thepoets, have forsaken nature herself, to study and imitateone another. While our artists are employed todepict Nature, they are living in our mighty capital,cut off from the very face of nature. They have fullemploy; for the eyes of those for whom they labourare not more familiar with the country than their own.Dash, and meretricious show captivate the multitude,and therefore dash and show are given in abundance;the wondering lover of nature looks for her invain. The ambitious and frippery taste of the age isstamped on all the most excellent productions of whatshould be the rustic burin. We now and then see abetter spirit; things overflowing with talent; and onthe very verge of nature. Such are some of the beautifulrecent illustrations of Grey's Elegy, Chevy-Chace,Aiken's Calendar of the Year, the bold sketches inHone's Table-book, and the elegant ones in some oftheir books for the young published by Barton andClark, Egg, and others: but, in general, our mostskilful artists are not contented with the simplicity ofnature; they want better bread than can be made ofwheat. Hence while they are admired in cities, Bewickreigns sole and triumphant all through the country.But how is this to be remedied ? As I have said,we have talent and manual skill equal to anything;what we want are purer designs, — designs, in fact,from Nature ! We want subjects drawn from thesame source that Bewick drew them. I do not meanthat our artists should imitate Bewick; no, that theyWOOD-ENGRAVINGS. 55should imitate Nature, — the true, the beautiful, the unambitious.Had Bewick lived a thousand years, hewould every day have seen some new subject, somenew features, in the everlasting changes and combinationsthat surround the fixed spirit of the universe.We have pupils of his — Harvey and Nesbit in particular,and why do not they, with their high talent,produce the same genuine nature? The answer isobvious. They are citizens. They have abandonedthe daily cognizance of Nature ; they have taken adirectly opposite course to Bewick. He was the inseparablecompanion of Nature from his boyhood.All his life long he was watching after, and pursuingher into her most hidden retirements. To himHigh mountains were a feeling, but the humOf human cities torture.He had tried the life of London, but he coidd notbear it. His soul was robbed of its nourishment.He was shut up, blinded, famished in that huge wildernessof stone ; dinned by that eternal chaos of confusedsounds. He gasped for the free air; he pinedfor the dews; for the solemn roar of the ocean; forthe glories of rising and setting suns. His father whenhe sent him from his country home at Heartburn, tobe apprenticed to Mr. Shelby at Newcastle, said tohim at parting — " Now Thomas, thou art going tolead a different life to what thou hast led here : thouart going from constant fresh air and activity, to thecloseness of a town and a sedentary occupation : thoumust be up in a morning, and get a run." AndThomas followed faithfully — for it chimed exactlywith his own bent, — his father's injunction. Every06 INFLUENCE OFmorning, rain or shine, often without his hat, and hisbushy head of black hair ruffling in the wind, hewould be seen scampering up the street towards thecountry; and the opposite neighbours would cry —There goes Shelby's fond boy." These morningexcursions he kept up during his life ; and they didnot suffice him. He ran away during his apprenticeship,and roamed far and wide through the gloriousand soul-embuing scenery of Scotland. Year afteryear, and day after day, it was his delight to strollover heaths and moors, by sedgy pools and runningwaters. He saw bird, beast, and fish, from his hiddenplaces, in all the freedom of their wild life. He sawthe angler casting his line; the fowler setting his netand his springes ; the farmer's boy amusing his solitude,whenHe strolled the lonely Crusoe of the field —prowling after water-fowl amid the reedy haunts;watching the flight of birds with greedy eyes; lightingfires under the screening hedge, and collectingsticks for fuel, and blowing them on hands and kneesinto a flame. Such were his loves, his studies, hisperpetual occupations ; and to have similar results, wemust have persons of a similar passion and pursuit.We must have designers; for Mee have plenty ofmanual dexterity, capable of executing any design tothe minutest shade, — we must have designers in whomNature is, at once, an appetite, a perpetual study,and quenchless delight. Landscape painters we haveof this character. Turner, with his gorgeous creations;Copley Fielding with his heaths and downs, inwhich miles of space are put upon a few feet of .57pass, and that soul of solitude poured upon you in agallery, which you before encountered only in theheart of living nature ; Collins with his exquisite sea-sides,and rustic pieces; Hunt with his really rusticcharacters ; Barrett with his sunsets ; Cranfield, Cattermole,and others. We want a designer for woodcutsof a similar character. What scenes of peerlessbeauty and infinite variety might an individual giveus, who would devote himself, heart and soul, to thisobject ; who would ramble all through the variedand beautiful scenery of these glorious islands atsuccessive intervals ; who would pedestrianize insimple style; who would stroll along our wild shores;amongst our magnificent hills; prowl in fens andforests with fowlers and keepers; and seek refreshmentby the fire-side of the way-side inn ; and takeup his temporary abode in obscure and old-fashionedvillages. Such a man might send into our metropolis,and thence, through the aid of the engravers, to everypart of the kingdom, such snatches of natural loveliness,such portions of rural scenery and rural life, asshould make themselves felt to be the genuine productof nature — for nature will be felt, and kindle apurer taste and a stronger affection for the country.I am not insensible to all the difficulties which liein the way of such a devotion: nor that such a schemewill be pronounced chimerical by those who, at a farslighter cost, can please a less informed taste; buttill we have such a man, we shall not have a secondBewick; and till such a mode of study is, more orless, adopted, we shall never have that love of thegenuine country gratified, which assuredly and extensivelyexists.58 WOOD-ENGRAVINGS.Since writing the foregoing remarks, it is withgreat pleasure that I have seen the arts of designingand wood-engraving beginning to separate themselves,and that of designing for the wood engraverstaking its place as a distinct profession. Mr. Harvey-has,for some time, been exclusively a designer;and Mr. Melville is following his example. Someexquisite designs by this latter artist have been madefor a little volume of Mrs. Howitt's — Birds andFlowers — published by Barton and Clark. This importantstep has only to be followed up by designersin the manner pointed out in this chapter, to insurethat complete return to nature which is so much to bedesired, and where such an exhaustless field of beautyand life awaits the observant artist, as would place thepresent pre-eminent manual skill of our wood engraversin its true and well merited position.PART II.THE FORESTS OF ENGLAND.Amongst the most interesting features of the countryare our forests. There is nothing that we come incontact with, which conveys to our minds such vividimpressions of the progression of England in powerand population; which presents such startling contrastsbetween the present and the past. We lookback into the England which an old forest brings toour mind, and see a country "one wild expanse of woodlands,heaths, and mosses. Here and there a littlesimple town sending upIts fleecy smoke amongst the forest boughs.From age to age no tumult did arouseIts peaceful dwellers ; there they lived and died,Passing a dreamy life, diversifiedBy nought of novelty, save, now and then,A horn, resounding through the neighbouring glen,Woke them as from a trance, and led them outTo catch a brief glimpse of the hunt's wild route ;The music of the hounds ; the tramp and rushOf steeds and men ; — and then a sudden hushLeft round the eager listeners ; — the deep moodOf awful, dead, and twilight solitude,Fallen again upon that forest vast.60 THE FORESTSWe see in the distance the stately castle of the feudallord ; we hear the bell of the convent from the neighbouringdale. There are solitary hamlets and scatteredcottages, with mud walls and thatched roofs, peepingfrom the ocean of umbrageous tree-tops, andlittle patches of cultivation. Born thralls are tillingthe lands of the thane, or watching his flocks andherds, to defend them from the wolves and bears ;foresters are going their rounds beneath hoary oaks,on the watch for trespassers on venison and vert. Wemeet with the pilgrim with his scallop shell, and sandalshoon ; we come suddenly on the solitude of thehermit, where some spring bubbles from the forestturf, or scatters its waters down the fern-hung rocks.Perhaps the noble and his train sweep past in pursuitof the stag or boar ; perhaps the outlaw and his trainin the same pursuit, and setting at defiance, amid vastwoods and tracks familiar to himself, all the keenofficers, and bloody statutes of forest law.It is a pleasure but to hear,The bridles ringing sharp and clear,Amid the forest green ;To hear the rattle of the sheaves,And coursers rustling in the leaves.With many blasts between.Stewart Rose's Red King.Perhaps there is the sound of martial alarm — the clashof sudden onset in the forest glade. The dwellings ofthe vassals surrounding the lord's castle are in flames,fired by the band of some hostile noble. Such is theEngland into which an old forest carries our imagination;— partially peopled with feudal barons and unletteredserfs ; without commerce abroad ; withoutOF ENGLAND. 61union within ; brave, yet demi-savage ; aspiring, butviolent; pious, yet sanguinary in all its penal enactments.When we step out of memory and imaginationinto the cheerful daylight and conscious present, whatan England now! All those forests, with three orfour exceptions, are gone ! — their names alone left inthe land by the powerful impressions of time and custom.One wide expanse of cultivation ; — the gardenof the world ; — swarming towns, splendid cities, busyand populous hamlets appearing everywhere, andfenced fields inter scattered with patrician dwellings,not crowned with towers, lit by mere loop-holes, defendedwith bastion ed gateways, portcullises, and drawbridges,and moats; but standing with open aspects ofpeaceful beauty, amid fair gardens and fair lawns, undefendedby feudal ramparts, because a thousand timesmore strongly fortified by the security of enlightenedlaws. We see a swarming people, free, and full ofknowledge, even to its hinds and mechanics, in possessionof the highest arts of life ; the hills and dalescovered with their harvests and their cattle ; — the seasround the whole globe with their ships ; — a people, atonce the most powerful and the most civilized on theearth.Those old feudal towers are, for the most part,crumbling into ruin, the wasting vestiges of a barbaroussystem, or embellished and adapted to the spiritof the present times. Those abbeys and convents,standing in similar ruins, or exhibiting still more marvellouschange, — the altars pulled down, the chantriessilenced, and the professors of a sacred celibacy drivenout, and replaced by men of the world, with theirwives and families; — no longer places of worship, bute362 THE FORESTSplaces of domestic abode. Those two mighty powers,Feudalism and Popery — gone for ever !Here is an astounding change. A stupendous marchhas been going on from that time to this; and onefrom which, is there a man, however much he maymurmur at the present times, who would be willing torecede a single step ? Would the noble be willing togive up the delights of London for a feudal castle surroundedby wild woods and wastes, a troop of ruderetainers, and no resources but the year's round ofhunting, or of party feuds — not of tongues in Westminster,but of swords and firebrands in the forests?Would he acquiesce in this, when the country canscarcely keep him a few month?, though he canassemble round him kindred spirits, books, the eleganciesand mind of social life, and the speediest newsof the whole world? Would the country gentlemanliketo sink into a feudal retainer ? The merchantfollow his procession of pack-horses through narrowroads, and in high peril of bandits? The farmer dropdown into the born thrall? The parish priest converthis pleasant parsonage and family into the solitarybachelorship of popery ? Would the man most pressedby the cares and heart-griping necessities of thispopulous and struggling time, be willing to acceptthe quiet simplicity of those days, with their monotonoussolitude, ignorance, servitude, and perpetualdanger of arbitrary infliction of death or mutilation ?And yet, in what colours of the rose do our imaginationsclothe these times? The repose, the simplicity,the picturesque solitude, come before us witha peculiar feeling of delight. And so, no doubt, therewas a wild charm about them. The old minstrelsOF ENGLAND. 63delighted to sing about them, and they did it with afeeling of nature. The green shows, the merry greenwoods,especially when "the leaves were lark andlong " in summer ; whenThe wood-were sang and would not cease.Sitting upon the spray ;the exploits of the outlaw ; the hymn of the lonelyanchorite ; the vesper-bell of the convent ; and thechivalrous adventures of knights and dames in forestsand hoary holts, fired them with a genuine enthusiasm,and communicate their warmth to us. No doubt too,that baron and esquire, forester and lawless pursuersof the deer, had all a wild delight in their life; andinstinctively closing the eyes of our mind upon whatwas dark and unpalatable in their practice, we openthem to all that was free, peaceful, and in contrastwith our own situation and mode of existence. Werush from cities and social anxieties into the free worldof woods and wildernesses, with hearts that feel thecool refreshments of nature. To us it is a novelty,with all its piquancy about it ; and we cannot bidelong; enough to wear off the charm. We come too,with the high poetry of a thousand intellectual associationsto take possession of woodland freedom. Wehave all the power of Milton, Shakspeare, Spenser,and Ariosto upon us ; and how delicious seems thepicturesque England of the feudal ages ! We have,indeed, now too little of what they had too much.They, like the modern Americans, would gladly haveexchanged some of their trees for cultivated lands;they had too much of a good thing ; in popularphraseology, they could not see the wood for trees :but oh ! how delightful are those tree-lands to us,64 THE FORESTSprisoners of civilization, and walkers amongst brick-walls.Let us wander awhile now amongst those freshwoodlands. Our old chroniclers tell us, that thiskingdom was once nearly overspread with forests ;that they existed from time immemorial ; that is, longbefore the Norman dynasty commenced, by whichthey were more perfectly defined, carefully fenced,and protected with sanguinary laws. They were thatpart of the country, and indeed, the greater part,which retained its original state. That which remaineduninclosed, and therefore called forest, orforest, quad ferrum statio because there naturallyretired and made their abode the wild creatures, feranatures. All this was held to belong to the king; andwhen the Conqueror began to reign, who had occasionto give away and divide large tracts amongst hismilitary followers, he began to exercise more strictlyhis prerogative over the remainder. Not satisfiedwith sixty-nine forests, lying in almost every part ofthe kingdom, such, and so many, as Evelyn says, asno other realm of Europe had, he laid waste a vasttract of country in Hampshire, and created another,thence called the New Forest, because it was the lastadded to the ancient ones, except that of HamptonCourt, the work of Henry Vivaciousopinions respecting the origin of this NewForest have occupied the attention, and divided theopinions of antiquarians and historians. PolydoreVirgil asserted that the Conqueror's motive for afforestingso large a tract of country here, was because itenabled him to maintain it, secure from the intrusion ofall but his own creatures, and thereby always to haveOF ENGLAND. 65a most convenient station for the escape of his followers,in case of any revolt, to their own country, orfor the secret and secure arrival of fresh forces thence.Mr. Camden, however, has satisfactorily shewn, thatno such object was attributed to him by the chroniclersof his own, and immediately succeeding times, whocertainly were sufficiently bitter against him, for hishaughty temper, and the reckless atrocities which hecommitted in carrying into effect his system of policy,the thorough breaking of the Saxon spirit, and theestablishment of his own noblesse. No such motive,however plausible, was attributed to him for five hundredyears. As Mr. Carte very reasonably suggests,if such was his intention, he would have carried itinto effect within the first five years of his reign,dnrino- which time he was engaged in putting downdisaffection, and strengthening his position. In thepursuance of these objects he was not in the habit ofstopping short at trifles on the score of humanity.His horrible devastation," says William of Salisbury,"of great part of Yorkshire, and all the countiesbelonging: to Enfant, north of the Humber, wasmade that the Danes and Scots invading his kingdomthat way, might find no subsistence, and to punish thepeople for disaffection to his government; withoutregarding what number of innocent persons would beinvolved in the destruction." We are told, even byone of the Norman historians, (Ord. Vit. iv. p. 314,515; and Ingulph. p. 79), who speaks of it withhorror, that above 160,000 men, women and childrenperished by famine in those ruined counties. Thedevastation was such that, for above sixty miles,where before there had been many large and flourishesTHE FORESTSing towns, besides a great number of villages and finecountry seats, not a single hamlet was to be seen ; thewhole country was uncultivated, and remained so tillHenry ll's reign.If we date the making of this forest at the same timewith the publishing of the forest laws, it will followthat it was made merely for the pleasures of the chase.This was natural enough, when we reflect that he hadtaken up his favourite residence at Winchester; andthis is the reason assigned by all the authorities nearestto his own time. The Saxon Chronicler, believed tobe cotemporary with William, assigns this sole reason,and adds — " William loved great deer, as if he hadbeen their father;" which Henry of Huntingdoncopies. No trace of other motive appears in Emetichis own chaplain, Knyton, Ordericus Vitalis,Simon Dunelmensis, Crompton, William of Salisbury,Florence of Worcester, Matthew Paris, He-langford,or other ancient authority. In such a manthe passion for the chase was cause sufficient. In allearly stages of a country, where it abounds with forests,and intellectual resources hardly exist, hunting mustconstitute the great passion of life. The Britons, theSaxons, were passionate hunters. Harold had alreadyrestrained all forests to his own use, and William putthe finishing stroke to the system. Here, however,occurs a second point of difference of opinion in thehistorians. Some tell us that he made this forest,others, that he merely enlarged it. It is certain thatthe ancient forest of Ythene existed here before ; butit is probable that it had become rather a woodlandthan a preserve of game ; and that William's enlargementwas almost, in fact, a new creation : and strictlyOF ENGLAND. 67speaking, entirely so, as a forest, having its definedboundaries, its stock of deer, its appointed officers,and its code of laws and courts : — this, the very nameof New Forest clearly implies.Others, again, attribute to his son Rufus, the enlargementand the devastations, and thence look uponhis own death, in the very spot where he had pulleddown a church, as a direct divine judgment. Therecan be little doubt but that both had a hand in it.The Conqueror probably laid waste and depopulatedso as to complete the boundaries of his forest, andcarry out his conceived plans, and Rufus went on,on the old royal principle, of making a solitude andcalling it peace, to pull down churches, and removewhat hamlets or cottages yet remained to interferewith princely ideas of forest seclusion. That Williamdid all that is attributed to him, is declared by allthe historians of that and immediately succeedingtimes ; and Gemeticensis, his own chaplain, distinctlydeclares, that it was the popular belief that the deathof his two sons, Richard and Rufus, and his grandson,the son of Robert, were judgments of God upon himfor his atrocities committed here in the making of it.These atrocities consisted in laying waste the country,to the extent of thirty miles in length, or ninety incircumference, the extent still attributed to it; destroyingtowns, chapels, manors and mansion houses ;according to some writers, twenty-two mother-churches,to others thirty-six, and to others thirty-two.Unquestionably the number was great; two churchesonly being mentioned in his own Survey in DoomsdayBook, between Ad. 1083 and 1086, the 17th and 20thof his reign, as standing in all that space, while in the68 THE FORESTSrest of the county there were 100. This violence hecompleted by driving out the inhabitants and stockingthe land with deer, stags, and other game.Such was the origin and extent of the ancient royalforests of England, all preserved and maintained forthe especial and exclusive pastime of the kings.Truly the state of a king was then kingly indeed: 69forests, 13 chases, and upwards of 750 parks existingin England. There were, in Yorkshire alone, inHenry VIII. 's time, 275 woods, besides parks andchases, most of them containing 500 acres. Over allthese the king could sport; for it was the highesthonour to a subject to receive a visit from the king tohunt in his chase, or free warren, while no subject,except by special permission and favour, could hunt inthe royal parks. These 69 forests of immense extentlying in all parts of England, and occupying no smallportion of its surface, all stood then for the sole gratificationof the royal pleasure of the chase, and supplyingthe king's household ; and few persons havenow any idea of the state, dignity, and systematicseverity of this great hunting establishment of England,maintained through all succeeding reigns to thetime of the Commonwealth, and some part of it muchlonger. Each forest was an imperium in imperio,having its staff of officers, — the lord warden, hisdeputy, a steward and bow-bearer, rangers, keepersor foresters, verdure, agistors, regarded, bailiffs,wood-wards, beadles, etc. etc., with their own courts.First the Court of Attachment, held every fortydays, in which all attachments against offenders in theforest were received, evidence heard upon them, andwere enrolled to be presented at the Court of SwainENGLAND. 69MOTE. This swain mote was held three times everyyear, which all the swains, or free tenants, were boundto attend. The warder or his steward presided, andthe foresters, verderers, and other ministers of theforest were the judges. Here all the attachmentsenrolled in the records of the Court of Attachmentwere received and examined, but no award or judgmentwas made or executed by this court; but itswore in a grand jury to examine these attachment*,of which all that appeared made on sufficient groundsand evidence were reserved for the decision of theJustice-Seat, or highest court of the forest. Thejustice seat, or Court of Eyre in the forest, was heldonce in three years. Two justices in Eyre wereappointed as supreme judges in these courts: onehaving jurisdiction in all the forests north, and theother over those south of the Trent. Yet thereappears in the early reigns to have been great irregularityin the appointment of these justices. Sometimesthere were two, according to the legitimateordinance ; at others we find three going the circuit,ov mornay as it was called, as in Edward I.'s reign,when in the 15th year of that reign, three are namedas going the mornay of the north; viz. Sir WilliamVesey, Thomas Granville, and Richard of Gryp-pine, justices. This Sir William Vesey, Richardof Gryppinge, and their fellows, justices, are repeatedlymentioned in the king's writs. This might arise fromthe discovery that collusion and bribery to coverpeculation had been the consequence of one justicegoing alone ; for it is complained, that it " was fonderthat our lorde the kynge had sustained grete andmany solde hurte fro the mornay of Robert Neville."70 THE FORESTSGreat peculation and appointment of his own creaturesfor his own purposes were proved against RobertEvringham, and he was "deposed from his office ofchief worcestershire of fee in the Forest of Sherwoodfor ever"*Every officer was sworn to present to the court ofattachment, every offender against the laws of theforest, for the decision of the justices, through theprocess already described, a system of most summaryrigour, without favour or concealment, yet abusesstill crept in ; and the long term between the comingof the justices — three years — tended greatly to this;for as no case could be finally decided till then, itafforded vast scope for the powerful and wealthy totry the force of bribery on the j justice, as well as madethe case fearfully severe on those who could not findbail or give security, and must therefore be in gaolall that time ; especially as a man might be taken uponpresumption. This, therefore, became a grossinjustice to the innocent.You would imagine from the oaths of the differentofficers, that their duties were all alike, for theybound them all to seize, secure, and present forattachment all persons committing any depredationson vert or venison; vert, curiously enough AnglicizedGreen Hugh, i. e. green hue, and so continuallywritten in the Assise Forests, meaning everythinghaving a green leaf, and therefore extending fromthe forest trees to the underwood and shrubs whichformed cover for the game, and also to the grasswhich was the food of the game. All persons seenMS. documents respecting Sherwood Forest, in Bromley HouseLibrary, Nottingham.OF ENGLAND. 71suspiciously strolling about on the highways, especiallyif in cloaks, with dogs in leash, or out of it,pursuing small birds, squirrels, or vermin, cuttingturf, peat, or boughs, or fallen timber, heath, or fern,without proper authority. The dwellers in the purlieusof the forest were kept a strict eye upon ; andall gates, or fences, or dykes were presentable whichwere too high for the deer to pass from one part ofthe forest to another. The forests were very systematicallydivided into walks, or keeping, wards orregards, over which was a properly subordinate successionof officers. The ranger had surveillance overthe principal keepers; they over their deputy keepers,and night-walkers. The verderers had especially tolook after the vert, although sworn to watch for andbring to punishment, offenders of all kinds, and tothem must all offenders be brought to give surety toappear at the attachment. Besides these, there werein every township, and every regard, wood-wards andtheir men, who attended to the felling and accountingfor all timber. There were agistors also to lookafter the agistment of cattle. The Swainmote wasempowered to inquire and to see that all officerspunctually performed their forest duties, going regularlytheir rounds ; and that they paid the wages oftheir deputies, so that none might be tempted tocommit depredations on the game, wood, browse,peat, turf, deers' horns, or any other product of theforest. A sharp vigilance was kept up on this head,and severe punishment awarded for such offenders.No produce of the forest might be taken out of itwithout a direct warrant from the justice or warden,neither cattle, timber, dead deer, vert, or anything72 THE FORESTSwhatever. Those who had freeholds within the forest,as came to be the case in time, through grants fromkings to favourites of one kind or another, weresubject to the same restriction. And where warrantwas granted for any of these purposes, or for supplyingthe religious houses with wood for burningetc., the verderers were to see that no more wasactually taken out than the warrant allowed, and werepunished if convicted of failing in this duty.* Perambulationsat stated periods were made throughouteach forest, its enclosures, purlieus, and boundaries,to ascertain that all was kept in order, and that therewas neither waste of vert nor venison, which includedall game; nor encroachment within, nor without.The external boundaries of a forest, were not likethose of a park, walls or pales, but metes and bounds,meres, rivers, and hills, otherwise it was not a forest.Drifts of the forest were made, at least twice in theyear. By the Assises of Pickering and Lancaster,Yet a curious instance is recorded in one of the Inquisitions ofSherwood Forest, of the way in which the vigilance of these lawswas evaded. The Countess of Newcastle, whose husband was probablyat that time governor of Newark Castle, had procured largequantities of timber out of the forest, under a warrant to furnish suchtimber for the necessary repairs of that castle. The quantity deliveredled to an inquiry, and it was found that the castle was not repairedat all, but that the timber had been sold, and the countess had got thecash. Yet after this it was again found, that not being able to procureanother warrant for timber, she had, however, got one for thedelivery of cord-wood for burning, and under the title of cord-wood,the deputy-warden had supplied her with some of the best oaks of theforest. On a second investigation it turned out that the deputy-wardenwas a partner in a limber trade — that timber was thus procuredthrough the means of the countess's plea of public service, andthat she and the deputy shared the spoil.OF ENGLAND. 73the officers of the forest did use to make drifts at leasttwice in the year : the first, fifteen days before Midsummer,at the beginning of t\\e henceforth, that the forestmig-ht be avoided and emptied of all cattle during thattime. And every commoner was then forced to comeand challenge his beasts, and take them away, or theywere taken by the officers of the forest as strays.The second drift was at Holyrood-day, when theagistors did begin to agis the king's defense woods,and all beasts and cattle of all sorts then found inthem were driven by the officers of the forest to someconvenient place, and impounded, and then warningwas given that every man should come and fetch hisown. Forests are driven for three causes. First, forthe avoiding of surcharging; secondly, for the avoidingof Jorreners, who have no right; thirdly, that nobeasts be communed that are not legally commonable,as geese, goats, sheep, and swine, which are notcommonable. Swine, however, were admitted to thewoods of the king's forests if. their noses were dulyringed, and paid for their run there, a sum calledpannage ; and owners of woods in the forests mightrun such swine in their own woods. Upon reasonablecauses the officers of the forest may make theirdrifts oftener if they will.Manhood's Forest Laws, p. 86-7.Such was the general constitution of a forest, withits courts, officers, laws, and customs ; and so systematicdoes it seem ; surveillance and subdivision soregularly descending downward, till it included watchand ward over every part, and the familiar acquaintanceof every forester with his own location, that one reallywonders how any Robin Hood could long escape74 THE FORESTSamongst them. The difficulty of the thing no doubtit was that contributed so much to raise his renown.But the vast extent of the forests, the obscurity of thewooded parts, and the immense out-boundaries layingthem open to the nocturnal incursions of marauders,still account for the traditionary exploits of deer-stealers,in spite of the then forest-law, which itselfgave a strong spice of interest to the adventurer.The severity of the laws under William and hisimmediate successors was monstrous. " In the Saxontimes," says Blackstone, " though no man was allowedto kill or chace the king's deer, yet he might startany game, pursue and kill it on his own estate, butthe rigour of those new constitutions vested the soleproperty of all the game in England in the king alone;and no man was entitled to disturb any fowl of theair, or any beast of the field, of such kinds as werespecifically reserved for the royal amusement of thesovereign, without express licence from the king, of achase or a free warren; and these franchises weregranted as much to preserve the breed of animals asto indulge the subject. From a similar principle towhich, though the forest laws are now mitigated, andby degrees grown entirely obsolete, yet from this roothas sprung a bastard slip, known by the name of theGame Law, now arrived to and wantoning in itshighest vigour ; both founded upon the same notionof permanent property in wild creatures, and bothproductive of the same tyranny to the commons ; butwith this difference, that the forest laws establishedonly one mighty hunter throughout the land ; thegame laws have raised a little Nimrod in everymanor. And in one respect, the ancient law wasOF ENGLAND. 75much Jess unreasonable than the modern, for theking's grantee of a chase or free-warren, might killgame in every part of his franchise, but now, thougha freeholder of less than los. a-year, is forbidden tokill a partridge upon his own estate, yet nobody else,not even the lord of the manor, unless he hath a grantof free-warren, can do it without committing a trespass,and subjecting himself to an action."Commentaries iv. 415, 8vo.The full rigour of the forest laws of the Normandynasty must be a curious subject of contemplation toan Englishman now. William decreed the eyes ofany person to be pulled out, who took either a buckor a boar. Rufus made the stealing of a doe, a hangingmatter. The taking a hare was fined 20,9., and aconey Io., as money was then ! Easier adds, thatfifty persons of fortune, being apprehended by thelast prince for killing his bucks, were forced to purgethemselves by the fire of ordeal, etc. Henry I. madeno distinction between him who killed a man, and himwho killed a buck ; and punished them who destroyedthe game, though not in the forest, either by forfeitureof their goods, or loss of limbs. Richard I. enactedmutilation, and pulling out of eyes for hunting in theforest, though he afterwards relaxed a little, and contentedhimself with banishment, imprisonment, orfine. Whoever was summoned to the chase, and refusedto go, paid a fine of 505. to the king.The feeling created amongst the people by thisbloody code, may be imagined by the language ofJohn of Salisbury, who, after speaking of the higheroffences, says, — " What is more extraordinary is, thatit is often made by law criminal to set traps or snares76 THE FORESTSfor birds, to allure them ; by springes and pipes, or useany craft to take them; and offenders are punishedby forfeiture of goods, loss of limbs, or even death.One would suppose that the birds of the air, and thefish of the sea were common to all ; but they belongto the crown, and are claimed by the forest lawswherever they fly. Hands off ! keep clear ! lest youincur the guilt of high treason, and fall into the clutchof the hunters. The swains are driven from theirfields, M^iile the beasts of the forest have a liberty ofroving ; and the farmer's meadows are taken fromhim to increase their pasture. The new-sown groundsare taken from the farmer, the pastures from thegrazier and shepherd ; the bee-hives are turned awayfrom the flowery bank, and the very bees are hardlyallowed their natural liberty." — Polf/craticon, i. 4.Ah ! Johannes Sarisburiensis, thou wert a radical !Can anybody read the indignant spirit of this passage,and say that radicalism is anything new under thesun ? This is the very soul of Hampden. The inhumanityof those proceedings occasioned frequentdisturbances, till the revolt of the barons extorted fromHenry HI. the Charta de Forest, by which herepealed those severe laws, and enacted others moreequitable. These, again, were from time to time,softened by different monarchs, as civilization, andpopular power and influence advanced, by what arecalled Assises of the Forest which were a kind ofrevision and re-enactment of the forest laws, by differentkings ; omitting or modifying any former provisionswhich might seem contrary to the spirit of thetime ; and adding such others as were deemed necessary.As, for instance, the assise of Edward I., theOF ENGLAND. 77preamble of vvliich was thus : — " Here followeth theAssise of Forest of our lorde the kinge E., sonneof kinsre H. and his commandments of his forests inengland, made by the assent and counsel of ,busshoppes, abbots, earls, barons, knightsof all his realme." This consists of twenty items ;and provides principally, that any person found in theforest, or the woods of the forest, trespassing on thevenison, shall be taken, and, on conviction of huntingor taking the king's venison, he shall be imprisoned,and not delivered without the king's especial commandment,or that of his justice of the forest.* Thatall trespassers on the vert, shall be taken before theverderers, and they shall find sufficient surety to comebefore the next court of attachment; and such attachmentshall be enrolled, to be presented to the justicesof the forest when they next come into those parts tohold the pleas of the forest. That none who heldwoods within the forest should suffer those woods tobe without a keeper, or they should be taken into theAn old rhyme, full of mystery to uninitiated ears, contained thelaw of attachment in this case. Any person was to be seized andconveyed before a forester, or verdercr, who was found, —At dog-draw, stable-stand,Back-beyond, or bloody-hand.Which mean, — at dog-draw, having a dog in a leash, following a deerby the scent, in order to come upon it and slay it ; or having woundeda deer, and following the dog-draw, or guidance of the dog to overtakeit. At stable-stand, standing in the forest with bow ready to discharge atthe deer, or with a dog in a leash ready to slip him on its appearance.At back-bear, or back-beyond, actually carrying any forest propertyaway. At blood-hand, with hands or person bloody, as from theactual slaughter of game. Though three of these are truly called bythe lawyers, presumptions, they were held sufficient for attachmentand conviction.VOL. II. F78 THE FORESTSking's hands again. Such holders of woods, or anyother persons inhabiting within the forest, should nothave any bows, arrows, or arbalasts ; or any brae, greyhound,or any other engine " to hurte the king of hisDeare." But any dogs introduced into the forestshall be expedited ; or, according to the Englishphrase, lamed, so that they may not be able to seizethe deer; and that the expectation, or laming ofdogs, shall be made every three years. This practiceof laming is differently described by different writers.Some define it as consisting in cutting off at least oneof the fore-feet ; others in cutting off the claws only ;and others, in cutting out the fleshy part of bothfore-paws. Probably the practice differed in differentforests, and different ages. At all events, the dogswere so mutilated as to be unable to seize a deer; theLatin term implies the actual lopping off the foot.Future assises confine this laming to mastiffs; nogreyhounds, braces or brackets being allowed entranceat all. No mower was allowed to bring " a greatmastiff to drive away the deer of our lord the king,but little dogs to look after such things as lie open."The assise continues — that no holders of foreignwoods in the forest shall agiste* before the regulartime of the king's agistment, " which begins at michaelmasand hastes to mainmast then next following."That none shall asserts in the forest withoutbeing taken before the verderer, and giving surety toThat is, turn in cattle to graze, at so much per head, which wasdone in most forests, and the money paid to the verderer, — a certainnumber of persons mostly having a right of common besides, by grantorcharter.-f- Root up the covert and make a clearing.OF ENGLAND. 79appear at the next attachment. That no tanner orwhittier of leather dwell in the forest, out of boroughs,towns, etc. That any archbishops, bishops,barons, or knight being found hunting, the forestershall demand "a wedded and a pledge," and if he refuse,the forester shall see "his dede," and cause it to beenrolled to be presented before the justice of the forest.Other assises say, that the bodies of such dignitaries,whether temporal or spiritual, shall be seized till theygive security for their appearance ; but that any suchnobleman, or dignitary, being sent for to the king onany business, shall have the privilege of hunting oneor two deer as he goes through the forest, and thesame on his return, provided it be in view of theforester, otherwise he shall blow a horn, lest he seemto steal it.That any man going along the king's highway,through a forest, with a bow, shall bear it withoutstring ; or with dogs, he shall have them coupled, andhis greyhounds " knitted in a leash." That if anydamage be done to the king's vert or venison, orwaste, of which no rational account can be given, theforesters, or verderers, under whose care the saidcharges have been, shall be taken, and no satisfactionbut their own bodies shall be received till the king,or his justice, have had their will of them. Yet, soearly as Henry II., it was found that all these strictprovisions being insufficient to prevent M'aste of thewoods, and "extreme finishing of the deere," theoffice of regarder was established. The regarded wereoriginally to be knights, but "other good people"were afterwards admitted. They were to be chosenby the king's writ, and there were to be twelve in80 THE FORESTSeach forest. The foresters and verderers were gentlemen: the former appointed by the king's letters-patent;the latter by writ in full county, like ourpresent members of parliament; yet were the re-garters set as inspectors over them. They were togo through every part of the forest, accompaniedby the foresters, verderers, woodwards, bailiffs, andbeadles, and examine into the state of vert and venison; comparing them with the reports of their predecessors,and seeing that no waste, or embezzlement,or improper, or superabundant agistment was made ;that no asserts, or purprestures* were attempted.This, however, they could not do when they pleased.They were summoned by writ, once in three years,preparatory to the coming of the justice to hold hispleas, to whom they were to deliver their roll, dulysigned and sealed.Queen Elizabeth, who found that, during theminority of her brother Edward, and the troubledreign of her sister Mary, great waste, destruction, andembezzlement had taken place, made repeated inquestsinto the state of the forests by her commissioners,and had general surveys and valuations made.She descends in her assises to the very bees, which itseems built then abundantly in our woods, as they doin the American forests now — the old, hollow oaks,being very store-houses of honey. Hawks, herons,the nests of hawks, and every species of beast thathad been held the legitimate denizens of forests byher predecessors, as stags, bucks, hares, badgers, foxes,and even cats and squirrels, are enumerated.Encroachments and obstructions of several kinds, such as impedimentsin the highways, turning dykes, building swine-cotes, mills, etcOF ENGLAND.These forest laws continued till the Commonwealth.One court of justice was held after the Restoration ;but after the revolution of 1688, they fell into desuetude,and now all offences against the forests are cognizableby the common laws of the land.For the fullest information on this subject, seeCowed, Hewett, Coke, and Blackstone ; or Manhoodon Forest Laws.The English Forests were formerly as follows:30. Huckestow, Shropshire.31. Inglewood, Cumberland.32. Kingswood, Gloucester.33. Knaresborough, York.34. Langton, Durham.35. Leonard.,}Dorset.1. Arden, Northumberland.2. Allerdale, Cumberland.3. Amity, Yorkshire.4. Arden, Warwick.5. Ashton, Sussex.6. Pere, Hands.7. Bernwood, Bucks.8. Beverley, York9 Blackmore, orForest of Watched10. Brazen, Wilts.11. Charnwood, Leicester.12. Cheviot, Northumberland.13. Chute, Hands.14. Clun.15. Cors.16. Dartmoor, Devon.17. Larval, Hereford.18. Dean, Gloucester.19. Keeping, Lincoln.20. Delamere, Cheshire.21. Epping, Essex. .22. Exmore, Devon.23. Feckenliam, Worcester.24. Gillingham, Somerset.25. Gates, York.26. Hainault, Essex.27. Hampton Court, Middlesex28. Hardwicke, York.29. Hartlebury,36. Lee.37. Leicester, Leicester.38. Mentis, Somerset.39. Malvern, Worcester.40. Marginal, Cumberland.41 . Maxwell, Cheshire.42. Redwood, Stafford.43. New Forest, Hands.44. Amber, Hands.45. Peak, Derbyshire.46. Pen rise.47. Pembroke, Dorset.48. Hath.49. Riddlesdale, Northumberland50. Rockingham, Northampton..51. Rychiche, Somerset.52. Salcey, Northampton,53. Savornac, Wilts.The only forest in possessionof a subject.54. Elwood, Somerset.55. Sherwood, Nottingham.56. Staines, Middlesex.57. Tweeddale, Durham.82 FORESTS OF ENGLAND.58. Waltham, Essex.59. Whittlebury, Northampton.60. Wieliwood, Oxford.61. Wencedale.62. Western.6'3, Windsor, Berks.64. Whitfield, Westmorland.65. Wirrol, Cheshire.66. Whitby, Yorkshire.67. Woollen.68. Were, Worcester.69. Broken, Salop.Of these, most are now dis-afforested, and have leftonly their names. Those which remain are under themanagement of a board of commissioners; the chiefof whom is, by virtue of his office, always one of hismajesty's ministers. Redwood is principally inclosed,leaving, however, a portion belonging to the crown,and one lodge. It had formerly four wards, and fourkeepers, with each a handsome lodge, now in thehands of different private gentlemen. In Elizabeth'sreign it was about 24 miles in circumference, and in1658 it contained 9220 acres of land. In 1684 itcontained 47,150 trees, and 10,000 cord of hollies andunderwood, valued at 30,710/. It and Bagot's Park,formerly part of it, still contain some of the largestoaks in England. Windsor is the King's Park, andthe most complete and splendid example of a park inthe world. — Of New Forest, and Sherwood, I proposeto speak more particularly.CHAPTER TI.NEW FOREST.This forest seems to retain not only more of theforest character than all our other forests, but to havemaintained more exactly its ancient boundaries.William of Salisbury says, the Conqueror laid wastethirty miles of country for this forest. The perambulationof the 22nd of Charles II., extending fromMilton south, along the Avon west, to Transpirenorth, and within Southampton Water east, by Farleyand Boldre back to Milton, includes about thirty milessquare, and this is the extent that is now attributedto it by the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. Inthe present hundred of New Forest, we have theVOL. II.F 284 NEW FOREST.parishes of Instead, Farley, and Boklre ; the chapels,or curacies of Lyndhurst, Beauties, Exbury,and Brokenhurst. It is indeed the only one of ourforests which now can give us a perfect idea of whatan English forest was in the feudal ages. It has notacquired, like Windsor, too much of a park-like characterby containing a royal residence; nor has it beenenclosed, and shaped into quadrangular fields: butthere it is, in its original extent, — vast, wild, stockedwith deer; with its alternations of woods and heaths,morasses and thickets ; interspersed with hamlets andfarms, and forest-huts, as were the forests of old. Asyou go from Southampton to Lyndhurst, you have afine ride through its lower regions, and see enough tomake you desire to steal away into the beautifulwoodlands. Lovely streams come winding out of itsshades, and hasten towards the sea. You get glimpsesof forest glades, and peeps under the trees into distantpark-like expanses, or heathy wastes. The deer arewandering here and there : here you see whole troopsof those ponies peculiar to this forest ; pheasants andpartridges come often running out on the way beforeyou. All about grow hollies, which were encouragedin most ancient forests for winter browse; and youhave glimpses of forest-trees that were enough to enrichall the landscape painters in the world. But if youwish to know really what New Forest is, you mustplunge into its very heart, and explore its farthest recesses.You may go on from wood to wood, and fromheath to heath; now coming out on the high ground, ason the Ringwood road, the wild forest lying visible formiles around, and the country towards Southamptonand to the very sea, all spread out wide and beautifullyto the eye: — now descending into profound solitudes,NEW FOREST. " 85and the depth of woodland gloom. It is a wild, wideregion, in which you may satiate yourselves withnature in its primitive freedom. In Bilhaghe, in theforest of Sherwood, you find a fragment of an ancientforest unique in its kind, — a region of old oaks, shatteredby the tempests of five hundred years, andstanding in all the hoary grandeur of age; and arethereby struck with a quick feeling of the mightyflight of time, — of the utter change and revolution ofmanners and government since those trees were intheir prime ; but when you step into the New Forest,you step at once out of the present world into thepast. You do not see it existing before your eyes asaremnant of antiquity, but as a portion of it, intowhich, as by some charm, you are carried. It is notadecaying relic; it is a perfect and present thing.The trees are not scathed and hollow skeletons,except in some few places, but stand the full-grownand vigorous giants of the wood. This is owing tothe timber being cut down for the navy ere it beginsto perish, and yet being left to attain a sufficient growth,and to furnish vast woods that extend over hill anddale, and give you foot-room for days and weekswithout fear of exhausting the novelty. It looks nowas it must have looked to the eye of one of our Normanmonarchs, except that the marks of the Conqueror'sravages and fires are worn out; the ruins ofchurches and cottages are buried beneath the accumulatedmosses and earth of ages; and peaceful smokeascends from woodland habitations.In my brief visit to it, I set out from Lyndhurst,and walked up to Stony-Cross, the place of Rufus'sdeath. From the moment that I turned up out of86 NEW FOREST.Lyndhurst, I seemed to have entered an ancientregion. There was an old-world primitive air abouteverything, that filled me with a peculiar feeling ofpoetry. I left behind the nineteenth century, andwas existing in the twelfth or fourteenth. Openknolls, and ascending woodlands on one side, coveredwith majestic beeches, and the village children plaino- under them : on the other, the most rustic cottages,almost buried in the midst of their orchardtrees, and thatched as Hampshire cottages only are —in such projecting abundance, — such flowing lines.Thatch does not here seem the stiff and intractablething it does elsewhere ; nor is it cut in that square,straight-haired fashion ; but it seems the kindliestthing in the world. It bends over gables and antiquecasements in the roof, and comes sweeping downover fronts resting on pillars, and forming verandasand porches ; or over the ends of the houses, down tothe very ground, forming the nicest sheds for plants,or places to deposit garden-tools, milk-pails, or otherrural apparatus. The whole of the cottages thereaboutare in equal taste with the roof; so different tothe red, staring, square brick houses of manufacturingdistricts. They seem, as no doubt they are, erectedin the spirit, and under the influence, of the geniusloci. The bee-hives in their rustic rows; the littlecrofts, all belong to a primitive country. I went on ;now coming to small groups of such places ; now toothers of superior pretensions, but equally blent withthe spirit of the surrounding nature ; — little paradisesof cultivated life. As I advanced, heathery hillsstretched away on one hand ; woods came downthickly and closely on the other, and a winding roadNEW FOREST. 87beneath the shade of large old trees, conducted me toone of the most retired and peaceful of hamlets. Itwas Minstead. There was an old school-house ; andbeneath the large trees that overshadowed the waylayhuge trunks of trees cut ready for conveyance tothe naval dock-yards; and the forest children, on theirway to school, were playing amongst them; nowclimbing upon them, now pushing each other off withmerry laughter ; boys and girls, as I approached,scampering away, and into the school.I know not how it is, but such places of woodlandand old-fashioned seclusion, of such repose and picturesquesimplicity, always bring strongly to mymind the stories of Tiecke. There must be a greatsimilarity in the aspect of these scenes, and of thosewhich he has so much delighted to describe. Ithought of the old woman with her dog and bird.Every solitary cottage seemed just such as hers was,I seemed to hear the birch-trees shiver in the breeze,the dog bark, and the bird sing its magic song.Alone in wood so gay'T is good to stay,Monow like to-dayFor ever and aye :O, I do love to stayAlone in wood so gay.It was early autumn. All birds really had ceasedto sing ; and the deep hush of nature but made moredistinct this spirit-song, amid the delicious reveriesin which I went wandering along, enveloped as inaheavenly cloud. All over the moorland groundspread the crimson glow of the heather. I went onwardand upward ; passing the gates of forest lodges,f388 NEW FOREST.and looking down into valleys, whence arose thesmoke of huts and charcoal fires. And anon, I stoodupon the airy height, and saw woods below, and feltnear me solitude, and a spirit that had brooded thereforages. I passed over high, still heaths, treadingon plants that grow only in nature's most uncultivatedsoil, to the mighty beeches of Boldre Wood,and thence away to fresh masses of forest. Herds ofred-deer rose from the fern, and went bounding away,and dashed into the depths of the woods; troops ofthose grey and long-tailed forest horses turned to gazeas I passed down the open glades ; and the red-squirrelsin hundreds, scampered up from the groundwhere they were feeding on fallen mast, and thekernels of pine-cones, and stamped and chattered onthe boughs above me.A lady who lives on the skirts of the forest, andwho moreover has walked through the spirit-land withpower, and is known and honoured by all true loversof pathos and imagination, had solemnly warned menot to attempt to pass through the larger woods withouta guide ; but what guide, except such as herself,or as the venerable William Gilpin would have been,could one have that we should not wish away tentimes in a minute ? If we must be lost, why, so letit be, — but let us be lost in the freedom of one's ownthoughts and feelings. Delighted with the true woodlandwildness and solemnity of beauty, I roved onwardthrough the widest woods that came in my way,and once, indeed, I imagined that a guide Mouldreally have been agreeable. Awaking as from a dream,I saw far round me, one deep shadow, one thick andcontinuous roof of boughs, and thousands of hoaryNEW FOREST. 89boles standing clothed, as it were, with the very spiritof silence. A track in the wood seemed to lead inthe direction I aimed at; but having gone on for anhour, here admiring the magnificent sweep of somegrand old trees as they hung into a glade, or a ravine,some delicious opening in the deep woods, or thegrotesque figures of particular trees which seemed tohave been blasted into blackness, and contorted intoinimitable crookedness by the salvage genius of theplace, — I found myself again before one of those veryremarkable trees which I had passed long before. Itwas too singular to be mistaken, and I stood to holda serious council with myself. As I stood, I becamemore than ever sensible of the tomb-like silence inwhich I was. There was not the slightest sound ofrunning water, whispering leaf, or the voice of anycreature ; the beating of my own heart, the ticking ofmy watch were alone heard. It was that deep stillnesswhich has been felt there by others.The watchmen from the castle topAlmost might hear an acorn drop,It was so calm and still;Might hear the stags in Hocknell groan,And catch, by fits, the distant moanOf King-gain's little rill.The Bed Kin".Whichever way I looked the forest stretched in onedense twilight. It was the very realization of thatappalling hush and bewildering continuity of shade sooften described by travellers in the American woods.I had lost now all sense of any particular direction,and the only chance of reaching the outside of thewood was to go as much as possible in one direct line.90 NEW FOREST.Away then I went — but soon found myself entangledin the thickest underwood — actually overhead inrank weeds ; now on the verge of an impassable bog,and now on that of a deep ravine. Fortunately for me,the summer had been remarkably dry, and the ravineswere dry too, — I could descend into them, and climbout on the other side. But the more I struggled on,the more I became confounded. Pausing to considermy situation, I saw a hairy face and a large pair ofeyes fixed on me. Had it been a satyr, I felt that Ishould not have been surprised, it seemed so satyr-likea place. It was only a stag — which, with itshead just above the tall fern, and its antlers amongstthe boughs, looked very much like Kuhleborn of theUndine story. As I moved towards him he dashedaway through the jungle, for so only could it becalled, and I could long hear the crash of his progress.Ever and anon, huge swine with a fierce guflawrushed from their lairs— one might have imaginedthem the wild boars of a German forest. At lengthI caught the tinkle of a cow-bell — a cheerful sound,for it must be in some open part of the forest, andfrom its distinctness, not far distant. Thitherward Iturned, and soon emerged into a sort of island in thesea of woods, a farm, like an American clearing. 1sate down on a fallen tree to cool and rest myself, andwas struck with the beauty of the place. These greenfields lying so peacefully amid the woods, which, inone place pushed forward their scattered trees, inanother retreated; here sprinkling them out thinlyon the common, and there hanging their masses ofdark foliage over a low-thatched hut or two. Thequiet farm-house too, surrounded by its belt of tallNEW FOREST. 91hollies ; the flocks of geese dispersed over the shortturf, and the cows coming home out of the forest tobe milked : it was a most peaceful picture, and unlikeall that citizens are accustomed to contemplate, exceptin Spenser, or the German writers. These cow-bellstoo, have something in their sound so quaintand woodland. They are slung by a leathern strapfrom the neck of the leader, having neither sound norshape of a common bell, but are like a tin canister, witha ring at the bottom to suspend them by. They seemlike the first rudimental attempt at a bell, and have asound dull and horny, rather than clear and ringing.The leaders of these herds are said to have a singularsagacity in tracking the woods, and finding theirway to particular spots, and home again, by extraordinaryand intricate ways.Having now a clear conception of my position, Iproceeded leisurely towards Stony-Cross, the reputedplace of the catastrophe of Rufus. The tree whencethe fatal arrow glanced, or, at least, the one markedby popular tradition as ii, was standing till about acentury ago, when a triangular stone was set down toidentify the spot; with these inscriptions, one on eachside.1. Here stood the oak, on which an arrow, shot by Sir WalterTyrrel at a stag, glanced and struck King William the Second, surnamedRufus, in the breast, of which he instantly died, on the secondoF August, Ad. 1100.2. King William the Second, surnamed Rufus, being slain, as isbefore related, was laid in a cart belonging to one Purkess, anddrawn from hence to Winchester, and was buried in the cathedralchurch of that city.92 NEW FOREST.3 A. D, 1743 : That the place where an event so memorable hadhappened, might not be hereafter unknown, this stone was set up byJohn Lord Delaware, who has seen the tree growing in this place.This place is called in Doomsday Book, Truism,by Lelaiul, Thoroughly, by other writers, Cunningham,and Chuham. It is now known by the name ofStony-Cross. Leland says that, in his time, (thereign of Henry VIII.) a chapel was standing near theplace, most probably built by some of King William'sdescendants, to pray for his soul ; it being the generalopinion of the time, that the divine judgment for hiscruelties in the forest lead fallen upon him here moreexpressly, because here he had actually destroyed achurch. No trace of such a thing is now visible, andindeed, it is one of the singularities of this spot, thatso little vestige of the destroyed villages, churches, etc.is to be discovered.Great numbers of people visit Stony-Cross in thesummer. Large parties come out from Southampton,Winchester, and the neighbouring towns, and pic-nicunder the trees that are scattered about ; and a pleasureplace for a summer day's excursion cannot bewell imagined. There is a great charm in visiting aspot marked by a singular historical event 700 yearsaa-o, and finding it so similar in all its present features.It lies on a wide slope amongst the woods. Fromthe Ringwood road above, splendid views over thecountry present themselves ; not far off is a capital inn,and below are a few scattered cottages, standing amidtheir orchards, a picture of forest simplicity and peace.When I was there, the trees hung with loads of fruit,yet the little wooden houses stood, some of them emptyNEW FOREST. 93and unprotected ; their inhabitants, I suppose, beingout working in the woods. I sate on the trunk of afallen tree, and contemplated them with a feeling ofdelight. Supposing that it might be in one of themthat the descendants of the Purkess, who conveyedthe king's body to Winchester, lived, I went to theonly one where there appeared anybody at home toinquire, and learned that Purkess had lived at Minstead,a mile off. This village is said to have receivedits name from the exclamation of Rufus, ^vhen thearrow struck him; — "O myne swede!" Yet he issaid to have died instantly : if therefore, this were thespot of his death, how came Minstead by the name ?But the house of Purkess was at Minstead ; and theman also is said to have lived near, in a small hut, andmaintained his family by burning charcoal. Possiblythe difficulty may be explained by what is very likely,that Purkess mig-ht be working; in the wood at thetime of the accident, and .conveyed the body to hishouse, before he conveyed it thence to Winchester inhis cart. The name of Purkess is not mentioned byany historian, but the fact of the body being so conveyedis, and constant tradition says that Purkess Measthe man, and that he received as a reward the grantof an acre or two round his hut. His male descendantshave continued to occupy the same house, and carryon the same trade from that time till very recently.The last of the lineal occupiers of the hut died an oldman a few years ago ; his daughter had married away,and his son, having learned some other trade, hadgone to Southampton to practise it; so that here asingular residence of 700 years ends. The family issaid to be the most ancient in the county. It was64 NEW FOREST.said that a piece of the wheel of the cart on which thebody was conveyed, had always been preserved in thehut. When I asked if this were true; "Yes," saidthe cottager, " the old man had a curious old piece ofwood that he used to shew, and when the parties weregone, he used to laugh and say, ' it did very well forthe gentlemen'" Alas! for the honour of all relicsthat are too shrewdly inquired into !Much interesting information respecting this fineold forest is to be found in " Gilpin's Forest Scenery,"The Rev. William Gilpin lived at Boldre, in a sweetold parsonage, in a fine situation, facing noble woods.He built and endowed a school-house there, out ofthe profits of the sale of his drawings, and lies buriedin that churchyard. I visited his tomb with MissBowles, who lives near, and who, like all poeticalpeople who live near one, has an attachment to theforest as enthusiastic as that of her venerable friendGilpin himself.Gilpin supposes that the peculiar breed of wildhorses with which this forest abounds, are a racedescended from the Spanish tenets driven ashore onthe coast of Hampshire in the dispersion of theInvincible Armada. Great quantities of these areannually taken and sold. They are useful for anykind of employment, and are remarkable for beingsure-footed. The colts are either hunted down byhorsemen, or caught by stratagem. He gives also acurious account of herding the hogs in this forest,which has been so frequently quoted that most readersmust be familiar with it.There is a numerous population within the limitsof this forest; having got a habitation there by oneNEW FOREST. 95means or another. On the skirts of the forest, andround its vast heaths are numbers of poor huts, whoseinmates have very little visible means of existence,but profess themselves to be woodmen, charcoal-burners,and so on ; but it is pretty well understoodthat poaching and smuggling are their more probablevocations. Some of their cabins are the rudest erectionsof boughs, turf, and heather. Their poles forcharcoal-burning are reared in huge pyramids withthe smallest ends uppermost ; and they tell a story inthe forest, of a popular physician mio was sent for onsome urgent occasion, and coming to a certain placewas met by a party of men, who told him he mustsubmit to be blindfolded. He did not feel in a conditionto resist, and therefore acquiesced in the proposalwith an apparent good will, though inly not sowell pleased with the adventure. He continued tosee sufficiently to discover that they took him downa wild and dismal glen. It was evening ; and thelight of the charcoal fires was seen glimmering hereand there. They came to a huge pile of poles, whichthe men partly removed, and led him through a sortof labyrinthine passage within them, where his bandagewas removed, and he found his patient lying inthe midst of a hut, which furnished plenty of evidencethat it was not merely the retreat, but the depot ofsmugglers. Without, however, seeming to noticeanything but his patient, he prescribed, received hisfee, was again bandaged, and conducted to the spotwhere he had been met, and wished a very goodnight.Foresters and Borderers," says John Evelyn,"are not generally so civil and reasonable as mighti)6 NEW FOREST.be wished." And that seems to be exactly the characterof those in the New Forest. Many of them,like those in the woods of America, are mere squatters,but the attempt to disturb them is much thesame as to disturb a hornet's nest. Conscious thatthere is no strength but in making common cause,they are all up in arms at any attempt to dislodgeany of them. It is not long since I read in the newspapersof an attempt of the farmers to remove someof these suspicious neighbours to a greater distance,which brought out such a host of hostile forestersagainst them, threatening: to burn their houses overtheir heads, as compelled them to send for the military.This is just in keeping with the character given ofthem in the neighbourhood. They are a fine race ofmen, say they, but many of them desperate. Insevere winters the distress and destitution of thesewild people have sometimes been' found to be beyonddescription, both in intensity and extent.In this forest are nine walks, and to each a keeper.It has also two rangers, a bow bearer, and land-warden.There is also an officer of modern date inthe constitution of a forest, the purveyor, appointedby the commissioners of the dockyards at Plymouth,whose business is to assign timber for the use of thenavy. There are also various inferior officers, asvermin killers, etc. Many of these offices are nowmerely sinecures, and are held by gentlemen whorarely see the forest; the greater part of their concernwith it being to receive their salaries, and the numberof fat bucks belonging by prescription to the office.The lodges are handsome buildings, fit for the residenceof any gentleman, and are mostly so occupied.NEW FOREST. 97The one at Lyndhurst, where George III. used totake up his residence during his hunting expeditions,is a substantial brick building close to the road. Init is preserved one of the stirrups of Rufus.And still, in merry Lyndhurst hall,Red William's stirrup decks the wall ;Who lists, the sight may see ;And a fair stone, in green Manhood,Informs the traveller where stoodThe memorable tree.In a note to this stanza of *' The Red King," apoem on the death of Rufus, by William StewartRose, bow-bearer of the New Forest, and therefore,as he himself tells us, successor to Sir Walter TyiTell,Mr. Rose says — " the stirrup, suspended amongsmoked escutcheons of the royal arms, and stags'antlers, makes a good addition to the forest ornamentsof the hall of judicature. The justice-seat and bar,are of ancient and massive oak ; an enormous bacon-rack,of the same age and materials, surmounts thewhole. The green habits of the judge and officersassort well with the rest ; and it is impossible to see acourt held under this sylvan pomp and circumstanceto view the mixed and oddly accoutred rabble ofpeople attached — to hear their defences, founded onsome wild notions of natural law, delivered in an uncouthjargon, still considerably dashed with Anglo-saxon— to observe the sang-froid with which theyhear the decision of their judges, and, not least, toobserve the prompt dispatch of justice — it is impossible,I say, to witness such a scene (as a spectatoronce observed to me), Without being transported inimagination back to the fourteenth century."NEW FOREST.The Commissioners of Woods and Forests havemade extensive plantations in various parts of theforest, which appear in a thriving condition, and arebelted with a variety of pines — Scotch, silver fir,Weymouth pine, pilasters, etc., whose contrastedfoliage makes a rich appearance.CHAPTER III.SHERWOOD FOREST.New Forest, as we have now seen, still retains itscompleteness as a forest — its herds of deer, its keepersgoing their daily rounds, its wild horses, and swinealmost as wild, and all its ancient extent of wastes,woodlands, and forest people. A widely differentcondition does this once noble forest exhibit. It wasmore than all celebrated as the scene of the exploitsof Robin Hood, and his merry men. In his day, itextended from the town of Nottingham to Whitby inYorkshire, or rather it and the forest of Whitby layopen to each other, in perfect contiguity. At a muchlater day it extended far into Derbyshire ; but, aftermany dis-afforestings and encroachments, in the reignof Queen Elizabeth, it contained an equal space withthat of New Forest at present. Here our Normankings delighted to come and enjoy their hunting insummer at their palace of Clypstone, built by HenryII. ; and an especially favourite place of John, whosemark upon the forest trees growing in that neighbourhood,has been repeatedly found of late years, in cuttingthem up for timber.It was a pleasant region ; varied with its hill and100 SHERWOOD FOREST.dale, fair lakes, — some of which yet remain; — rivuletsof most beautiful clearness ; woods of noble growth ;and the abundant Trent rolling along its southern side.In it lay Nottingham, Mansfield, Hardvvick, Wel-beck,Thereby, since the birth-place of Lady MaryWorsley Montague; Newstead, the abode of LordByron; Annesley, the heritage of Mary Chatsworth,and many an other ample domain. It was governedby a warden, his lieutenant, and a steward ; a bow-bearer,and a ranger ; four verderers, twelve regarded,four agistors, and twelve keepers in the main forest,under the chief forester, who held it in fee, withliberty to destroy and kill at pleasure, reserving 100deer in each walk. There were also several woodwardsfor every township within the forest, and onefor every principal wood. It had also five hays, orroyal parks, each fenced in, and furnished with itslodge ; and having each a forester, going his roundson horseback, with a page ; and two foresters on footwithout a page. These hays were Best-wood, Lindby-hay, Bellay, Birkland cum Bellay, and Clypstone.In these hays no man commons," says the Inquisitionof King Henry III., taken in the thirty-fifth yearof his reign, at St. John's house in Nottingham.They were especial reserves of game for the royal use,which was not to be disturbed by the intrusion of anyother men, or their cattle, on any pretence.Besides these, there were extensive woods and demesnes:Newstead, Lyndhurst, Warbeck, Rumford,Rosewood, Slumber, Kingshaghe, Warburton, Arnall,Edmonstone, Mansfield-workhouse, Hye Forest,Kyegill, and Ravished, Boswell Rise, Sutherland{qrj., the land of Robert Fitzouth, or Robin Hood'sSHERWOOD FOREST. 101land ?) the barony of Southwest, and others, full ofgreat woods of oak, many of them 700 years old;thirteen hundred head of red deer at the very last Inquisition,besides fallow deer without number.* Allthis is broken up, and dispersed as a dream. Theseroyal hays and demesnes have been bestowed in grantsby different monarchs : as Newstead by Henry VIII,to Sir John Byron; Westwood by Charles II., to theDuke of St. Albans, his son by Nell Gwyn; andso on, or sold. The great woods have fallen underthe axe; and repeated enclosures have reduced theopen forest to that part which formerly went by thename of the Hye~Forest; a tract of land of about tenmiles long, by three or four wide, extending from theNottingham road, near Mansfield west, to Clipstone-park east. This tract is, for the most part, bare oftrees. Near Mansfield there remains a considerablewood, Harlowe Wood, and a fine scattering of oldoaks near Berry-hill, in the same neighbourhood ; butthe greater part is now an open waste, stretching in asuccession of low hills, and long winding valleys darkA curious fact is apparent on the face of "A Vere taken byspecial commandment from his Majesty to the Lord Warden of hisforest, of all the Red Deer in this forest, 1616." The warden wasobliged to maintain 100 head of red deer in each of the twelve walks1200 in the whole. In this inquiry there proved to be 1260; butinAnnesley, the property of the Chawoi ths, and Newstead, the propertyof the Byrons, there were only ten deer altogether. TheseByrons and Chaworths were always notorious Nimrod, and sufferednone to escape them. In Papplewick too, the adjoining parish, therewere only two ! The keepers indeed affirmed that " some days" therewere twenty in Annesley Pills, and fourteen in Newstead Woods,but they did not appear to the Commissioners. In another " Vere,"taken in 1635, though the deer had increased in other walks, so thatthe total numbers were 1367, in Newstead and Annesley there wereonly 19 !102 SHERWOOD FOREST.with heather. A few solitary and battered oaksstanding here and there, the last melancholy remnantsof these vast and ancient woods ; the beautiful springs ;swift and crystalline brooks; and broad sheets of waterlying abroad amid the dark heath, and haunted bynumbers of wild ducks and the heron, still remain.Nature is not easily deprived of these ; and in summer,when the plover and the lark build there, andsend along those brown dales their merry whistle, orloud cries, and in autumn when the whole wastebursts into a blaze of crimson beauty with the blossomingheather, it is still, stripped as it is, a charmingplace for a contemplative ride or stroll. Here twentyyears ago, Captain Cartwright might be seen followinghis hawks, and here still you meet a few sportsmen,with their fine dogs leaping amongst the longheather and red fern.But at the Clipstone extremity of the forest, stillremains a remnant of its ancient woodlands unrifled,except of its deer — a specimen of what the whole oncewas, and a specimen of consummate beauty and interest.Birkland and Bilhaa:he taken together formatract of land extending from Fullerton, along the sideof Thereby Park, the seat of Earl Manners, to Clip-stonePark, of about five miles in length, and one ortwo in width, — Bilhaghe is a forest of oaks ; and isclothed with the most impressive aspect of age thatcan perhaps be presented to the eye in these kingdoms.Stonehenge does not give you a feeling ofgreater eld, because it is not composed of a materialso easily acted on by the elements. But the hand oftime has been on these woods, and has stamped uponthem a most imposing character. I cannot imagine aSHERWOOD FOREST. 103traveller coming upon this spot without being startled,and asking himself — "what have we got here?" Itis the blasted and battered ruin of a forest. A thousandyears, ten thousand tempests, lightnings, winds,and wintry violence have all flung their utmost forceon these trees, and there they stand, trunk after trunk,scathed, hollow, grey, gnarled; stretching out theirbare, sturdy arms, or their mingled foliage and ruin —a life in death. All is grey and old. The ground isgrey beneath, the trees are grey with clinging lichens,the very heather and fern that spring beneath themhave a character of the past. If you turn aside, andstep amongst them, your feet sink in a depth of mossand dry vegetation that is the growth of ages, orrather that ages have not been able to destroy. Youstint and look round, and in the height of summer,all is silent ; it is like the fragment of a world wornout and forsaken. These were the trees under whichking John pursued the red deer 600 years ago. Thesewere the oaks beneath which Robin Hood led uphis bold band of outlaws. These are the oaks whichhave stood while king after king reigned ; while theEdwards and Henrys subdued Ireland, and ravagedScotland and France; while all Europe was seeking torescue Jerusalem from the Saracens ; while the wars ofYork and Lancaster deluo-ed the soil of all thiskino^domwith blood; while Henry VIH. overthrew popery,wives, ministers, and martyrs with one strong, ruthlesshand ; while Elizabeth, with an equal hand of shrinkingmight and decision, made all Europe tremble at awoman's name, and stand astonished at a woman'sjealousy, when she butchered her cousin, the Queenof Scots. Here they stood, while the monarchy of104 SHERWOOD FOREST.England fell to the ground before Cromwell and theCovenanters; while Charles II., restored to his realm,but not to wisdom, revelled ; while under a newdynasty, the fortunes of England have been urgingthrough good and evil their course to a splendour anddominion strangely mingled with suffering and disquiet,yet giving prospect of a Christian glory beyondall precedent and conception. Through all this thesetrees have here stood silently — and here they are!monuments of ages that cannot be seen without raisingin our souls remembrance of all these mightythings. To the contemplative mind they are inscribedall over with characters of strange power. Theyshew us at a glance, and with a palpableness whichfew things besides possess, how far the day of theirfirst growth is past by ; how far the ages of feudalismand civilization lie asunder. All around them, insteadof that ocean of woods, heaths and morasses,come crowding up green fields, and the boundary-marksof free men ; and if we were to see a hoarypilgrim suddenly make his appearance on the pave ofa great modern town, propped on his long staff, andbelted in his grey robe, with his sandal-shoon andscallop-shell, we should not feel more strongly thediscrepancy of life and character between him andthe spruce population around him, than between thesehoary and doddered oaks and the cultured countrywhich hems them in.But Bilhaghe is only the half of the forest-remainshere : in a continuous line with it lies Birkland — atract which bears its character in its name — the landof Birches ! It is a forest perfectly unique. It isequally ancient with Bilhaghe, but it has a less dilapi-SHERWOOD FOREST. 105dated air. There are old and mighty oaks scatteredthrough it, ay, some of them worn down to the veryultimatum of ruin, Without leaf or bough, standinghuge masses of blackness; but the birches, of whichthe main portion of the forest consists, cannot boastthe longevity of oaks. Their predecessors haveperished over and over, and they, though noble andunrivalled of their kind, are infants compared withthe oaken trunks which stand amongst them. Birk-land! it is a region of grace and poetry ! I haveseen many a wood, and many a wood of birches, andsome of them amazingly beautiful too, in one quarteror another of this fair island, but in England nothingthat can compare with this. It must be confessed thatthe birch woods which clothe the mountain sides, beautifythe glens, and stud the romantic lochs of Scotland,derive a charm from the lovely and sublime formsof those mountains, glens, and waters, which is notto be expected in this lowland country. The birchtrees which rear their silvery stems, tree above tree,on the rocks of the I'rosachs ; the birch MOods thatfill the delicious valleys of Rossshire — which paradisethe glens and feather the heathery mountain-sidesof Glen-More nan Alpin — the great glen of Scotland,traversed by the Caledonian Canal — thousandsof summer tourists can testify with me are lovelybeyond description ; but Birkland has some advantageswhich they have not. Its trees have reached asize that the northern ones have not ; and the peculiarmixture of their lady-like grace with the stern andample forms of these feudal oaks, produces an effectmost fairylandish and unrivalled.Advance up this long avenue, which the nobleVOL. II. G106 SHERWOOD FOREST.owner of this forest tract has cut through it, and lookingright and left as you proceed, you shall not beable long to refrain from turning into the temptingopenings that ever and anon present themselves.Enter which you please, — you cannot be wrong.You may wander for hours, and still find fresh aspectsof woodland beauty. These winding tracks, justwide enough for a couple of people on horseback, orina pony-phaeton to advance along, carpeted with amossy turf that springs under your feet with a deliciouselasticity, and closed in with shadowy trunksand flowery thickets — are they not lovely ? Andthen you come to some sudden opening, where thelong pensile branches of the birches, and the sweepingmasses of oaken boughs surround and shut you inwith a delectable solitude, where you may lie on thewarm turf and read, or listen to the whispering leavesor the solemn sough of the forest ; or a merry partyof you may laugh and talk to your hearts' content,glad as the blue sky above you ; and vow that youwill come and pitch your tents here for a fortnight, —a jocund company, like Shakspeare's immortal troopin the forest of Arden. There never was scenery torealize more perfectly our idea of that forest. Butgo on : you enter on a wider expanse, on which aglorious oak stretches out its vast circumference ofboughs that droop to the very ground, and form anample tent, whose waving curtains fan you with themost grateful air. Here you come upon the solitaryfoot-path that crosses the forest. You hear the lightclap of a gate, and presently beneath the limpingtrees, you see some rustic personage pursuing thispath, and going unconsciously past you as you standSHERWOOD FOREST. 107amongst the thickets — some old man with heavy pace,or village girl hurrying along as if those woods werestill haunted by dubious things. But advance, andhere is a wide prospect. The woodmen have clearedaway the underwood ; they have felled trees that wereovertopped and ruined by their fellows ; and theirbillets and fallen trunks, and split-up piles of blocks,are lying about in pictorial simplicity. On all sides,standing in their solemn steadfastness, you see huge,gnarled, strongly-coloured, and missed oaks, someriven and laid bare, from summit to root, with thethunder-bolts of past tempests. An immense tree iscalled the Shamble-Oak, being said to be the one inwhich Robin Hood hung his slaughtered deer; butwhich was more probably used by the keepers for thatpurpose. By whomsoever it was so used, however,there still remain the hooks within its vast hollow.The old birches, without doubt some of the largest inEngland, shew like true satyrs of the woods — to theheight of a man, being shagged, indented, and cross-hatched,as it were, into a most satyr roughness,and contrast well with the higher bole, which risesclear and shining as silver to the boughs, which sweepdown again to the ground in graceful lightness.There is no end to the variety of their aspect andgrouping. From the sylvan loveliness around you,you might fancy yourself in the outer wilderness ofsome Armada's garden. In spring, these woods areall alive with the cawing of jackdaw's, which build inthousands in the hollow oaks; and as their bustleceases as the evening falls, the nightingales are heard,and the owl and the dor-hawk come soaring throughthe dusky air.108 SHERWOOD FOREST.It is just the region to grow poetical in. I neverwalk these woods without forgetting for the time allthe cares of towns and common life. It is to me apalpable introduction into the old world of poetry andromance. There is a spirit and feeling of the intellectualworld that falls on you as the peculiar spirit ofthe place. It seems to me that if Milton, Shakspeare,Spenser, and all those noble poets whose minds havemoulded the better mind and character of this greatcountry were to revisit it at times, when they hadlooked round them on the agitations of city-life, tosome such place would they come awhile to refreshthemselves with their old delights, and to hold highconverse on the present fashion and prospects ofhumanity. Nothing seems so natural to these scenes,as to imagine their presence thus joined with thekindred spirits of a later day — Scott, Byron, Shelley,Coleridge, Hogg, and the like; — their religion, theirpassions, their doubts, their philosophical mysticism allnow blended down into a heavenly nobility and unionof heart and desire; their favourite fancies and pursuitsstill dear to them as ever, but their intellectual visionwidened to the embracement of the universe. I seemto see Shelley and Keats going hand in hand alongsome fair glade ; the one pouring out all that soul oflove which possessed him, which he wished had beenthe foundation of the Christian religion instead offaith, and who yet, blinded by the impetuosity of youthand indignation against the despotism of priestcraft,failed to see that this same love was the very life andglory of that system ; — the other young poet stilllittering aloud his longings for time ! time ! in whichto achieve an eternity of fame : —SHERWOOD FOREST. 109Oh I for ten years, that I may do the deedThat my own soul has to itself decreed !Or Lamb, speaking to those old friends of his earthlysojourn, of some fair creature met in the valleys ofheaven : —She loves to walkIn the bright regions of empyrean light,By the green pastures and the fragrant meads,Where the perpetual flowers of Eden bow !By crystal streams, and by the living waters,Along whose margin grows the wondrous treeWhose leaves shall heal the nations ; underneathWhose holy shade a refuge shall be foundFrom pain and want, and all the ills that waitOn mortal life, from sin and death for ever.But away, spirit of the woods ! Time urges ; theworld calls : and we are thrown once more into themidst of the stirring, rushing, unceasing stream ofmen. These woods and their fairy-land dreams arebut our luxuries ; snatches of beauty and peace caughtas we go along the dusty path of duty. The townhas engulfed us; a human hum is in our ears; andthe thoughts and the cares of life upon us once more.CHAPTER IV.FOREST ENCLOSURES.Before I quit this part of my volume, let me say aword on the subject of forest enclosures. There arecertain persons, who from notions of national benefit,are very desirous that all crown lands should be disposedof; and all forests and wastes enclosed. Asamatter of national benefit I think them considerablymistaken. For the very highest purposes of nationalbenefit I desire, and that most earnestly, to see themkept open. I know the logic regularly employedby these people ; — to make two blades of corn growwhere one grew before ; to make all our lands in thehighest degree productive of food. Now, if we werecattle, or sheep, the great end of whose existence itwas to graze well, and get fat, then is their reasoningmost excellent. But I look upon humanity as havingother wants than mere physical ones. I too wouldhave all our lands produce us food; but then it shouldbe food of various kinds ; food not only for one part,the corporeal, but for every part of our nature ; andin these forests and open lands the intellectual part ofthe nation " have a food that these men know not of."FOREST ENCLOSURES. IllHe who attends to our mere animal prosperity maycall himself an utilitarian, but the true utilitariancomprehends in his scheme what is good for man inhis integral nature ; for his spiritual and intellectualneeds, as well as for his bodily. But taking them ontheir own ground, these forest lands are not mere unproductivewastes. They supply our dockyards withan abundance of valuable timber ; in them lie farms,and cottage homes, with their orchards, gardens, andlittle enclosures. They maintain a large population,and they pasture a vast quantity of cattle, sheep, hogs,and horses. Take even such a tract as that of Dartmoor,now stripped of its trees. There cattle andsheep run in great numbers ; and there lies about ininexhaustible quantities, granite, which supplies labourin shaping it, and conveying it away, to a largebody of men, and goes forth to build our public M'orksand adorn our metropolis. And there too the minesemploy, again, numerous people, and send up largequantities of valuable metal. And what should wegain by an enclosure ? We should gain a greatersupply of corn, which the farmers and landlords nowfind they have actually too much of.* Having hedgedabout the kingdom with enactments to prevent thefree importation of grain, they now find that theygrow so much of it that they cannot really get a remuneratingprice for it. But even if we did want it,we have only to throw open our ports, and have asmuch as we want, at almost any price, and cattle too,which we could give our manufactures in exchangefor. This is all that the most sanguine advocates ofThey did so especially in 1834, and 1835; when wheat was only38 and 40 shillings per quarter.•112 FOREST ENCLOSURES.universal enclosure pretend that we should gain : andthen let us see what we should lose by it. In thefirst place, these lands would go to swell the rentalsof the rich, as all others enclosed have done. Theenclosure system has been one of unexampled absurdityand injustice. It has been conducted on theprinciple of — " Unto him that hath shall be given,and from him that hath not shall be taken away eventhat which he hath." Unto him who could show thathe had land lying in proximity to the waste about tobe enclosed, has been given more, in the exact proportionto the quantity which he had. The morehe had, the more was given him ; and from him thathad none, was taken that which he had — the customof communion his beasts on the waste. One wouldnaturally have supposed that in a christian countrythere would have been a desire to provide for thosewho had nothing. That in every parish the wasteland should have been, if allotted at all to the inhabitants,allotted to those Medio had most need of it. Therule has always been exactly the reverse ; and theconsequence has been that our poor population, strippedof their old common rights, have been thrownupon the parish ; their little flock of sheep, their fewcows, their geese, their pigs, all gone; and no collateralhelp left them to eke out their small earnings ;and in case of loss of work, or sickness, no resourcebut parish degradation, — the consequent evil influenceupon the character of the rural population has beenenormous. They have a sense of injustice, if theyhave not the power to resist it; and when they seea system of this kind, they say — "much will havemore," and their spirits are none the better for theFOREST ENCLOSURES. 113feeling that accompanies the melancholy truth. Now,the same system would assuredly be continued, wherecommon allotments took place ; and in the sale ofcrown lands, a few great persons would purchasethem; a few farmers would live and pay high rents,where hundreds of comfortable cottagers now live,who would then be added to the list of paupers.But it is not merely the poor that would lose by it.The miner, the artist, the naturalist, the poet, the antiquarian,the lover of the country, and the frequenterof it for health or relaxation, all would suffer mostseriously by it, and the country would suffer withthem. In the wastes of Devon and Cornwall, inthose of Derbyshire, Warwickshire and Northumberland,the subterranean mass is worth, in many places,a hundred times the surface. Enclose, and cover upwith cultivation these wastes, and you bury by millionsthe wealth of the nation, and the bread of theminers. At present, they lie open to the foot andthe eye of the scrutinizing and adventurous. Theycan traverse heaths and mountains, and amid thebarely covered rocks beneath them, or in the precipicesthat tower above them, they can at leisure,hunt out and discover the sparkling vein, or the dulland secret ore ; and open up a fountain of labour andaffluence that may run for ages. But enclose thesewild regions ; warn off the curious inquirers withboards threatening " prosecution as the law directs,"or as may now be seen on the premises of an old ladyin Surrey — that "anybody trespassing will be shotat without farther notice !" — keep them out withfences, and cover up the surface with accumulatingsoil and manure, and there may the riches of Proving2114 FOREST ENCLOSURES.hence remain buried for ever. With the researchesof the miner, you restrict those of the geologist too.With the naturalist it fares the same. Every spade-graftof your cultivation annihilates the habitats andlocalities of animals, insects, and plants which canexist only in the unploughed wilderness. You destroysome of the most curious natural productions of yourcountry for ever, and circumscribe some of the mosthealthful, heart-purifying, and spirit-cheering pursuitsof men. Your ploughs and mattocks pierce throughand erase immediately, the earthy mounds, the circles,the stone vestiges of far-past ages, and with them thepleasant journeys and inspiring speculations of antiquarians;as well as a great portion of the historiclight and evidences of the nation. If you could rootout the New Forest, you might possibly get as wellsupplied with timber from some other quarter, butwhere would you find the landscape painter such atreasury of sylvan and picturesque beauty, such deliciousnooks and hollows, and fair streams windingunder forest boughs? Where such groupings andendless variety of foliage and forest stems ? Wheresuch lights and shades and colours as nature therediffuses over her own regions in the everlasting circulationof the seasons ; and all within six or sevenhours' ride of the metropolis ? I should like to knowwhere you will find him substitutes for the naked,waste, but glorious expanses of the Surrey heaths, ofDartmoor, Stainmore, the high moors of Derbyshire,those of Northumberland, Lancashire, or of Scotlandthat land which has often been called poor, butwhich from the influence of its wild and magnificentscenery is continually pouring out a wealth of geniusFOREST ENCLOSURES. 115that is miraculous ? Thank God ! they never canpull down its mountains, and reduce them to the deadlevel, and quadrangular fields of cultivation ; and intotheir fairy-land recesses there will always be a retreatfrom the engrossing, engulphing spirit of mercantilecalculation.But I am passing from painting to poetry ; andyet, one is so blended with the other that I would askthe shrewdest person living to shew me where theytotally separate. Where then, I ask, will they findsubstitutes for the painter, for our wild and desolatemoors ? There the very air in its elastic freshness isfull of health and inspiration to him. There he drawsan indemnity for his constitution from the deadlyeffects of long and close confinement in cities andpainting rooms. There every turf is covered with arude beauty to his eyes ; there every rock and stone ispiled in bold and inimitable shapes of savage grandeurby the spirit of nature for him ; and the winds, andrains, and vegetative powers of centuries have beenbusy tinging them with the hues of his admiration.There, amid the sound of falling waters and the roarof coming tempests, he feels all his faculties calledinto power and life within him, and brings home,,season after season, scenes that cover the walls of ourcity homes with a wild magnificence. Enclose thesetracts ; hem them in with walls and hedges, and hewill no longer visit them. You will no longer findhim sitting on some moorland stone, watching thestream which hurries with sea-like sound along itscraggy bed ; those rocky banks and long lines of treesthat overhang it, and mark its course along the desert.He will no longer fix the solitary labourer, or the116 FOREST ENCLOSURES.passing group, in their own peculiar character, norpaint the lurid gloom of the storm as it comes with afrown and a thunder of rains and winds only knownin such shelterless regions. And when you banishhim, you banish the poet, and the lovers of poets too.It is on our moors and our mountains that the profoundestspirit of poetry dwells. There is an influencefelt there, which has more than half createdour Shakspeare, Milton, Spenser, Wordsworth,Scots, Coleridge, Shelley, and other high spiritsthat have striven to elevate the English mind abovethe mere ordinary enjoyments of life. And is it truethat any one ever felt the full charm of the works ofScott who was not familiar with heaths and mountains? Did any one ever feel all the beauty of theopening of Ivanhoe who had not often lingered in ourforests ? Has any one a true conception of " As youlike it," of "Macbeth," or of "The MidsummerNight's Dream," of " The Fairy Queen," or of manyanother divine creation of the British Muse, who isnot conversant with the free, beautiful, and untamednature by whose influence they are shaped ? It isone of the great offices of the poet to keep alive thelove of nature ; and it is, again, by a correspondinglove of nature that they must be comprehended andrelished. The more you reduce our whole island toa uniformity of colour and cultivation, the more effectuallyyou extinguish this great action and reaction,which are health to the spirituality of the publicmind.We are now arrived at a crisis in which we canafford a few forests and moors to lie open; but wecannot afford to have our higher tastes and feelingFOREST ENCLOSURES. 117deprived of their legitimate aliment. Shut us up intowns, or within an eternal continuity of hedges andditches, and we shall cease to be the high-souledpeople we are. We shall become the drudges ofselfish interests, or the victims of false taste. Wemust have some openness, some freedom, some breathingplaces left us. As Abernethy said, that the parksof London were its lungs; so our mountains, forests,and moorlands are the lungs of the whole country. Itis there that we rush away from counting-houses, factories,steam-engines, railroads, politics, and sectarianfactions, and breathe for a season the air of physicaland mental vigour; and feel the peace of nature; anddrink in from all things around us a new life, a newfeeling, full of the benevolent calm which is shed byits Creator over the world. Scott said he must see theheather at least once a year, or he should die. Crabbemounted his horse in a passion of desire which could nolonger be resisted, and rode fifty miles to see the sea;and more or less of this feeling lies in every bosomthat is not totally dead to the true objects of life. Thefailing in health ; the over-worn in spirit ; the followersof a summer's recreation, all seek our hills and seacoasts,and plains, where the peace or magnificence ofnature, or where some celebrated monument of thepast is to be found. If any one would know theextent of this delight in such things, or the numberswho indulge in it, let him go, as I have elsewhere said,to any such place in this kingdom, on any day throughthe summer and autumn. If we had the amount ofthe numbers who make a summer excursion to thesea-side, or to our moorland and mountain districts, itwould be amazing. The parties who swarm alongour Derbyshire valleys, and in every nook of Scot-vol.II. G 3118 FOREST ENCLOSURES.land, Wales, Ireland, and the Western Isles, areapparently without end.Now this is a very healthful taste, and one, thatwith all our trading, manufacturing, and money-gettinghabits we cannot too much encourage. Wecomplain of our countrymen seeking pleasure so muchabroad, and shall we diminish the objects of popularattraction at home ? No, there never was an age inwhich our forests and moorlands were of half thevalue they are of to us now. As true utilitarians, wehave the strongest motives to keep them open, as wemean to keep alive the fine arts, poetry, the love ofantiquity, and the love of nature amongst us; as wewould retain and invigorate in us that higher life bywhich we have climbed to our present national altitude ;by which our sages and poets have been nourished,and become the true teachers and inspirers of virtueand nobility to the world ; by which we are made tofeel our animal life even with a double zest; and areyet, I trust, destined to make the name of Englandthe greatest in the history of the world.I do not mean to say that no waste lands should behenceforth enclosed. There are plenty, every oneknows, that have no particular grace or interest aboutthem. Let them, in the name of all that is reasonable,be hedged and ditched as soon as you please; but asfor the village green, the common lying near a town,the forest, and the moorland that has a poetical charmabout it, felt and acknowledged by the public — maythe axe and the spade that are lifted up against thembe shivered to atoms, and a curse, worse than thecurse of Kehama, chase all commissioners, landsur-veyors, petitioning lawyers, and every species of fencerand divider out of their boundaries for ever and ever.-T-^^" 'Ji^CHAPTER V.WILD ENGLISH CATTLE.We have a few herds of the original cattle whichonce abounded in England and Scotland, still remaining.We have long ago destroyed our wolves, bears,and boars ; and it seems almost a miracle that a fewof these inhabitants of our ancient forests have beenpreserved. They form the most interesting objects ofthose parts of the country where they exist. Everyoneknows the use Scott has made of them in theBride of Lammermuir. There was formerly a fineherd of them at Drumlanrig in Scotland. In Englandthey were to be found at Burton-constable in Yorkshire; Wollaston near Nottingham ; Disburse inCraven ; Lime Hall in Cheshire ; Charley Castle inStaffordshire; and ChilHngliam Castle in Northumberland.That they were of the true old breed was120 WILD ENGLISH CATTLE.sufficiently testified by their common resemblance ;being universally milk-white; having only the tipsof their horns, and their muzzles and ears coloured.The only difference was, that in some herds, the tipsof the ears, and the whole of their inside were black,in others red, or brown. What may be the numbersremaining at Lime or Disburse, I do not know. AtWollaston they have become mixed with the commonbreed; but at Charley there are about twenty ofthem, where they retain their ancient characteristics,and their wildness. Here, there are sundry superstitionsconnected with them. It is believed and assertedthat if they amount to more than a certain number,or if a calf of an unusual colour is produced, somecalamity happens in the family of the noble owner,Earl Ferrets. This, it is asserted, was the case whenone of the earls was executed ; and indeed, that everyfamily calamity of magnitude has been thus prognosticated.The noblest herd is to be found at GillinghamCastle, on the Northumbrian borders, the seat ofEarl Mandeville. The park is well calculated forthe use of such animals. It lies in a solitary country.Care seems taken to render the isolation as completeas possible ;— there is not even a public-house permittedby his lordship in the small hamlet, whichseems to exist just as the ancient, dependent hamletof the feudal castle did in the feudal times themselves.The castle, a fine fabric, in true castellated style,and well befitting: the classic land of Northumberlandthe region of Fenwick, Walworth, and Clievy-Chace — of the skirmishes of Douglas and Percy — ofmany an ancient cross, convent, battle-stone, andWILD ENGLISH CATTLE. 121hermit cell, lies embosomed in its woods at the footof wild hills, which ascend eastward for a mile ormore, and terminate in a range of bare and craggyeminences of a fine woodland character. This steepslope between the castle and these heights is the park.Various woods and deep dells are scattered over it, sothat the cattle can choose a high and airy pasturebetween them, where they see afar off any approach —a situation they seem particularly to enjoy ; or can,at the slightest alarm, plunge into the depth of woodsand glens.Bewick, who visited them, has given capital portraitsof this interesting race of cattle, and the followingpassages from his account of them are marked byhis usual accuracy. " At the first appearance of anyperson, they set off in full gallop, and at the distanceof two or three hundred yards make a wheel round,and come boldly up again, tossing their heads in amenacing manner. On a sudden they make a full stopat the distance of forty or fifty yards, looking wildly atthe objects of their surprise; but on the least motionbeing made, they all again turn round, and run offwith equal speed, but not to the same distance : forminga shorter circle, and again returning with a bolderand more threatening aspect than before, they approachmuch nearer, probably within thirty yards ; when theymake another stand, and again run off. This they doseveral times, shortening their distance, and advancingnearer, till they come within ten yards ; when mostpeople think it prudent to leave them, not choosingto provoke them further; for there is little doubt butintwo or three times more they would make anattack.122 WILD ENGLISH CATTLE.The mode of killing them was, perhaps, the onlymodern remains of the grandeur of ancient hunting.On notice being given that a wild bull would be killedon a certain day, the inhabitants of the neighbourhoodcame mounted and armed with guns, etc., sometimesto the amount of a hundred horse, and four or fivehundred foot, who stood upon walls, or got into trees,while the horsemen rode out the bull from the rest ofthe herd, until he stood at bay ; when a marksmandismounted and shot. At some of these huntingtwenty or thirty of these shots have been fired beforehe was subdued. On such occasions the bleeding victimgrew desperately furious, from the smarting ofhis wounds, and the shouts of savage joy that wereechoing from every side : but, from the number ofaccidents that happened, this dangerous mode has beenlittle practised of late years; the park-keeper alonegenerally shooting them with a rifled gun, at one shot.When the cows calve, they hide their calves foraweek or ten days, in some sequestered situation, andgo and suckle them two or three times a-day. If anyperson come near the calves, they clap their headsclose to the ground, and lie like a hare in form to hidethemselves. This is a proof of their native wildness,and is corroborated by the following circumstance,that happened to the writer of this narrative, whofound a hidden calf of two days old, very lean andvery weak. On stroking its head, it got up, pawedtwo or three times like an old bull, bellowed veryloud, stepped back a few steps, and bolted at his legswith all his force. It then began to paw again, bellowed,stepped back, and bolted as before ; but knowingits intention, he stepped aside, and it missed him.WILD ENGLISH CATTLE. 123fell, and was so very weak, that it could not rise,though it made several efforts. But it had doneenough : the whole herd was alarmed, and coming toits rescue, obliged him to retire ; for the dams willallow no person to touch their calves, without attackingthem with impetuous ferocity.When any one happens to be wounded, or isgrown feeble through age or sickness, the rest of theherd set upon it, and gore it to death.The weight of the bulls is generally from forty tofifty stone, the four quarters : of the cows about thirty.The beef is finely marbled, and of excellent flavour."We visited the park in 1836, and were at greatpains to get a sight of this noble herd. We weretold that the keeper was in the park and would get usaview of it ; but on going into it, we found him, andsome others of the household, busily engaged in shootingfawns. For this purpose some men on horsebackwere galloping round a herd of deer, and drivingthem in a particular direction, where a keeper lay inambush, near a narrow opening between the woods,and when they came near enough, shot with his riflesuch fawns as he wanted. It was a scene of greatanimation : the galloping men — the keeper seen cautiouslypeeping out, to watch for the approach of theherd — the herd here collected into a dense group, inwatchfulness and alarm — and again streaming off in along line across the park, in some direction whichseemed most to promise escape. The cries of the oldthe shriller cries of the young — the sudden flashand report from the thicket— the fall of the fawn — andthe flying of the herd in some other direction, madeup a lively though painful scene.124 WILD ENGLISH CATTLE.But this spoiled our peculiar sport. The wild cattle,accustomed to be fired at themselves occasionally,alarmed at the sound of the guns, had retired to themost obscure woodland retreats of the park. Severalpersons told us that they had seen the whole herd afew minutes before, in the highest part of the park;but we traversed the woods in every direction, andpenetrated into their darkest recesses without gettinga glimpse of them. This we did for a couple of hours,and spite of the warnings of those who were well acquaintedwith them, so great was my anxiety to havea view of these fine animals. Two sawyers, whowere sawing timber at a pit up in a glade of the park,told us that a few mornings before, on coming to theirwork, they found several bulls in the glade, whichbegan to shake their heads and tear up the ground inastyle which induced them to betake themselves tothe wood as nimbly as possible. We were told too,that Mr. Landseer, while sketching some of thesecattle, found it advisable to retreat more than once ;and that people are not only frequently pursued, butthat one man had been killed by them the previoussummer. However, trusting to my ability to mounta tree, in case of need, I determined to hold on till Ifound them; and having thus gone through all thewoods but one, not excepting Robin Hood's Clench,for Robin has a traditionary retreat in many a placeof the north, I was certain they must be there, andtherefore gave way to the remonstrances of wiserheads, and retired to a distance to watch their issuingforth. The firing of the guns in the lower part ofthe park had ceased, and we were assured that the cattlewould not be long before they made their appear-wildENGLISH CATTLE. 125once. And sure enough, in about half an hour, thisgrand herd of wild cattle came streaming out of thisvery wood. There were upwards of a hundred ofthem ; and they spread themselves at equal distancesacross the steep glade, between this and the nextwood, and commenced a steady graze, ever and anonlifting up a cautious head, to ascertain the actual absenceof danger. It was a sight well worthy of a longjourney to see. Their number, their uniformity ofcolour and shape, the wild shy look of the cows, thesturdy strength of the bulls — some of them of a largesize — and their clear snowy hue, which made themconspicuous for many miles distant, as we occasionallyturned, on our way over the moors to Woollen, andsaw them still grazing in the very same spot andorder. They reminded us of the herds of the sun,amongst which Ulysses' hungry crew made suchhavoc in the meads of Trinacria.We were told that the hunting of the bulls hadbeen renewed by Lord Ossulston, the eldest son ofthe Earl of Mandeville, with whom it was a veryfavourite pursuit — certainly the grandest species ofchase yet left in Britain, and the only one which thesense of danger incurred can heighten and ennobleto anything like the same level as that of hunting thetiger in India, or the bear in the northern countriesof Europe. It seems, as well he may, that the Earlis proud of this fine herd of cattle, and, it is said, refuseson any terms, to furnish any of his noble neighbourswith a pair of them to stock their parks similarly.It is to be hoped that this interesting remnant of thenative herd will long be preserved in its present magnificentnumber and purity of breed.PART III.HABITS. AMUSEMENTS, AND CONDITION OFTHE PEOPLE,CHAPTER I.COTTAGE LIFE.What a mighty space lies between the palace andthe cottage in this country ! ay, what a mighty spacebetween the mansion of the private gentleman andthe hut of the labourer on his estate ! To enter theone : to see its stateliness and extent ; all its offices,out-buildings, gardens, greenhouses, hothouses; itsextensive fruit-walls, and the people labouring tofurnish the table simply with fruit, vegetables, andflowers ; its coach-houses, harness-houses, stables, andall the steeds, draught-horses, and saddle-horses,hunters, and ladies' pads, ponies for ladies' airing-carriages,and ponies for children ; and all the groomsand attendants thereon ; to see the waters for fish, thewoods for game, the elegant dairy for the supply ofmilk and cream, curds and butter, and the dairy-maidsand managers belonging to them : and then, to enterthe house itself, and see all its different suites ofapartments, drawing-rooms, boudoirs, sleeping-rooms.COTTAGE LIFE. 127dining and breakfast rooms; its steward's, housekeeper'sand butler's rooms; its ample kitchens andlarders, with their stores of provisions, fresh and dried ;its stores of costly plate, porcelain and crockery apparatusof a hundred kinds ; its cellars of wine and strongbeer; its stores of linen; its library of books; itscollections of paintings, engravings, and statuary ; thejewels, musical instruments, and expensive and interminablenick-mockery of the ladies ; the guns and dogs ;the cross-bows, long-bows, nets and other implementsof amusement of the gentlemen ; all the rich carpetingand fittings-up of day-rooms, and night-rooms, withevery contrivance and luxury which a most ingeniousand luxurious age can furnish ; and all the troops ofservants, male and female, having their own exclusiveoffices, to wait upon the person of lady or gentleman,upon table, or carriage, or upon some one ministrationof pleasure or necessity : I say, to see all this, and thento enter the cottage of a labourer, we must certainlythink that one has too much for the insurance of comfort,or the other must have extremely too little. Ifthe peasant can be satisfied with his establishment,and the gentleman could not tell how to live withouthis, one would be almost persuaded that they couldnot be of the same class of animals. Knowing, however,that they are of the same species, it only showsof what elastic stuff human nature is made ; into whata nutshell it can compress its cravings, and howimmensely it can expand itself when the pressure ofnecessity is withdrawn. I am not going here to mootthe old question of whereabout happiness lies in thisstrange disparity of circumstance; it, no doubt, liessomewhere between the extremes. It certainty cannot128 COTTAGE LIFE.be created by external superfluities. They lay opentheir possessors to the exercise of despotic power ; tothe corruptions of pride and luxury ; to false taste,frivolous pursuits, and the diffusion of the attentionover so many objects as to prevent the heart fromsettling' firmly on any. They have a tendency toweaken the domestic attachments, and the love ofsolid pursuits. On the other hand, the pressure ofpoverty and ignorance certainly can, and too oftendoes, lie so heavily as to destroy the relish of life'senjoyments in the cottager. Yet happiness is a firesidething ; and the simplicity of cottage life, the fewnessof its objects, and the strong sympathies awakenedby its trials and sufferings, tend to condense theaffections, and to strike deep the roots of happiness inthe sacred soil of consanguinity. When wealth isaccompanied by a desire to do good, it is a gloriousand a happy destiny; when lowly life is virtuous,easy, and enlightened, it is a happy destiny too — forit is full of the strong zest of existence, and strongaffections. But this is not my present subject.When we go into the cottage of the workingman,how forcibly are we struck with the differencebetween his mode of life and our own. There is histenement of, at most, one or two rooms. His nakedwalls; bare brick, stone or mud floor, as it may beafew wooden, or rush-bottomed chairs ; a deal, or oldoak table; a simple fire-place, with its oven beside it,or, in many parts of the kingdom, no other fire-placethan the hearth; a few pots and pans — and you havehis whole abode, goods and chattels. He comes homeweary from his out-door work, having eaten his dinnerunder hedge or tree, and seats himself for a few hoursCOTTAGE LIFE. 129with his wife and children, then turns into a rude bed,standing perhaps on the farther side of his only room,and out again before daylight, if it be winter. Helias no one to make a fire in his dressing-room, to layouthis clothes, to assist him in his toilet; he flings onhis patched garments, washes his face in a wooden orearthen dish at the door; blows up the fire, gets readyhis own breakfast, and is gone.Such is the routine of his life, from week to weekand year to year ; Sundays, and a few holidays, arewhite days in his calendar. On them he shaves, andputs on a clean shirt and better coat, drawn from thatold chest which contains the whole wardrobe of himselfand children ; his wife has generally some separatedrawer or bandbox, in which to stow her lighter andmore fragile gear. Then he walks round his littlegarden, if he have it; goes with his wife and childrento church or meeting; to sit with a neighbour, or havea neighbour look in upon him. There he sits, hischildren upon his knee, and tells them how his fatherused to talk to him.This is cottage life in its best estate ; in its unsophisticatedand unpauperised condition. He has nocarriages, no horses, no cards of invitation, or ofadmittance to places of amusement; none of the luxuries,fascinations, or embellishments of life belong tohim. It is existence shorn of all its spreading andflowering branches, but not pared to the quick. Thisis, supposing the father of the family is sober andindustrious; — that he is neither a pot-house haunter, agambler at the cockpit, a boxer, a dog-fighter, apoacher, an idle, rackety, and demoralized fellow, asthousands are. This is, supposing that he brings130 COTTAGE LIFE.home his week's wages, and puts them into the handsof his wife, as their best guardian and distributer, —saying : — " Here, my lass, this is all that I haveearned; thou must lay it out for the best; shaveenough to do to win it."And what are these wages, out of which to maintainhis family, aided by the lesser earnings of hiswife, by taking in washing, helping in harvest-fields,charring in more affluent people's houses, and so on,and the earnings of the children in similar ways, orinsome neighbouring factory? His own probablyamount to nine, or, at most, twelve shillings, and ifhis family be large, and there are several workersamong them, the whole united earnings may reachtwenty shillings per week ; a sum which will hardlyfind other men wherewith to pay toll-bars, or purchasegunpowder; a sum which we throw away repeatedlyon some bauble ; and yet, on this will a whole familymaintain life and credit for a week, ay, and on muchless too. In this little hut, which we should hardlythink would do for a cow-shed or a hay-loft, and towhich the stables of many gentlemen are real palaces,is the poor man packed with all his kindred lives,interests, and affections : and so he carries on thewarfare of humanity, till He, who is no respecter ofpersons, calls him to stand, side by side, before histhrone with the rich man who "has fared sumptuouslyevery day."Such are " the short and simple annals" of thousandsand tens of thousands in these kingdoms : andyet what fine strapping young fellows spring up inthese little cabins, men who have tilled the soil ofEngland and wielded at home her mechanic tools, andCOTTAGE LIFE. 131borne her arms abroad, till their industry and genius,under the direction of higher minds, have raised herto her present pitch of eminence ; and what sweetfaces and lovely forms issue thence to Sunday worship,to village feast and dance ; or are seen by theevening passer-by in the light of the ingle, amid thefamily group, making some smoky-raftered hut a littletemple of rare beauty, and of filial or sisterly affections.I often thank God, that the poor have theirobjects of admiration and attraction; their domesticaffections and their family ties, out of which spring athousand simple and substantial pleasures ; that beautyand ability are not the exclusive growth of hall andpalace ; and that, in this country at least, the hand ofarbitrary power dare seldom enter this charmed circle,and tear asunder husband from wife, parent from children,brother from sister, as it does in the lands ofslavery. Yet our New Poor Laws have aimed adeadly blow at this blessed security; and, till thesound feeling of the nation shall have again disarmedthem of this fearful authority, every poor man's familyis liable, on the occurrence of some chance stroke ofdestitution, to have to their misfortune, bitter enoughin itself, added the tenfold aggravation of being tornasunder, and immured in the separate wards of aPoverty Prison. The very supposition is horrible ;and, if this system, this iron and undiscriminatingsystem, — a blind tyranny, knowing no difference betweenaccidental misfortune and habitual idleness,between worthy poverty and audacious imposition,between misfortune and crime, — be the product ofPhilanthropy, may Philanthropy be sunk to the bottomof the sea !132 COTTAGE LIFE.But the cottage life I have been speaking of, isthat of the better class of cottagers; the sober andindustrious peasantry: but how far short of this conditionis that of millions in this empire ? To say nothingof Irish cabins, the examples of what a state ofdestitution, misery, and squalor men may sink into ;how much below this is the comfort of a Highlandhut? What a contrast is there often between thecottage of an English labourer, and the steading of aHighland farmer. There it stands in a deep glen,between high, rocky mountains. His farm is a wildsheep-tract among the hills. Wheat, he grows none,for it is too cold and weeping a climate. He has alittle patch of oats for crowdie and oat-cake ; potatoeshe has, if the torrent has not risen during suddenrains, so high in the glen, as to sweep his crop away.He has contrived a little stock of hay for his cows,but where it can have grown you cannot conceive,till some day, as you see a woman or a boy herdingthe cattle amongst the patches of cultivation, — forthere are no fences between the grass and arable landyou find one or the other cutting the longer grassfrom the boggy waste with a sickle, and drying itoften in little sheaves as our farmers dry corn. Butthe house itself; — it is a little, low, long building ofmud, or rough stones; the chimney composed of fourshort poles wrapped round with hay-bands ; a flatstone laid upon it to prevent the smoke being drivendown into the hut by the tempestuous winds from thehills; and another stone laid upon that, to keep itfrom being blown away. The roof is thatched withbracken, with the roots outermost; or often the sameroof is a patchwork of bracken, ling, broom, and turf.COTTAGE LIFE. 133A little window of perhaps one pane of thick glass,or of four of oiled paper. The door, which reachesto the eaves, is so low that you must stoop to enter;and the smoke is pouring out of it faster than it ascendsfrom the chimney. A few goats are, mostlikely, lying or standing about the door. You enter,and as soon as you can discern anything through theeternal cloud of smoke, you most probably find yourselfin a crowd. The fire of peat lies in the centreof the hut, surrounded by a few stones; woodenbenches are nailed on one side against the wall, andthe other is partitioned off like a large wooden cupboard,with sliding doors or curtains, for the familybed, as you find all over Scotland, and even in Northumberland.The pigs are running about the floor;hens are roosting over your head ; the cows are lowingin, what we should call, the parlour; nine or ten children,or weans, as they call them, and a callant, orbow, who teaches the weans, and the father and mother,and very probably their father and mother, orone of them, in extreme age, are fixing their eyes onthe stranger.It was but last year that Mrs. Howitt and myselfpassed the night in such a dwelling, and a slightnotice of the place may present, to many of ourreaders, a new view of cottage life. It was in Koss-shire, some thirty or forty miles north-west of Inverness,at a spot called the Connie, lying between LochChilly and Loch Luichart. A wild, and yet mostbeautiful spot it was,— a little strath opening itselfout between the wooded mountains which surroundLoch Chilly, and the bare stony hills in the directionof Strath Conan. We came upon it after wan-vol.II. H134 COTTAGE LIFE.during through the delicious fairyland of birch woodsthat clothe that Loch in the very romance of picturesquebeauty, springing up amongst the wildestchaos of crags, here hanging over the water, and heresurrounding the ruinous blackness of some solitaryhut, that, but for children playing before it, wouldappear to have been tenantless for years. A sterndefile guarded by vast masses of projecting rocks, byplaces clothed with the richest drapery of crimsonheather, by places naked and lividly grey, and heightabove height still scattered with climbing birch trees,brought us to a little nameless loch hidden in thewoods, girt with a dense margin of reeds, and coveredwith the most magnificent display of white water-lilies,and then appeared two of those little huts in this Highlandsolitude. The evening was rapidly sinking intonight, and we were uncertain how far it was to thenext inn. Two women appeared at the door of oneof the huts, and rather startled us with the information,that the nearest inn in the way we proposed togo, was distant five-and-twenty miles ! That anothermile brought us to the ferry over the Conan, wherethe carriage road ceased, and all beyond was mountainand moorland waste. We seemed, as it were, tobe on the very verge of civilization ; and there appearedto be nothing for us, but to retrace our wayfor some miles, or to take up our lodging in thishouse.Weary as we were, this appeared the less objectionablealternative, and we accepted the offer whichthe elder woman made us. The moment we did so,the poor woman seemed struck with the rashness ofher act. " What shall I do for the like of you ?COTTAGE LIFE. 135What shall I find for the like of you ?" We assuredher we should not be very fastidious guests, and inwe went. It was such a hut as I have just described.The fire lay on a hearth of stones, with a few largestones built up against the mud wall to prevent thehouse from being burnt. The woman's husband, afarmer, was gone into Yorkshire with lambs ; ahired shepherd sat on the side of the partitioned bed,such as I have already described ; two fine sheep-dogslay before the fire, and a troop of bare-loggedand kilted boys came running in from some distantschool. They were Macgregor, having come hitherfrom Dumbartonshire, and could, fortunately for us,speak English. We sate on a bench in the ingle,and all these little Macgregor, Rigor Macgregor,Peter and Duncan and the rest, squatted on the mud-floorand alternately watched us and their eldest sister,a fine bare-legged lassie of eighteen, who was busybaking pancakes for us. It was a hot post both forherself and for us. She put on seats till the hut waslike an oven, and the smoke made our eyes smartalmost past endurance. Yet we watched the progressof her operation with great interest, as she made apaste of oatmeal and water, rolled it out in cakes, cutit into segments, baked them on an iron girdle overthe fire, and then reared them before the glowingseats to make them crisp. This done, she found ussome tea, and that was our supper. They had twoor three cows, but their milk was already in the processof being converted into cheese ; the potatoes andthe oats of the last crop were exhausted, and the wetseason had prevented the ripening of the present.There was," said our hostess, " a great cry in the136 COTTAGE LIFE.country for food !" Our fatigue, and this announcement,induced us to think we fared well. They madeus a comfortable bed in the spence, where we foundfour Gaelic Bibles, and the History of RobinsonCrusoe ! Early in the morning we pursued our way;but ere we took our leave, the poor woman came infrom fetching up her cows, her clothes wet to thevery knees. When we expressed our surprise —"• O," said she, " that is what we are used to everydayof our lives. While you have been in your bed,the hereby has three times gone round the corn-fieldswith his dogs, to chase away the stags and roes intothe woods. The last thing every night, while thecorn is growing in the field, he goes round — onceagain at midnight, and then at the earliest dawn ofday. Every night it must be done, or a green bladewould not be left. If you went in the gloaming withthe man into the wood, sir, you would see twentystags as big as our cows. Oh, it 's an awful place forwild beasts — foxes and badgers, and serpents: didyou ever see a serpent ma'am ? Sometimes in amorning they rear themselves up in a narrow path,and hiss at me bitterly." As the poor woman spoke,we stood at the door of her little tenement, and sawthe heavy dew lie glittering on the grass all round;and the primitive cheese press, consisting of a pole,one end of which was thrust into a crevice of a rock,and the other weighted with a huge stone; and aroundus were the heathy mountains and the woods ; themists and clouds clinging to the sides of wild hills, orrolling away before the breeze of morning ; and thesound of the neighbouring torrent alone disturbingthe deep solitude. We could not avoid feeling howCOTTAGE LIFE. 137far was all this from the cottage-life of England. Wegave the poor woman what we thought a fitting returnfor her hospitality, and left her overwhelmedwith a grateful astonishment, which showed what wasthere the real value of money.This is a scene in the scale of comfort far belowthe general run of labourers' houses in England ; butyet how far, infinite far lower, do many of our workingpeople's abodes sink. What dens have we inmanufacturing towns ! What little, filthy, dismal,yet high-rented dens ! What cabins do some of ourcolliers and miners inhabit ! What noisome, amphibiousabodes abound in our fishing villages, such asCrabbe has painted ! What places have I seen indifferentparts of England, which everywhere obtainthe name of Rookeries — huge piles built for somepurpose which has not answered; or some desertedhall, let off in little tenements ; the windows broken,and stopped with old rags and hats ; the ground allround trodden down, covered with ash-heaps; a fewstunted bushes, or gooseberry trees, where once hadbeen a garden, displaying the ragged and tatteredwash of the indigence of indigence : altogether exhibitingsuch an air of poverty as impoverishes one'svery spirit, and fills it with a nameless feeling of disgustand despondence for days after. Such a placeI particularly recollect seeing somewhere betweenNether and Gretna-green; and, observing an oldman "thundering about," as he called it, as withouthope and object, I asked him how this place came tolook so forlorn — " O," said he, " we once could runour cows on the waste, and did very well, but that istaken away. Sir James asked the steward what the138 COTTAGE LIFE,poor people must do, ' O, they will all hooly* away,'said he ; but where are we to hooly to ?"Ah ! cottage life ! There is much more hiddenunder that name than ever inspired the wish to buildcottages ornees, or to inhabit them. There is a vastmass of human interests within its circle, of which theworld takes little note. The loves and hopes; thetrials and struggles ; the sufferings, deaths and burials;the festivities and religious confraternities; the indignitiesthat fret, and the necessities that compel toaction and union our simple brethren and sisters.How little is truly known; how much is consequentlymisjudged; how wide is the indifference concerningthem in those who have the power to work miraclesof love and happiness amongst them, and must oneday stand with them at the footstool of our commonFather, who will demand of his children how each hasloved his brethren.Let us turn our eyes, however, a moment from thedark side to the light one. There is not a morebeautiful sight in the world than that of our Englishcottages, in those parts of the country where theviolent changes of the times have not been so sensiblyfelt. Where manufactures have not introduced theirred, staring, bald brick houses, and what is worse,their beer shops and demoralization : where, in fact, amore primitive simplicity remains. There, on theedges of the forests, in quiet hamlets and sweetwoody valleys, the little grey-thatched cottages, withtheir gardens and old orchards, their rows of bee-hives,Slip quietly away. A word often found in the old BorderBallads, as " Then hooly, hooly up she rose," etc.COTTAGE LIFE. 139and their porches clustered with jasmines and roses,stand : —Hundreds of hutsAll hidden in a sylvan gloom, — some perchedOn verdant slopes from the low coppice cleared ;Some in deep dingles, secret as the nestOf Robin Redbreast, built amongst the rootsOf pine, on whose tall top the throstle sings.Hundreds of huts, yet all apart, and feltFar from each other ; 'mid the multitudeOf intervening stems ; each glen or gladeBy its own self a perfect solitude.Hushed, but not mute. j^;^,^ ,^j-^^„^There they stand, and give one a poetical idea ofpeace and happiness which is inexpressible. Wellmay they be the admiration of foreigners. In manyof the southern counties, but I think nowhere morethan in Hampshire, do the cottages realize, in myview, every conception that our poets have given usof them. One does, no doubt, when looking on theirquiet beauty, endow them with a repose and exemptionfrom mortal sufferings that can belong to nohuman dwelling ; and Professor Wilson, in his poemcalled an "Evening in Furness Abbey," which appearedin Blackwood's Magazine, September, 1829,a poem flushed all over with the violet hues ofpoetry, and overflowing with tenderness and grace,gives one this very delightful expression of a thoughtwhich has occurred to many of us —The day goes byOn which our soul's beloved dies ! The dayOn which the body of the dead is stretchedBy hands that decked it when alive ; the dayOn which the dead is shrouded; and the dayOf burial— one and all go by ! The grave140 COTTAGE LIFE.Grows green ere long; the church-yard seems a placeOf pleasant rest, and all the cottages,That keep for ever sending funeralsWithin its gates, look cheerful every one,As if the dwellers therein never died,And this earth slumbered in perpetual peace.But sobering down by such sad, yet sweet thoughtsas these, our poetical fancies of cottage life, and bringingthem within the range of human trouble andsuffering, still these rustic abodes must inspire uswith ideas of a peace and purity of life, in most soothingcontrast with the hurry and immorality of cities.Blessings be on them wherever they stand, in woodlandvalleys, or on open heaths, throughout fair England; and may growing knowledge bring growth ofhappiness, widening the capacity of enjoyment withouttouching the simplicity of feeling and the strengthof principle. Well may the weary wayfarer —Lean on such humble gate and think the while,O ! that for me some home like this would smile ;Some cottage home to yield my aged form,Health in the breeze, and shelter in the storm.There are thousands of them inhabited by woodmen,labourers, or keepers, that are fit dwellings forthe truest poet that ever lived ; and it is the ideal ofthese picturesque and peace-breathing English cottagesthat has given origin to some of the sweetestparadises in the world — the cottages of the wealthyand the tasteful. What most lovely creations of thisdescription now abound in the finest parts of England,with their delicious shrubberies, velvet lawns, hiddenwalks, and rustic garden-huts ; their little paddockslying amid woods, and skirted with waters ; spotsCOTTAGE LIFE. 141breathing the odour of dewy flowers, and containingin small space all the elegance and the country enjoymentsof life.Happiness, it is true, is not to be dragged into suchplaces ; but what places they are for the genuine loverof the country to invite her into ! The very feelingof the cumbrous pomp and circumstance of aristocraticestablishments in this country, makes one think ofsuch sweet hermitage with a sense of relief and congratulation.What more charming abode has thewide earth for a spirit soothing itself with the pleasuresof literature and the consolation of genuinereligion, far from the wrangling of political life, thansuch a one as the cottage of Miss Bowles, at Buck-land,on the border of the New Forest; of MissMitford, at Three-Mile-Cross; or that of Wordsworthat Rydal ? But we must quit these earthly paradisesto speak of other things.IICHAPTER II.POPULAR FESTIVALS AND FESTIVITIES.What a revolution of taste has taken place in theEnglish people as it regards popular festivals andfestivities ! Our ancestors were passionately fond ofshows, pageants, processions, and maskings. Theywere fond of garlands and ribbons, dancing and festivemerriment. May-day, Easter, Whitsuntide, St. John'sDay, Yule, and many other times, were times ofgeneral sport and gaiety. Music and flowers abounded;mumming, morris-dancing, and many a quaint displayof humour and frolic spread over the country. Thetimes, and the spirit of the times, are changed : — wearebecome a sober people. England is no longermerry England, but busy England ; England full ofwealth and poverty — extravagance and care. Therehas been no small lamentation over this change ; andmany of our writers have laboured hard to bring usonce more to adopt this state of things. They mightas well attempt to bring back jousts and tourneys,popery, and government without representation. Thetimes, and the spirit of the times are changed. Struts,POPULAR FESTIVALS. 143Hone, Leigh Hunt, Miss Laurence, and many others,may expatiate on the poetic beauty of these things :they may deplore the extinction of this graceful rite,that jocund festivity, and pray as earnestly to resumethem once more ; but can they give us our lighthearts again ? Can they make the nation youngagain? Can they make us the simple, ignorant, confidingpeople, living in the present, careless of thefuture, as our ancestors were ? Till they can do this,they must lament and exhort us in vain. As soonmight they bid the sun retrace his path ; the seasonsreverse their course ; earth and heaven turn back inthe path of their years. What our ancestors were,they were from circumstances that are gone for ever ;and what we are, we are from another mighty successionof circumstances, of which the memory and effectmay no more be blotted out, than the stars can beblotted out of the clear heavens of midnight. Thecountry has passed through deep baptisms, and processesof fermentation which have worked out thelighter external characters, and totally re-organisedthe moral as well as the political constitution of thekingdom. The better qualities of the old Englishcharacter I trust we fully retain, but the more juvenileand fantastic ones are irrevocably destroyed in theshock of most momentous convulsions.Amongst the many attempts to account for thesedate cast of the modern popular mind, Mr. Buller,in " England and the English," has attributed it tothe spread of Methodism. Had he attributed it toPuritanism he would have been nearer the mark.Methodism may possibly have done something towardsit, but it neither began early enough, nor spread POPULAR FESTIVALSverbally enough, to have the credit of this change.The decay of popular festivities has been noticed andlamented by writers for the last century. It has beengoing on both before and since the rise of Methodism,with much the same pace of progression, and isequally felt where Methodism is not allowed to shewits face, as where it exercises its fullest power. Overwhat a great extent of this country does the influenceof high-church landlords prevail, where Methodismcannot get footing ; where the people are all expectedto go soberly to church as in the good old times ; andyet there the people are just as grave, have grownout of the sports and pastimes of their ancestors, justas much as in the most Methodistic districts. In themanufacturing districts, where the Methodists havegained most influence, it is true enough that theyhave helped to expel an immense quantity of dog-fighting,cock-fighting, bull-baiting, badger-baiting,boxing, and such blackguard amusements*; but Maying,guiding, plough-blocking, morris-dancing, weregone before, or would have gone had not Methodismappeared.Mighty and many are the causes which havewrought this great national change; — causes whichhave been operating upon us for the last 300 years ;and are so intimately connected M'ith our wholenational progress, political and intellectual — with allour growing greatness, with all our glory and oursorrows, that had not Methodism existed, that characterwould have been exactly what it is.The Reformation laid the foundation of this change.While we had an absolute pope, and an absoluteking; while the people were neither educated, norAND FESTIVITIES. 145allowed to read the Bible, nor to be represented inparliament ; while the monarch and a few noble familiesheld all the lands of the kingdom, the lowerclasses had nothing to do but to follow their mastersto the wars, or live easily and dance gaily in times ofpeace. The retainers of great houses, the labourersin the fields, foresters and shepherds following theirsolitary occupations, constituted the bulk of the nation.Merchants and merchandise were few; our greattrading towns and interests did not exist; the days ofnewspapers, of religious disputes, of literature andperiodicals were not come. The people were eitherat work or at play. When their work was over, playwas their sole resource. They danced, they acted rudeplays and pantomimes, with all the zest and gaiety ofchildren, for their heads were as unoccupied withknowledge and grave concerns as those of children.They lived in poverty it may be, but still they livedin that state of simplicity and dependence which leftthem little care, and they were cut off by the impossibilityof rising out of their original rank from alltroublesome excitement. It was equally the concernof the civil government and the hierarchy to encouragesports and festivities, to keep them out of dangerousinquiries into their own condition, or rights. In thegreat feudal halls, the minstrel, the jongleur, the jester,and other ministers of gaiety ; hawks and houndsabroad, jollity and drinking at home, kept the mindsof all idlers occupied with matters to their taste. Theclergy and monks promoted M'ith an equal zeal ofpolicy, the festivals of saints, keeping of high daysand holidays, processions, games, and even acting themysteries and miracle-plays. While the system POPULAR FESTIVALStinned, this spirit and national character must havecontinued likewise ; but the Reformation burst like avolcano from beneath, and scattered the whole smilingsurface into disjointed fragments, or buried it beneaththe lava of ruin.Henry VIII. at once destroyed Monkery and theCatholic church. He at once seized on the ecclesiasticallands, and snapped asunder the ecclesiasticalpolicy. The translation of the Bible let in a flood oflight that revealed all the phantasmagoria of the past,and prepared a train of everlasting inquiries, disquietudes,and intellectual and political triumphs for thefuture. The people saw they had been treated aschildren, but they now awoke to the passions and theconscious power of men. They had tasted of thetree of knowledge of good and evil, and their eyeswere opened to their actual condition, never more tobe closed. The lands that were rudely seized andarbitrarily distributed, created a new class in thecommunity — the gentry — a link between the aristocracyand the people ; — possessing the knowledge ofthe one, and sharing the interests of the other.Henry's predecessors had hastened this new era bycurtailing the wealth and power of the nobility ; andthe long wars of the houses of York and Lancasterhad already done much of this work for him ; exterminatingsome, humbling others, and embarrassingwith debts the remainder. So were the elements of amore popular career thrown into the midst of thenation ; and the religious persecutions on the Continent,by sending us swarms of jewellers, weavers, andother artificers, laid the foundation of those tradingpropensities which have now carried us to such aAND FESTIVITIES. 147marvellous length. We came to be a trading andcolonizing people, and to possess a fleet in order toprotect our new interests. How rapidly this navygrew, indicating by its own growth that of the generalwealth and commercial enterprise of England, ofwhich it was the consequence, is seen by this circumstance.In that fine old ballad of Sir AndrewBarton, Lord Howard is made to say to Henry VHI.in 1511—Sir Andrew's ship I bring with mee ;A braver ship was never none ;i\xiw hath your grace two ships ofwarr.Before in England was but one !This one was the Great Harry built in 1504. Inabout 80 years only afterwards, the English had thirtyvessels of war at sea, and with these dared to attackthe Invincible Armada of Spain, consisting of onehundred and thirty vessels, and by the assistance of aprovidential tempest, totally, dispersed and destroyedit. Then Howard of Effingham, Drake, Frobisher,Hawkins, were the names of our commanders, — nameswhich thenceforward filled all the known world withterror, and gave to England the empire of the seas.With this extension of national interests, a more activeand earnest spirit was diffused through the people.The struggle with enemies abroad, and with the rapidlymaturing spirit of religious freedom at home, keptElizabeth engaged, and induced in her a rigour ofpersecution, and in the people a rigour of resistanceand the soul of martyrdom. Before the developmentof these antagonist powers, all lightness fled ; singinggave way to preaching and listening ; dancing, to runninganxiously to know the fate of sufferers, and the148 POPULAR FESTIVALSdoctrines of fresh-springing teachers. So completelyhad the old relish for merriment and pastimes diedout, that her successor, James, endeavoured to compelthe people, by the publication of his " Book of Sports"to be jocose and gamesome. But it would not do.The soul of the people was now up in arms for theirrights ; and the despotic nature of himself and his son,resisting its claims, kept up such a fever of politicalstrife in the kingdom as would have put out all jestingand capering if they had not gone before. Thehierarchy fell, — fell in one wide chaos of civil contention; and, as if torrents of blood, and volumes of fire,and the trampling hoofs of thousands of careeringcavalry had not been enough to overwhelm and dashto pieces every remaining fragment of jollity andpopular fete, — in came Puritanism from Geneva ; andthe Solemn League and Covenant from Scotland.There was a final close to all the pageantry of processions,and the merry saintliness of festivals : theywere denounced and abhorred as the carnality of Antichrist,and the rags of the scarlet woman. Charles II.indeed, could revive licentiousness, but he could notbring back the holiday guise of " the old profession."And what has been the course of England since ?One ever-widening and ascending course of mightywars, expanding commerce, vast colonization, and thegrowth of science, literature, and general knowledge.We are no longer a nation of feudal combatants, ofpiping shepherds, and thoughtless peasantry, — but ofbusy, scheming, money-collecting, family creatingmen. Our last tremendous war put the climax to thisamazing career. In it all Europe seemed torn to piecesand organized anew. We, as a people, were led by cir-AND FESTIVITIES. 149substances to put forth the most stupendous energiesthat perhaps any nation ever did. To defend ourcolonies; to support the interests of our allies witharms and subsidies; to supply the whole of Europewith all species of manufactures, and almost all speciesof merchandize, and through this demand stimulatinginto existence the powers of steam and machinery, apopulation of amazing numbers to maintain. Andthen, the shock and the revulsion when this greatwar-system suddenly ceased ! An immense debt, vasttaxes, the necessity of maintaining high prices, thenecessity of boundless competition and low wages thatwe might so compete with the continent, returning toits old habits.Who does not know with what a fiery force this hasfallen on the working classes? What distress, whatpauperization, what desperation, brought to the verypitch of rebellion, they have gone through ; and recollectingthis, can any one think otherwise than thatit has been enough to sober any people that is notdestitute of every element of high character. If wecould, after a baptism like this, be still like the French,a dancing, dissipation-loving people, we should, likethem, have but a fitful care to secure our liberties, andthe comforts of good government ; like them, at thismoment, we should be the victims of successive revolutions,yielding no fruit but tyranny. But we are asober and a thoughtful people, and are therefore workingout of the mass of our difficulties the form of arenewed constitution, adapted to our present enlargedviews and experience. But besides this, our energieshave not been called forth for this good end alone ;they have brought with their exercise a high relish for150 POPULAR FESTIVALSintellectual pleasures. Our minds have been stirredmightily, and, like animals that during their wintry-torporfeel no hunger, yet feel it keenly the momentthey are awake, they have become hungry for congenialaliment. We have fed on much knowledge, andare no longer children, but full-grown men, with manlyappetites and experienced tastes. Could we now sit,as our ancestors did, for nine hours together at a mystery? Could we endure to read through the chroniclesand romances of the middle ages, — books which spunout their recitals to the most extraordinary length,and were never too long; for books then were few?If we could not, so neither could the simple pleasuresand rural festivities satisfy the peasantry of this. Wearethe creatures of new circumstances, and of a higherreach of knowledge. A combination of causes, toopuissant to be resisted, has made hopeless all return tothe puerilities of the past. And after all, happinessof which the people, however unwisely, are alwaysin quest, does not consist in booths and garlands,drums and horns, or in capering round a May-pole.Happiness is a fire-side thing. It is a thing of graveand earnest tone ; and the deeper and truer it is, themore is it removed from the riot of mere merriment :The highest mood allowedTo sinful creatures, for all happinessWorthy that holy name, seems steeped in tears,Like flowers in dew, or tinged with misty hues.Like stars in halo.John Wilson.And the more our humble classes come to taste ofthe pleasures of books and intellect, and the deep firesideaffections which grow out of the growth of heartAND FESTIVITIES. 151and mind, the less charms will the outward forms ofrejoicing have for them. Beautiful and poetical, Igrant, are many of the old rites and customs of whichwe have been speaking; but they are beautiful andpoetical as belonging to their own times, — and many ofthem, I am inclined to believe, as seen in the distance ;for, seen at hand, there is a vulgarity in most popularcustoms that offends invariably our present tastes.Nor do I mean to say that our present populationcannot be cheerful. A more truly cheerful peoplenever existed ; and they can dance and be merry toowhen they will; as Christmas, and Whitsuntide, andtheir annual village feasts, and their harvest-homescan testify. Since the Reformation, the saints of thecalendar having become mere names in this country,their festivals have accordingly died away. Whitsuntide,Easter, and Christmas seem almost all thathave maintained their stand; and of these we willspeak a little ; but in the first place, let us have a fewwords on May-day.CHAPTER III.May-day.May-day was celebrated with a gaiety and poeticalgrace far beyond all other festivals. It had comedownfrom the pagan times with all its Arcadianbeauty, and seemed to belong to those seasons morethan to any Christian occasions. It is one that thepoets have all combined to lavish their most deliciousstrains upon. The time of the year was itself so inspiring,— with all its newness of feeling, its buds andblossoms and smiling skies. It seemed just the chosenperiod for heaven and earth and youth to mingletheir gladness together. There is no festivity that isso totally gone ! Washington Irving, in his very interestingaccount of his visit to Newstead Abbey,takes the opportunity to say, that he had been accusedby the critics of describing in his Sketch Book popularmanners and customs that had gone by, but thathe had found those very customs existing in thisneighbourhood. That those who doubted the accuracyof his statements must come north of the Trent.That here he found May poles standing in the .153fashioned villages, and a band of plough-bullocks evencame to the abbey while he was there.Washington Irving certainly seemed most agreeablyimpressed with the primitive air of this part ofNottinghamshire, and it is interesting to see the effectwhich places most familiar to you, produce on theminds of strangers of taste and poetical feeling. Hisdelight at finding himself in old Sherwood, the hauntof Robin Hood; in hearing the bells of Mansfield ata distance ; and his remarking the names of Falstaff,Hardstaff, Beardall, as names abounding about theforest, naturally suggesting the character of thosewho first bore them — names so common to our eyesas never to have awakened any such idea. All this isvery agreeable ; but let no lover of ancient customscome hither on the strength of Washington Irving'sreport, unless he means to travel much farther northof the Trent than Newstead. There is certainly aMay-pole standing in the village of Linby near New-stead,and there is one in the village of Mansfieldnear Southwest ; but I have been endeavouring torecollect any others for twenty miles round, and cannotdo it, and though garlands are generally hung onthese poles on May-day, wreathed by the hands ofsome fair damsel who has a lingering; affection for theolden times, and carried up by some adventurous lad,alas ! the dance beneath it, where is it? In the dalesof Derbyshire, May-poles are more frequent, but thedancing I never saw. In my own recollection, theappearance of morris-dancers, guisers, plough-bullocks,and Christmas carriers, has become more and morerare, and to find them we must go into the retiredhamlets of Staffordshire, and the dales of Yorkshireand Lancashire.154 May-day.One would have thought that the May-day fetewould have outlasted all others, except it were Christmas,on the strength of the poetical wealth of heartand fancy woven with it through our literature. Everywriter of any taste and fancy has referred with enthusiasmto May-day. Chaucer, Spenser, Shakspeare,Fletcher, Milton, Browne, Herrick, and all our laterpoets, have sung of it with all their hearts. Chaucer,in Salmon and Archie, describes Archie going to thewoods for garlands on May morning, according to theold custom. HeIs risen, and looketh on the merry day ;And for to do his observance to May,Remembering on the point of his desire,He on the courser, starting as the fire,Is risen to the fields him to place ;Out of the court were it a mile or way :And to the grove of which that I you told,By Aventine his way began to hold.To maken him a garland of the groves,Were it of woodbine, or of hawthorn leaves,And loud he sung, against the sunny sheen:Oh May, with all thy flowers and thy green,Right welcome be thou, faire, fresh May ;I hope that I some green here gotten may."And from his courser with a lusty heart,Into the grove full hastily he start.And in a path he roamed up and down.Milton has many beautiful glances at it, and Shakspearetouches on it in a hundred places, as in " TheMidsummer Night's Dream :"If thou lowest me then.Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night ;And in a wood, a league without the town.Where I did meet thee once with Helena,To do observance to a morn of May,There will I stay for thee.May-day. 155The European observance of this custom is principallyderived from the Romans, who have left tracesof it in all the countries they subdued. It was theirfestival of Flora. It was the time in which theysacrificed to Maia; and in Spain, where this customseems to remain much as they left it, the village-queenstill is called Maia. But we have traces of itas it existed amongst the Saxons, whose barons at thistime going to their Wittenagemote, or Assembly ofWise Men, left their peasantry to a sort of saturnalia,in which they chose a king, who chose his queen.He wore an oaken, and she a hawthorn wreath ; andtogether they gave laws to the rustic sports, duringthose sweet days of freedom. The May-pole too, orthe column of May, was the grand standard of justiceamongst these people, in the ey-commons, or fieldsof May : and the garland hung on its top, was thesignal for convening the people. Here it was that thepeople, if they saw cause, deposed or punished theirgovernors, their barons and kings. It was one of themost ancient customs, which, says Brande, has byrepetition been from year to year perpetuated.But we have traces also of its mode of celebrationamong our Druid ancestors, for it is certainly one ofthe old customs of the world, having come downfrom the earliest ages of Paganism through variouschannels. Dr. Clarke in his Travels, vol. ii. p. 229,has shown that the custom of blowing horns on thisday, still continued at Oxford, Cambridge, London,and other places, is derived from a festival of Diana.These ancient customs of the country did not escapethe notice of Erasmus when in England, nor the ceremonyof placing a deer's head upon the altar of St.156 May-day.Paul's church, which was built upon the site of atemple of Diana, by Ethelbert king of Kent. Mr.Johnson, in his " Indian Field Sports," also states thecurious circumstance, that the Hindoo hold a vernalfeast called Bhuvjzah, on the 9th of Baisach, exclusivelyfor such as keep horned cattle for use or profit,when they erect a pole and adorn it with garlands ; andperform much the same rites as used to be adopted bythe English on the first of May. Thus it appearshow ancient and how widely spread was this custom ;and its celebration by the Druids and Celts, point itout as belonging to the worship of the sun. In Irelandand the Highlands of Scotland, the people stillkindle fires on the tops of their mountains on thisday, called Real Fires, and the festival then celebratedBeltane, or Bealtane. The practice is to betraced in the mountainous and uncultivated parts ofCumberland, amongst the Cheviot, and in manyparts of Scotland. Mr. Pennant says — " On the firstof May, in the Highlands of Scotland, the herdsmenof every district hold their Beaten. They cut asquare trench in the ground, leaving the turf in themiddle. On that they make a fire of wood, on whichthey dress a large caudle of eggs, butter, oatmeal,and milk, and bring, besides the ingredients of thecaudle, plenty of beer and whisky ; for each of thecompany must contribute something. The rite beginswith spilling some of the caudle on the ground, bywayof libation. On that every one takes a cake ofoatmeal, on which are raised nine square knobs, eachdedicated to some particular being, the supposed preserverof their flocks and herds ; or to some particularanimal, the real destroyer of them. Each personMay-day. 1 37then turns his face to the fire, breaks off a knob, andflinging it over his shoulder, says — " This I give tothee ; preserve thou my sheep ; — this I give to thee ;preserve thou my horses:" and so on. After thatthey use the same ceremony to the noxious animals —This I give to thee O Fox ! spare thou my lambs ;this to thee O hooded Crow! this to thee Eagle !"When the ceremony is over they dine on the caudle,etc. etc.Something of this kind is retained in Northumberland,in the syllabub prepared for the May-feast,which is made of warm milk from the cow, sweetcake, and wine ; and a kind of divination is practisedby fishing with a ladle for a wedding-ring, which isdropped into it for the purpose of prognosticatingwho shall be first married. This divination of thewedding-ring is practised in the midland counties onChristmas eve ; and they have a peculiar kind of tallpots made expressly for this purpose, called posset-pots.I have myself fished for the ring on many amerry Christmas eve.One cannot avoid seeing in these ceremonies theirmost ancient origin and consequently wide-spreadadoption. The throwing over the shoulder offeringsto good and evil powers is exactly that of all savagenations, the effect of one uniform tradition. TheAmerican Indians, indeed, seldom propitiate the good,but are very careful to appease, or prevent the evilManitou. These notions have, no doubt, everywherecontributed to connect ideas of the presence and powerof spiritual and fairy creatures, and the extraordinarylicense of witchcraft on this night and day. Wecannot avoid thinking of the wizard rites of theVOL. II. I158 May-day.Vicksburg in Germany, made so familiar by Goethe;and we see the reason why all houses were defendedby forest boughs, gathered with peculiar ceremonies,and worn by the young on May-eve in almost everyEuropean country.What then were the exact ceremonies of May-day? The Romans celebrated the feast of Flora inthis manner. The young people went to the woods,and brought back a quantity of boughs with whichthey adorned their houses. Women ran through thestreets, and had the privilege of insulting every onewho came in their way. And here may we not seethecustom, still continued in France, though falleninto desuetude here, of the spouses (brides) of themonth of May? The spouses are the little daughtersof the common people, dressed in their best andplaced on a chair, or bank, in the streets and publicwalks, on the first Sunday in May. Other little girls,the brides' companions, stand near with plates, andtease the passengers for some money for their spouses.Like the Romans, then, our ancestors celebratedMay-day as a festival of the young. The youth ofboth sexes rose shortly after midnight, and went tosome neighbouring wood, attended by songs andmusic, and breaking green branches from the trees,adorned themselves with wreaths and crowns offlowers. They returned home at the rising of thesun, and made their windows and doors gay with garlands.In the villages they danced during the dayround the May-pole, which was hung to the very topwith wreaths and garlands, and afterwards remainedthe whole year untouched, except by the seasons, — afading: emblem and consecrated offering to the .159tess of Flowers. At night the villagers lighted upfires, and indulged in revellings, after the Romanfashion. In this country they added the pageant ofRobin Hood and Maid Marian, with Friar Tuck,Will Stately, and others of their merry company ;the dragon and the hobby-horse, — all of which may befound fully described in Strutt's Queenhoo-Hall.Spenser and Herrick give very graphic pictures ofthese popular festivities, which I shall here give ; andfirst, Spenser from the Shepherds' Calendar.Young folks now flocked in everywhereTo gather May baskets,* and smelling breve ;And home they hasten the posts to dight,And all the kirk pillars, ere daylight:With hawthorne buds, and sweet eglantine,And garlands of roses, and sops-entwine.Sicker this morrow, no longer age,I sawe a whole of shepherds outgoeWith singing and shouting, and jolly chere ;Before them rode a lustre habere,That to the many a hornpipe played,Whereto they dance, echo one with his may.To see these folks make such jovisaunceMade my heart after the pipe to daunce.Tho to the greene-wood they sweeten hem all.To fetched home May with their musical],And home they bring, in a royal throne.Crowned as king, and his queen attoneWas Lady Flora, on whome did attendA fivyre flock of faeries, and a fresh bandOf lovely nymphs. O that I were thereTo helped the ladies their May-bush beer !Herrick's poem is in the form of a lover inviting hissweetheart to go out a May-gathering.Bushes.160 May-day.Corunna's GOING A-MAYING.Get up, get up for shame : the blooming mornUpon her wings presents the God unshorn :See how Aurora throws her fairFresh quilted colours through the air :Get up, sweet slug-abed, and seeThe dew bespangling herb and tree.Each flower has wept and bowed towards the eastAbove an hour ago, yet you not dressed :Nay, not so much as out of bedWhen all the birds have matins said,And sung their thankful hymns; 'tis sin,Nay, profanation to keep in ;When as a thousand virgins on this daySpring sooner than the lark to fetch in May !Rise and put on your foliage, and be seenTo come forth like the spring time, fresh and green,And sweet as Flora. Take no careFor jewels for your crown, or hair ;Fear not, the leaves will strewGems in abundance upon you :Besides, the childhood of the day has kept,Against you come, some orient pearls unwept.Come and receive them, while the lightHangs on the dew-locks of the night,And Titan, on the eastern hillRetires himself, or else stands stillTill you come forth. Wash, dress, be brief in praying ;Few beads are best when once we go a-saying !Come, my Corinna, come, and coming markHow each field turns a street, each street a park,Made green and trimmed with trees ; see howDevotion gives each house a bough,A branch ; each porch and door, ere this.An ark, a tabernacle is,Made up of whitethorn, neatly interwove,As if here were those cooler shades of love.May-day. 161Can such delights be in the street,And open fields, and we not see 't ?Come, we '11 abroad, and let 's obeyThe proclamation made for May ;And sin no more, as we have done, by staying;But my Corinna, come, let's go a- Maying'.There 's not a budding boy or girl, this day.But is got up and gone to bring in May :A deal of youth, ere this, is comeBack, and with whitethorn laden home ;Some have despatched their cakes and cream.Before that we have left to dream ;And some have wept, and wooed, and plighted troth.And chose their priest, ere we can cast off sloth.Many a green gown has been given ;Many a kiss both odd and even ;Many a glance too has been sentFrom out the eye, love's firmament ;Many a jest told, of the key's betrayingThis night, and locks picked ; yet we 're not a- Maying !Come, let us go while we are in our prime,And take the harmless folly of the time ;We shall grow old apace, and dieBefore we know our liberty :Our life is short, and our days runAs fast away as does the sun :And as a vapour or a drop of rain.Once lost can ne'er be formed again :So when, or you or I are madeA fable, song, or fleeting shade;All love, all liking, all delight.Lie down with us in endless night.Then, while time serves, and we are but decaying,Come, my Corinna, come, let 's go a-Maying !Such were the festivities of youth and nature towhich our monarchs, especially Henry VIII., Elizabeth,and James, used to go forth and participate.In the reign of the Maiden Queen, pageant seemed162 May-day.to arrive at its greatest height, and the May-dayfestivities were celebrated in their fullest manner, andso they continued, attracting the attention of the royaland noble, as well as the vulgar, till the close of thereign of James I. In " The Progresses of QueenElizabeth," vol. iv. part i., is this entry : " May 8th,]60'2. On May-day, the queen went a- Maying toSir Rich. Buckley's, at Lewisham, some three or fourmiles off Greenwich." This may be supposed to beone of those scenes represented in Mr. Leslie's magnificentpicture of May-day, in which Elizabeth is aconspicuous object. It is recorded by Chambers thatHenry VIII. made a grand procession with his queenKatherine, and many lords and ladies, from Greenwichto Shooter's Hill, where they were met by aRobin Hood pageant. In Henry Vi's time, thealdermen and sheriffs of London went to the Bishopof London's wood, in the parish of Stebenheath, andthere had a worshipful dinner for themselves andother comers ; and Lydgate the poet, a monk of Bury,sent them by a pursuivant " a joyful commendationof that season, containing sixteen stanzas in metreroyal."In April, 1644, there was an ordinance of thetwo houses of Parliament for taking down all andsingular May-poles ; and in 1654, the ModerateIntelligencer says — "this day was more observed bypeople's going a-saying than for divers years past,and indeed, much sin committed by wicked meetings,with fighting, drunkenness, ribaldry, and the like.Great resort came to Hyde Park; many hundred of richcoaches, and gallants in rich attire, but most shamefulpowdered-hair men, and painted and spotted ivomen."May-day. 163And this before my Lord Protector ! so that the oldspirit was rising up again from beneath the influenceof Puritanism ; and the Restoration was again thesignal for hoisting the May-poles. In Hone's EverydayBook, and in that valuable miscellany, Time'sTelescope, many particulars of the rearing again thegreat May-pole in the Strand, and of the latest j\Iay-pole standing in London, may be found.Old Aubrey says, that in Holland they had theirMay-looms before their doors, but that he did notrecollect seeing a May-pole in France. Yet nothingis more certain than the custom of the French ofplanting tall trees in their villages at this time, and ofadorning their houses with boughs, and of planting ashrub of some pleasant kind under the window, or bythe door of their sweethearts, before day-break, on aMay-morning. Aubrey complains himself bitterly ofthe people taking up great trees in the forest of Woodstockto plant before their doors ; and John Evelyn asbitterly laments the havoc made in the woods in histime. They are safe from such depredations now.Yet in different parts of England still, till within thesefew years, lingered vestiges of this once great day.At Hardcastle in Lincolnshire, the young people usedto come marching up to the May-pole with wandswreathed with cowslips, which they there struck togetherin a wild enthusiasm, and scattered in a showeraround them. At Pastor in Cornwall, they have, orhad lately, the procession of the Hobby-horse. AtOxford on May-day, at four o'clock in the morning,they ascend to the top of the tower of Magdalen College,and used to sing a requiem for the soul of HenryVIL, the founder, which was afterwards changed to a164 May-day.concert of vocal and instrumental music, consisting: ofseveral merry catches, and a concluding peal of thebells. The clerks and choristers, with the rest of theperformers, afterwards breakfasted on a side of lamb.At Arthur's Seat, at Edinburgh, they make a grandassembly of young people about sunrise, to gatherMay-dew, and dance. In Huntingdonshire, a correspondentof Time's Telescope says, that the childrenstill exhibit garlands. They suspend a sort of crownof hoops, wreathed and ornamented with flowers, ribbons,handkerchiefs, necklaces, silver spoons, andwhatever finery can be procured, at a considerableheight above the road, by a rope, extending fromchimney to chimney of the cottages, while they attemptto throw their balls over it from side to side,singing, and begging halfpence from the passengers.A May-lady, or doll, or larger figure, sometimes makesan appendage in some side nook. The money collectedis afterwards spent in a tea-drinking, with cakes,etc. May-garlands with dolls are carried at Northamptonby the neighbouring villagers, and at otherplaces. At Great Grande in Cambridgeshire, atHitch, and elsewhere, they make a Lord and Ladyof May. At night, the farmers' young men-servantsgo and cut hawthorn, singing what they call the Night-song.They leave a bough at each house according tothe number of young persons in it. On the eveningof May-day and the following evening, they go roundto every house where they left a bush, singing TheMag-Song. One has a handkerchief on a long wandfor a flag, with which he keeps off the crowd. Therest have ribbons in their hats. The May-Song consistsof sixteen verses, of a very religious cast. AtMay-day.Penzance, and in Wales they keep up May dances,and other peculiar ceremonies.I have been more particular in detailing the rites andcustoms of this festivity, because, once more popularthan any, they are now become more disused. Therehave been more attempts to revive the celebration ofMay-day, from its supposed congeniality to the spiritof youth, than that of any other festivity, but all invain. The times, and the spirit of the times, arechanged.CHAPTER IV.EASTER FESTIVITIES.May-day was the great festival of the young. Easterwas the great festival of the church. It followed thedismal and abstemious time of Lent, and came heraldedby Palm-sunday, the commemoration of our Saviour'sriding into Jerusalem; Sunday-Thursday, the dayon which he washed the feet of his disciples; andGood-friday, the day of his death. All these dayswere kept with great circumstance. On Palm-sundaythere was, and still is in Catholic countries, a greatprocession to church, with tapers and palm branches,or sprigs of box as a substitute. Stowe says that inthe week before Easter " had ye great shows made forthe fetching in of a twisted tree, or withe, as they termedit, out of the woods into the king's house, and the likeinto every man's house of honour and worship."This was the sallow, or large-leaved willow, whosecatkins are now in full bloom, and are still called palmsby the country people. Sunday-Thursday, or DiesMandate, the day of the command to wash each other'sfeet, was a great day of humiliation and profession ofChristian benevolence. The Pope washed the feet ofEASTER FESTIVITIES. 167certain poor men; kings and princes did the same;in the monasteries the custom was general, and longretained. After the ceremony, liberal donations weremade to the poor, of clothing, and of silver money ;and refreshments were given them to mitigate theseverity of the fast: on the 15th of April 1731, ,a distribution was made at Whitehall,to 48 poor men and 48 poor women, the king's agethen being 48 — of boiled beef and shoulders of mutton; loaves and fishes ; shoes, stockings, linen andwoollen cloth ; and leathern bags with one, two, three,and four penny pieces of silver, and shillings to each;about four pounds in value. The archbishop of Yorkalso washed the feet of a certain number of poor persons.James II. was the last king who performed thisin person : but a relic of this custom is still preservedin the donations dispensed at St. James's on this day.In 1814 this donation was made with great ceremonyat Whitehall Chapel. In the morning. Dr. Carey,the sub-almoner, and Mr. Hanley, the secretary ofthe Lord High Almoner, Mr. Not, and others belongingto the Lord Chamberlain's office, attended by40 yeomen of the guard, distributed to 75 poor womenand 75 poor men — being as many as the king wasyears old — a quantity of salt fish, consisting of salmon,cod, and herrings ; pieces of very fine beef, five loavesof bread, and some ale to drink the king's health. Atthree o'clock they met again ; the men on one side ofthe chapel, the women on the other. A processionentered, consisting of a party of yeomen of the guard,one of them carrying a large gold dish on his head,containing 150 bags with 75 silver pennies in each,for the poor people, which was placed in the royal168 EASTER FESTIVITIES.closet. They where followed by the sub-almoner inhis robes, with a sash of fine linen over his shoulder,and crossing his waist. He was followed by two boys,two girls, the secretary, and another gentleman, withsimilar sashes, etc. etc. : all carrying large nosegays.The church evening service was then performed; atthe conclusion of which the silver pennies were distributed,and woollen cloth, linen, shoes and stockings,to the poor men and women, and, according to ancientcustom, a cup of wine, to drink the king's health.This ceremony is still continued in similar style.At Rome, the altar of the Capella Carolina is illuminatedwith more than 4000 wax tapers ; and thepope and cardinals go thither in procession, bringingthe sacrament along with them, and leaving it there.Then the pope blesses the people, and washes thefeet of some pilgrims, and serves them at dinner. AtMoscow, Dr. Clarke says, the Archbishop washes thefeet of the Apostles, that is, twelve monks designedto represent them. The archbishop takes off hisrobes, girds his loins with a towel, and proceeds towash their feet, till he comes to St. Peter, who risesup, and the same interlocution takes place betweenhim and the prelate as is said to have done betweenour Saviour and that apostle.The next day is Good-friday, so called by theEnglish, but Holy-Friday on the continent — theday of our Saviour's death. Thousands of Englishtravellers have witnessed, and many described, thesplendid pageant of this night at St. Peter's at Rome,on which the hundred lamps which burn over theapostle's tomb, are extinguished, and a stupendouscross of light appears suspended from the dome, be-easterFESTIVITIES. 169tween the altar and the nave, shedding over the wholeedifice a soft lustre delightful to the eye, and highly-favourableto picturesque representations. This exhibitionis supposed to have originated in the sublimeimagination of Michael Angelo, and he who beholdsit will acknowledge that it is not unworthy of the inventor.The magnitude of the cross, hanging as ifself-suspended, and like a meteor streaming in the air;the blaze that it pours forth ; the mixture of light andshade cast on the pillars, arches, statues, and altars ;the crowd of spectators placed in all the different attitudesof curiosity, wonder, and devotion; the processions,with their banners and crosses gliding successivelyin silence along the nave, and kneeling aroundthe altar : the penitents of all nations and dresses collectedin groups near the confessionals of their respectivelanguages ; a cardinal occasionally advancingthrough the crowd, and as he kneels, humbly bendinghis head to the pavement; "in fine, the pontiff himselfwithout pomp and pageantry, prostrate before thealtar, offering up his adorations in silence, form ascene singularly striking.In various Catholic countries the lights are suddenlyput out at the sound of a bell, and a flagellation, in imitationof Christ's sufferings, commences in the dark,with such cries as make it a truly terrific scene. Theeffect of the singing of the Miserere at Rome, in thetime of the darkness, has been described by severalwriters as inexpressibly sublime.At Jerusalem the monks go in procession to MountCalvary with a large crucifix and image, where theytake down the image from it with all the minute procedureof taking down, unfailing, taking off the crown170 EASTER FESTIVITIES.of thorns, etc., etc. In Portugal, they act in thechapel the whole scene of the crucifixion, the VirginMary sitting at the foot of the cross with Mary Magdaleneand St. John ; the coming of Nicodemus andJoseph of Arimathea; the taking down by order ofPilot, and bringing the body in procession to thetomb.Such are the ceremonies of Catholic countries; herethe people eat hot-cross buns and go to church, andthat is aU. The first sound you hear on awaking inthe morning, is that of numerous voices crying hot-crossbuns, for every little boy has got a basket, — andsets out with a venture of buns on this day. Yethow few know or call to mind the amazing antiquityof this custom. Mr. Bryant traces it to the time ofearly Paganism, when little cakes called hoion wereoffered to Astarte, the Catholics having politicallyengrafted all the Gentile customs in their form ofChristianity.Then comes Easter eve, on which the fast was mostrigorous ; and then broke Easter day, the joyousSunday, the day of the resurrection. All sorrow,fasting, and care now gave way to gaiety ; and religiouspageants were established, and are so still inCatholic countries, to edify the people. Goethe givesa lively description of the effect of the coming Eastermorn upon Faust. He is just wearied out of life withambitious cravings, and about to swallow poison, whenhe hears the sound of bells, and voices in chorus, singing(j — Christ list erstanden !EASTER FESTIVITIES. 171EASTER HYMN.— Chorus of Angels,Christ is from the grave arisen !Joy is his. For him the wearyEarth has ceased its thraldom dreary,And the cares that prey on mortals;He hath burst the grave's stern portals ;The grave is no prison :The Lord hath arisen !Faustus — Oh, those deep sounds, those voices rich and heavenly !How powerfully they sway the soul, and forceThe cup uplifted from the eager lips !Proud bells, and do your peals already ring,To greet the joyous dawn of Easier morn ?Hymn Continued.— Chorus of Women.We laid him for burial'Mong aloes and myrrh.His children and friendsLaid their dead master there !All wrapped in his grave-dressWe left him in fear —Ah! where shall we seek him?The Lord is not here !Chorus of Angels.The Lord hath arisen —Sorrow no longer ;Temptation hath tried him,Eut he was the stronger IHappy, happy victory !Love, submission, self-denialMarked the strengthening agony.Marked the purifying trial :The grave is no prison :The Lord is arisen.Faustus — Those bells announced the merry sports of youth ;This music welcomed in the happy spring ;And now am I once more a happy child.And old remembrance twining round my heart.Forbids this act, and checks my daring steps —Then sing ye forth — sweet songs that breathe of heaven !Fears come, and earth hath won her child again.Dr. Answer Translation.17'2 EASTER FESTIVITIES.In this beautiful incident, purely English readersmay be aj3t to attribute to German extravagance thechorus of angels; but Goethe had in his eye theCatholic pageants — pageants that once were commonhere. The only theatres of the people were thechurches, and the monks were the actors. Plays weregot up with a full dramatis personas. of monks, indresses according to the characters they assumed. Thesepulchre was erected in the church near the altar, torepresent the tomb wherein the body of Christ waslaid. At this tomb, which was built at an enormouscost, and lighted at an equal one, and for which therewas a gathering from the people, there was a grandperformance at Easter-day. In some churches MaryMagdalene, Mary of Bethany, and Mary of Nain,were represented by three deacons clothed in dalmaticsand misses, with their heads in the manner of women,and holding a vase in their hands. These performerscame through the middle of the choir, and hasteningtowards the sepulchre with downcast looks, saidtogether this verse, " Who shall remove the stone forus ?" Upon this, a boy clothed as an angel, in alas,and holding a wheat-ear in his hand, before the sepulchre,said, " Whom do you seek in the sepulchre ?"The Maries answered, " Jesus of Nazareth, who wascrucified." The boy-angel answered, " He is nothere, but is risen," and pointed to the place with hisfinger. The boy-angel departed very quickly, andtwo priests in tunics, sitting without the sepulchre,said, " Women, whom do you seek ?" The middleone of the three said, " Sir, if you have taken himaway, say so." The priest, shewing the cross, said,They have taken away the Lord." The two sittingEASTER FESTIVITIES. 173priests said, "Whom do you seek, women?" TheMaries, kissing the place, afterwards went from thesepulchre. In the mean time a priest, in the characterof Christ, in an alb, with a stole, holding a cross,met them on the left horn of the altar, and said,Mary !" Upon hearing this, the mock Mary threwherself at his feet, and with a loud voice, cried, " Cabin!"The priest representing Christ, replied,nodding, "Noli me tang ere ;" touch me not. Thisbeing finished, he again appeared at the right horn ofthe altar, and said to them as they passed before it,Haik," do not fear. This being finished, he concealedhimself, and the women-priests, as though joyfulat hearing this, bowed to the altar, and turningtowards the choir, sung " Alleluia, the Lord is risen !"This was the signal for the bishop or priest to beginand sing aloud, Te Deem.Brand quotes, from the churchwardens' accounts atReading, several items paid, for nails for the sepulchre; for rosin for the Resurrection-play ; for makinga Judas ; for writing the plays themselves ; and othersuch purposes. Fosbrooke gives " the properties" ofthe Sepulchre-show of St. Mary Redcliff church,at Bristol, from an original MS. in his possession,formerly belonging to Chatter ton, viz. " Memorandum: — That Master Canning hath delivered, the4th day of July, in the year of our Lord 1470, toMaster Nicholas Pelles, vicar of Redcliff, Moses concern,Phillip Bartholomew, and John Brown, procuratorsof Redcliff aforesaid, a new sepulchre, wellgilt with fine gold, and a river thereto; a image ofGod Almighty rising out of the same sepulchre, withallthe ordinance that length thereto ; that is to say,174 EASTER FESTIVITIES.a lath made of timber, and iron-work thereto. Item ;hereto longetli Even made of timber and stainedcloths. Item ; Hell made of timber and iron-workthereto, with Devils the number of thirteen. Item,four knights keeping the sepulchre with their weaponsin their hands; that is to say, two spears, two axes,with two shields. Item, four pair of angels' wings,for four angels, made of timber and well painted.Item, the Padre, the crown and visage ; the ball witha cross upon it, well gilt with fine gold. Item, theHoly Ghost, coming out of Even into the sepulchre.Item, length to the four angels four Perukes.''^Fosbrokes British Monachism.Throughout the Christian world, wherever the Catholicand Greek churches extend, great and magnificentare the pageants, processions, and rejoicingstill of this day. The lights themselves at the sepulchreare objects of great admiration. When thiskingdom was catholic, the paschal, or great Eastertaper at Westminster Abbey, was three hundredpounds weight. Sometimes a large wax light calleda serpent was used ; its name being derived from itsform, which was spiral, and was wound round a rod.To light it, fire was struck from a flint consecrated bythe abbot. The paschal in Durham cathedral wassquare wax, and reached to within a man's lengthof the roof, from whence this waxen enormity waslighted by "a fine convenience." From this superiorlight all others were taken. Every taper in thechurch was purposely extinguished, in order that thismight supply a fresh stock of consecrated light, till atthe same season of the next year a similar parenttorch was prepared.EASTER FESTIVITIES. 175Of the lighting of the annual fire at the HolySepulchre at Jerusalem, Turner, in his Tour to theLevant, gives a singular account. " We entered thechurch of the Holy Sepulchre with difficulty, ourjanissary carrying before us a whip of several leathernthongs, which he used most liberally. The churchwas filled with pilgrims and spectators, not less innumber than 7000. What a scene was before me !The Greek and Armenian galleries overlooking thedome, were filled with female pilgrims of those nations,enthusiastically looking towards the sepulchre,and crossing themselves. Below me, the wholechurch, and particularly the circular apartment containingthe dome, was absolutely crammed with pilgrims,men and women, hallooing, shouting, singing,and violently struggling to be near the sepulchre,while the Turkish soldiers were driving them backwith their whips. One man I saw in the contentionhad his right ear literally torn o&. The place immediatelynear the window whence the fire was given,was occupied by the richest pilgrims, who, for thisprecedence, pay to the Turks "200 or 300 sequins.An old woman sitting on the step of the door of theGreek church, had kept that seat for a day and anight without moving, and paid two dollars to get it.A ring was kept, as well as the tumult would allow,by the crowd around the sepulchre, round which pilgrimswere carried on others' shoulders, singing religioussongs in Arabic and Greek; while, at othertimes, a party of ten or twelve ran rioting round it,knocking down every one that stood in their way.The Greek and Armenian bishops were shut in thesepulchre at two o'clock with a single Turk, who is176 EASTER FESTIVITIES.well paid to declare that he saw the fire descend miraculously,or, at least, to keep silence. Before theyenter, the sepulchre is publicly inspected, and all thelamps extinguished.At twenty minutes to three, the fire was givenfrom the window, and was received with a tremendousand universal shout through the whole church.On its first appearance, the torch was seized by a boywho rubbed it against his face, hand, and neck, withsuch vehemence as to extinguish it, for which he waswell beaten by those near him. Eight different timeswas the fire given from the window, and as everypilgrim carried candles in his hand, in bunches of four,six, eight, or twelve, in ten minutes the whole churchwas in a flame, and in five more nearly every candlewas extinguished. But what enthusiasm ! The menrubbed them against their heads and faces, their caps,and handkerchiefs ; and the women uncovered thebosom, directing the flame along their heads, necks,and faces, and all crossing themselves during theoperation, with the utmost devotion and velocity.The candles, when a little of them is burnt, are carriedhome, and ever afterwards preserved as sacred.Messengers with lanterns, stood ready at the door, tocarry the fire to the Greek convent of Bethlehem, ofthe Cross at Sulla, and of St. Saba, near the DeadSea.Equally curious, and far more splendid are theceremonies at Rome on this day. The moment theysuppose our Saviour is risen, the cannons of the castleof St. Angelo are fired, and all the bells in the citybegin ringing at once. The people, throwing off theirfasting weeds, give themselves up to rejoicing. TheEASTER FESTIVITIES. 177church of St. Peter, and the whole piazza before it,are crowded with all classes of persons in gala dresses.The pope is carried in magnificent state, through thechurch, shaded by waving peacocks' feathers, attendedby his guardia nobile, in princely uniform, glitteringwith gold, their helmets adorned with plumes offeathers ; the ambassadors and their wives ; the senatorsand their trains ; the Armenian bishops and priests,in very splendid robes ; the cardinals, bishops, and allthe Roman troops in grand procession. The popeblesses the people from the terrace, who receive thebenediction on their knees, and look up with eagereyes for the indulgences that are scattered amongstthem by some of the cardinals. In the evening thereis a grand illumination of St. Peter. " On enteringthe Piazza," says a traveller, " we beheld the architectureof the dome, facade, and colonnade, all marked outbysoft lamps : a bell tolled, and in a moment, as ifstruck by a magical wand, the whole fabric burst intoa dazzling blaze of the most beautiful light ; nor couldwe conceive how the sudden transition was effected.Fire-works and festivities concluded the evening."In Spain, Portugal, South America, wherever, indeed,the Catholic religion extends, similar churchplays, pageants, and rejoicing prevail. In the Greekchurch, nay even in Turkey, Easter is a great festival.The Russians celebrate it with extraordinary zeal. AtMoscow no meetings of any kind take place withoutrepeating the expressions of peace and joy, Christ'svoscREss ! Christ is risen ! To which the answeralways is the same ; Voistiney voscress ! He is risenindeed ! On Easter-monday begins the presentationof the Paschal eggs. Lovers to their mistresses, relatesEASTER FESTIVITIES.tons to each other, servants to their masters, all bringornamented eggs. The meanest pauper in the streetpresenting an egg, and repeating the words Christ'svoscRESS, may demand a salute even of the empress.All business is laid aside ; the upper ranks are engagedin visiting, balls, dinners, suppers, masquerades; whileboors fill the air with their songs, or roll about thestreets drunk. Servants appear in new and tawdry-liveries,and carriages in the most sumptuous parade.In all this may be seen what Easter was in Englandwhen it was a Catholic country — what a changein our observance of times the Reformation has produced! Fifteen days were the festivities usually keptup ; in many places servants were permitted to restfrom their labours; all courts of justice were shut up,and all public games of a worldly nature were forbidden.Still in London it is a great week of relaxationto the mechanics, who pour out to Greenwich and otherplaces by thousands to enjoy themselves. On EasterMonday 1834, as stated under the head of " Sundayin the Country," it appeared that no less than 100,000persons went by the steam vessels to different places.In large towns, Easter-monday is a holiday, and youmay see a few swings, shows, and whirligigs for thechildren ; but as you go farther into the country, alltrace of this once great festival fades away. In themidland counties you rarely see a Paschal, or as it ismore commonly called, a Pace-Egg. These eggs,which are almost as ancient as the Ark, of which theyare a symbol, are to be found in almost all civilizedcountries. They are an emblem of the resurrection.As the whole living world went into the ark and wereshut up for a season, like the life in the egg, so byEASTER FESTIVITIES. 179the egg, the ancients for ages symbolized the traditionof that great event, bringing eggs to the altars oftheir gods. The Hindoo even conceive their godBrahma, once in a cycle of ages, to enter into theegg, with the whole animated universe, and to float,like the ark, on the waters of eternity, till the timecomes to reproduce himself and all things with him.So the Gnostic engrafted this idea on the christianreligion ; for the entrance of Christ into the tomb, andhis resurrection, were at once typified by the ark, andthe egg, its symbol. This adopted custom, as allsuch customs do which have a sentiment in them dearto the human heart, flew far and wide. We haveseen that the Russians give paschal-eggs : but whatis more singular, the Mohammedan do the same.In France, in the week preceding Easter, baskets fullof eggs boiled hard, of a red or violet colour, are seenin the streets, and the children amuse themselveswith playing with, and afterwards eating them. InEgypt, the cattle and trees were coloured red at thisperiod, because, they said, the world was once on fireat this time. The egg, placed on the paschal tableof the Jews, was a symbol of the destruction ofthe human race, and of its regeneration. The eggentered into all the mysterious ceremonies called apocalyptic; and the Persians, who present it at the commencementof the new year, know that an egg is thesymbol of the world. Throughout the country ofBonneval, on the day preceding Easter Sunday, andduring the first days of that week, the clerks of thedifferent parishes, beadles, and certain artizans, goabout from house to house to ask for their Eastereggs. In many places the children make a sort of180 EASTER FESTIVITIES.feast at breakfast in Easter on red or yellow eggs.The Druids had the egg in their ceremonies; andnear Dieppe is a Druidical barrow, where a fete usedto be held by the country people till the Revolution,where vast crowds of both sexes assembled from theneighbouring villages, and gave themselves up to aday of sports and rejoicing, in which eggs figuredmost singularly.The Pace Eggs seem now to have retired northwardin England. In Yorkshire and Lancashire, andso northward, they may be found. They are boiledhard, and beautifully coloured with various colours,some by boiling them with different coloured ribbonsbound round them ; others by colouring them of onecolour, and scraping it away in a variety of figures ;others by boiling them within the coating of an onion,which imparts to them the admired dye. Early inthe morning of Easter Monday, in the Lancashiretowns and villages where wooden clogs are worn, youmay hear a strange clatter on the pavement underyour window. It is the children, who are running toand fro, begging their Pace Eggs.In Staffordshire, Shropshire, Lancashire, Cheshire,and Durham, they still retain the custom of heavingor lifting on Easter-monday and Tuesday. In someof these counties on Monday, the men lift the womenby taking hold of their arms and legs, which is repeatednine times ; and on Tuesday the women usethe like ceremony with the men. In other places,the men on one day go decorated with ribbons intoevery house into which they can get an entrance,force every woman to be seated in this vehicle, andlift her up three times with loud huzzahs; and on theEASTER FESTIVITIES. 181next the women ehiim the same privilege. In someplaces the women sit out in the streets, and practisethis odd ceremony on every male passenger that theycan catch, giving him a salute round; afterwards layinghim under contribution, and the sum thus derivedthey lay out in a tea-drinking.Ball-play used to be practised on Easter-sunday inthe church, the clergy and dignitaries joining in it.Corporations with the mace, sword, and cap of maintenancecarried before them, used to go out on Mondayto play at ball, and dance with the ladies. Theyused to eat tansy-pudding and bacon as customary tothe time. These, and many other, to us, ridiculouscustoms were all of ancient Pagan origin engrafted onChristianity, and had all a symbolical meaning, mostprobably unperceived by the multitude who usedthem. The lifting three times had reference to theresurrection after three days ; the ball was a symbolof the world ; tansy the bitter herbs of the passion,and bacon to express their abhorrence of Jews, thedestroyers of the Saviour.We now see how all these festivities were keptalive by the art and power of the church, and howsoon they fell into mere pageants when the Reformationpoured in a truer light.That the Reformation did effect this change ismost convincingly proved by the retention of the oldCatholic religious plays still in Catholic countries.Mr. Hone, in his " Ancient Mysteries," brings togethera variety of modern instances of such things onthe continent ; and our travellers can furnish us withmore. Moore's mention of these plays in his " FudgeVOL. II. K182 EASTER FESTIVITIES.Family in Paris," in 1817, must be familiar to everybody: —What follyTo say that the French are not pious, dear Dolly,When here one beholds, so correctly and rightly,The Testament turned into melt cranes nightly;And doubtless, so fond they 're of scriptural facts,They will soon get the Pentateuch up in five acts.Here Daniel, in pantomime, bids bold defianceTo Nebuchadnezzar and all his stuffed lions.In a note, he adds, that in this " Daniel, ou la Fosseaux Lions" Jehovah himself is made to appear ! In1822, M. Miehelot, the editor of the Mirour, wasarraigned at the tribunal for having ridiculed the statereligion, because he lead published a description of apuppet-play just then witnessed at Dieppe, consistingof the birth of Christ, the passion, and the resurrection! and in which our Saviour, the Virgin, Judas,Herod, etc., were most revoltingly introduced. DuringCongress at Vienna in 1815, the Allied Monarchsused to attend a sacred comedy, of David, performedby the comedians of the National Theatre, in whichAustrian soldiers fired off their muskets and artilleryin the characters of Jews and Philistines ! It isneedless to say that nothing of the kind could betolerated in this country."f^W\MCHAPTER V.WHITSUNTIDE.This is the only ancient religious festival that hasbecome a popular one since the Reformation, throughthe addition of a modern circumstance. Clubs, orFriendly Societies have substituted for the old churchceremonies, a strong motive to assemble in the earlydays of this week as their anniversary: and the timeof the year being so delightful, this holiday has, infact, become more than any other, what May-day wasto the people. Both men and women have theirFriendly Societies, in which every member pays acertain weekly or monthly sum, and on occasions ofsickness or misfortune, claims a weekly stipend, or asum of money to bury their dead. These Societies184 WHITSUNTIDE.were very prudential things, especially before theinstitution of Savings' Banks, which are stillbetter;and in the vicinity of towns have become most importantresources for the working class, and especiallyservants. In the country. Friendly Societies still do,and will probably long remain, because Savings' Banksare not easily introduced there. In a Savings' Bank,whatever a person deposits he receives with interest.It is safe, and may be demanded any time. On theother hand, a man may contribute for years to a club,and not want a penny for himself on account of sickness,and at his death, with the exception of a fixed sumto bury him, and one for his widow, all his fund goesfrom his family ; or, what is worse, he may pay for manyyears, and just when he wants help, he finds the boxempty, through the great run upon it by the sicknessor accidental disabling of his fellows ; or the stewardhas proved dishonest, and has decamped; or he hasfailed. Many such cases have occurred, especiallyduring the violent changes of the last twenty years.In some particular cases, the capital of a dozenFriendly Societies has, by some strange infatuation orartifice, been lodged in the hands of the same man,who has proved bankrupt, and ruined them all. Theseare the drawbacks on Friendly Societies ; and yet withthese, they were better than nothing for the poor, andsome of them have, in many cases, been remedied bythe members sharing their fund amongst them onceevery seven years. They were, and are, often, thepoor man's sole resource and refuge against thehorror of falling on the parish, and have helped himthrough his time of affliction without burthening hismind with a sense of shame and dependence.WHITSUNTIDE. 185Well then may they come together on one certainday or days throughout the country, to hold a feast offellowship and mutual congratulation in a commonhope. Their wealthier neighbours have encouragedthem in this bond of union and mutual help, and havebecome honorary members of their clubs. It is afriendly and christian act. Accordingly, on Whit-monday,the sunshiny morning has broke over thevillages of England with its most holiday smile. Allwork has ceased. There has been, at first, a sabbathstillness, a repose, a display of holiday costume.Groups of men have met here and there in the streetsin quiet talk ; the children have begun to play, andmake their shrill voices heard through the hamlets.There have been stalls of sweetmeats and toys set outin the little market-place, on the green, by the shadywalk, or under the well-known tree. Suddenly thebells have struck up a joyous peal, and a spirit ofdelight is diffused all over the rustic place, ay, alloverevery rustic place in merry England. Forthcomes streaming the village procession of hardy menor comely women, all arrayed in their best, gay withribbons and scarfs, a band of music sounding beforethem; their broad banner of peace and union flappingover their heads, and their wands shouldered like thespears of an ancient army, or used as walking-staves.Forth they stream from their club-room at the villageale-house.'Tis merry Whitsuntide, and merrilyHoliday goes in hamlet and green field ;Nature and men seem joined, for once, to tryThe strength of Care, and force the carle to yield :Summer abroad holds flowery revelry :For revelry, the village bells are pealed ;VOL. II. L186 WHITSUNTIDE.The season's self seems made for rural pleasure,And rural joy flows with o'erflowing measure.Go where you will through England's happy valleys,Deep grows the grass, flowers bask, and wild bees hum ;And ever and anon, with joyous sallies,Shouting, and music, and the busy drumTell you afar where mirth her rustics rallies,In dusty sports, or 'mid the song and humOf Royal Oak, or bowling-green enclosure.With bower and bench for smoking and composure.May's jolly dance is past, and hanging high.Her garlands swing and wither in the sun ;And now abroad gay posted banners fly.Followed by peaceful troops, and boys that runTo see their sires go marching solemnly,Shouldering their wands ; and youths with ribbons wonFrom fond fair hands, that yielded them with pride.And proudly worn this merry Whitsuntide.And then succeeds a lovelier sight, — the dames,Wives, mothers, and arch sigh-awakening lasses,Filling each gazing wight visit wounds and flames,Yet looking each demurely as she passes.With flower-tipped wand, and bloom that flower outshines;And, in the van of these sweet, happy facesMarches the priest, whose sermon says, " be merry,"The frank, good squire, and sage apothecary. W. H.Forth stream these happy bands from their clubroom,making the procession of the town before theygo to church, and then again after church and beforegoing to dinner, for then begins the serious businessof feasting, too important to admit of any fresh holidayparade for the rest of the day. Nothing can be morejoyously picturesque than this rural holiday. Thetime of the year — the latter end of May, or early partof June, is itself jubilant. The new leaves are justout in all their tender freshness : the flowers are en-gardeningthe fields, and making odorous the garden :WHITSUNTIDE. 187there are sunshine and brightness to gladden thisfestival of the lowly. In my mind are associated withthis time, from the earliest childhood, sunshine,flowers, the sound of bells, and village bands of music.I see the clubs, as they are called, coming down thevillage; a procession of its rustic population all intheir best attire. In front of them comes bearing thegreat banner, emblazoned with some fitting scene andmotto, old Harry Lomax the blacksmith, deputed tothat office for the brawny strength of his arms, andyet, if the wind be stirring, evidently staggering underits weight, and finding enough to do to hold it aloft.There it floats its length of blue and yellow, and onits top nods the huge posy of peonies, laburnumflowers, and lilacs, which our own garden has dulyfurnished. Then comes sounding the band of drums,bassoons, hautboys, flutes, and chariots : then thehonorary members — the freeholders of the place — thesage apothecary, and the priest whose sermon says"be merry" — literally, for years, his text being onthis day the Avoids of Solomon — " Let us eat anddrink, for tomorrow we die ;" — and then the simplesons of the hamlet, walking as stately and as gravelyas they can for the nods and smiles of all their neighbourswho do not join in the procession, but are all atdoor and window to see them go by. There they go,passing down the shady lane with all the villagechildren at their heels, to the next hamlet, half a mileoff, which furnishes members to the club, and musttherefore witness their glory. Now the banner andthe gilded tops of their wands are seen glancingbetween the hedge-row trees; their music comesmerrily up the hill ; and as it dies away at the next188 WHITSUNTIDE.turn, the drumming of distant villages becomesaudible in half a dozen different quarters. Thencome, one after another, the clubs of the neighbouringhamlets, as the old ballad of the Earl of Murray veryexpressively says, "sounding through the town;"giving occasion to a world of criticism and comparisonto the village gossips, no doubt always terminating infavour of their own folk.But the most beautiful sight is that of the women'sclubs, which in some places walk on the same daywith those of the men, but more commonly on Tuesday.Here the contrast between the band and ,and the female array that follows them,gives great effect. In some places they are gracedwith the presence of some of the ladies of the neighbourhoodwho are honorary members, and their cultivatedcountenances, and style of bearing, againcontrast with the simple elegance or shewy finery ofthe rustic train which succeeds, consisting of thesedate matrons and blooming damsels of the village.Their light dresses, their gay ribbons and bonnets,their happy, and often very handsome faces, cannotbe seen without feeling with Wordsworth, thatTheir beauty makes you glad.In all the pageants and processions that were everseen, there is nothing more beautiful than those lightwands with which they walk, each crowned with anosegay of fresh flowers. These posted wands wereworthy of the most chastely graceful times of Greece;and amongst the youthful forms are often such asStothard would have gloried in seizing upon to figurein his charming procession pieces. Indeed a Whit-whitsuntide.189suicide procession in his hands would have formedaltogether a picture equal to his Canterbury Pilgrimage,and the Procession of the Flitch of Bacon. Ithas never had justice done it, and Stothard is gone ;but we have artists remaining from whose pencil itmay, and 1 trust will, receive honour due. Why notLeslie add it to his Sir Roger de Coverley going tochurch, or Sir Roger and the Gipsies? I can seethepainting already in my mind's eye. The villagechurch is in one extremity ; the banner of the men'sclub is stooping at the porch as the train is about toenter, and the women's club is advancing up the streetin the foreground : the band composed of figures fullof strong character; the female figures full of simpleelegance and arch beauty, — their posted wands depictedwith the force of reality ; the village street inperspective; the village ale-house with dependingsign ; booths and stalls, and all around merry facesand holiday forms.These love-feasts of the Friendly Societies seemvery appropriately celebrated at this festival, whichwas originally derived from the Agapai, or love-feastsof the early Christians. It is, indeed, a great improvementon the Whitsun-Ales, which succeededthe Agapai in the Roman church. It is, as I havebefore observed, the happiest and almost sole adaptationof a modern institution to an ancient custom bvthe church of England; a policy, on the contrary,so closely studied and extensively practised by theCatholic church. The Whitsun-Ales were so calledfrom the churchwardens buying, and laying in frompresents also, a large quantity of malt, which theybrewed into beer, and sold out in the church or WHITSUNTIDE.where. The profits, as well as those from Sundaygames — there being no poor-rates — were given to thepoor, for whom this was one mode of provision, accordingto the Christian rule, that all festivities shouldbe rendered innocent by alms. " In every parish,"says Aubrey, " was a church-house, to which belongedspits, crocks, and other utensils for dressing provisions.Here the house-keepers met. The youngpeople were there too ; and had dancing, bowling,shooting at butts, etc., the ancients sitting gravely by,and looking on.King James, to check the progress of non-conformity,and keep people to church, published hisBook of Sports," and commanded attendance onWhitsun-ales ; church-ales, etc. ; but he soon foundthat forced sport is no sport at all. These FriendlySocieties, however, by adopting this day, have revivedthe Agapai in a more popular shape, and longmay they continue, refined indeed, and made moretemperate by better information, and a better morality.These being held at public houses, and their monthlynights, on which they pay their contributions, beingheld there too, has made many persons object to them,and the utilitarian spirit, especially during periods ofgeneral distress, has induced many of them to give uptheir bands, banners, and ribbons, and to throw themoney thus saved into the general stock ; but if weareto retain any rustic festival at all, we cannot, Ithink, have a more picturesque one, or at a pleasanttime. Let all means be used to preserve a day ofrelaxation and good-fellowship from gross intemperance,but let not the external grace and rustic pageantrybe shorn away. As I have met theseWHITSUNTIDE. 191Whitsuntide processions in the retired villages of Staffordshire,or as I saw them in the summer of 1835at Warsop in Nottinghamshire, I would wish to seethem as many years hence as I may live. In thelatter village, Miss Hamilton, a lady of poetical taste,and author of several poetical works, had painted thebanner for this rural fete with her own hands, and theflowers with which the wands were crowned wereselected and disposed in a spirit of true poetry. Long,I say, may this bright day of rejoicing come to thehamlet; and the musing poet stop in the glades ofthe near woodlands, and exclaim with Kirk White :Hark how the merry beds ring jocund round,And now they' die upon the veering breeze ;Anon they thunder loudFull on the musing ear.Wafted in varying cadence, by the shoreOf the still twinkling river, they bespeakA day of jubilee,An ancient holiday. »And lo ! the rural revels are begun,And gaily echoing to the laughing sky,On the smooth-shaven greenResounds the voice of mirth.Mortals ! be gladsome while ye have the power.And laugh, and seize the glittering lapse of joy ;In time the bell will tollThat warns ye to your graves.CHAPTER VI.CHRISTMAS.The next and last of these popular festivities that Ishall notice at any length, is jolly old Christmas, — thefestival of the fireside ; the most domestic and heartfeltcarnival of the year. It has changed its featureswith the change of national manners and notions, butstill it is a time of gladness, of home re-union and rejoicing;a precious time, and one so thoroughly suitedto the grave yet cheerful spirit of Englishmen, thatit will not soon lose its hold on our affections. Itsold usages are so well known ; they have been so repeatedlyof late years brought to our notice by WashingtonIrving, Walter Scott, Leigh Hunt in his mostgraphic and cordial-spirited Months, Indicator, andLondon Journal, and by many other lovers of theolden time, that I shall not now particularly describethem. We have already seen how, in all our religiousfestivals, the most ancient customs and riteshave been interwoven with Catholicism. Who doesnot recognize, in the decoration of our houses andchurches with ivy, holly, and other evergreens, thedecorations of the altars of Greece and Rome withlaurels and bays as the symbols of the renewal of theCHRISTMAS. 193year and the immortality of Nature? In our mistletoebranches the practice of Druidical times? Whodoes not see in the Abbot of Unreason, and his jollycrew, the Saturnalia of ancient times? Those Mediodo not, may find in Brand's Antiquities, the variousvolumes of Times' Telescope, collected by my worthyfriend John Millard, and in Hone's Every-day, Table,and Year Books, matter on these subjects, and on theChristmas pageants, rites, and processions of Rome,that would of itself fill a large volume. In old times itwas from Christmas to Candlemas a period of generaljollification ; for the first twelve days — a general carnival.The churches were decorated with evergreens ;midnight mass was celebrated with great pomp ; accordingto Aubrey, they danced in the church afterprayers, crying Yole, Yole, Yole, etc. For a fortnightbefore Christmas, and during its continuance,the mummers, or guisers, in their grotesque array,went from house to house acting George and theDragon, having the princess Saba, the doctor, andother characters all playing and saying their parts inverse.Others acted Alexander the Great, and theKing of Egypt. Bands of carollers went aboutsinging; and all the great gentry hadA good old fashion when Christmas was come,To call in their old neighbours with bagpipe and drum.And then in those good old halls, what a feasting,and a sporting, and a clamour was there ! The Yuleblock on the fire, the plum-porridge and mince-pieson the table, with mighty rounds of beef, plum-pudding,turkeys, capons, geese, goose-pies, herons, andsundry other game and good things. Ale of twelvel2194 CHRISTMAS.months old circling round, and the old butler and hisserving-men carrying up the boar's head, singing inchorus the accustomed chaunt, as they set it beforethe lord of the feast :Caput April deferReddens laudes domino.The boar's head in hand bring I,With garlands gay and rosemary ;I pray you all sing merrily,Qui testis in convivial, etc.Then, as Burton in his Anatomic of Melancholiatells us, — " what cards, tables, dice, shovel-board,cheese-play, the philosopher's game, small trunks, billiards,music, singing, dancing, ale-games, catches,purposes, questions, merry tales of arrant knights,kings, queens, lovers, lords, ladies, giants, dwarfs,thieves, fairies, goblins, friars, witches, and the rest.Then what kissing under the mistletoe ! roaring ofstorms without, and blazing hearths and merry catcheswithin!"With all this rude happiness we cannot now linger;let us be thankful that our ancestors, rich and poor,enjoyed it so thoroughly, enjoyed it together, as becameChristians, on the feast of the nativity of theircommon Saviour. We will just review this state ofthings as it existed in the time of old Wither, twohundred years ago; and the remembrance of it, asit glanced on the imagination of Scott, and then turnto it as it exists amongst us now.CHRISTMAS.So now is come our joyful'st feast ;Let every man be jolly ;Each room with ivy leaves is dressed,And every post with holly.CHRISTMAS. 105Though some churls at our mirth repine,Round your foreheads garlands twine ;Drown sorrow in a cup of wine.And let us all be merry.Now all our neighbours' chimneys smoke,And Christmas blocks are burning,Their ovens they with baked meats choke,And all their spits are turning.Without the door let sorrow lie ;And if from cold it hap to die,We'll bury it in a Christmas pie,And evermore be merry.Now every lad is wondrous trim.And no man minds his labour ;Our lasses have provided themA bagpipe and a tabor :Young men and maids, and girls and boys,Give life to one another's joys;And you anon shall by their noisePerceive that they are merry.Rank misers now do stating shun ;Their hall of music sounded ;And dogs thence with whole shoulders run,So all things there abounded.The country folks themselves advanceWith crowd-muttons out of France ;And Jack shall pipe and Jill shall dance,And all the town be merry.Ned Squash hath fetched his bands from pawn,And all his best apparel ;Brisk Nell hath bought a ruff of lawnWith dropping of the barrel.And those that hardly all the yearHad bread to eat, or rags to wear.Will have both clothes and dainty fare.And all the day be merry.196 CHRISTMAS.Now poor men to the justicesWith capons make their errants ;And if they hap to fail of these,They plague them with their warrants :But now they find them with good cheer,And what they want, they take in beer.For Christmas comes but once a year,And then they shall be merry.Good farmers in the country nurseThe poor, that else were undone ;Some landlords spend their money worseOn lust and pride in London.There the oysters they do play ;Drab and dice their lands away.Which may be ours another day,And therefore let's be merry.The client now his suit forbears ;The prisoner's heart is eased ;The debtor drinks away his cares,And for the time is pleased.Though others' purses be most fat,Why should we pine or grieve at that?Hang sorrow ! care will kill a cat,And therefore let's be merry.Hark ! now the wags abroad do callEach other forth to rambling ;Anon you '11 see them in the hallFor nuts and apples scrambling.Hark how the roofs with laughter sound,Anon they'll think the house goes round,For they the cellar's depth have found.And then they will be merry.The wenches with their wassail bowlsAbout the streets are singing ;The boys are come to catch the owls.The wild mare in it bringing.CHRISTMAS. 197Our kitchen-boy hath broke his box,And to the dealing of the oxOur honest neighbours come by flocks,And here they will be merry.Now kings and queens poor sheepcotes have.And mute with every body ;The lowest now may play the knave,And wise men play the noddy.Some youths will now a mumming go.And others play at Rowland-bo,And twenty other games boys mo,Because they will be merry.Then wherefore in these merry daiesShould we, I pray, be duller ?No, let us sing some roundelays.To make our mirth the fuller.And while we thus inspired sing.Let all the streets with echoes ring ;Woods, and hills, and every thing,Bear witness we are merry.This is, at once, quaint and graphic. It shews usthe joys of our ancestors in their homeliness and theirstrength. It is full of the spirit of the time, and theimpressions of surrounding things. Let us now seethesame days through the magic mist of a modernpoet's imagination — a poet whose soul turned to allthe beauty and picturesque splendour, and the jollityof the past with a passion never, in any bosom, livingwith a stronger delight. How, in reverted vision ofhis heart and mind is everything purified, sanctified,and refined. What a force of enjoyment breathesthrough the whole : how vividly are all the characteristicsof the time, its fable, and its manners given ;yet, with what a grace and delicacy, unknown to the198 CHRISTMAS.poet of the times themselves. We have here all thehappiness, the hospitality, the generous simplicity ofthe past, tinged with the beautiful illusions of thepresent.ANCIENT CHRISTMAS.And well our christian sires of oldLoved, when the year its course had rolled.And brought blithe Christmas back again.With all its hospitable train.Domestic and religious riteGave honour to the holy night :On Christmas Eve the bells were rung ;On Christmas Eve the mass was sung ;That only night in all the yearSaw the stole priest the chalice rear.The damsel donned her kirtle sheen ;The hall was dressed with holly green ;Forth to the wood did ferryman goTo gather in the mistletoe.Then opened wide the baron's hall.To vassals, tenants, serf and all ;Power laid his rod of rule aside.And Ceremony doffed his pride.The heir with roses in his shoes,That night might village partner choose ;The lord, derogating shareThe vulgar game of " post and pair."All hailed with uncontrolled delightAnd general voice the happy night,That to the cottage, as the crown,Brought tidings of Salvation down.The fire with well-dried logs supplied,Went roaring up the chimney wide ;The huge hall table's oaken face,Scrubbed till it shone the day to grace.Bore then upon its massive boardNo mark to part the squire and lord.CHRISTMAS. 199Then was brought in the lusty braunBy old blue-coated serving-man ;Then the grim boar's-head frowned on high,Crested with bays and rosemary.Well can the green-garbed ranger tellHow, when, and where the monster fell ;What dogs before his death he tore.And all the baiting of the boar.While round the merry wassail bowl,Garnished with ribbons, blithe did trowel.There the huge sirloin reeked ; hard byPlum-porridge stood, and Christmas pie ;Nor failed old Scotland to produce,At such high tide the savoury goose.Then came the merry maskers in,And carols roared with blithesome din ;If unmelodious was the song.It was a hearty note and strong.Who lists may in their mumming seeTraces of ancient mystery.White shirt supplied the masquerade.And smutted cheeks the visor made ;But oh ! what maskers richly dight.Can boast of bosoms half so light !England was merry England then,Old Christmas brought his sports again.'Twas Christmas broached the mightiest ale;'Twas Christmas told the merriest tale ;A Christmas gambol oft would cheerA poor man's heart through half the year.Scott's Marion.In these two poems we have sufficient picture of thepast ; what of these things continue with the present ?In Catholic countries, indeed, much of the ancientshow and circumstance remain. In Rome, all thesplendour of the church is called forth. On Christmaseve, the pipes of the Pifferari, or Calabria minstrels,are heard in the streets. The decorators are busy indraping the churches, clothing altars, and festooning200 CHRISTMAS.facades. Devout ladies and holy nuns are preparingdresses, crowns, necklaces, and cradles, for the Madonnaand Child of their respective churches. Thetoilette of the Virgin is performed, and she blazes indiamonds, or shines in tin, according to the riches ofthe respective parish treasuries. In the church of thePantheon, says Lady Morgan, she was crowned withgilt paper, and decked with glass beads, and on thesame day in Santa Maria Novella, we beheld the coal-blackface set off with rubies and sapphires, whichglittered on her dusky visage " like a rich jewel in anEthiop's ear." The cannons of St. Angelo announcethe festival ; shops are shut, and saloons deserted. Themidnight supper and the midnight bands begin theholy revel, and the splendid pomp in which the augustceremonies are performed at the churches of the Quirinal,St. Louis, and the Ara Coeli, is succeeded by abanquet of which even the poorest child of indigencecontrives to partake. The people from the mountainsand the Campagna flock in to witness and to enjoy thefete, and present a strange sight of wild figures amidthe inhabitants of the city. The churches are lit upwith thousands of wax tapers; the colla, or cradle ofChrist is removed from the shrine at the chapel ofSanta Maria Maggiore, and carried in procession tothe chapel of the Santa Croce, where it is exposed onthe high altar on Christmas-day to the admiration ofthe faithful. Musical masses are performed ; the Popehimself performs service in the Setting Chapel onChristmas-eve, and on Christmas-day, his Holinessperforms mass in St. Peter's, in Hebrew, Greek, andLatin ; amid a most brilliant assembly of people of allnations, princes, ambassadors, nobles, and distinguishedstrangers.CHRISTMAS. 201At Naples numbers of shepherds from the mountainsof the Abruzzi, and the neighbouring Appetitesflock in two or three weeks before Christmas, and goabout the streets, playing on their bagpipes as theCalabria do both here and in Rome. Most of theNeapolitan families engage some of these itinerantmusicians to play a quarter of an hour at their houseson each day of the Novena .• the wild appearance ofthese mountaineers, and the shrill notes of their pipesattract the attention of travellers. Fireworks are displayedhere in the most extraordinary manner; and,as in other parts of Italy, it is the custom to erect inthe churches and in private houses, representations ofthe birth of our Saviour ; — the stable, the shepherds,the oxen, the Virgin Mary receiving the homage ofkings and their trains, are all exhibited with great ingenuity.A similar custom prevailed in some parts ofSpain. Such are the customs of these and othercatholic countries. In the north, where Christmaswas celebrated as a festival of the gods of the ancientScandinavians, under the name of Yule, it is nowcelebrated with great devotion ; and in Germany theyhave some domestic customs of a very interesting nature.Coleridge, in the Friend, gives the followingaccount of what he witnessed himself. " The childrenmake little presents to their parents, and to eachother ; and the parents to the children. For three orfour months before Christmas, the girls are all busy;and the boys save their pocket-money to make orpurchase these presents. What the present is to be,is cautiously kept secret, and the girls have a world ofcontrivances to conceal it — such as working when theyare out on visits, and the others are not with them ;202 CHRISTMAS.getting up in the morning before day-light, etc.Then, on the evening before Christmas-day, one ofthe parlours is lighted up by the children, into whichthe parents must not go. A great yew bough is fastenedon the table at a little distance from the wall ; amultitude of little tapers are fixed in the bough, butnot so as to burn it till they are nearly consumed; andcoloured paper, etc. hangs and flutters from the twigs.Under this bough, the children lay out in great order,the presents they mean for their parents, still concealingin their pockets, what they intend for each other.Then the parents are introduced, and each presents hislittle gift : they then bring out the remainder, one byone, from their pockets, and present them with kissesand embraces. When I witnessed this scene, therewere eight or nine children, and the eldest daughterand mother wept aloud for joy and tenderness ; andthe tears ran down the face of the father, and heclasped all his children so tight to his breast, it seemedas if he did it to stifle the sob that was rising withinhim. I was very much affected. The shadow of thebough and its appendages on the walls and archingover on the ceiling, made a pretty picture ; and thenthe rapture of the very little ones, when at last thetwigs and their needles began to take fire and snap, —O, it was a delight for them !On the next day, in the great parlour, the parentslay on the table the presents for the children. Ascene of more sober joy succeeds; as on this day, afteran old custom, the mother says privately to each ofher daughters, and the father to his sons, that whichhe has observed most praiseworthy, and that whichwas most faulty in their conduct. Formerly, and stillCHRISTMAS. 203in all the smaller towns and villages throughout NorthGermany, these presents are sent by all the parents tosome one fellow, who, in high buskins, a white robe,a mask, and an enormous flax wig, personates KneltRupert, i. e. the servant Rupert. On Christmas nighthe goes round to every house, and says that JesusChrist, his master, sent him thither. The parents andelder children receive him with great pomp and reverence,while the little ones are most terribly frightened.He then inquires for the children, and according tothe character which he hears from the parents, he givesthem the intended present, as if they came out of heavenfrom Jesus Christ. Or if they should have beenbad children, he gives the parents a rod, and, in thename of his master, recommends them to use it frequently.About seven or eight years old, the childrenare let into the secret, and it is curious how faithfullythey keep it."The bough mentioned by Coleridge as yew, is byother writers said to be of birch. The Christ-child issaid to come flying through the air on golden wings ;and causes the birch-bough fixed in the corner of theroom to grow, and to produce in the night, all mannerof fruit; gilt sweetmeats, apples, nuts, etc., for thegood children. Richter makes Quintus Fixlein recallone of these scenes of his youth, very beautifully.I will," said he to himself, *' go through the wholeChristmas-eve, from the very dawn, as I had it of old.At his very rising he finds spangles on the table, sacredspangles from the gold-leaf and silver-leaf with whichthe Christ-child has been emblazoning and coating hisapples and nuts, the presents of the night. Thencomes his mother, bringing him both Christianity and204 CHRISTMAS.clothes ; for in drawing on his trowsers, she easily recapitulatedthe ten commandments ; and in tying hisgarters, the Apostles' creed. So soon as candle-lightwas over, and day-light come, he clambers to the armof the settle, and then measures the nocturnal growthof the yellow wiry grove of Christmas-birch. Therewas no such thing as school all day. About threeo'clock the old gardener takes his place on his largechair, with his Cologne tobacco-pipe, and, after this,no mortal shall work a stroke. He tells nothing butlies, of the aromatic Christ-child, and the minglingUtrecht with his bells. In the dark our little Quintustakes an apple, and divides it with all the figuresof stereometry, and spreads the fragments in two heapson the table. Then, as the lighted candle enters, hestarts up in amazement at the unexpected present, andsays to his mother, ' Look what the good Christ-childhas given thee and me, and I saw one of his wing-sglittering !' And for this same glittering he himselflies in wait the whole evening.About eight o'clock, both of them with necksalmost excoriated with washing, and in clean linen,and in universal anxiety lest the Holy Christ-childfind them up, are put to bed. What a magic night !What tumult of dreaming hopes ! The populous,motley, glittering cave of fancy opens itself in thelength of the night, and in the exhaustion of dreamingeffort, still darker and darker, fuller and moregrotesque ; but the Making gives back to the thirstyheart its hopes. All accidental tones, the cries ofanimals, of watchmen, are, for the timidly devoutfancy, sounds out of heaven ; singing voices of angelsin the air ; church music of the morning worship.CHRISTMAS. 205"At last come rapid lights from the neighbourhood,playing through the window on the walls, andthe Christmas trumpets, and the crowing from thesteeple hurries both the boys from their bed. Withtheir clothes in their hands, without fear for the darkness,without feeling for the morning frost, rushing,intoxicated, shouting, they hurry down stairs into thedark room. Fancy riots in the pastry and fruit perfumeof the still eclipsed treasures, and haunts herair-castles by the glimmering of the Hesperides-fruitwith which the birch-tree is laden. While theirmother strikes a light, the falling sparks sportfullyopen and shroud the dainties on the table, and themany-coloured grove on the wall ; and a single atomof that fire bears on it a hanging garden of Eden."Such are the rites, fancies, and ceremonies withwhich other, and especially Catholic countries, haveinvested this ancient festival. What now remain inour Protestant nation of these customs? Much isgone ; many are the changes that have taken place inour manners and opinions ; and yet is it certain thatwe regard this season of festivity with a strong andsacred affection. It is true that there is commonlybut one day of thorough holiday to the people ; oneday on which all shops are shut ; on which labour inagreat measure ceases, and the poor join with therich in repose and worship. The poor, indeed, donot partake the benefit of this season, as the poor ofold time did ; the houses of the great are not, as theywere then, open to all tenants and dependents.There is now, indeed, upon the great man's table,No mark to part the squire and lord ;206 CHRISTMAS.but there is a mark more immobile than the salt, setin the grain of our minds. The distinctions of societyhave grown with our commercial wealth and havemultiplied grades and relations. A sense of independencetoo has sprung up in the lower classes, withcommerce and the growth of intelligence. The greatman might, indeed, condescend to call his tenants anddependents to his hall to a Christmas revel, but ifthey went at all they would go reluctantly, and feelill at ease. They would feel it as a condescension,and not as springing out of the heartiness of oldcustoms. They would feel that they were out oftheir element; for all classes know instinctively thebroad differences of habits, manners, and modes ofthinking that separate them from each other moreeffectually than any feudal institutions did their ancestors.The pride of the yeoman would be more indanger of suffering than the pride of the lord ; thepride of the cottager than that of the farmer, if invitedto his table. When the brick floor and the woodenbench gave way in the farm-house to the carpet andthe mahogany chair, the feet of the labourer ceasedto tread familiarly round the farmer's table. Harvestmeals and harvest-home suppers bring them togetherin rustic districts; they are the remaining links ofthe old chain of society ; but the Christmas custom isbroken, and is therefore no longer observable withfull content. This great difference between the pastand present exists, and therefore the rejoicing of thepoor at this time is short and small : Mould to heaventhat the kindly feeling of the community would makeit greater !But, independent of this, to the rest of the com-CHRISTMAS. 207unity Christmas brings much of its ancient pleasure.Each class within itself, enjoys it, perhaps moredeeply, if less noisily than of old. It is, as I havebefore said, the festival of the fireside. Friends andfamilies are brought together by many circumstances.Summer tourists and out-of-door pleasure-seekershave all turned home at the frown of winter. As itwas their delight in the early year to plan excursions,to make parties, and then to fly forth in all directions,to enjoy new scenes, new faces, summer skies, andsea-breezes ; it is now their delight to assemble againround their familiar firesides, with the old familiarfaces, to talk over all that they have seen, and said,and done. Parliament has adjourned, and wearysenators and their families have fled from London,and are, once more, at their country seats. Childrenare come home from school; business seems to pause,or to move less urgently in the dead season of theyear, and releases numbers from its tread-mill roundto an interval of relaxation. All the branches offamilies meet with spirits eager for enjoyment ; andstorms, frosts, and darkness without, send them forthat enjoyment to the fire-bright hearth.Christmas-eve approaches, and with it signs of observance,and feasting, and amusement. Holly, ivy,and mistletoe appear in vast quantities in the markets,and almost every housekeeper, except those of theSociety of Friends, furnishes herself with a quantity todecorate her windows, if not always to sport a kissing-bush.Churches, halls, city houses and country cottages,are all seen with their windows stuck over withsprigs of green and scarlet-berried holly. Mistletoeis said never to be introduced into churches except by208 CHRISTMAS.ignorance of the sextons, being held in abhorrence bythe early Christians on account of its prominence inthe Druidical ceremonies. And this is likely enough ;but in the house it maintains its station, and wellmerits it, by the beauty of its divaricated branches ofpale-green, and its pearly-white berries. But Christ-massivebrings not only evergreens into request, butabundance of more substantial things. The coaches totown are fairly loaded to the utmost with geese, turkeysand game, as those downwards are with barrels ofoysters. The grocers are busy selling currants, raisins,spices, and other good things, for the composition ofmince-pies and Christmas sweetmeats. Pigs are killed,and pork-pies, sausages, and spareribs abound from thegreatest hall to the lowest hut. Heaven be thankedthat the blessing goes so far in this instance. It is adelight to think of all the little children in the poorman's house, that the year through have lived coarselyif not sparely, now watching the fat pig from theirown stye cut up, and pies and spareribs, boiling pieces,black-puddings, and sausages, springing up as from amagical storehouse unlocked by the key of Old Christmas.O ! it is a delicious time, when the father andthe mother can sit down amongst their throng of eagerlittle ones, that "feel their life in every limb," andfeast them to their hearts' content ; and live with themfor a short time amid substantial things and savourysmells, and, after all, hang in the chimney corner twonoble flitches for the coming year.These good things come with Christmas-eve, andwith them come the Waited. Except in some fewvery primitive districts, these do not go about for aweek or more as they used to do, but merely on thisCHRISTMAS. 209night. And it is a fact singularly unfortunate for Mr.Buller's theory of the effect of Methodism noticedbefore, that wherever Methodists exist they are sureto be amongst these waited, and are, in many places,the only ones. The strange, dreamy, yet delightfuleffect of the music and singing of these waited, as youhear them in a state rather of sleep than waking, whohas not experienced ? They are, as Fixlein expressesit, to our conscious senses, but half dormant understandings," sounds out of heaven, singing voices ofangels in the air." I shall never forget the delicious impressionsof this midnight music on my childish spirit,and would fain hear such strains on every returningChristmas-eve till I cease to hear any mortal sounds.But Christmas morning comes ; and ere daylightdawns, you are awoke by the rejoicing music of allthe village or the city bells, as it may be; and cannothelp feeling, spite of all that puritans and grave denouncesof times and seasons' have said, that there issomething holy in the remembrance of the time whichdoes your spirit good. Who can read these versesof Wordsworth's, addressed to his brother, withoutfeeling the truth of this ?TO THE REV. DR. WORDSWORTH.The minstrels played their Christmas tuneTo night beneath my cottage eaves ;While, smitten by the lofty moon,The encircling laurels, thick with leaves,Gave back a rich and dazzling sheen,That overpowered their natural green.Through hill and valley every breezeHad sank to rest with folded wings;Keen was the air, but could not freezeNor check the music of their strings;VOL. II. M210 CHRISTMAS.So stout and hardy were the bandThat scraped the chords with strenuous hand.And who but listened? — till was paidRespect to every inmate's claim ;The greeting given, the music played.In honour of each household name,Duly pronounced with lusty call,And " merry Christmas "' wished to all !O Brother ! I revere the choiceThat took thee from thy native hills jAnd it is given thee to rejoice ;Though public care full often tills,(Heaven only witness of the toil)A barren and ungrateful soil.Yet would that thou with me and mine,Hadst heard this never-failing rite ;And seen on other faces shineA true revival of the light — ■Which Nature and these rustic Powers,In simple childhood, spread on ours !For pleasure hath not ceased to waitOn these expected, annual rounds.Whether the rich man's sumptuous gateCall forth the elaborate sounds.Or they are offered at the doorThat guards the dwelling of the poor.How touching, when at midnight sweepSnow-mufHed winds, and all is dark,To hear — and sink again to sleep !Or, at an earlier call, to mark.By blazing fire, the still suspenseOf self-complacent innocence.The mutual nod, — the grave disguiseOf hearts with gladness brimming o'er ;And some unbidden tears that riseFor gaines once heard, and heard no more :Tears brightened by the serenade,For infant in the cradle laid !CHRISTMAS. 211Ah ! not for emerald fields alone,With ambient streams more pure and brightThan fabled Cytherea's zoneGlittering before the Thunderer's sight,Is to my heart of hearts endearedThe ground where we were born and reared !Hail ! ancient Manners ! sure defence,Where they survive, of wholesome laws;Remnants of love whose modest senseThus into narrow room withdraws ;Hail, Usages of pristine mould,And ye, that guard them, Mountains old !Christmas-day then is come ! and with it begins aheart-felt season of social delight, and interchangesof kindred enjoyments. In large houses are largeparties, music, and feasting, dancing and cards.Beautiful faces and noble forms, the most fair andaccomplished of England's sons and daughters, beautifythe ample fire-sides of aristocratic halls. Senatorsand judges, lawyers and clergymen, poets andphilosophers, there meet in cheerful and even sportiveease, amid the elegancies of polished life. In moreold-fashioned, but substantial country abodes, old fashionedhilarity prevails. In the farm-house heartyspirits are met. Here are dancing and feasting too ;and often bondman's buff, turn-trencher, and some ofthe simple games of the last age remain. In allfamilies, except the families of the poor, who seemtoo much forgotten at this, as at other times in thisrefined age, there are visits paid and received; partiesgoing out, or coming in ; and everywhere abound, asindispensable to the season, mince-pies, and wishesfor " a merry Christmas and a happy New-year."It is only in the more primitive parts of the country212 CHRISTMAS.that the olden customs remain. The Christmas carolswhich were sung about from door to door, for a weekat least, not twenty years ago, are rarely heard nowin the midland counties. More northward, from thehills of Derbyshire, and the bordering ones of Staffordshire,up through Lancashire, Yorkshire, Northumberlandand Durham, you may frequently meetwith them. The late Mrs. Fletcher (Miss Newbury)one of the most highly-gifted, both in talents andprinciple, of those who are early lost to the world,collected a volume of such as are sung in the neighbourhoodof Manchester, and presented it to Mrs.Howitt. Amongst them are many of the most ancient,such as — " Under the Leaves, or the SevenVirgins," beginning —All under the leaves, and the leaves of life,I met with virgins seven ;And one of them was Mary mild.Our Lord's Mother in Heaven.The Moon shone bright" — beginning withThe moon shone bright, and the stars gave a lightA little before it was day,TI1J8 Lord our God he called to us,And bade us awake and pray.Awake, awake, good people all,Awake and you shall hear,Our blessed Lord died on the crossFor us whom he loved so dear ;and ending thus —Today though you 're alive and well.Worth many a thousand pound.To-morrow dead, and cold as clay.Your corpse lies under ground.CHRISTMAS. 213God bless the master of this house,Mistress and children dear ;Joyful may their Christmas be,And happy their New-year.That singular old ballad of Dives and Lazarus, inwhich occur these stanzas: —As it fell out upon a day,Poor Lazarus sickened and died ;There came two angels out of heavenHis soul therein to guide.Rise up, rise up, brother Lazarus,Thine heavenly guides are we ;Thy place it is provided in heaven.To sit on an angel's knee."As it fell out upon a day.Rich Dives sickened and died ;There came two serpents out of hellHis soul therein to guide.Rise up, rise up, brother Dives,Thine evil guides are we;Thy place it is provided in hell.To sit on a serpent's knee 5 "One has this home-thrusting stanza:So proud and lofty do some people grow.Dressing themselves like players in a show ;They patch and paint, and dress like idle stuff,As if God had not made them good enough.The well-known Twelve Joys :The first good joy that Mary had, it was the joy of one.To see her own son Jesus to suck at her breast-bone ;To suck at her breast bone, good man, and blessed shall he be.Through Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the One United Three ! etc.•214 CHRISTMAS.The equally popular one :God rest you, merry gentlemen,Let nothing you dismay ;Remember Christ our SaviourWas born on Christmas-day,To save poor souls from Satan's power.Who 've long time gone astray.Which ends thus :God bless the master of this house,And mistress also ;And all the little childrenThat round the table go ;With their pockets full of money,And their cellars full of beer ;And God send you a happy New-year.Amongst them is found Bethlehem City.In Bethlehem city, in Jewry it was,That Joseph and Mary together did pass;And there to be tax'd, as many one mo.When Caesar commanded, in truth it was so, etc.And that fine hymn which is sung in some places atmidnight by the Waited, and which the Methodistshave adopted for their early morning service :Christians, awake ! salute the happy morn.Whereon the Saviour of the world was born.And the following, which though evidently in a mostdefective state, I shall give entire, as exhibiting astriking impress of the character of the middle ages;and shew how well they understood the true spirit ofChrist.Honour the leaves and the leaves of life.Upon this blest holiday,When Jesus asked his mother dear.Whether he might go to play.CHRISTMAS.To play ! to play ! said blessed Mary,To play, then get you gone ;And see there be no complaint of youAt night when you come home.Sweet Jesus, he ran unto yonder town,As far as the holy well ;And there he saw three as fine childrenAs ever eyes beheld.He said, " God bless you every one.And sweet may your sleep be ;And now, little children, I'll play with you.And you shall play with me."Nay, nay, we are lords' and ladies' sons —Thou art meaner than us all ;Thou art but a silly fair maid's child.Born in an oxen's stall."Sweet Jesus he turned himself about.Neither laughed, nor smiled, nor spoke.But the tears trickled down from his pretty little eyes.Like waters from the rock.Sweet Jesus he ran to his mother dear,As fast as he could run —Oh mother, I saw three as fine childrenAs ever were eyes set on.I said " God bless you every one.And sweet may your sleep be —And now, little children, I' 11 play with you.And you shall play with me."Nay," said they, " we 're lords" and ladies' sons.Thou 'rt meaner than us all ;For thou art but a poor fair maid's child,Born in an oxen's stall."Then the tears trickled down from his prey little eyesAs fast as they could fall,Then," said she, " go down to yonder town.As far as the holy well.And there take up those infants' souls.And dip them deep in hell."Oh no ! oh no ! " sweet Jesus then said,Oh no ! that never can be ;For there are many of those infants' soukCrying out for the help of me ! "216 CHRISTMAS.I must not close this article either without recalling:to the recollection of some of my readers that quaintold carol, which was sung by bands of little childrenat Christmas, and which brings fairly before us thepaintings of the old masters, where Joseph is alwaysrepresented as so old a man, and Mary sits in theoxen's stall " with her crown on her head.Joseph was an old man, and an old man was he.And he married Mary, the Queen of Galilee.It goes on to describe how they went into thegarden, and Queen Mary asked Joseph to gather hersome cherries, on which he turned very crabbed, madeMary weep, and then all the cherry-trees made theirobeisance ;And bowed down to Mary's knee —And she gathered cherries by one, two, and three.These are in the spirit of the legend which relates thatJesus, when a boy, was playing with other boys, whenthey made sparrows of clay, and he made a sparrowtoo, but his sparrow became instantly alive, and flewaway.Simple were the times when such rude rhymes asthese were framed, to be sung before the doors and bythe blazing yule clogs of gentle and simple. Theyare not calculated to stand the test of these days ; theschoolmaster will root them all out : but it is to behoped that he will leave untouched the cordial spirit ofpiety and affection so fitted to make happy this desolateperiod of the year.In Yorkshire, Staffordshire, Cornwall, and Devon,the old spirit of Christmas seems to be kept up moreearnestly than in most other counties. In Cornwall,CHRISTMAS. 217they still exhibit the old dance of St. George and theDragon. A young friend of ours happening to be atCamden-Low in the Staffordshire hills at Christmas, incame the band of bedizened actors, and performed thewhole ancient drama, personating St. George, the Kingof Egypt, the fair Saba, the King's daughter, the Doctor,and other characters, with great energy and inrude verse. In Devon they still bless the orchards onChristmas-eve, according to the old verses : —Wassail the trees, that they may beareYou many a plum, and many a peace :For more or less fruits they will bringAs you do give them wassailing.In some places, they walk in procession to the principalorchards in the parish. In each orchard one treeis selected as the representative of the rest; and issaluted with a certain form of words. They then eithersprinkle the tree with cider, or dash a bowl of cideragainst it. In other places, only the farmer and hisservants assemble on the occasion, and after immersingcakes in cider, hang them on the apple-trees.They then sprinkle the trees with cider; pronouncetheir incantation ; dance about the tree, and then gohome to feast.In Mr. Grant Stewart's " Popular Superstitions ofthe Highlands," may be found an account of the Highlandmode of celebrating Christmas ; and here we saya hearty good-bye to Jolly Old Christmas.We have now made a hasty sketch of those oldfestivals which still retain more or less of their ancientinfluence. We have endeavoured to show what is thepresent state of custom and feeling in these particularsM 2•218 CHRISTMAS.by contrasting It with the past. New-year's-day isyet a day of salutations ; Valentine's-Day has yet somesportive observance amongst the young; and Plough-monday,here and there, in the thoroughly agriculturaldistricts, sends out its motley team. This consists ofthe farm-servants and labourers. They are dressed inharlequin guise, with wooden swords, plenty of ribbons,faces daubed with white-lead, red ochre, andlamp-black. One is always dressed in woman's clothesand armed with a besom, a sort of burlesque mixtureof Witch and Columbine. Another drives the team ofmen-horses with a long wand, at the end of which istied a bladder instead of a lash ; so that blows are givenwithout pain, but with plenty of noise. The insolenceof these Plough-bullocks, as they are called, whichmight accord with ancient license, but does not at allsuit modern habits, has contributed, more than anythingelse, to put them down. They visited every house ofany account, and solicited a contribution in no veryhumble terms. If it was refused, their practice was toplough up the garden walk, or do some other mischief.One band ploughed up the palisades of a widow ladyof our acquaintance, and having to appear before amagistrate for it, and to pay damages, never afterwardsvisited that neighbourhood. In some places I haveknown them enter houses, whence they could only beejected by the main power of the collected neighbours; for they extended their excursions often to thedistance of ten miles or more, and where they werethe most unknown, there practised the most insolence.Nobody regrets the discontinuance of this usage.CHAPTER VII.THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS.The Fairies, which gave in old times one of the mostinteresting' and poetical features to the country, haveall vanished clean away. Of those supernatural andairy beings who used to haunt the wood-lands, hamlets,and solitary houses of Old England, they were thefirst to depart. " They were of the old profession" —true Catholics ; and with Catholicism they departed ; andhave only left their interest in the pages of our poets,who still cling with fondness to the fairy mythology.Boards, bar guests, ghosts, and hobgoblins, still inmany an obscure hamlet, and the more primitive partsof the country, maintain much of their ancient power,and continue to quicken the steps of the clown inlonely places, of the school-boy past the churchyard,and to add a fearful interest to the winter fire-sidestories in cottages and farms. Witchcraft, spite ofwhat Sir Walter Scott asserted in his Demonology?is far from having ceased to have stanch believers innumerousplaces. Are not many of the Methodistsfirmly persuaded of demoniacal possession ? It is notlong ago that Mr. Seaton, one of their ministers,•220 THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS.published a volume in support of tins doctrine, anddetailed a very extraordinary case of possession of aboy who mounted on the surbase of the room, anddanced there, on a space where he could not for amoment support himself when not under this influence.In this curious book, which I sent to Sir Walter Scott,and which he assured me he meant to make use of, butwas, no doubt, prevented by his quickly succeedingdecline, is a minute account of all the process of prayingthe spirit out of the lad, of the dogged resistanceof the demon, and their final triumph over him. JohnWesley was strongly impressed with a belief of suchthings, as may be seen in his " News from the InvisibleWorld," and in the pages of the old series of theWesley an Magazine. And if recent demoniacal possessionbe a living faith of the nineteenth century,witchcraft has no lack of votaries. In Nottingham, atown of seventy thousand inhabitants, I knew a shoemakerwho stood six feet in height, and " might dancein iron mail," who lately lived, and probably still lives,in constant dread of the evil arts of witches and wizards.On the lintel and sill of his door, he had the ancientcharm of reversed horse-shoes nailed ; but he said, hefound them of little use against the audacious maliceof witchcraft. He had standing regularly by his firesidea sack-bag of salt, for he bought it by a sack at atime for the purpose, and of this he frequently, duringthe day, but more especially on dark and stormynights, took a handful, with a few horsehair stumps,and crooked pins, and casting them into the fire together,prayed to the Lord to torment all witches andwizards in the neighbourhood, and he believed thatthey were tormented. As I stood by the man's fireTHE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS. 2*21while he related this, it was burning with the beautifulpurple hue of salt. On all other subjects he appearedas grave and sober as his neighbours.In the obscure alleys of large towns, as well as insolitary situations, fortune-tellers still live, and to myown knowledge draw many customers, besides thegipsies, who haunt there in winter time, and are theregular professors of palmistry. Witches, spectres,gipsies, and cunning people still remain to diversifycommon life, spite of all the spread of education ; butthe fairies, pleasant little people, are gone for ever,and have been gone long. Chaucer, indeed, saysthat they were gone in his day.In olde days of the king Arthur,Of which that Bretons spoken grete honour,All was this land fulfilled of faerie ;The elf quene, with her holy compagnieDanced full oft in many^a grene mede.This was the old opinion as I rede ;I speke of many hundred yere ago ;But now can no man see non elves mo,For now the grete charitie and prayersOf liquours and other holy freezes,That beechen every land and every serene.As ihikke as motes in the sonne heme,Blessing halles, chambers, kitchens and bores,Cities and burghes, castles high and torres,Throes and homes, shepenes and dailies,This maketh that lier bun no fairies ;For then as wont to walked was an elf,Ther walworth now the limitour himself.And Dr. Cornet, bishop of Norwich, who died in1635, wrote the following interesting2'2'2 THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS.FAREWELL TO THE FAIRIES.Farewell rewards and fairies !Good housewives now may say;For now foule sluts in dairies,Doe fare as well as they ;And though they sweep their hearths no lessThan maids were wont to doe,Yet who of late for cleanlinessFinds sixpence in her shoe 1Lament, lament old Abbies,The Fairies' lost command ;They did but change priests' babies.But some have changed your land :And all your children stolen from thenceAre now grown Puritans,Who live as changing ever sinceFor love of your defenses.At morning and at evening bothYou merry were and glad,So little care of sleep and sloth,Those prettier ladies had.When Tom came home from labour.Or Miss to milking rose,Then merrily went their tabour.And merrily went their toes.Witness those rings and roundelayOf theirs which yet remain ;Were footed in Queen Aviary's daysOn many a grassy plane.But since of late Elizabeth,And later James came in,They never danced on any heathAs when the time hath bin.By which we note the fairiesWere of the old profession,Their songs were Ave Maries,Their dances were procession.THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS. 223But now, alas ! they all are dead,Or gone beyond the seas,Or farther for religion fled.Or else they take their ease.A tell-tale in their companyThey never could endure;And whoso kept not secretly,Their mirth was punished sure.It was a just and christian deed,To pinch such hack and blue;O how the commonwealth doth needSuch justices as you !Now they have left our quarters;A Register they have,Who can peruse their charters,A man both wise and grave.A hundred of their merry pranksBy one that I could nameAre kept in store ; con twenty marksTo William for the same.To William Churn of StaffordshireGive laud and praises due.Who every meal can mend your cheerWith tales both old and true :To William all give audience,And pray ye for his noddle ;For all the fairies' evidenceWere lost if it were addle.Possibly the fairies may yet linger in the dales ofPatrick Forest, where poor Hogg used to see them,and sung so many beautiful lays in their honour, thathe may be styled the Poet Laureate of the Fairies.But he is gone now — gone after many another greatand shining light of the age, having made the shepherd'splaid almost as glorious as the prophet's mantleand they may not choose to reveal themselves toanother. They may possibly yet pay an occasional224 THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS.visit to Staffordshire, the county of William Churn ;and we have, indeed, heard of them doing somepleasant miracles on Midsummer-eve on CalderIf we are to believe the report of a certainlittle damsel, as given in Tait's Magazine of June,1835—Some, they played with the water,And rolled it down the hill jAnd this, they said, shall men-lily turnThe poor old miller's mill.For there has been no waterEver since the first of May,And a blithe man shall the miller beBy the dawning of the day,O ! the miller how he will laughAs he sees the mill-dam rise —The jolly old miller how he will laughTill the tears fill both his eyes.And some they seized the little winds,That sounded over the hill,And each put a horn into his mouth,And blew so sharp and shrill.And there," said one, " the merry winds goAway from every horn.And these shall clear the mildew dankFrom the blind old widow's corn."O ! the poor blind widow —Though she has mourned so long.She'll be merry enough when the mildew's gone.And the corn stands stiff and strong.And some they brought the brown linseed,And flung it down from the Low ;"And this," said they, "by the sunrise.In the weaver's croft shall grow,"O ! the poor, lame weaver,How will he laugh outright.When he sees his dwindling flax-fieldAll full of flowers by night.THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS. 225Then up and spoke a brownie,With a long beard on his chin,And I have spun the tow," said he,*' And I want some more to spin.I 've spun a piece of hempen cloth,And I want to spin another ;A little sheet for Mary's bed.And an apron for her mother."And with that I could not help but laugh.And I laughed out loud and free.And then, on the top of the Camden-LowThere was no one left but me.And all on the top of the Camden-LowThe mists were cold and grey,And nothing I saw but the mossy stones,That round about me lay.This deponent saith, that coming down from theLow, she saw all their benevolent intentions alreadyrealized. It is to be hoped that such visits may beagain paid to Camden-Low, but we have our doubts.The Pixies may possibly-still haunt those cavesand dells in Devonshire where Coleridge and warringtonsaw them; but with those exceptions — andthey received on the faith of poets, who take licensewe believe they have all emigrated. In the lays ofShakspeare and Milton, they are made immortaldenizens of our soil ; and we shall never see moonlight,or come upon the ver-rings that still markour plains and downs, without feeling and poeticallybelieving that the fairies have been there. In Wales,however, the common people still declare that theyabide. Scotland may have given up the brownies, andkelpies, and risks ; and we may no longer have hob-thrushesdwelling amongst our rocks, or Robin Good-fellow,alias Puck, alias Hobgoblin, playing his pranks,as in this confession.226 THE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS.When e'er night-wanderers I meet,As from their night-sports they trudge home,With counterfeiting voice I greece,And call them on with me to rome,Through woods, through lakes,Through bogs, through brakes ;Or else unseen with them I go,All in the nice,To pray some tricks,And frolicks it with ho, ho, ho !Sometimes I meet them like a man ;Sometimes an ox, sometimes a hound ;And to a horse I turn me can ;To trip and trot about them round.But if to rideMy back they stride,More swift than wind away I go,O'er hedge and lands,Through pools and pondsI whinny laughing ho, ho, ho !He may not come to play those pranks, nor asMilton has described his visits to the farm :To earn the cream-bowl duly set.The thrashing-machine has thrown the lubber-fiendout of employment ; but the Welsh still declare themselveshonoured by the continuance of these night-wanderers.They have still the corpse-candles ; andhear Gabriel's hounds hunting over the hills by night,and stoutly avow that the fairies are as numerous thereas ever. There is a water-fall at Aberpergum, calledthe Fairies' Water-fall, where they are, almost anynight to be heard singing ; and I have heard a verygrave Friend declare that he has seen them dancingin a green meadow, as he rode home at night. Howlong, indeed, this may continue, one cannot tell ; forold Morgan Lewis, who for fifty years has acted asTHE FAIRY SUPERSTITIONS. 227guide to the beautiful water-falls of Neath Valley,and is a most firm believer in all the Fairy faith, especiallyof their luring children away by assuming theforms of their deceased relatives, and offering themfairy-bread to eat, which changes their natures, andthey are compelled to join the Elfin troop — declaresthat they are now gone from that neighbourhood ; thatthe spirit of man is become too strong for them."A fair friend has sketched for me, the old man inthe attitude of describing to a party the exact spoton which his father saw their very last appearance.Behind him rises the Dines Rock, from time immemorialthe sanctum sanatorium of Welsh fairyland;and old Morgan is exclaiming, " They are gone ! theyare gone ! and we'll never see them more !",'-^P' «^» ^,^^^3^.3;^B*fe-CHAPTER VIII.THE VILLAGE INN.There is nothing more characteristic in rural lifethan a village ale-house, or inn. It is the centre ofinformation, and the regular, or occasional rendezvousof almost every-body in the neighbourhood. Youthere see all sorts of characters, or you hear of them.The where-about of every-body all around is thereperfectly understood. I do not mean the low pothouse— the new beer-shop of the new Beer-bill, withLICENSED TO BE DRUNK ON THE PREMISES blaZOnedover the door in staring characters — the of the midland counties — the Ridley-Wink ofthe west of England. No, I mean the good old-fashionedcountry ale-house ; the substantial, well-to-doold country ale-house — situated on a village green,or by the road-side, with a comfortable sweep out ofthe road itself, for carriages or carts to come round tothe door, and stand out of all hare's-way. The niceold-fashioned house, in a quiet, rural, out-of-the-way,THE VILLAGE INN. 229old-fashioned district. The very house which Goldsmithin his day described —Where grey-beard mirth and smiling toil retired,Where village statesmen talked with looks profound.And news much older than their ale went round.It is a low, white washed, or slap-dashed, or stuccoed,or timber-framed house, with its various roof,and steep gables ; its casement windows above, brightand clean, peeping out from amongst vines or jasmines,where the inn-keeper's neat daughter, who actsthe parts of chamber-maid, bar-maid, and waiter, maybeseen looking abroad; and its broad bay-windowsbelow, where parties may do the same, and where, asyou pass, you may occasionally see such parties — apleasant-looking family, or a group of young, gaypeople, with merry, and often very sweet facesamongst them ; — their post-chaise, travelling-carriage,barouche, or spring-cart, according to their severalstyles and dignities, standing at the door, under thegreat spreading tree. Ay, there is the old spreadingtree, that is as old and probably older than the innitself It is an elm, with a knotty mass of rootswelled out around the base of its sturdy stem into aprodigious heap — into a seat, in fact, on holiday occasions,for a score of rustic revellers, or renters. Insome cases, where the root has not been so accommodating,a good stout bench runs round it ; or wherethe root is at all endangered by scratching dogs, pickingand hewing children, or rooting pigs of the village,it has heaped up a good mound of earth roundit; or it is protected by a circle of wattled fence.You see the tree is a tree of mark and consequence;230 THE VILLAGE INN.it is, indeed, the tree. It is looked upon as part andparcel of the concern ; of as much consequence to thehouse as its sign; and it is often the sign itself: —The Old-Elm-Tree! Or it may be a yew — thevery yew out of which Robin Hood and Little John,Will Scarlet or Will Stately cut their bows — yes,that house is " The Robin Hood." Or it may be amighty ash — the One-Ash, or the Mony-Ash as inthe Peak of Derbyshire. Or it is an oak of as muchdignity — The Royal-oak. Or it is a whole grove orcluster by character or tradition — The Seven-Sistersor The Four-Brothers — or The Nine-Oaks — all ofwhich sisters, brothers, or nine companions, exceptone, are decayed, dropped off, or thrown down, asmany a family beside has been. See! — the signhangs in it, or is suspended on its post just by, bearingthe likeness of the original tree, attempted bysome village artist.Just such a tree and such a house, all my Surrey,and many of my Metropolitan readers are familiarwith at the foot of St. Anne's Hill, by Chertsey. TheGolden-Grove, kept by James Snowdon, — who doesnot know it, that loves sweet scenery, sweet associations,or a pleasant steak and pipe, or a tea-party ona holiday of nature, in one of the most delicious nestsimaginable ? Yes ! there is a nice old village inn foryou ; and such a tree ! There you have the pictureof the Golden-Grove all in a blaze of gold — somewhatdashed and dimmed, it is true, by the blaze of manysuns, — but there it is, in front of the inn, and by theold tree. The inn, the hanging gardens and orchards,the rustic cottages scattered about, the rich woods andsplendid prospects above, the beautiful meadows andTHE VILLAGE INN. 231winding streams below ; why, they are enough toarrest any traveller, and make him put up his horse,and determine to breathe a little of this sweet air,and indulge in this Arcadian calm, amid these embowering:woodlands. And where is he ? Below inthose fair meadows, amid those cottage roofs and orchardtrees, rises the low, square church-tower ofChertsey : — Chertsey, where Cowley lived and died ;and where his garden still remains, as delicious asever, with its grassy walk winding by his favouritebrook, and the little wooden bridge leading into therichest meadows. And where his old house yet remains,saving the porch pointing to the street, whichwas taken down for the public safety, but the circumstanceand its cause recorded on a tablet on the wall,with this concluding line —Here the last accents flowed from Cowley's tongue.You then, poetical or enthusiastic traveller or visitant,tread the ground which Abraham Cowley trod in hisretirement; and what is more, you tread the groundwhich Charles James Fox trod in his retirement.The hill above is St. Anne's, — conspicuous through agreat part of Surrey, Berks, Bucks, Hearts, and Middlesex,delightful for its woods and for its splendidpanoramic views, including the winding Thames,Cooper's Hill, celebrated by Sir John Dunham,Hampstead, Highgate, Harrow, and mighty Londonitself, but still more delightful to the patriotic visitant,as the place where Fox retired to refresh himselfafter his parliamentary contests, and to recruit himselffor fresh struggles for his country. It is a placewhich Rogers by his pen, and Turner by his pencil,23*2 THE VILLAGE INN.have made still more sacred. Who does not knowthe lines of Rogers in his poem of Human Life, inhis last splendidly embellished edition of his works,referring to Fox?And now once more where most he wished to be,In his own fields, breathing tranquillity —We hail him — not less happy Fox, than thee !Thee at St. Anne's so soon of care beguiled,Playful, sincere, and artless as a child !Thee, who wouldst watch a bird's nest on the spray.Through the green leaves exploring, day by day.How oft from grove to grove, from seat to seat.With thee conversing in thy loved retreat,I saw the sun go down ! — Ah, then 'twas thine.Ne'er to forget some volume half divine,Shakspeare's or Dryden's — through the chequered shadeBorne in thy hand behind thee as we strayed ;And where we sate (and many a halt we made).To read there with a fervour all thine own.And in thy grand and melancholy tone,Some splendid passage, not to thee unknown,Fit theme for long discourse. — Thy bell has tolled !But in thy place among us we beholdOne who resembles thee.There is the place, drawn by Turner, exactly as itis; and there is still living the widow of the greatstatesman, at the advanced age of upwards of ninetyyears.It must be confessed that the Golden-Grove islocated in a very golden situation, and then — its tree!I suppose that is scarcely to be rivalled. I haveplaced on my title-page the King of Belgium's tree,but James Snowdon's tree is every whit as remarkable.It is a grand old elm, with massy, wide-spreadinghorizontal branches, on which is laid a stout oakenfloor, fenced in by a strong parapet of boards andTHE VILLAGE INN. 233palisades. It is an aerial, arborean lodge, reached by aneasy flight of steps, furnished with seats and tables,and canopied by the green awning of the whole tree'sfoliage — ^jiist the sylvan bower that makes one long tosee a joyous party in on a summer's day, looking outwithglad faces on the passers by; or a rustic company,with their homely pots of ale, and the smokeof their pipes circling out amongst the green leavesabout them.This is the old-fashioned country ale-house, such asI am speaking of, only that we are still merely at theentrance of it, still lingering and haunting about thedoor, while the landlady and her daughter are on thefidgets to receive us, and the old landlord comes outwithhis bare head, and his rustic bow, and greets uswith — " A fine old tree that, sir ! Their heads don'tache as planted it, sir;" and the hostler is advancingfrom the stable to take charge of our vehicle. Butwalk in. How clean it is! .Bless us, what a nicesnug parlour ! What an ample, comfortable kitchen,or house-place as they call it, with its wide fire-place.What an array of plates, dishes, and bright pewterpots on the shelves around, and of hams and flitchesdangling from the ceiling. It is a substantial place ;there is no fear of starvation here. The joint isturning at the fire, and the tea-kitchen stands for everboiling, ready to mix a tumbler of spirits, or to makecoffee or tea at all hours.These country inns are, of course, some greater,some less ; some richer, some more simple — accordingto their custom, situation, or other contingent circumstances; but they are generally clean to a miracle,and plentiful places. The travelling carriages stop toVOL. JI. N234 THE VILLAGE INN.bait there, for it is between towns; the squire comesthere occasionally, for he patronizes it, and has allprivate and public meetings held there. Most probablyit is his own property, and its sign the arms of hisfamily ; and what is quite as likely, the landlord is hisold servant. Half of these places are kept by oldservants of the neighbouring families who have marriedand retired to public life. The groom, the coachman,nay the valet or the butler, has married thelady's maid, or the comely laundress, or a daughter ofa neighbouring farmer, and there is nothing he can soreadily fashion himself to as an inn. It is somethingafter his own way — he is still waiting on somebody,at table, or at carriage. He is knowing in horses anddogs, and he can't be well spared out of the neighbourhood.He is acquainted with all the farmers, andtheir acquaintance all round, and they come to thehouse. In nine cases out of ten he has a farm attachedto his inn. In other cases, our country innkeeper isa maltster too, or a miller ; and these are the countryinns for good cheer. O, what cream, what freshbutter, what fresh eggs, what fresh vegetables, whatplump tender pullets, what geese and ducks for theroasting, with all appendages of peas and onions, cucumbersand asparagus, can that larder produce whichis situated in the Goshen of rural plenty ; wherethe malt-kiln is at hand instead of the druggist's shop ;where barley is steeped instead of calculus ; wherethe hostel has a plentiful garden at its back, and agood farm behind that.Go up to your bed-chamber ; you are delighted withits sweetness — its freshness — its cleanness. You fairlystand to snuff up the air that comes in at the openTHE VILLAGE INN. 235window. You turn to admire the clean white bed —the snowy sheets — the fresh carpet — the okl-fashionedwalnut drawers, and wide elbow-chairs of massy workmanship,with damask cushions, clean, though muchworn, which have been purchased at the sale of someancient manor-house. All is as bright and clean asbusy, and country hands can make them. There islavender in the drawers! You may, indeed, if youplease, be laid in lavender; for you have oily to lookoutof your window, and the garden below has wholehedges of lavender, and there are trees of rosemarynailed up your walls to the very window-sills of theroom. And then you see such filbert-bushes, suchdamson, and plum, and apple, and pear trees, that youhave visions of apple dumplings, damson tarts, and ahundred other rural dainties. And now, if you wantto study the character of the place ; if you are staying-somefew days, and are curious in "the short andsimple annals of the poor ;" if you want to paint likeNorland or Gainsborough ; or to vie with Miss Mit-fordin sun-shiny pictures of an English village, thereyou are in the very watch-tower of observation.You look out on the green, and there comes all thepopulation, — the old to talk and smoke their pipes, theyoung to play at skittles, nine-pins, quoits, or cricket.You see out over fields and farms ; whatever, or whoeveryou meet in your walks, — cottage or hall, man,woman, or child, your landlord can give the whole historyand mystery of it; and, besides, as I have said,there every body comes. The clergyman himselfcomes there sometimes, to meet his neighbours, onparish or other affairs. All the gentlemen-farmers andplodding farmers, the keepers, the labourers, — every236 THE VILLAGE INN.body has some business at one time or another there.There are the privileged guests of the bar, the frequentersof the best parlour, the rustic circle of the kitchenfireside. There the wedding-party comes, and oftendines there. There the very followers of the funeralfind some occasion or need of comfort to draw them.*There the soldier on furlough halts — the recruitsmarching to their destination, halt too. If it be acountry that is at all frequented for its natural beautyor curiosities, or for sporting, there is always somewild-looking animal or other, a " man at a loose end,"ready to guide you to the moors, to act as a marker, tocarry your game-bag, or your fishing-basket. In allsuch places there is a wit, an eccentric, a good singer.The Will Wimbles, the broken-down gentlemen, thenever-dwells, all come there. You may see them andhear them, and when they are gone, may hear all theiroddities and their histories; and every evening youshall hear every piece of news, for five miles round, asrelated and canvassed over by the guests amongst themselves.Many of these landlords are themselves perfectoriginals ; and by their humour, their racy anecdotes,111 Wales the lenders of a country funeral adjourn, as regularlyas they attend the funeral itself, to the ale-house; and it strikes anEnglishman very strangely, to meet a funeral going to the church,and to hear the chief mourner, perhaps the widow, crying aloud, andrepeating as she goes, all the virtues of the deceased ; and in an hourafter, to find the whole company seated in the public house, envelopedin a canopy of tobacco-smoke, loud in talk, and drowning their sorrowin their cups. I recollect how my feelings were harrowed bymeeting such a funeral, and a widow just so lamenting; but the gentlemanwith me, a resident of the place, said " O, it is all the better —they run ofT the poignancy of their feelings by their lamentations.Their grief seems like one of their mountain torrents — loud and rapid,and then it is gone."THE VILLAGE INN. 237and " random shots of country wit" draw numbers totheir ingle. If any of my readers have heard old MatthewHobson, of the Nag's Head, Wythburn, at the footof Evelyn, holding forth in the midst of the rusticfrequenters of his hearth, they have a good notion ofsuch Boniface, — men that can furnish a Wordsworthor a Crabbe with the rough diamond of a story whichthey set in imperishable gold, — or flash out sparks ofnative wit that afterwards set the tables of city palacesin a roar.But lest I should be accused of tempting my readersinto the abodes of publicans and sinners, I inst againremind them that I am only talking of those quiet,respectable old country inns, where the master andmistress had a character to maintain, had a regard tothe opinion of the parson and the squire; and of thoseonly as places of necessary refreshment. As parts andparcels of English rural life, I am bound to describethem ; and who has not spent a pleasant hour in sucha place with a friend, on a pedestrianizing excursion,or with a rural party at dinner or tea ? And who hasnot rejoiced to escape from night and storms, on wideheaths, or amongst the mountains, to the "shelter ofsuch rustic roof?" Into such a house I remember,years ago, being driven by a wild night of wind, rain,and pitchy darkness, on the edge of Yorkshire, and thecheerful blaze of the fire, and the rustic group roundit, as I entered, were a right welcome contrast to thetempestuous blackness without. Wet, and cold, andweary as I was, I had no intention of being conductedto the best parlour of so small a house as this was, inso secluded a part of the country, on a dismal night inOctober. Whoever is obliged at such a season to beesTHE VILLAGE INN.take himself to such humble hostel, let him, if he donot find a good fire blazing in the parlour, seat himselfin the old chimney-corner : there he is sure ofwarmth and comfort in a homely way. In summer arustic inn, in the most obscure district, is pleasantenough ; but in winter, beware ! Travellers are fewthe best parlour is probably not used once a month,for all country incomers know that the old chimney-corneris always warm. Instead, therefore, of beingled, as is the regular custom, on the arrival of a respectablelooking stranger, into the best parlour, whilea fire is lighted, and of waiting, chill and miserable,for its burning up, and for the coming of your tea orsupper, watching the smoking, snapping, fizzing sticks,and the reek, refused ascent up the damp chimney,ever and anon, puffing out into the room in clouds —march at once into the common room, or ensconceyourself as a privileged guest into the bar. If youfind a fire blazing in the parlour, that is indication thatthere is passing enough on that road to keep oneburning there : if not, the blazing ingle is your spot.There I took my station, with a high wooden screenbehind me, a bright hearth before me; and having ordereda beef-steak and coffee, and secured the roomover this very one for my lodging, knowing that thattoo is always dry in winter, I began to notice whatcompany I had got. The scene presented is worthdescribing, as a bit of rural life. About half a dozenvillagers occupied the centre of the great circularwooden screen, at one end of which I was seated.Before them stood the common three-legged roundtable of the country public-house, on which stoodtheir mugs of ale. The table, screen, fire-irons, floor,THE VILLAGE INN. 239everything had an air of the greatest cleanness. Oppositeto me, in one of the great old elbow-chairs, socommon in country inns in the north, some of them,indeed, with rockers to them, in which full-grownpeople sit rocking themselves with as much satisfactionas children, sate an old man in duffil-grey trowsers andjacket, and with his hat on ; and close at my left handa tall, good-looking fellow of apparently fifty-five, whohad the dress of a master stone-mason, but a look ofvivacity and knowingness, very different to the rest ofthe company. There was a look of the wag, or therake about him. He was, in fact, evidently a fellowthat in any place or station would be a gay, fosteringblade; and if dressed in a court dress, would cut agallant figure too. He eyed me with that expressionwhich said he only wanted half a word to make himselfvery communicative. The check which my entrancehad given to the talk and laughter which Iheard on first opening the door, had now passed, andI found a keen dispute going on, upon the importantquestion of how many quicksets there are in a yard,when planted four inches asunder. The old man oppositeI found was what a punster would term a fence— a planter of fences, — a founder andestablisher of hawthorn hedges for the whole countryround ; and out of his profession the dispute hadarisen. The whole question hinged on the simple inquiry,whether a quickset was put in at the very commencementof the line of fence, or only at the end ofthe first four inches. In the first case there would beevidently nine — in the latter only eight. The matterin dispute was so simple and demonstrable, that onewondered how it could afford a dispute at all. Some,240 THE VILLAGE INN.however, contended there were eight quicksets, andsome that there were nine; and to demonstrate, theyhad chalked out the line of fence with its division intoyards, and sub-division into four inches, on the hearthwith a cinder; but the dispute still went on as keenlyas if the thing were not thus plainly before their eyes,or as disputes continue in a more national assembly onthings as self-evident: and many an earnest appealwas made from both sides to the old hedger, Vv'ho havingonce given his decision, disdained to return anyfurther reply than by a quiet withdrawal of his pipefrom his mouth, a quiet draught of ale, and the simpleasseveration of — "Nay, I'm sure!" The debatemight have grown as tediously prolix as the debatesjust alluded to, had not my left-hand neighbour, thetall man of lively aspect, turned to me, and, pointingto the cindery diagram on the hearth, said, " Whatthings these stay-at-home neighbours of mine canmake a dispute out of ! What would Ben Jonson havethought of such simpletons? Look here ! if thesenoisy chaps had ever read a line of Homer or Hesiod,they would net plague their seven senses out aboutnothing at all. Why, any child of a twelve-month oldwould settle their mighty question with the first wordit learned to speak. Eight or nine quicksets indeed !and James Broadfoot there, who should know ratherbetter than them, for he has planted as many in histime as would reach all round England, and Ireland toboot, has told them ten times over. Eight or ninenumb-skulls, I say !"O !" said I, a good deal surprised — " and so youhave read Homer and Hesiod, have you?"To be sure I have," replied my mercurial neigh-theVILLAGE INN. 241your, " and a few other poets too. I have not spentall my life in this sleepy-headed place, I can assureyou."What, you have travelled as well as read then ?"Yes, and I have travelled too, master. BenJonson was a stone-mason ; and if I am not a stonemasonI am a sculptor, and that is first-cousin to it.When Ben Jonson first entered London with a hodof mortar on his head, and a two-foot rule in hispocket, I dare say he knew no more that he hadtwenty plays in his head, than I knew of all thecherubim I should carve, and the epitaphs I shouldcut; and yet I have cut a few in my time, and writtenthem too before-hand."O ! and you are a poet too ?"He nodded assent, and taking up his mug of ale,and fixing his eyes stedfastly on me over the top ofit as he drunk with a look of triumph,' — then settingdown his mug — " And if you want to know that, youhave only to walk into the churchyard in the morning,and there you '11 find plenty of my verses, andcut with a pen of iron too, as Job wished his elegy tobe." Here, however, lest I should not walk into thechurchyard, he recited a M'hole host of epitaphs, manyof which must have made epitaph-hunters stare, ifthey really were put on head-stones.Well," I said, " you astonish me with yourlearning and wit. I certainly did not look for sucha person in this village — but pray where have youtravelled?"O ! it 's a long story — but this I can tell you — Ihave gone so near to the end of the world that Icould not put sixpence between my head and the sky."N 2242 THE VILLAGE INN.At this the whole company of disputants forgottheir quicksets, lifted their heads and cried — " Welldone Septimus Scallop ! That's a good 'un. If thegentleman can swallow that, he can anything."O !" said I, " I don't doubt it."Don't doubt it !" they shouted all at once —don't doubt it? Why, do you think any man evercould get to where the sky was so low as he couldn'tget in sixpence between his head and it?"Yes he could, and often has done — make yourselvessure of that. If a man has not a sixpence hecannot put it between his head and the sky ; and heis pretty near the world's end too, I think."Here they all burst into a shout of laughter, in themidst of which open flew the door, and a tall figurerushed into the middle of the house, wrapped in ashaggy coat of many capes, dripping with wet, andholding up a huge horn lantern. A face of wonderfullength and of a ghastly aspect glared from behind thelantern, and a voice of the most ludicrous lamentationbawled out — " For God's sake, lads, come and helpme to find my wagon and horses ! I've lost mywagon! I've lost my wagon!" Up jumped thewhole knot of disputants, and demanded where hehad lost it. The man said that while he went todeliver a parcel in the village the wagon had goneon. That he heard it at a distance and cried, " woa !woa!" but the harder he cried, and the farther hewent, the faster it went too. At this intelligenceaway marched every one of the good-natured crewexcepting the wit. " And why don't you go ?" Iasked. — "Go! pugh ! It's only that soft brother ofmine, Tim Scallop, the Doncaster carrier. I'll beTHE VILLAGE INN. 243bound now that the wagon hasn't moved an inchfrom the spot he left it in. He has heard the windroaring, and doesn't know it from his own wagonwheels. Here these poor simpletons will go runningtheir hearts out for some miles, and then they willcome back and find the horses where he left them. 1could go and lay my hand on them in five minutes.But they are just as well employed as in gripingMrs. Tappit's hearthstone. Never mind; — I wastelling you of what the hostler said to Ben Jonsonwhen Ben was reeling home early one morning froma carouse, and Ben declared that he was never sopricked with a horse-nail-stump in his life —Ben. — Thou silly groomTake away thy room.And let Ben Jonson pass :Groom. — O ! rare Ben !Turn back again,And take another glass !Septimus Scallop laughed at the hostler's repartee,and I laughed too, but my amusement had a differentsource from his. There was something irresistiblyludicrous in the generous rushing forth of the wholecompany to the aid of the poor carrier, except thewitty brother ! But he was quite right: in about anhour, in came the good-natured men, streaming withrain liked drowned rats, and declaring that after runningthree miles and finding no wagon, they bethoughtthemselves of turning back to where thecarrier said it was lost; and there they had nearlyrun their noses against it, standing exactly where heleft it.So much for the village inn. Every traveller must244 THE VILLAGE INN.have seen in such a place many a similar piece ofcountry life. A new class of ale-houses has sprungup under the New-Beer-Act, which being generallykept by people without capital, often without character;their liquor supplied by the public brewers, andadulterated by themselves; have done more to demoralizethe population of both town and country,than any other legislative measure within the lastcentury. In these low, dirty, fuddling places, youmay look in vain forThe whitewashed wall, the nicely sanded floor.The varnished clock that clicked behind the door.In manufacturing towns, and agricultural districts,they alike multiply the temptations to the poor man,and by their low character are sure to deteriorate hisown. Against the swarms of these, in many placesthe quiet respectable old village inn has little chance.It must disappear, or be kept by a different and aworse class of people ; and when it goes, it goes withGoldsmith's graphic lamentation — for very differentare the shops that succeed it :Vain transitory splendours ! could not allReprieve the tottering mansion from its fall !Obscure it sinks, nor shall it more impartAn hour's importance to the poor man's heart.Thither no more the peasant shall repair.To sweet oblivion of his daily care;No more the farmer's news, the barber's tale,No more the woodman's ballad shall prevail ;No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear.Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear jThe host himself no longer shall be foundCareful to see the mantling bliss go round;Nor the coy maid, half willing to be prest,Shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest.CHAPTER IX.POPULAR PLACES OF RESORT. WAKES, STATUTES,AND FAIRS.Besides the remains of the ancient festivals, thecountry people find a great source of amusement inthese gatherings. The Wake is the parochial feastof the dedication of the church. It has now dwindledinto a village holiday, shorn by the Reformation ofall its ecclesiastical and sacred character. But itfurnishes a certain point in every year, in every individualparish, to which the rural people can lookforward as a point of rest and mutual rejoicing. It isa time which leads them to clean up their houses, tolook forward and prepare for a renewal of their wardrobe;and which cheers the spirit of many an otherwisesolitary and labouring person with the prospectof a short season of relaxation, a short pause in theotherwise ever-going machinery of servitude. Theold people, — parents, and grand-parents, — say, whentelling of their children out at service, in some distantplace, or married and settled far off: " Well, well,we shall see them at the wake. They '11 all be here,thank God, well and hearty, I hope." The children,246 WAKES, STATUTES,as they groan at times under the tedium of perpetuallabour, suddenly cheer up, and say, — " Well but weshall go home at the wake:" — a thing which is regularlystipulated for at hiring : and the vision of thatjoyful time, though but a moment in itself, puts outall the twilight of their weary waiting. The timecomes. The merry bells of the church are ringing onthe anniversary of that church's completion, perhapsfive, or seven hundred years ago. Merrily they ring;and simple and glad creatures, young maidens, andyouths, and comely pairs with a troop of childrenround them, hear them, as they come over hill anddale, approaching from all quarters the place of theirnativity, and the place of their ancestors : the oneplace, however small, and however obscure, tinged alloverwith the memories of childhood, and filled withthe stories and legends that were interwoven with thevery grain of their minds by their parents' recitals inearly life — the one place, therefore, which seems themost important in the universe. They, like the Chinese,always place in the map of their simple thoughtstheir native village, in the centre of the earth. Overhill and dale they are coming, all in their holidayarray; and in many a bright little cottage, basking inthe sunshine of morning, are eager hearts looking outfor them ; wondering how Grace and Thomas willlook; whether they are much altered; and whetherthe children of the married ones will be much grown.The beauty of these village feasts is, that they do notoccur all at one time, so that the friends and acquaintanceof the inhabitants of one place, come pouring intosee them, and are ready in their turn to receivethem at their feast.AND FAIRS. 247They are times of pleasant exchange of hospitalitiesand renewals of simple friendships. Out of doorsthere are stalls of toys and sweetmeats, and whirligigsfor the children; within, there is, for once, plum-puddingand roast beef, and an infinity of such talk asbest pleases their tastes. Old notes of by-gone yearsare compared. Many are recalled to remembrancewho have not been thought of for a long time. Thehearts of the old are warmed by retracing their earlydays, early exploits, and early acquaintance, withallthe pleasant exaggerations of memory ; and theyoung listen, and think with wonder on those goodold times.In some old-fashioned places, these feasts are namedfrom and mingled with the remains of other old churchrites. At Ilkeston, in Derbyshire, it is still called theCross-Dressing, and the cross in the village is dressedup with oaken boughs, with their leaves gilt andspangled. At Islington, hear Coverdale, the Well-dressing,or Well-Flowering, when they dress upa beautiful spring with flowers, and have dances andprocessions, and much merriment, is their great feast,though it may not happen to fall exactly on the dayof the dedication of the church. At Blidworth, inthe old demesnes of Sherwood, it is their Rocking, Isuppose from its happening to fall on the day afterTwelfth-day, or St. Distaff 's-day, the custom of whichis described by Herrick • —Partly work, and partly play.Ye must on St. Distaff's day :From the plough soone free your tame,Then come home and other them.If the maiden a spinning goe,Burne the flax, and fire the tow.248 WAKES, STATUTES,Bring in pails of water then,Let the maiden bewail the men :Give St. Distaff all the right,Then bid Christmas sport good night.And next morrow every one,To his owne vocation.In different villages, different customs have alliedthemselves to the great annual feast, the season ofmeeting of friends and relatives. Long may thesemeetings remain bound up with, at least, one brightday in the year. I trust, however knowledge and refinementmay extend themselves, they will never refinethese rural holidays away. Let them root out crueltyand rudeness, and drunkenness, as they have donealready in a great degree — for where now are bull-baiting,bear-baiting, dog-fights, and cock-fights,which twenty years ago were the invariable accompanimentsand great attractions of these wakes ? LetChristian knowledge root out these things, and thusperfect this one white season of the cottager's year —making it entirely an occasion for cultivating the bestaffections, and knitting together family ties.STATUTES.These, which are called provincially Statius, orStatice, are meetings for hiring of farm and householdservants, "according to statutes made and provided,"and are held in certain central and convenientplaces. They are attended merely by farmers, and peoplewho happen to want men or maid-servants, and bythe servants themselves. By the latter they are lookedforward to with much interest. They furnish occasionfor a holiday. They are for the time their own mas-andFAIRS.tears, having left, or being about to leave their places,and either to re-engage themselves, or to seek newones. They here meet their old acquaintances, andcompare notes of the past year, of the character of thedifferent places they have had ; of what extraordinaryhas befallen them ; and are full of new schemes andspeculations as to where they shall go ; what advanceof wages they shall obtain ; in what capacity they shallhire themselves. In many parts of the country hewho offers himself as a shepherd, appears with a lockof wool in his hat, placed under the band ; the wagonerhas a bit of whipcord stuck there ; the milk-maid inher bonnet a tuft of cow-hair ; and the general run offarm-servants are conspicuous enough as to what theyare by their carters-frocks, or slops, hob-nailed ankleboots, and out-of-door, half-waggish, half-sheepishlooks.It is a true country scene, to see all these rude sonsof the soil collected together from their farm-yards,and solitary fields, where, far from towns, they havegone whistling after the plough, sowing, or gatheringin harvest; and the girls that have been scrubbing,churning, and milking, and occasionally helping in thehay or corn fields, here dressed out in their rusticfinery, and shewing such robust forms and rosy facesas might astonish our over-delicate citizens. To seethefarmers going amongst them, inquiring after theiraccomplishments and qualities, and cheapening themmuch as they would cheapen a horse ; and their noless wary wives negotiating with the buxom damsels ofthe mop and pail. These matters all satisfactorily disposedof, and the Earnest, or money given on accountof future services, or as it is otherwise called, the FastsWAKES, STATUTES,ening-penmj, from its formerly being a penny, thoughnow a shilling, being given, away go the farmers andfortresses, and leave the lads and lasses to a day ofjollity and fun. The swains lose no time in selectingeach his chere-amie for the day ; and the afternoon isspent in eating, flirting, drinking, and dancing, andthen, all separate their several ways, for at least anotheryear.Some of these Statutes in agricultural districtsbring together a vast concourse of people. I oncewent, when a boy, with my schoolmaster to Poles-worthStatute, in Warwickshire, and well rememberthat such was the crowd, that although 1 saw a pennyon the ground, and made many attempts to stoop downand pick it np, I found it impossible to do it. InNorthumberland, Durham, and the south of Scotland,similar meetings are held, where the Hinds hire theirBondage.FAIRS.Statutes are places where the working class of therural districts amuse themselves, but fairs are greatsources of pleasure to all classes of country people.The farmers, and their wives and daughters; thevillagers of all descriptions; the cottagers from themost secluded retreats ; the squire aud his family fromthe hall, all flock to the fair of their county town,and find some business to be transacted, and a worldof pleasure to be enjoyed. There are cheese, cattle,horses, poultry, geese, and a hundred other things tobe sold; and multitudes of household articles, clothing,and trinkets to be bought ; and besides all this, a vastof seeing and being: seen to be done. I will describethe great October Fair of Nottingham, called Goose-andFAIRS. 251Fair, as a good specimen of a country fair on a largescale.In the country, for many miles round, this fair islooked forward to by young and old with views ofbusiness and recreation for months : and what wasdone, and said, and seen at Goose-Fair; who wasmet there, and what matches were made, serve forconversation for months afterwards. The buyers andsellers of cheese, apples, onions, and a variety of otherarticles, are making their preparations to be there ;some of them from distant counties ; horse-jockeysare getting ready their strings of horses; youngpeople are putting their wardrobes in order, andexpecting all that such young people do expect onsuch occasions. In the town, two or three daysbefore, the signs of the approaching fair increase.Husre caravans incessantly arrive, with their wildbeasts, theatricals, dwarfs, giants, and other prodigiesand wonders. Then come trotting in those light,neat, covered wagons, containing the contents ofsundry bazaars that are speedily to spring up. Asyou go out of the town at any end, you meet caravanafter caravan, cart after cart, long troops of horsestied head and tail, and groups of those wild andpeculiar-looking people, that are as necessary to a fairas flowers are to May ; — all kinds of strollers, beggars,gipsies, singers, dancers, players on harps, Indianjugglers, Punch and Judy exhibitors, and similarwandering artists and professors.For some days before the general fair commences,the horse-fair is going on. You recognise all theknowing-ones in horse-flesh from all the countryround; country gentlemen and smart young farmers252 WAKES, STATUTES,and cunning jockeys with their long drab great coats,short old boots, and their jockey whips stuck carelesslyunder their arm. Horses of all kinds, light and heavy,full blood, half blood, and no blood at all, are riddenand driven to shew their action, along the pavementin all directions, as if the aim of the riders was to runovereverybody they could, and break their own necksinto the bargain.Then on the authentic day of the fair, forth comesthe procession of the corporation to proclaim the fair,and march up the market-place and down again intheir scarlet robes, mayor and aldermen, the maceborne and the trumpet blown before them, and thebeadles with their staves behind. Having made thisprocession to the wonder of all children, and sight-lovingadults, they ascend into the Town Hall, there,oddly enough, called the Exchange, and the crierproclaims the fair from the charter, at the promptingof the town-clerk. The fair is proclaimed, and isalready in existence. There is the market-place, anarea of six acres, jammed full of stalls, shows, bazaars,and people. From the earliest hour of the morning,wagons loaded with cheese have been arriving, whichare now seen on one side of the market-place, pitcheddown in piles, and in quantities enough, one wouldthink, to serve all England for a twelvemonth. Thereare the farmers, and their wives and daughters, wellwrapped up in good market coats, with numerouscapes, surveying with pride the workmanship of theirhands, and the product of their summer's dairy; andthere are the dealers, busy amongst it with theircheese-tasters, tasting and chaffering, and buying, andsending off their purchases by wagons to the wharfs.AND FAIRS. 253It is incredible in what a little time those great heapsof cheese vanish from the stones, and nuts and onionsin abundance.The whole market-place is now one mass of moving-people,and intermitted din. Wombwell's Menageriedisplays all its gigantic animals on its scenes ;Holloway's " Travelling Company of Comedians," aredancing with harlequin and clown in front of theirlocomotive theatre ; wonderful women, and children,and animals; wonderful machinery, panoramas, andprodigies are displayed on all sides in pictorial enormity,and the united sounds of Wombwell's fine bandof musicians in their beef-eater costume, the band ofHolloway, the smaller ones of other shows, and thebindings, and inviting, and oratorical declamation ofa dozen different showmen, with bellowing of gongs,and clashing of cymbals, make up a sound enough todrive to distraction more swine than ran into the seaof Gennesaret, but which > seems, notwithstanding,wonderfully delightful to ears grown weary of countryquiet. It is curious to see the numbers pouring inand out of these places ; to see the dense crowd ofupturned faces collected before every show wherethere are antics playing, and clowns and fools talkingnonsense for their entertainment. To hear the heartylaughs which follow their standing jokes, is to feelhow cheaply pleasure can be furnished to hungryspirits.But the crowd of fair-goers walking round andround this annual Babel ! During the morning,business is the chief engrossment ; but from noon tilleleven or twelve o'clock at night, pleasure is the pursuit.The farmers' daughters, who stood in their254 WAKES, STATUTES,caped coats before their piles of cheese, are nowmetamorphosed into most extraordinary belles, andhave found beans as dashing as themselves. At allthe stalls, purchases of gingerbread, sweetmeats, nuts,and oranges, are going on ; and through the bazaars —these modern additions to fairs, goes a perpetualstream of gay people, admiring the endless variety ofthings that are there displayed on either hand. Tea-ladies,work-boxes of rosewood and pearl, china,cut-glass, drums and trumpets, and all kinds of toys ;bracelets and necklaces, and all species of femaletrinkets; fans, and parlour bellows, figures in porcelainand painted wood ; purses, musical boxes, and, inshort, all the thousand contents of a bazaar.This afternoon portion of the fair is called the gig-fair,because people come driving in their gigs to it :i. e. it is the pleasure-fair, where smart people fromall quarters come to see, and to be seen. The secondday of the fair, I believe, is the earliest on which vertgenteel people make their appearance, and then youmay often see numbers of country families of goodstanding mingling in the moving mass of Vanity Fair.It is amusing enough to sit at a window, and lookover all the stirring and motley scene. To see theeternal stream of smart dresses and fair faces go by.Round and round they move, in one dense throng,every one apparently driven forward by the weight ofthe corning crowd; and, taking into consideration thepress, the noise, the weariness of such thronged andcontinued walking, one is apt to wonder how anyhuman beings can find pleasure in it. But that theydo find pleasure, and an intense pleasure, their eagerand multitudinous flocking thither sufficiently denote.AND FAIRS. 255They come out of a quietness that presents a littlenoise and dissipation as an agreeable contrast. Theycome to attractions adapted to their taste. Thegreater part of them are full of youth and expectation.There is no occasion on which so many countryflames are struck up as at a fair. And, in truth, yousee numbers of fine healthy forms of both sexes inthis crowd, and beautiful faces in numbers sufficientto make you feel with the poet :The ancient spirit is not dead ;Old times, thought I, are breathing there;Proud was I that my country bredSuch strength, a dignity so fair.It is a time, in fact, of universal country jollity, ,love-making, present-making, treating,and youthful entertainment, enjoyed to an extentthat people of different tastes can form no conceptionof. Many an important connexion is dated from thefair; many a freak, a pleasure, a piece of wit andfun are thence registered, and talked of at countryfire-sides to the latest period of life ; and these are allso much part and parcel of our common nature, thatthere must be a stony place in the heart which doesnot strongly sympathise with the actors and partakersof them. Joy, therefore, to all fair-goers ! and withthe growth of greater intelligence and taste, long maythe healthy capacity of being lightly pleased retain itshold on the robust forms and sweet faces of EnglishRural Life.I have often thought that we have artists who go alloverthe world in quest of novelties of scene, costume,character, and grouping, many of whom, if they cameto an English fair, with minds capable of entering256 WAKES, STATUTES, AND FAIRS.into what they saw, might give us scenes and figuresof more real interest than they often bring back afteryears of absence. The dancing-scene before Holloway's;the figures and coquetting of country bellesand their lovers; and the picturesque simplicity ofthe old men gazing like children on some wonder-promisingshowman, and now full of consternationand amaze at some of them finding their purses cleanvanished from their pockets, would form good subjectsfor the penciLi ^t^' '' . *^T^^jp&^-jrr^t:^%':.;^ n#^j ajSS^r*!" '^'^^-iCHAPTER X.SPOUTS AND PASTIMES OF THE PEOPLE.HISTORY OF THEIR CHANGES, AND PRESENT STATE.A mighty revolution has taken place in the sportsand pastimes of the common people. They, indeed,furnish a certain indication of the real character of apeople, and change with the changing spirit of a state.A mighty revolution has taken place in this respect,within the last thirty years, in England, and that entirelyproduced by the change of feeling, and advanceof character. But if we look back through the wholeVOL. II. o258 SPORTS ANDcourse of English history, we shall find the sports andpastimes of the people taking their form and characterfrom the predominant spirit of the age ; in agreat measure copied from the amusements and practicesof their superiors, and always influenced by them.While the feudal constitution of society prevailed,and chivalry was in vogue, the sports of the commonpeople had a certain chivalric character. They sawjousts and tourneys, and feats of archery, and theyousted and tilted, and shot at butts. Tilting at thequintain was, in all the chivalric ages, a populargame. It was a Roman pastime, instituted for militarypractice, and continued for the same object bythe feudal nations ; and was adopted by the commonpeople as a favourite game, because both the laws ofchivalry and their slender finances prevented themtaking part in jousts and tourneys. In Strutt maybefound descriptions and quaint illustrative engravingsof the various kinds of this game. " The Quintain,"says Strutt, quoting from Vegetius, de re militant,Ministries and others, " originally, was nothingmore than the trunk of a tree, or post set up for thepractice of the throes in chivalry. Afterwards a staff,or spear was fixed in the earth, and a shield beinghung upon it, was the mark to strike at; the dexterityof the performance consisted in striking theshield in such a manner as to break the ligatures andbear it to the ground. In process of time this diversionwas improved, and instead of the staff and theshield, the resemblance of a human figure, carved inwood, was introduced. To render the appearance ofthis figure more formidable, it was generally made inthe likeness of a Turk, or a Saracen, armed at allPASTIMES. 259points, having a shield upon his left arm, and brandishinga club, or a sabre in his right. Hence, thisexercise was called by the Italians — ' running at thearmed man, or at the Saracen.' The quintain thusfashioned, was placed upon a pivot, and so contrivedas to move round with facility. In running at thisfigure, it was necessary for the tilter to direct hislance with great adroitness, and make his stroke uponthe forehead, between the eyes, or upon the nose;for, if he struck wide of those parts, especially uponthe shield, the quintain turned about with much velocity,and in case he was not exceedingly careful,would give him a severe blow upon the back with thewooden sabre held in the right hand; which was consideredas highly disgraceful to the performer, whileit excited the laughter and ridicule of the spectators.When many were engaged in running at the Saracen,the conqueror was declared from the number of strokeshe had made, and the value X)f them. For instance,if he struck the image upon the top of the nose betweenthe eyes, it was reckoned for three ; if belowthe eyes upon the nose, for two ; if under the nose tothe point of the chin, for one ; all other strokes werenot counted : but, whoever struck upon the shield,and turned the quintain round, was not permitted torun again upon the same day, but forfeited his coursesas a punishment for his unskilfulness." Brande, in hisPopular Antiquities, tells us that the Saracen wasoften armed with a bag of sand instead of a sabre,which came upon the back of the unlucky tilter withsuch violence as to fling him to the earth with no enviableshock. Various were the quintain, accordingto the age in which they were used, or the means of260 SPORTS ANDthe players. In some cases the quintain was merelya common stake with a board fastened to it; in others,it was a post with a cross-bar moving on a pivot,something like a turnstile, with the sand-bag at oneend of the bar, and the board, or shield at the other.In others, it was a water-butt set upon a post, so asto throw its contents over the tilter if he struck it unskilfully.In others, it was a living person holding ashield. There was also the water-quintain. " A pole,or a mast," says Fitzstephen, " is fixed in the midstof the Thames, during the Easter holidays, with astrong shield attached to it; and a boat being previouslyplaced at some distance, is driven swiftly towardsit by the force of oars, and the violence of thetide, having a young man standing at the prow, whoholds a lance in his hand with which he is to strikethe shield ; and if he be dexterous enough to breakthe lance against it, and retain his place, his mostsanguine wishes are satisfied. On the contrary, ifthe lance be not broken, he is sure to be thrown intothe water, and the vessel goes away without him;but, at the same time, two other boats are stationednear to the shield, and furnished with many youngpersons, who are in readiness to rescue the championfrom danger." It appears to have been a very popularpastime, for the bridge, the wharfs, and the housesnear the river, were crowded with people on this occasion,who came, says the author, to see the sports,and make themselves merry.Ringing at the quintain continued to be a favouritegame till Queen Elizabeth's time ; and was universalthroughout the country. Plot, in his History ofOxfordshire, mentions it, and Laneham describes aPASTIMES. 261curious instance of it exhibited at Kenilworth duringthe entertainment given by the Earl of Leicester toQueen Elizabeth. There was, he says, a solemncountry bridal; when, in the castle was set up aquintain for feats of arms, where, in a great companyof men and lasses, the bridegroom had the first courseat the quintain, and broke his spear arcs hardiest.But his mare in his manage did a little stumble, thatmuch-adore had his manhood to sit in his saddle. Butafter the bridegroom had made his course, rose therest of the band, awhile in some order; but soonafter tag and rag, cut and long tail; where thespecialty of the sport was to see how some for hisslackness had a good bob with the bag, and some forhis haste to topple downright, and come tumbling tothe post. Some striving so much at the first settingout that it seemed a question between man and beastwhether the race should be performed on horsebackor on foot; and some put forth with spurs, would runhis race bias, among the thickness of the throng,that down they came together, hand over head.Another, while he directed his course to the quintain,his judgment would carry him to a man among thepeople; another would run and miss the quintainwith his staff, and hit the board with his hand."Boys imitated this game on their own scale, drawingone another on wooden horses to the quintain,or running at it on foot ; and various other rusticexercises were derived from it. Of archery we neednot speak, every one knowing how universal it wasduring the feudal ages; and quarter-staff, quoits,flinffino- the hammer, pitching the bar, and similargames were the offspring of the same state of society.VOL. II. P262 SPORTS ANDPlaying at ball and at bowls were very ancient andkingly sports, and became general amongst the people.They were ancient classical games, and no doubtwere introduced by the Romans into this country.They are mentioned both in the oldest metricalromances, and the oldest of our popular ballads.Tennis courts were common in England in the sixteenthcentury, and the establishment of such placescountenanced by the monarchs. Henry VIII. wasa tennis player. Fives courts, and places for thepractice of a variety of ball-games, — hand-ball, ,stool-ball, principally played at by women,hurling, foot-ball, golf, bandy, stow-ball, pall-mall,club-ball, trap-ball, tip-ball, and that which is nowbecome the prince of English ball-games, cricket.Another circumstance in the feudal ages, whichcontributed to promote these and other games, was,that towns were few. The majority of the commonpeople, living in the country ; in forests and fields ;watching the game, or cultivating the lands, or tendingthe herds and flocks of their lords, on open downsand wastes, naturally congregated with greater zestin villages after the day's tasks were over, and enteredinto amusements with the light-heartedness of children; for they were as ignorant of all other cares, ofbook-learning, and what was going on in the world,at a distance, as children. Hence their social pleasureswere of an Arcadian stamp — they danced, theyleaped, they wrestled, they kicked the foot-ball, orflung the hand-ball, the quoit, or the bar.But another circumstance which tended to fashiontheir amusements was, that the feudal ages were alsothe ages of the Catholic church ; a church which de-pastimes.263lighted to amuse the imaginations of the people withshows, pageants, miracle-plays, and mysteries. Thechurch festivals were all scenes of holiday, feasting,and wonderment. Processions, and representationsof the acts and persons of their religious faith, keptthem fixed in admiration and insatiable delight. Thechurches were the first and only theatres. In themall scripture subjects, personages, doctrines, and evenopinions were represented, and brought palpablybefore the wondering people, in mysteries, moralities,and miracle-plays. Things which now would justlybe deemed the most revolting blasphemies and desecrationsof holy things, were then gravely broughtout by the church, for the entertainment and edificationof the people. I have already shewn somethingof this in speaking of the religious festivals, as celebratedin Catholic countries, but we can only seethese things in their full growth, by looking back intothe middle ao;es. The theatrical exhibitions of Londonin the twelfth century were of this kind ; representationsof the miracles wrought by confessors, andthe sufferings of holy martyrs. But these did notsuffice. These ecclesiastical actors penetrated intothe Holy of Holies, and dared to represent the sacredTrinity before the eyes of the mob. In the mysterycalled Corpus-christi, or Coventry-Play, being playedin a moveable theatre, by the mendicant friars ofCoventry, the Deity himself is represented seated onhis throne, delivering a speech commencing thus :Ego sum de Alpha et Omega, principium et finis.My name is known God and Kynge,My worke for to make now wyl I wends,In myself now restetli my reining,It hath no gunning, ne noe ende.264 SPORTS ANDThe angels then enter, singing from the church service," To Thee all angels cry aloud, the heavens andall the powers therein ; to Thee the cherubim and seraphimcontinually do cry, Holy, hol)^, holy, Lord Godof Hosts." Lucifer next makes his appearance, anddesires to know if the hymn they sang was in honourof God or of himself? The good angels readily reply,in honour of God; the evil angels incline to worshipLucifer, and he presumes to seat himself on thethrone of the Deity, who then banishes him into hell.In the mysteries, the Devil and his angels seem tohave been the principal comic actors; and by all kindof pc'"^s, strange gestures, and contortions excited thelaughter of the people. At many of these plays thekings and their courts, all the nobility and gentry ofthe time, as well as the people, would sit with thehighest delight, nine hours a day, for six and eightdays together. Nay, at the moralities, which werenot representations of facts, but moral reasonings anddialogues, carried on by Virtues, Vices, Good Doctrine,Charity, Faith, Prudence, Discretion, Death,and the like, they would sit equally long. The Scotchwere as persevering in these amusements as our ownancestors. They are represented as sitting "fraenine houris avoir none till six houris at even," at therepresentation of Sir David Lindsay's " Satyr of theThree Estates," and in 1535, in the reign of theaccomplished James IV. Here, however. Sir David,the Chaucer of Scotland, had turned the weapons ofthe church against itself, and through its favouritemedium, the drama, uttered the most caustic satireagainst it from the mouths of Rex Humanity, Wantonness,Solace, Placebo, Sensuality, Homeliness,PASTIMES. 265Flattery, Falsehood, Deceit, Chastity, Divine Correction,etc, etc.Besides the church too, during the feudal times,there were the festivities kept up in the castles andhalls at Christmas, Easter, birthdays, and other greatdays, on which all kinds of pageants, mining, masks,and frolics, were shewn to their followers and dependents,by the great feudal lords ; and their minstrels,mimes, and jesters were made to exert theirarts for their gratification. Wandering minstrelsand jongleurs went from house to house, and fromvillage to village, following their profession of entertainersof the people. All these things combinedto fashion the popular taste, and the popular amusements,and all at the Reformation received theirdeath-blow. It was not, indeed, an instant death,but it was a slow and certain one ; for though thereigns of Henry VI 1 1, and Elizabeth seemed to carrypageants and tourneys to their climax, the livingprinciple of them was dying out. The Catholicchurch, the great mother of all festivals and mysteries,was overturned, and in the dispersion of its propertythe rise of new classes and a new state of thingsoriginated ; and so far had these causes taken effectin the reign of James I., that he made public proclamationin 1618, that "Whereas, we did justly, inour progress through Lancashire, rebuke some Puritansand precise people, in prohibiting and unlawfullypunishing of our good people for using their lawfulrecreations and honest exercises on Sundays and otherholidays after the afternoon service, it is our will that,at the end of divine service, our good people be notdisturbed, letted, or discouraged, from any lawful266 SPORTS ANDrecreation, such as dancing, either for men or women;archery for men, leaping, vaulting, or any other harmlessrecreation ; nor for having of May-games, ,and Morris-dances, and the setting up ofMay-poles, and other sports therewith used."But the day was gone by. A new spirit was arisen,and was destined soon to shew itself with overwhelmingpower. The days of Cromwell and the Puritanswere coming, when all these things were to be denouncedas popish and heathenish. The spirit andlanguage at that time becoming universally such asthat displayed by Thomas Hall, Bed., Pastor ofKings-Norton, in his Funera Florae, or the Downfallof May-games in 1660, in which he says, "Thecity of Rome, in the county of Babylon, has contraryto the peace of our lord, his crown and dignity,brought in a pack of practical fanatics, viz. : ignorants,Atheists, Papists, drunkards, swearers, swashbucklers,maid-marian, morris-dancers, makes, mummers.May-pole stealers, health-drinkers, gamesters,lewd men, light women, contemners of magistrates,effrontery of ministers, rebellious to masters, disobedientto parents, dissenters of time, and abusersof the creature, etc."This republican Puritanism, in its genuine style,was now again about to cease, but the effects of it couldnever be obliterated by subsequent kings. Comparethe popular amusements as enumerated by Burton inhis " Anatomic of Melancholic," a short time beforethe Commonwealth, with those Mdiich remained thirtyyears ago, — the period when they expired nearlyaltogether, and gave way to a new era. " Cards,dice, hawks, and hounds," he says, " are the retreat267tons of the gentry ; ringing, bowling, shooting, playingwith keel-pins, trunks, costs, foot-balls, barons,running at the quintain, and the like, are the commonrecreations of country folk. Riding of great horses,running of rings, tilts and tournaments, horse-races andwild-goose chases, are despots of greater men. Thecountry hath its recreations of May-games, feasts, fairsand wakes; both town and country, bull-baiting andbear-baiting, in which the countrymen and citizensgreatly delight ; dancing of ropes, juggling, comedies,tragedies, artillery-gardens, and cock-fightings, ,makes, jesters, gladiators, and tumblers."Thirty years ago, tilts and tournaments had goneafter their parent chivalry ; archery had fallen beforegunpowder; Whitsun-ales had followed many anotherecclesiastical merriment; comedies and tragedies hadset up their own secular houses apart from the church;and scarcely any of the other amusements were leftbut bull-baiting, bear-baiting, cock-fighting, and similarbarbarities. The public mind had become vulgarizedand brutalized. The spirit of chivalry, withits pageants and knightly feats, had diffused somesense of grace and graceful emulation amongst thepeople ; the church, amid all its ludicrous shows andabsurdities, had conveyed some moral principles ; thewandering minstrels had in their lays and ballads excitedsome feelings of honour, and many a feeling oftrue nature and homely poetry: but all these sourcesof inspiration, feeble and mingled with evil as theywere, were dried up, and during the long wars of theHanoverian dynasty the common people seem to havebeen neglected as rational and immortal beings, andcultivated and educated only as the instruments and268 SPORTS ANDthe food of war. Accordingly, the minstrels haddwindled into ballad-singers, the jongleurs into jugglersand mountebanks ; the Arcadian amusements ofthe country — May-games, dances on the green, Wrestlingand leaping, were nearly extinct ; and there remainedthe very characteristic sports of bull-baiting,bear-baiting, badger-baiting, dog-fighting, cock-fighting,and throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday. Bearand bull baiting were games that our queens Elizabethand Anne had both delighted in, but the moreelegant pastimes of those queens and their subjectshad fallen into desuetude, the savage and brutal aloneremaining. This was natural enough. From thedays of Marlborough to those of Wellington, thecommon people had been bred for the battle-field, —the food of the great European Moloch of war ; andthe bloody spirit, which casts out all the fairer spiritsof grace and gaiety, had been purposely and avowedlycherished, as the true English spirit. Who that remembersthese times, does not recollect the famousspeeches of Wykeham and his colleagues in favour ofthese brutal sports? Who forgets their prognosticthat if this spirit was destroyed, there was an end ofour martial ascendency ? But the point of time hadarrived beyond which this spirit could not endure.The brutal and vulgarized condition of the peopleflashed on the perception of the middle classes, whichamid all the noise of war had been progressing inintelligence and refinement. Robert Raises andSunday-schools arose. A better spirit, a better senseof our duties and responsibilities towards the peopleawoke. It was seen, that all over the country themore laudable sports of the village green, and thePASTIMES. 269village wakes, as quoits, nine-pins, skittles, wrestling,leaping, cricket, and the other ball games; will-pegs,jumping in sacks, and other athletic amusements hadlost much of their relish, and were abandoned for thebloody spectacles of the bull-ring and the cock-pit.Attempts were made to counteract this spirit; parliamentwas petitioned on the subject, and after therepulse given to these attempts by the senators Ihave alluded to, nothing was so common as to seethebulls led through the villages adorned with ribbons,and bearing on their necks large placards of —"Sanctioned by Wykeham and Parliament!"I have before me now a curious specimen of theeffect of such doctrines on the minds of those evenwho are, by national authority, the public teachers ofthe country, in a little volume published in 1819, bya clergyman of the name of Chain — " An Account ofCranbourn Chase." He says, " cock-fighting also, inthe last century, was a favourite diversion, greatly delightedin by persons of all ranks ; and there was anobleman. Lord Albemarle Bertie, who was so foundof the amusement, that he attended cock-pits when hewas totally blind. And there were but few gentlemenin the country, who did not keep and breedgame cocks, and were very anxious and careful in thebreeding of them. Frequent matches were made,and there were cock-pits in almost every village, theremains of which are still visible. To this amusementalso Cranbourn Chase contributed, for the cocksbred in it were superior to others, both in shape andmake, and, as the feeders name it, handled betterwhen brought to their pens ; insomuch that LordWeymouth, of Longest, an ancestor of the presentp 2270 SPORTS ANDMarquis of Bath, for many years had a cock at walkat every lodge in the chase, and the keepers werewell rewarded for taking care of them ; and whenthey were brought chickens from Longest annually,each game-cock was accompanied with two dunghillhens, which became the perquisite of the keeperwhen the cock was taken away. But in our days ofrefinement, this amusement of cock-fighting hath beenexploded, and, in a great measure, abandoned, beingdeemed to he barbarous and cruel; but in this respectthe writer thinks differently, and believes it to be the leastso of any diversions now in vogue, and nothing equal asto cruelty, to horse-racing, in which poor animals areinvoluntarily forced against their nature to performancesagainst their strength, with whips and spurs,which, in jockey phrase is styled cutting up. But infighting of cocks the case is totally different; for, insteadof a force against nature, it is an indulgence ofnatural propensities; for cocks at their walks, and atfull liberty, will seek each other for battle, as far asthey can hear each other's crowing; and the armingthem icith artificial weapons, when they are brought inthe pit to fight, is the very reverse of cruelty, for thecontest is sooner ended, and sufferings, trifling incomparison to what they would have been, had theyfought with their own natural weapons, by laceratingtheir bodies, and bruising each other in every tenderpart."Now, to feel the full force of the Rev. WilliamChain's notion of a game that is the least cruel ofany diversions now in vogue, it is necessary to considerthat these cocks are stimulated to contest byheating food and artificial contrivances, such as keep-pastimes.271ing them within the sight or crow of their rivals:that they are then clipped almost bare of feathers :the feathers are clipped off their stomachs ; theirheads cut clean of their wattles ; their wings and tailscut short and square ; that they are, in fact, metamorphosedfrom the most gallant-looking of birds intothe most bare, comical, quaint, and. strutting objectsin nature, I was going to say; but they are put out ofall nature, and are, lastly, armed with steel or silverspurs of an inch long, sharp as needles. With thesethey kick and pierce each other, "lacerating theirbodies, and bruising each other in every tender part ;"fighting till their heads are all one mass of gore ; tillthey are often stark blind, and go staggering aboutlike drunken men, till one has the luck to strike theother clean through the head with his artificial spur.This is a game which a clergyman, a teacher ofChristianity, could by custom come to think " theleast cruel of all the diversions now in vogue." It isimpossible to produce more striking evidence of theeffect of a familiarity with cruelty. It is just by thesame process that men come to approve of war andslavery. God be praised that all these bloody sportsare gone for ever from the soil of England. Thatbull, bear, and badger baiting, have all, after many ahard contest, been eventually put down ; that forsome years, so much has the mind of the commonpeople been raised and softened, there have scarcelybeen any cock-fighters, except noblemen and gentlemen,whose cock-pits have been the nuisances of theirneighbourhoods, and their game-cock caravans, travellingfrom place to place with these cocks, haveoffended the public eye. It is a satisfaction to record272 SPORTS ANDthat in the year 1835, even this brutal game wasmade illegal by Act of Parliament, and that throughthe exertions of Joseph Pease, the only member ofParliament who is a member of the Society ofFriends.Since these atrocities have been exploded, theirplace has not been supplied by an equal number ofmore commendable amusements. The people oflarge towns, in particular, have not substituted asufficient equivalent. Politics and ale-houses seem,till lately, to have furnished their sole stimulants.There appears to have been a pause in that importantportion of human life amusement, so far as the commonpeople are concerned ; but it has been in appearanceonly. One of the greatest changes that evertook place in human society, has been in this intervalmaturing. The change from the last stage of worn-outfeudalism to the commencement of the era ofsocial regeneration. A change from a system inwhich the largest portion of mankind was regardedbut as the instruments of the luxury and revenge ofthe wealthy few, — to one in which every part of thehuman family will be recognised as possessing thesame nature, and worthy of enjoying the same domesticand intellectual blessings. A change, in fact,from Gentiles to Christianity; from the condition inwhich the great of the earth lorded it over the poor,to that in which the common sympathies of our naturewill be honoured and obeyed ; and a career of intelligence,benevolence, and mutual good-will and goodworks will begin, to end in a prosperity beyond ourpresent imagination. And already what symptoms ofthis better state of things break upon us ! WhatPASTIMES. *273schools, and Mechanics' Libraries and Institutes ; whatFriendly Societies, and plans on the part of the wealthyfor the benefit of the poor. For amusements therehas been no time. All workers, both in town andcountry, have been compelled to plod on solemnlyand half-despairingly from day to day, and from yearto year. But pleasures of a higher order, and moreakin to genuine happiness, — social pleasures and pleasuresof the intellect, will open upon and grow uponour more numerous brethren of the operative class.They will find pleasures in books — boundless, unimagined,inexhaustible, inexpressible pleasures ; — pleasuresin their wives and children, pleasures in theirfiresides, and in the glorious face of nature, whichhave hitherto been unknown to their eyes and hearts,sealed up in the frost of ignorance and the contemptof the proud. And already we see the commencementof that new order of pastimes which will assuredlyresult from this new order of mind. In thecountry, indeed, you find with pleasure occasionally,in some old-fashioned hamlet, the villagers and farm-servantsin an evening tossing the quoit, that relic ofthe ancient discus; bowling, or playing at skittles;but rustics, in general, look to wakes and fairs foramusement; and yet at wakes you do not see half thesports there used to be, — as running, leaping, jumpingin sacks; or aiming at the snuffbox balancedon the will-pegs ; and where these games do remain,they are too frequently attached to ale-houses, andmade gambling baits of. But, in town and country,it is the noble, and as Miss Mitford, the fair historianof rural life, justly calls it, the true English game ofcricket, which shews whither the mind of the people274 SPORTS ANDis tending, and what will be the future character ofEnglish popular sports.This game seems to have absorbed into itself everyother kind of ball game, trap-ball, bat-and-ball, tip-cat,or foot-ball. Foot-ball, indeed, seems to havealmost gone out of use with the inclosure of wastesand commons, requiring a wide space for its exercise ;but far and wide is spread the love of cricketing, andit may now be safely ranked as the prince of Englishathletic flames. I will here describe a match of thisfine sport, which was played on the 7th and 9th ofSeptember, 1835, between the Sussex Club and theNottingham Club, and the thoughts which it producedin me at the time.The Nottingham Club challenged the Sussex Clubto a match for fifty guineas a-side ; and played first atBrighton, where the Sussex men were beaten, whothen went to play the Nottingham men on their ownground. The match commenced on Monday, September7th, and was finished on Wednesday, the 9th,about half-past four o'clock. Tuesday having been awet day, there was no playing. The Nottinghammen beat again, having three wickets to go down. Amore animating sight of the kind never was seen.On Sunday morning early, we saw a crowd goingup the street, and immediately perceived that, in thecentre of it, were the Sussex cricketers, just arrivedby the London coach, and going to an inn kept byone of the Nottingham cricketers. They looked exceedinglyinteresting, being a very fine set of fellows,in their white hats, and with all their trunks, carpet-bags,and cloaks, coming, as we verily believed, to bebeaten. Our interest was strongly excited ; and onPASTIMES. 275Monday morning we set off to the cricket-ground,which lies about a mile from the town, in the Forest,as it is still called, though not a tree is left upon it, —a long, furzy common, crowned at the top by abouttwenty wind-mills, and descending in a steep slope toa fine level, round which the race-course runs. Withinthe race-course, lies the cricket-ground, which was enclosedat each end with booths ; and all up the forest-hillwere scattered booths, and tents with flags flying,fires burning, pots boiling, ale-barrels standing, andasses, carts, and people bringing still more good things.There were plenty of apple and ginger-beer stalls ;and lads going round with nuts and with waggish looks,crying — "nuts, lads! nuts, lads!" In little hollowsthe nine-pin, and will-peg men had fixed themselvesto occupy loiterers; and, in short, there was all theappearance of a fair.Standing at the farther side of the cricket-ground,it gave me the most vivid idea possible, of an amphitheatrefilled with people. In fact, it was an amphitheatre.Along each side of the ground ran a banksloping down to it, and it, and the booths and tents atthe ends were occupied with a dense mass of people,all as silent as the ground beneath them ; and all up thehill were groups, and on the race-stand an eager, throng. There were said to be twentythousand people, all hushed as death, except whensome exploit of the players produced a thunder ofapplause. The playing was beautiful. Mr. Ward,late member of parliament for London, a great cricket-player,came from the Isle of Wight to see the game,and declared himself highly delighted. But nothingwas so beautiful as the sudden shout, the rush, and276 SPORTS ANDbreaking up of the crowd, when the last decisive matchwas gained. To see the scorers suddenly snatch uptheir chairs, and run off with them towards the players'tent ; to see the bat of Bart Goode, the batsman onwhom the fate of the game depended, spinning up inthe air, where he had sent it in the ecstasy of the moment; and the crowd, that the instant before was fixedand silent as the world itself, spreading all over thegreen space where the white figures of the playershad till then been so gravely and apparently calmlycontending, — spreading with a murmur as of the sea;and over their heads, amid the deafening: clamour andconfusion, the carrier-pigeon with a red ribbon tied toits tail, the signal of loss, beating round and round asto ascertain its precise position, and then flying off tobear the tidings to Brighton, — it was a beautiful sight,and one that the most sedate person must have delightedto see.My thoughts on such occasions, overpass the thingsmoving before me, and run on into consequences;and I could not help feeling what a great change thelast thirty years had produced in the mind, taste, feeling,and moral character of our working population.What a wide difference was here presented to the ruderabbles formerly assembled to the most barbarous andblackguard amusements imaginable. Why this is anear approach to the athletic games of the Greeks;and no Greek crowd could have behaved with moreorder and propriety, and an intense interest, excited,not by any vulgar and unworthy cause, but by a finetrial of skill and activity between their townsmen andtheir countrymen of a distant county. Such an interestarising out of such an emulation, not only shewsPASTIMES. 277a great progression of the public taste, but will wonderfullypromote that progression. Here, if we havebeen disappointed in many other instances, we see theactual and legitimate effect of general education. It isbecause the general mind is quickened, raised, and madecapable of more refined impulses, that twenty thousandpeople can now sit, day after day, to witness a contestof manly activity and pure skill, and enjoy a highdelight without drunkenness and brutal rows. Neverwas a more respectable collection of people seen; andalthough there were plenty of booths and tents wellsupplied with all sorts of eatables and wrinkles, anda good many took a necessary refreshment, or a comfortableglass and a pipe as they sat and looked on, atthe time we left there were no symptoms of drunkenness,but a sight the most gratifying imaginable —thousands of poor workmen streaming off homewardsthe moment the game was over, many of them withtheir children, wives, or sweethearts.I say, therefore, that my thoughts ran on into consequences,and I saw, in prospect, the great good whichthis better taste for amusement, this purer species ofemulation, will produce. It is a beautiful sight seemen coming from a distant part of England to contendin a noble gymnastic exercise with those ofanother part of the country ; and the spirit of generousrivalry thus is spread wider and wider. You see whilea match is impending, what numbers of cricket playersare out in the fields, from grown men to boys that canbut just wield the lightest bat. You see, even whilethe great game is going on, boys playing their lessergames in the outskirts of the crowd ; and when thematch is decided, the spirit is kindled and diffused278 SPORTS AND PASTIMES.farther than ever by the warm discussions of thevarious merits of the players, and the glory acquiredby the best.This is a spirit which deserves the attention both ofthe public and the legislature, and if ever we come tosee public grounds appropriated to every large townfor such exercises, as has been proposed in Parliamentby Mr. Buckingham, then not merely cricket but kindredsports will be pursued, — quoits, nine-pins, bowls,archery, leaping and running; all having a directtendency to strengthen the body and quicken themind ; to counteract both the physical and moral poisonsof crowded factories and thickly populated towns.It may, indeed, be objected, that all such gameswould lead to betting; but are we to shrink fromevery useful measure through fear of its abuse? Isay fearlessly, let us set the brand of public abhorrenceon such a practice, boldly and firmly, and the practicewill disappear. It is not long since the brutal practiceof boxing had become a mania, and seemed to setall public censure at defiance, but it did but seem, —public censure put it down. Let the higher classestoo, sanction these laudable exercises by their presenceas a public duty, and the British people will, in myopinion, in coming years, exhibit scenes of beautifulskill, activity and grace, as imposing as Greece eversaw. In the instance here selected, the two mostobvious circumstances were, — first, the absence of thehigher classes, especially of the ladies ; and secondly,the most perfect and admirable decorum of the people.CHAPTER XI.WRESTLING.We must not close this department of our subject,without saying a word or two on wrestling. Thisexercise, which at one time was almost universal, isnow, like many others, fallen into general disuse ; andis confined almost entirely to Cornwall and Devon inthe west, and the counties of Chester, Lancaster,Cumberland, and Westmorland in the north. Thesecounties, indeed, have always been pre-eminent inthe science of wrestling, and have possessed practicespeculiar to themselves. Formerly, the citizens ofLondon were great wrestlers. Stow tells us, that inthe month of August, about the feast of St. Bartholomew,there were divers days spent in wrestling. Thelord mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs being present, inalarge tent pitched for that purpose, near Clerken-well; the officers of the city, namely, the sheriffs,sergeants, and yeomen ; the porters of the king'sbeam, or weighing-house, etc., gave a general challengeto such of the inhabitants of the suburbs as280 WRESTLING.thought themselves expert in this exercise. In Sewell'sHistory of the Society of Friends, a curious circumstanceis recorded connected with this taste of theLondoners for wrestling. Edward Burroughs, a youngand enthusiastic preacher in that society, which thenwas newly formed, seeing a ring made for a wrestlingmatch in some part of the city where he was passing,and a man in it awaiting the acceptance of his challengeby some one, suddenly stepped into it, to thegreat amazement both of the champion and the spectators," who," says the historian, " instead of somelight and airy person, seeing a grave and awful youngman," were utterly posed and confounded ; and theeloquent and zealous minister, taking advantage ofthis surprise, told them he was prepared for a contest,but of another sort to what they were looking for ;and forthwith gave them such a sermon in his fieryand vehement style of eloquence, which had gainedhim the name of Boanerges, or the son of thunder, aswonderfully quieted them down, and sent them awayin a solemn frame of mind.This wrestling spirit, however, appears to havevanished for a long period from London as well as thecountry, and to have been only of late years revivedby the West of England, and Westmorland, andCumberland Clubs. These have drawn together greatnumbers; the spectators at the anniversary display ofthe Westmorland club at Chalk-Farm, in the springof 1^37, being about 8000.Sir Thomas Parkyn, of Bunny Park, in Nottinghamshire,who was a zealous advocate and patron ofwrestling, gave an annual prize for the best wrestler,and ordered the continuance of the same in his will ;WRESTLING. 281but it would not take root there, and the only remainingtraces of his endeavour are, his book on theCornish Hug, and his effigy in a niche in Bunnychurch, in the attitude in which a wrestler receiveshis antagonist, with his favourite title of ThomasDictator inscribed over his head.It is singular that in the two extremities of thecountry, where wrestling maintains its ancient popularity,adjoining counties, whose rivalry, no doubt,keeps alive the interest in it, should maintain suchopposite practices. In some of the northern counties,kicking is allowed, in others it is not. In Devon,kicking shins is a great part of the game ; in Cornwallit forms no part of it. Lancashire is famous for itscross-buttock, and Cornwall for its hug. Cornwalland Devon, however, possess unquestionably the preeminencein this ancient art, an art which held aneminent rank in the Olympic games of Greece. " TheCornish," says Fuller, "are masters of the art ofwrestling, so that if the Olympian Games were nowin fashion, they would come away w with the victory.Their hua is a crowning: close with their fellow combatant,the fruits whereof is his fair fall, or foil at theleast." "They learn the art," says Carew, "early inlife, for you shall hardly find an assembly of boys inDevon and Cornwall, where the untowardly amongthem will not as readily give you a muster of thisexercise, as you are prone to require it."A writer in Hone's Every-Day Book, in 1828, says,No kicks are allowed in Cornwall except the playerswho are in the ring mutually agree to it. A hat isthrown in as a challenge, which being accepted by another,the combatants strip and put on a coarse loose282 WRESTLING.kind of jacket, of winch they take howl, and of nothingelse. Pkiy then commences. To constitute a fair fall,both shoulders must touch the ground at, or nearly thesame moment. To guard against foul play, to decide onthe falls, and manage the affairs of the day, four or sixSticklers, as the umpires are called, are chosen, towhom all these matters are left. Wrestling thrives inthe eastern part of Cornwall, particularly about SaintBustle and Saint Columb. At the latter place, residesPolkinhorne, the champion of Cornwall, and by manyconsidered entitled to the championship of the fourwestern counties; Cannn, the Devonshire champion,having declined to meet horn, Polkinhorne has notpractised wrestling for several years past, while Cannnhas carried off the prize at every place in Devon thathe shewed at. They certainly are both good ones.Perkins, a friend of Polkinhorne's, is a famous handat these games ; and so was Warner of Redruth, tilldisabled in Feb. 1825, by over-exertion on board theCambria brig, bound for Mexico."This writer proceeds to state, that John Kill, Esq.bequeathed the income of an estate to be given invarious prizes for racing, rowing, and wrestling; thesegames to be held every fifth year for ever ; and thatthe first was celebrated in July, 1801, around a mausoleumwhich he erected in his life-time on a high rocknear St. Ives. " Early in the morning, the roads fromNelson, Truro, and Penzance, were lined with horsesand vehicles of every description, while thousands oftravellers on foot poured in from all quarters till noon,when the assembly formed. The wrestlers entered thering ; a troop of virgins dressed in white, danced andchanted a hymn composed for the occasion ; the spec-wrestling.283tutors ranged themselves along the hills, and, at length,the mayor of St. Ives appeared in his robes of state.The signal was given; the flags were displayed fromthe towers of the castle; here the wrestlers exertedtheir sinewy strength ; here the rowers dashed throughthe waves, and the songs of the damsels added delightto the scene. A dinner and ball at the Union Hotelconcluded the day. The games were again celebratedin 1806, 1811, 1816, and 1821, with increased favourand admiration."iSo much for Cornish play ; that of Devon I havealready said, is of a different kind. The Devon wrestlersdon't practice the hug, but kick shins dreadfully.For this purpose they have their shoes armed withiron, and before going into the ring, they wrap uptheir legs with numerous folds of carpeting to defendthemselves from the violence of the kicks. " The Devonshiremen," says the same writer, who professes tobe of neither county, and to admire the champions ofboth, " have no under-play, nor have they one heaver.Visit a Devon ring, and you will wait a tedious timeafter a man is thrown ere another appear. After undergoingthe necessary preparation for a good kicking,he enters, and shakes his adversary by the hand, andkicks, and lays hold when he can get a fit opportunity.If he is conscious of superior strength, he goes towork, and by force of arm wrests his opponent off hislegs, and lays him flat ; or if too heavy for this, hecarries him round by the hip. But when the men findthat they are ' much of a muchness,' it is really tiresome; caution is the word, and the hardest shoe, andthe best kicker, carries it. I have seen in Cornwallmore persons at these games when the prize has been284 WRESTLING.a gold-laced hat, a waistcoat, or a pair of gloves, thanever attend the sports in Devon, where the prizes areliberal, for they don't like to be kicked for a trifle ; oreven at the famed meetings of later days in London,at the Eagle in the City Road, or the Golden-Eagle inMile-end. How is this? Why, in the latter places,six, eight, and at farthest twelve standards, are asmuch as a day's play will admit of; while in CornwallI have seen forty made in one day. At Penzance, onMonday, 24th ultimo, thirty standards were made, andthe match concluded the day following. In Devon,what with the heavy shoes, and thick padding, andtime lost in equipment and kicking, half that numbercannot be made in a day. I have frequentlyseen men obliged to leave the ring, and abandon thechance of a prize, owing solely to hurts they have receivedby kicks from the knee downwards ; nay, I haveseen Cannn's brothers, or relations, obliged to do so. Tothe eye of a beholder unacquainted with wrestling, theCornish mode must appear as play ; that of Devon —barbarous. It is an indisputable fact that no Cornishwrestler of any note ever frequents the games in Devon,and that whenever those from Devon have played inCornwall, they have been thrown — Jordan by Perkins,and so on."I think any person not of Devon must give the preferenceto the play of Cornwall as more scientific andless savage; but before we proceed to compare therival champions, let us give a little more display of theDevonshire men by an eye-witness in 1820, who hasrelated his visit to the ring at Mouth, in the LondonMagazine, with a great feeling of enjoyment. He wastold one morning that there was going to be a wrestlingWRESTLING. 285and that "the Canns would be there; and young Brock-ended; and Thorne, from Danish ; and the men fromthe moors!" This excited his imagination; as well itmight, for there is something about the names of thesemen, the Canns, the Brockendens, the Widdicombs ofthe moors, that has a wild, grim, and wrestlers sound ;and accords well with those grey, ancient and romanticmoorlands of the western regions of our island. Onapproaching the ring he found a champion in it. " Hewas a young man of extremely prepossessing appearance,stripped to the shirt, and enclosed with thelinen jacket with a green cock on the back, which Ihave noticed to be the customary garment. His figure,which in its country garb had not particularly impressedme with its size or strength, now struck me as highlypowerful, compact, and beautiful. His limbs werewell grown, and strongly set — yet rather slight thanotherwise — and his body was easy, slim, and yet peculiarlyexpressive of power. The fronts of his legs fromthe knee to the ankle, were armed with thick carpeting,to protect them from the kicks of his antagonist ;and even this strange armour did not give to his personthe appearance of clumsiness. His neck was bare,and certainly very fine ; — but the shape of his headstruck me as being the most expressive and poetical,(I use the term under correction) I had for a long timebeheld — being set off, I conceive, by the way in whichhis hair was arranged ; — and this was dark, hanging inthick spanish curls on each side of his forehead, anddown the back part of his head: add to all this, a handsome,melancholy, thin countenance, and you will haveat once some idea of the young man who now stoodVOL. II. Q286 WRESTLING.before me. I turned to a countryman near me, andinquired who this youth might be, whose undauntedmien and comely port had so taken my favour captive.Who is that V said the man, with a tone of surprise,accompanied with a look of profound pity at my ignorance— 'why, one of the Canns to be sure!' " But wewill pass over the first day's play, and come to the eveningof the second day's play. " The first shout of themaster of the revels was — ' The younger Cain, andWiddicomb of the Moors !' and this was received witha low murmur, and a deep interest which almostsmothered sound. The younger Cannn was the stoutestof the brotherhood, finely formed and fair-haired.He stripped and accoutred himself immediately : hisbrothers assisting in buckling his leg-armour, and fasteninghis jacket. There was evidently a great anxiety inthis group, but still the utmost confidence in ultimatesuccess ; — and I could not help taking part in the interestof the brothers, and at the same time entertaininga full share of their faith in their champion'striumph. ' And who,' said I to a neighbour, ' arethese Canns ?' ' They are farmers ; and there arefive brothers, all excellent wrestlers ; but you onlysee three here to-night.' But the fine young wrestlerstepped into the ring, and our conversation ceased.The moon was now very clear, full, and bright;and its light fell upon the noble person of Cannn, andshewed every curl of his hair. The Moor-man soonjoined him — prepared for the conflict. He was a giantin size, and from what I gathered around me, a man ofmost savage nature. The popular feeling was painfullyon Cannn's side. After the cup had been pledged,the opponents seized each other with an iron grasp.WRESTLING. 287Cannn stood boldly, but cautiously up, as conscious thathe had much to do ; and the Moor-man opposed himresolutely and grandly. The struggle was immediate ;and Cannn, with one terrific wrench, threw his antagonistto the earth; — but he fell so doubtfully on hisshoulder, that it seemed uncertain whether he wouldfall on his back, which is necessary to victory, or recoverhimself by rolling on his face. Cannn lookedproudly down upon him, and saw him by a miraculousstrain, which resembled that of a Titan in pain, savethe fall, by wrenching himself down on his face. Hisshoulder and side were soiled — but he was not deemedvanquished.By the order of the umpires the struggle was renewed,when owing, as I conceived, to the slipperystate of the grass, Cannn fell on his knees, and theMoor-man instantly hurled him on his back. All wasuproar and confusion — but Cannn was declared to havereceived a fall — and gloom spread itself over all ! Hecould not be convinced of the justice of his judges — acommon case when the verdict is adverse — and it wasin real pain of spirit that he pulled off the jacket.Young Brockenden followed next, with anotherman from the Moors ; and he received a doubtful fallwhich was much cavilled at, but which the judgesnevertheless gave against him. It now grew late,and the clouds thickened around, so that the wrestlerscould scarcely be perceived. I left the sports somewhatunwillingly; but I could not distinguish theparties, and in truth, I was dispirited at my favourite'sbeing foiled. I heard that the brother Canns retrievedthe fame of the family — but the darkness ofthe night, and the state of the grass, gave no chance,288 WRESTLING.either to the spectators, or to the wrestlers. In themorning, the ring, the awning, the scaffolding — hadvanished ; and the young fellow's had separated — theCanns to their farms — the men to the moors."Having now taken a peep at both the Cornish andDevonshire men, let us bring them into contact. In1826, at the Eagle-Tavern green, City-Road, severalmatches took place between Devonshire and Cornishmen,on the 19th, 20th, and 21st of September. Thefollowing exhibition of the struggle between AbrahamCannn, the champion of Dartmoor, and Warrenof Cornwall, is equal to a bass-relief from a Grecianfrieze, and gives a most graphic view of the systemsof the two counties. It is from the London Magazine,and evidently by the same writer.The contest between Abraham Cannn and Warrennot only displayed this difference of style, but wasattended with a degree of suspense between skill andstrength, that rendered it extremely interesting. Theformer, who is a son of a Devonshire farmer, hasbeen backed against any man in England for 500/.His figure is of the finest athletic proportions, and hisarm realizes the muscularity of ancient specimens.His power in it is surprising : his hold is like that ofa vice, and with ease he can pinion the arms of thestrongest adversary, if he once grips them, and keepthem as close together, or as far asunder, as hechooses. He stands with his legs apart, his bodyquite upright, looking down good-humouredly on hiscrouching opponent. In this instance, his opponent,Warren, a miner, was a man of superior size, and ofamazing strength, not so well distributed, however,throughout his frame : his arms and body being tooWrestling 289lengthy in proportion to their bulk. His visage washarsh beyond measure, and he did not disdain to usea little craft with eye and hand, in order to distracthis enemy's attention. But he had to deal with aman as collected as ever entered a ring. Cannn put inhis hand as quietly as if he were going to seize a shyhorse, and at length, caught a slight hold betweenfinger and thumb of Warren's sleeve. At this Warrenflung away with the impetuosity of a surprisedhorse. But it was in vain ; there was no escape fromCannn's pinch, so the miner seized his adversary in histurn, and at length both of them grappled each otherby the arm and the breast of the jacket. In a triceCannn tripped his opponent with the toe in a mostscientific but ineffectual manner, throwing him cleanto the ground, but not on his back, as required. Thesecond heat began similarly. Warren stooped more,so as to keep his legs out. of Cannn's reach, whopunished him for it by several kicks below the knee,which must have told severely if his shoes had beenon, after his country's fashion. They shook eachother rudely — strained knee to knee — forced eachother's shoulders down, so as to overbalance the bodybut all ineffectually. They seemed to be quitesecure from each other's efforts, as long as they heldby the arm and breast-collar, as ordinary wrestlers do.A new grip was to be effected. Cannn liberated onearm of his adversary, to seize him by the cape behind ;at that instant, Warren, profiting by his inclined posture,and his long arm, threw himself round the bodyof the Devon champion, and fairly lifted him a footfrom the ground, clutching him in his arms with thegrasp of a second Antlers. The Cornish men shouted290 WRESTLING.aloud, * Well done, Warren !' to their hero, whosenaturally pale visage glowed with the hope of success.He seemed to have his opponent at his will, and tobe fit to fling him, as Hercules flung Lucas any howhe pleased. Devonshire then trembled for its champion,and was mute. Indeed it was a moment ofheart-quaking suspense. But Cannn was not daunted;his countenance expressed anxiety, but not discomfiture.He was off" terra-firma, clasped in the embraceof a powerful man, who waited but a singlestruggle of his, to pitch him more effectually fromhim to the ground. Without straining to disengagehimself, Cannn with unimaginable dexterity, glued hisback firmly to his opponent's chest, lacing his feetround the other's knee-joints, and throwing one armbackward over Warren's shoulders so as to keep hisown enormous shoulders pressed upon the breastof his uplifted. In this position they stood, at leasttwenty seconds, each labouring in one continuousstrain, to bend the other, one forward, the other backwards.Such a struggle could not last. Warren,with the might of the other upon his stomach andchest, felt his balance almost gone, as the energeticmovements of his countenance indicated. His feettoo, were motionless, by the coil of his adversary'slegs round his ; so, to save himself from falling backward,he stiffened his whole body from the anklesupwards, and these last being the only liberatedjoints, he inclined forward from them, so as to projectboth bodies, and prostrate them in one column to theground together. It was like the slow and poisingfall of an undermined tower. You had time to contemplatethe injury which Cannn, the undermost.WRESTLING. 291would sustain, if they fell in that solid, unbendingposture to the earth. But Cannn ceased bearing uponthe spine as soon as he found his supporter going in anadverse direction. With a presence of mind untameable,he relaxed his strain upon one of his adversary'sstretched legs, forcing the other outwards with allthe might of his foot, and pressing his elbow on theopposite shoulder. This was sufficient to whisk hisman undermost the instant he stiffened his knee —which Warren did not do till more than half-way tothe ground, when from the acquired rapidity of thefalling bodies, nothing was discernible. At the endof the fall, Warren was seen sprawling on his back,and Cannn, whom he had liberated to save himself,had been thrown a few yards off, on all-fours. Ofcourse the victory should have been adjudged to thislast. When the partial referee was appealed to, hedecided, that it was not a. fair fall, as only oneshoulder had bulged the ground, though there wasevidence on the back of Warren that both had touchedit pretty rudely. After much debating, a new refereewas appointed, and the old one expelled : when thecandidates again entered the lists. The crowningbeauty of the whole was, that the second fall was preciselya counterpart of the first. Warren made thesame move, only lifting his antagonist higher, withthe view to throw the upper part of his frame outof play. Cannn turned himself exactly in the samemanner, using much greater effort than before, andapparently more put to it by his opponent's greatstrength. His share, however, in upsetting his supporterwas greater this time, as he relaxed one legmuch sooner, and adhered closer to the chest during292 WRESTLING.the fall ; for at the close he was seen uppermost, stillcoiled round his massive adversary, who admitted thefall, starting up, and offering his hand to the victor."Since then Polkinhorne of St. Columb has encounteredCannn, and thrown him, and is, or was, the acknowledgedchampion of the West. He is the keeperof the principal inn at St. Columb, where I on oneoccasion stopped, having shortly before taken a halfpennyticket from his dethroned rival, Cannn of Dartmoor,at the foot - bridge, between Plymouth andDavenport, where he was, if he be not yet, stationed.CHAPTER XII.FAVOURITE PURSUITS OF ENGLISH COTTAGERSAND WORKMEN.In my last chapter I gave a general view of thepresent rural sports and pastimes of the peasantry —perhaps as it regards wrestling, more prominentlythan some readers might think judicious. But what isprominent in the country life of any part of England,it is my bounden duty to set before my readers ; andthere is no feature of English life more remarkablethan the sanguine attachment of the people of someparticular parts to particular sports; more especiallywhere those sports have relaxed their ancient hold onthe people in all other districts, or have refused to beengrafted on other districts ; as golf continues to beone of the prime sports of Scotland, but will nottravel across the Tweed. Let us now, before closingthe department of this work appropriated to the peasantry,notice some characteristic features, which Ithink must strongly interest us all.After all, the happiness of a people is not found intheir amusements. Amusements may indicate, in acertain degree, that a people is happy ; but real happinessis a thing of a more domestic nature. It is aq2294 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFLar, and belongs to the household, or is to be foundin the quiet and enclosed precincts of home gardens.A great portion of the happiness of the commonpeople is therefore little perceived, for it is unobtrusive;and consists in following out those peculiarbiases and penchants which in higher personages aretermed genius. The genius of the working classes,which, from its deriving little help from science, or fieldof exercise from circumstance, is seldom admitted to begenius at all, still exhibits itself in a variety of ways,and contributes at once to their prosperity, their happiness,and to the stamping of individual character.A great deal of it is necessarily exerted in their particulartrades, and produces all that is beautiful andexquisite in handicraft arts. That which gives anartizan eminence in the workshop of his master, wouldprobably have produced specimens of art that wouldhave claimed the admiration of the whole community.Those glorious specimens of architectural perfection,which adorn our chief cathedrals, the work of themiddle ages, are the evidences of masonic skill, whichin this age might probably have been employed onour plainer structures, or in building steam-engines,or elaborating some piece of plate, or carving thehandles of parasols. Circumstance has much to doin the decision of the fate of all genius and ingenuity.It is a striking fact, that the greater number of artizanswho eminently excel in their own line, partakelargely of the temperament and foibles of genius.They are often irregular in their application to business,fond of company and of its excitements ; so thatnothing is so common as to say, that man is aninimitable workman, but that he will not work half hisENGLISH COTTAGERS.time, and is too fond of the public house, where hedraws a circle of admirers around him. But when aman is, at once, skilful, steady, and enthusiastic inhis art, — that man is a happy man. His mind hasaconstant subject of reflection, of exercise, of satisfactionbefore it. He sees with pride the workmanshipof his hands, and enjoys with as much inwarddelight the reputation and applause it brings him, asthe fame of a poet, a philosopher, or a conqueror doesto their respective possessors.But, in many others, the peculiar instinct shewsitself in some other pursuit than their trade. It doesnot happen to them to have fallen upon that professionwhich would have called forth the slumberingspirit, and when it wakes it shews itself in some otherform. These men are said to have their hobby.They have a favourite scheme, or occupation, whichshares their attention with their trade, and often supersedesit. Crabbe, that close observer of whateverpassed in this grade of life, has well described thesepropensities. If they shew themselves in a man's owntrade :Then to the wealthy you will see deniedComforts and joys that with the poor abide ;There are who labour through the year, and yetNo more have gained than — not to be in debt ;Who still maintain the same laborious course,Yet pleasure hails them from some favourite source ;And health, amusement, children, wife, or friend,With life's dull views their consolations blend.But if the bias of the mind does not lie in theman's own art :Nor these alone possess the lenient powerOf soothing life in the desponding hour;296 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFSome favourite studies, some delightful careThe mind with trouble and distresses share ; -^And by a coin, a flower, a verse, a boat,The stagnant spirits have been set afloat ;They pleased at first, and then the habit grew.Till the fond heart no higher pleasure knew.Oft have I smiled the happy pride to seeOf humble tradesmen in their evening glee ;When of some pleasing, fancied good possessed.Each grew alert, was busy, and was blest.Whether the caZ/-bird yield the hours delight.Or magnified in microscope, the mite ;Or whether tumblers, croppers, carriers seizeThe gentle mind, they rule it, and they please.Yes, it is in these and many other occupations,dictated by individual organization, or taste, thatnumbers of the working class find a world of happiness.Some are amateurs of one kind, some of another;some are readers of fancy pigeons, some offancy dogs ; others are enthusiasts in music, singing,bell-ringing, and make a noise in the world from bell-cries,organ-lofts, orchestras, at harmonic meetings,and in rural festivals. Some spend a whole life inseeking the perpetual motion ; some in devising improvementsin steam-engines, and other machines.Whether they deal with realities, or with chimeras,as too often they do, the busy spirit of humanity Millbe at work in the breasts of the operative class. Inthe country it assumes many a shape that is beautiful,and others that are picturesque. Some are incorrigiblepoachers, from the love of the pursuit of wildcreatures, of strolling about in solitary glens andwoods, of night-watching, and adventure. Othershave an inextinguishable love of a gun, — these menall their lives are noted for this propensity. TheyENGLISH COTTAGERS. 297have a certain keeper-like appearance. They affectfustian or velveteen jackets, with wide skirts, andhuge pockets ; gaiters, and strong shoes. They havea lounging, yet unauthorized air, which betrays tenthto be not the true men of office. They have alwayssome excuse for carrying a gun ; they are suffers ofcurious birds and animals ; or they procure them forone who is ; and it is alike amazing how they escapethe penalties of the law for trespasses and destructionof game, and yet bring home such owls, squirrels,herons, sea-birds, curlews, plovers, martins, and billiards,shrikes, waxen-chatterers, and foxes, and youngfawns, as are not to be obtained except by a traversing,daily and nightly, of parks, preserves, woods, andchases, as must be perilous, and indeed, impracticableto any other men. Noblemen and gentlemen generallyfind it desirable in the end, to install this particularvariety of the human species in all the honoursand freedom of keepership. Happy is the man ofthis stamp who reaches America. That is the land forhim ! A land of woods, of herds of deer, and turkeys,of bears and buffaloes. There he may roam theparadise of back settlements, and satiate his soul withhunting and shooting ; with lying in wait, and withwild adventure, without fear of game-laws, and theobstructions of monopoly.Others again, have an indomitable passion for huntingotters, badgers, polecats, rats, hedge-hogs, andsimilar tenants of out-of-the-way dales, river-sides,thickets and plantations ; and have perpetually at theirheels, terriers of every kind, spaniels, and lurchers.These are generally well entitled to be classed underthe head of ragamuffins ; and are generally more than298 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFhalf poachers, being as ready to snap up a leveret,rabbit, or young wild-duck, as they are to destroy astoat. But the passion for their peculiar fancy is inextinguishable,and not to be put out by a wholebench of magistrates, or a voyage to New SouthWales, for there the dogs would instinctively musterat their heels, and they would be after the kangaroosat the very first opportunity.A congener of these, and yet of a somewhat morecivilised grade, is the bird-catcher and trainer. Bewareof your nightingales that come in April fromsome sunny land, and shew you the preference of settlingfor the season in your shrubbery, or coppice. Ifthis man be your neighbour, the glorious song of midnightwill soon experience a mysterious hush. Youhear it, and proclaim the news to your family. Byday you catch its not-to-be-mistaken notes amongstthe budding trees, as you pass in and out of yourgrounds. " There is the very same bird come to itsfavourite spot," you say, to delight your wife, or sisteror children, who clap their hands, and run to carry thenews into the housekeeper's room. " There is the fineold nightingale again in the shrubbery !" At eveningon are put bonnets and hats, shawls and cloaks, andforth sallies the happy domestic group. The air ischill, for it is but April ; yet the moon is rising in hersweet pensiveness, and the freshness of the air and thebudding boughs are about you. Down the narrowpath you go, where the primroses gleam faintly fromamongst the mossy stems of the shrubbery trees. Pastthe rustic summer-house you go, down by the closeturf of the shadowy lawn, — near to the brook thatflows so subdued in its singing murmurs that it can-englishCOTTAGERS. 299not drown a single bird-note. You have reached thelittle wooden bridge — and hark ! — it is there sureenough ! Yes, to-night, and the next, and perhaps thenext, it is there, — and then it is gone. You wonderwhy. Can it have deserted its favourite haunt ? Canit be the stormy weather? The east wind must havesilenced it? No! it is moping in the cage of thatvillanous bird catcher, who is intending to aggravatehis crime of kidnapping this prince of air-minstrelsby fetching the blackbird which sings on the topof your ash, and the thrush that flings back his notesfrom the distant elm. Beware of your woodlarks,and your goldfinches, if this man be your neighbour.He has an ear which recognizes in a moment themaster singer, and he has a dozen arts to put in practiceagainst his liberty. In his little house is a collectionof prisoners that would make any reasonableperson's heart ache. He' has blackbirds that arestudying artificial tunes, — marches, and waltzes —how much more apt one would think them to learndirges and laments ! But he has even poor RobinRedbreast put to school under the nightingale — bul-finchesthat are blinded, and then made to listen indoleful obedience to his flute or pipe. They are to bepiping goldfinches of great note and value. But let usleave the melodious melancholy of his prison-house,and when we have lightened our hearts in the openair, we may muster up charity enough to do the manjustice. He has, after all, no lack of kindness in hisheart. He takes them captive as the Christians takenegroes — to civilize them, and make them happier !His soul is in all that he does. I one day met an oldman and woman in a wood. As I drew near them I300 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFheard a strange chirping of young birds. It was afine summer evening. " How is this," I said ; " itis time for the birds to be at roost, and yet I hearyoung ones chirping?" "O!" said the old man —"here they are;" opening his basket, and shewing anest-full of young canaries. " It was a fine evening,"said he, " and I and my old woman thought a walkwould do us good, and we thought it would do thebirds good too."The delights of angling seize upon another class.People that have not been inoculated with the truespirit, may wonder at the infatuation of anglers — buttrue anglers leave them very contentedly to theirwondering, and follow their diversion with a keendelight. Many old men there are of this class, thathave in them a world of science, — not science of thebook, or of regular tuition, but the science of actualexperience. Science that lives, and will die withthem ; except it be dropped out piece-meal, and withthe gravity becoming its importance, to some youngneophyte, who has won their good graces by his devotionto their beloved craft. All the mysteries oftimes and seasons, of baits, flies of every shape andhue ; worms, gentles, beetles, compositions, or substancesfound by proof to possess singular charms.These are a possession which they hold with pride,and do not hold in vain. After a close day in theshop or factory, what a luxury is a fine summerevening to one of these men, following some rapidstream, or seated on a green bank, deep in grass andflowers, pulling out the spotted trout, or resolutely,but subtlety bringing some huge pike or fair graylingfrom his lurking place beneath the broad stumpENGLISH COTTAGERS. 301and spreading boughs of the alder. Or a day, asummer's day, to such a man, by the Dove, or theWye, amid the pleasant Derbyshire hills ; by Yorkshireor Northumbrian stream; by Trent or Tweed;or the banks of Yarrow; by Teeth, or Leven, withthe glorious hills and heaths of Scotland round him !Why, such a day to such a man, has in it a life andspirit of enjoyment to which the feelings of citiesand palaces are dim. The heart of such a man, — thepower and passion of deep felicity that come breathingfrom mountains and moorlands ; from clouds thatsail above, and storms blustering and growling in thewind; from all the mighty magnificence, the solitudeand antiquity of nature upon him — Ebenezer Elliottonly can unfold. The weight of the poor man's lifethe cares of poverty — the striving of huge cities,visit him as he sits by the beautiful stream — beautifulas a dream of eternity, and translucent as the everlastingcanopy of heaven above him ; — they come —but he casts them off for the time, with the power ofone who feels himself strong in the kindred spirit ofall things around ; strong in knowledge that he is aman; an immortal — a child and pupil in the world-schoolof the Almighty. For that day he is morethan a king — he has the heart of humanity and thefaith and spirit of a saint. It is not the rod, and linethat floats before him — it is not the flowing water, orthe captured prey that he perceives in those momentsof admission to the heart of nature, so much as thelaw of the testimony of love and goodness writtenon everything around him with the pencil of Divinebeauty. He is no longer the wearied and oppressedthe trodden and despised — walking in thread-bare802 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFgarments, amid men who scarcely deign to look uponhim as a brother man, — but he is reassured and recognizedto himself in his own soul as one of thosepuzzling, aspiring and mysterious existences for whomall this splendid world was built, and for whom eternityopens its expecting gates. These are magnificentspeculations for a poor angling weaver, or carpenter;but Ebenezer Elliott can tell us, that they are hislegitimate thoughts when he can break for an instantthe bonds of this toiling age, and escape to the openfields. Let us leave him dipping his line into thewaters of refreshing thought, and return to the cottagegarden. There we shall see another form of thatbeneficently varied taste which adds so much to thepoor man's pleasures.We may look into many a cottage garden, and findit a little world of beauty and pleasant cares. Hereone poor man is a lover of bees. He has stored hislittle sheltered garden with all sorts of flowers thatbees love, or that come out early in the year for them.On the sunny side of his little domain you see hisrustic shed with its row of hives; all neatly thatched,and all sending out their busy stream of honey-gatherers.There is no man of any reflection but mustfeel what a source of enjoyment that row of hives hasbeen. "What cares and contrivances have contributedto extend that row from the solitary swarm, purchasedperhaps in the days of deeper poverty than nowpresses upon him. What summer-noon watchingsthere have been for the flight of new Swarms ; whathurry and ringing of pans and fire-shovels to charmthem down; what recapturings and bringing back tothe ancient bench, to form a new family in the littlebee-state.ENGLISH COTTAGERS. 303There is one circumstance, however, connectedwith the keeping of bees, which spoils the poetry ofit; and that is the brimstone pit of destruction thatawaits them. But there is many a poor man thatloves his bees with a strong affection, and loathes todothem that grievous wrong. He levies tribute, butdoes not destroy. I once saw a fine instance of thisfeeling. A poor man, a lover and keeper of bees,heard by chance that a swarm had taken np theirabode in the roof of Caverswall Nunnery, in Staffordshire;and that the abbess was intending to havethem destroyed. His residence was at a distance ofseven miles from the Abbey, but he instantly put hisfavourite volume of " Huber on Bees" in his pocketand set out. Here, being admitted to the presenceof the abbess, he told his errand, and begged that shewould not commit so barbarous and inhospitable anact,— that providence seemed to have directed thosewonderful little creatures thither as it were, for thecertainty of protection from the hearts of Christianladies. At least he begged that she would read thatbook before she put her threat into execution. Hesoon afterwards came to me with a face of great delight,saying — " The abbess has read Huber, and shewon't destroy the bees ! "Many cottagers, again, are most zealous and successfulflorists. This is a taste full of beauty, andpossessing a high charm. To select rich and suitablesoils; to sow and plant; to nurse and shade, andwater; to watch the growth and expansion of flowersof great promise ; — it is sufficient for the enjoymentof one spirit. The number of flowers now cultivatedby florists is much increased to what it was. They304 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFhad only the polyanthus, auricula, hyacinth, carnation,tulip, and ranunculus ; but the splendid dahlia, andthe pansy now engross much of their attention andadmiration. Others, again, are collectors and admirersof insects ; and as education extends, naturalhistory will, no doubt, receive many zealous adherentsfrom the operative ranks. Crabbe has described boththese tastes as united in one man.There is my friend, the weaver ; strong desiresReign in his breast ; 'tis beauty he admires.See ! to the shady grove he wings his way,And feels in hope the raptures of the day.Eager he looks ; and soon to his glad eyes.From the sweet bower, by nature formed, ariseBright troops of virgin-moths, and new-born butterflies ;Who broke that morning from their half-year's sleep,To fly o'er flowers where they were wont to creep.Above the sovereign oak, a sovereign skims,The purple Emperor, strong in wing and limbs :There fair Camilla takes her flight serene,Adonis blue, and Parthia silver queen :With every filmy fly from mead or bower.And hungry Sphinx, who threads the honeyed flower ;She o'er the lark spurs' bed, where sweets abound.Views every bell, and hums the approving sound :Poised on her busy plumes, with feelings nice.She draws from every flower, nor tries a floret twice.He fears no bailiffs wrath, no baron's blame.His is untaxed, and undisputed game ;Nor less the place of curious plants he knows ;He both his Flora and his Fauna shews.For him is blooming in its rich array.The glorious flower which bore the palm away.In vain a rival tried his utmost art,His was the prize, and joy o'erflowed his heart.This, this is beauty ! cast, I pray, your eyesOn this my glory ! see the grace — the size !ENGLISH COTTAGERS. 305Was ever stem so tall, so stout, so strong.Exact in breadth, in just proportion long ;These brilliant hues are all distinct and clean,No kindred tint, no blending streaks between ;This is no shaded, run-off, pin-eyed thing,A king of flowers, a flower for England's king ! "Lastly, the general pleasures of a garden form agrand item in the enjoyments of the poor man. Toshew what these pleasures are, to what an extent theyare enjoyed in some districts, even by town mechanics,and how much further they may be extended, Ishall quote a portion of a paper published by me inNovember 1835, in Tait's Magazine.There are, in the outskirts of Nottingham, upwardsof 5000 gardens, the bulk of which are occupied bythe working class. A good many there are belongingto the substantial tradesmen and wealthier inhabitants;but the great mass are those of the mechanics. Theselie on various sides of the town, in expanses of manyacres in a place, and many of them as much as a mileand a half distant from the centre of the town. Inthe winter they have rather a desolate aspect, withtheir naked trees and hedges, and all their littlesummer-houses exposed, damp-looking and forlorn ;but in spring and summer, they look exceedinglywell, — in spring all starred with blossoms, all thickwith leaves ; and their summer-houses peeping pleasantlyfrom among them. The advantage of thesegardens to the working-class of a great manufacturingtown, is beyond calculation ; and I believe no townin the kingdom has so many of them in proportion toits population. It were to be desired that the exampleof the Nottingham artizans was imitated bythose of other great, towns ; or rather, that the taste306 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFfor them was encouraged, and in fact, created, by theexample of the middle classes, and by patriotic personslaying out fields for this purpose, and letting them ata reasonable rate. A wide difference in the capabilityof indulging in this healthful species of recreation,must of course, depend on the species of manufacturecarried on. Where steam-engines abound, and areat the foundation of all the labours of a place, as inManchester, for instance, there you will find fewgardens in the possession of the mechanics. Thesteam-engine is a never-resting, unbearable, unper-suitable giant and despot ; and will go on thumpingand setting thousands of wheels and spindles inmotion ; and men must stand, as it were, the slaves ofits sleeping energies. O ! what was the fate of theancient genii to the fate of our modern mechanics !What was the fate of "the slaves of the lamp," orthe slaves of talismanic ring, to that of the slaves ofthe steam-engine ! They could vanish and lie at resttill came the irresistible call ; they could sport overocean and desert, through the air and the clouds;they could speed into the depths of space and wanderamid the inconceivable mysteries and miracles of unknownworlds, till the omnipotent spell recalled themto execute some temporary wish of their tyrant, andthen return to a wide liberty. But the slave of thesteam-engine must be at the beck of }ds tyrant nightor day, with only such intervals as barely suffice torestore his wearied strength and faculties: — thereforeyou shall not see gardens flourish and summer-housesrise in the vicinity of this hurrying and tremendouspower. But where it is not, or but partially predominates,there may the mechanic enjoy the realENGLISH COTTAGERS. 307pleasures of a garden. And how many are thosepleasures !Early in spring — as soon, in fact, as the days beginto lengthen, and the shrewd air to dry up the wintrymoisture — you see them getting into their gardens,clearing away the dead stalks of last year's growth,and digging up the soil ; but especially on fine daysin February and March are they busy. Trees arepruned, beds are dug, walks cleaned, and all therefuse and decayed vegetation piled up in heaps; andthe smoke of the fires in which it is burnt, rolling upfrom many a garden, and sending its pungent odourto meet you afar off. It is pleasant to see, as theseason advances, how busy their occupants become;bustling there with their basses in their hands andtheir tools on their shoulders; wheeling in manure;and clearing out their summer-houses; and what anair of daily increasing neatness they assume, till theyare one wide expanse of blossomed fruit-trees andflowering fragrance. Every garden has its summerhouse; and these are of all scales and grades, fromthe erection of a few tub staves, with an attempt totrain a pumpkin or a wild-hop over it, to substantialbrick houses with glass windows, good cellars for adeposit of choice wines, a kitchen, and all necessaryapparatus, and a good pump to supply them withwater. Many are very picturesque rustic huts, builtM'ith great taste, and hidden by tall hedges in a perfectlittle paradise of lawn and shrubbery — mostdelightful spots to go and read in of a summer day,or to take a dinner or tea in with a pleasant party offriends. Some of these places which belong to thesubstantial tradespeople have cost their occupiers from308 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFone to five hundred pounds, and the pleasure theytake in them may be thence imagined ; but many ofthe mechanics have very excellent summer-houses,and there they delight to go, and smoke a solitarypipe, as they look over the smiling face of theirgarden, or take a quiet stroll amongst their flowers :or to take a pipe with a friend ; or to spend a Sundayafternoon, or a summer evening, with their families.The amount of enjoyment which these gardens affordto a great number of families, is not easily to becalculated — and then the health and the improvedtaste ! You meet them coming home, having beenbusy for hours in the freshness of the summer morningin them, and now are carrying home a bass brimfulof vegetables for the house. In the evening thitherwardyou see groups and families going; the keywhich admits to the common paths that lead betweenthem is produced ; a door is opened and closed ; andyou feel that they are vanished into a pure and sacredretirement, such as the mechanic of a large towncould not possess without these suburban gardens.And then to think of the alehouse, the drinking, noisy,politics-bawling alehouse, where a great many of thesevery men would most probably be, if they had notthis attraction, — to think of this, and then to see thevariety of sources of a beautiful and healthful interestwhich they create for themselves here : — what a contrast! — what a most gratifying contrast ! There arethe worthy couple, sitting in the open summer-houseof one garden, quietly enjoying themselves, andwatching their children romping on the grass-plot, orplaying about the walks ; in another, a social group offriends round the tea-table, or enjoying the reward ofENGLISH COTTAGERS. 309all their spring labours, picking strawberries freshfrom the bed, or raspberries, gooseberries, and currantsfrom the bush. In one you find a grower of fineapples, pears, or plums, or of large gooseberries; in another,a florist, with his shew of tulips, ranunculuses,hyacinths, carnations, or other choice flowers that claimall his leisure moments, and are a source of a thousandcares and interests. And of these cares and interests,the neat awning of white canvas, raised on its lightframe of Mood ; the glasses, and screens of board andmatting, to defend those precious objects from everyrude attack of sun, wind, or rain — all these are sufficienttestimonies ; and tell of hours early and late, in thedawn of morning and the dusk of evening, when thehappy man has been entranced in his zealous labours,and absorbed in a thousand delicious fancies, and speculationsof perfection. Of late, the splendid dahliaand the pansy have become objects of attention; andI believe of the latter flower, till recently despisedand overlooked, except in the old English cottagegarden, there are now more than a hundred varieties,of such brilliance and richness of hue, and many ofthem of such superb expanse of corolla, as merit allthe value set upon them.This is the allotment system of the manufacturingtown ; to the full as desirable as that for the country,and which may be facilitated, fraught as it is withabundant physical and moral good, by philanthropicindividuals to a great extent. At Nottingham, as Ihave observed, the taste seems to have grown uporiginally of itself, and then, exciting the attention ofspeculators, has been extended to its present growthby them. The mechanics there have not their gar-vol.II. R310 FAVOURITE PURSUITS OFdens at a cheap rate. They all say that they couldpurchase their vegetables in the market for the amountof their rental and incidental expenses ; but then, theyget the health and the enjoyment, and their fruit andvegetables they get so fresh.There are, according to a personal examinationmade by myself, now, upwards of 5000 of these gardens,containing, as single gardens, 400 square yardseach, — the general scale of a garden ; though a goodmany are held as double, and even treble gardens.These let at from a half-penny to three half-pence peryard ; but averaged at three farthings, make a rentalof 11. 5s. per garden, or a total of 6250Z. Five thousandgardens of 400 yards each of clear garden ground,independent of fences and roads, give 413 acres andabout a rood. Now, if we add one-fifth for fences androads, the total quantity of land occupied is 496 acres,or we may say, in round numbers, 500 acres. Herethen, 500 acres, which, at fifty shillings an acre — agood rent for ordinary purposes, would yield a rentof 1250/. ; yield, by being converted into gardens, arent of 6250/., or a clear profit of 5000/.Thus, it is evident, that any persons willing to promotethe taste for gardening in the neighbourhood oftowns, might double, in many instances, the ordinaryrent of the land, and yet let it in gardens at half theprice of these Nottingham ones. Even where land inthe vicinity of a large town is very highly rented, ahalf-penny a yard, and ten gardens to the acre, fencesand roads included, would produce 8/. 6s. 8d. per acre;no contemptible sum; to say nothing of the real kindnessof the accommodation, and the health, pleasure,and pure taste communicated to their fellow men.ENGLISH COTTAGERS. 311Whilst, against the increased risk of loss, and the increasedtrouble of the collection of rent, are to be setthe value of the garden stock, fruit-trees, shrubs, andflower-roots, and the summer-houses, which enhancethe value to the next tenant.Here I close this chapter, and this department ofmy work, — the habits and amusements of the people.It is a subject to which I attach no common importance.The people make the majority of our race; andif they are all equally the objects of that divine carewhich created them, they must be equally the objectsof our truest sympathies. This has not hitherto beensufficiently considered : but every day that considerationmust be forced more and more upon us ; and weshall be made to feel that no philosophy is good whichdoes not include the poor in its theory ; no religion issound, which does not recognize their kinship; nolegislation is wise which does not operate for theirphysical and intellectual benefit ; and no country canbe said to be truly prosperous, where the multitude isnot respectable, enlightened, moral, and happy.Let us all endeavour to hasten this period, as aliving proof that Christianity is really preached to thepoor; and that our knowledge has produced the mostfelicitous of its genuine fruits, in peopling this greatnation with a race such as no nation has yet possessed; such as may eat,Well earned, the bread of service, yet may haveA mounting spirit; — one that entertainsScorn of base action, deed dishonorable,Or aught unseemly, Charles Lamb.CHAPTER XIII.SUNDAY IN THE COUNTRY.®on0t Eituerjte gic^ Bet J^tmmcT£!=JLieI)e Eusauf mid; letnl, in ttn^ttt ^ablafiy^tilie ;2)a tian &o aTjiitmngstJoIl tic ©(oduntonesi jFueirc,dint) etn ©c"bct Ixiar Ijrueitstigcr ©c«u0si ;Cin unliegreilltcl) Ijo'tDc^ ^c^nen■Srulj mtct tiurcT) main uti OTic^en Ijtnjuge'&tt,aiiiD unter tauiStnti Ijei^gcn €TjraEncn,JFudjItMc^ mtr eine melt enmdjn,Faust.In other days, the kiss of heavenly love descended upon me in thesolemn stillness of the sabbath ; then the full-toned bell sounded sofraught with mystic meaning, and a prayer was vivid enjoyment.A losing, inconceivable sweet, drove me forth to wander over woodand plain, and amid a thousand burning tears, I felt a world rise uptome. Hayward's Translation.Goethe, in his Faust, has given a very lively descriptionof a German multitude bursting out of the cityto enjoy an Easter Sunday; — mechanics, students,citizens' daughters, servant girls, townsmen, beggars,old women, ready to tell fortunes, soldiers, and amongstthe rest, his hero Faust, and his friend Wagner, proceedingto enjoy a country walk. They reach a risingSUNDAY IN THE COUNTRY. 313ground ; and Faust says — " Turn and look back fromthis rising ground upon the town. From forth thegloomy portal presses a motley crowd. Every onesuns himself delightedly to-day. They celebrate therising of the Lord, for they themselves have arisen :from the dark rooms of mean houses ; from the bondageof mechanical drudgery ; from the confinement ofgables and roofs ; from the stifling narrowness ofstreets ; from the venerable gloom of churches — arethey raised up to the open light of day. But look !look ! how quickly the mass is scattering itself throughthe gardens and fields ; how the river, broad and long,tosses many a merry bark upon its surface ; and howthis last wherry, overladen almost to sinking, movesoff. Even from the farthest paths of the mountain,gay-coloured dresses glance upon us. I hear alreadythe bustle of the village. This is the true heaven ofthe multitude ; big and little are buzzing joyously.Here I am a man — here I may be one."Making allowance for the difference of nationalmanners, this might serve for a picture of Sunday inthe neighbourhood of a large town in England.Human nature is the same everywhere. The girlsare looking out for sweethearts ; and both mechanicsand students are seeking after the best beer and theprettiest girl :Ein stares Bier, ein beitzender Toback,Und eine Image im Puts class list nun mein Geschmack.Strong beer, stinging tobacco, and a girl all in herprest, — that is the taste for me," cries one : and so itis here and everywhere. See how the multitudes ofour large manufacturing towns, and of London spend314 SUNDAY INtheir Sundays. They pour out into the country inall directions, but it is not to enjoy the country only.They do enjoy the country ; but it is because itheightens their wild delight in smoking, drinking, andflirtation. Who does not know what innumerablehaunts there are within five, ten, or even twentymiles round London, to which these classes repair onSundays: tea-houses and tea-gardens, country inns,hedge-alehouses, all the old and noted places wheregood beer and tobacco, merry company, and noisypolitics are to be found ? Wormwood, Greenwich, Richmond,Hampton-court, Windsor, the Nore, Herne-bay,Gravesend, Margate ; and those old-fashionedplaces of resort that Hone gives you glimpses of;such as Copenhagen House, the Sluice-house, Canon-bury,etc. — what swarming votaries have they all.*And what an immensity of new regions will the railroadsthat are now beginning to stretch their linesfrom the metropolis in different directions, lay open —terrcB incognita as it were, to the millions that in theThe following calculation, made on Whit-monday 1835, may-givesome idea of the number of similar pleasure-seekers on a finesummer Sunday. On Monday, between eight in the morning andnine at night, 191 steam-vessels passed through the Pool to and fromMargate, Herne-Bay, Sheerness, Southern, the Nore, Gravesend,Woolwich, and Greenwich, including several on their way to andfrom Scotland, Ireland, and the continent. Each vessel averaged, atleast, 500 persons. The above calculation was made by Mr. Brown,a boat-builder in Napping, who, with his servants, watched them allday. But many passed after nine, swelling the number to upwardsof 200; so that more than 100,000 persons must have been afloat inthe steamers on Monday, exclusive of the passengers in small boats.Several steam-vessels carried 800 and 900 souls each to the Nore andback. One steam-vessel brought back from Greenwich 1000 persons,another 1300, and a third was actually crowded with 1500 passengers.THE COUNTRY. 315dense and ever-growing mass of monstrous Londonpant after an outburst into the country. Truly maythese say, through the medium of this modern andmost providential means of occasional dispersion : —To morrow to fresh fields and pastures new !I well remember two ladies of high reputation inthe literary world, who, after reading Faust, wereinspired with a desire to see how the loMcr classesamused themselves on a Sunday in this country. Itwas, they thought, a subject of profitable study.They could not divest themselves of the idea that thepeople must wonderfully enjoy themselves, in theirown way ; and perhaps they might imagine that theyshould be received and complimented as Faust andhis friend Wagner were. Well ; the experiment wastried. Another gentleman and myself accompaniedthem ; and of all schemes, we hit upon that of goingby the steam-packet to Richmond. It was a finemorning in May. Our packet and another sailedfrom St. Katherine's wharf with crowded decks, and abright sun over our heads, casting its animating gloryupon tower and town, over the majestic river, and thegreen country to which, anon, we emerged. Weswept under bridge after bridge, and saw the mightymetropolis, with its vast wilderness of houses, wharfs,warehouses, and great public buildings, rapidly glideaway behind us; above all the towers and spires ofchurches, St. Paul's lifting its solemn dome and glitteringcross ; and then the villages, splendid villas,and beautiful gardens, with the tall robins in theirnew leaves, and covered with their snow-white massesof flowers, in gay succession ; — Lambeth, Vauxhall,316 SUNDAY INChelsea, Battersea, Fulham, Putney, Barnes, Chis-wick,Kew, Richmond ! — it was a fair and promisingscene.The people on board were well-dressed. Therewere some portly, middle-aged dames, with goldwatches at their sides, and clad in richest silks ; andthere were some as lovely young ones as Londoncould shew. You were sure that there were plenty ofthe very-well-to-do-in-the-world about you, if therewere none of the very refined ; substantial tradespeople,that would have the best the world could procurein eating, drinking, and dressing. And therewas a knot of Germans too; men with great mustachiosand laced coats; and damsels from whose tonguesthe strong, homely, expressive German speech seemedto fall wondrous softly. It was quite an attractivecircumstance: for our fair friends, being just in thefresh fervour of studying "Die Deutsche Space," andreading Faust, imagined everything in them interesting,and doubtless fancied them just such characters asGoethe would have drawn much out of. All seemedpromising, when lo ! we were at Richmond, and everythinghad been only orderly, cheerful, and nothingmore !Ah well ! this was English decorum on a Sunday ;if it were not very piquant, it was at least, very commendable.We stepped on shore, lunched, strolledabout on the terrace, amid streams of gay people ;sat on one of the seats, and gazed over that vast expanseof rich woodland, meads, and villas ; wandereddown the green meadows towards Petersham andTwickenham, into the woods below the ,and back to the packet. And now we weredestined to see the character of the common people onTHE COUNTRY. 317a Sunday jaunt. The moment the packet began tomove, it began to rain, and all the way it rained !rained ! rained ! The ladies took refuse in the cabin.What a cabin ! There were all the sober, orderlythrong of the morning, metamorphosed by the powerof strong drink into a rackety, roaring, drinking,smoking, insolent, and jammed-together crew. Thecabin was crushing full. The stairs were denselypacked with people. One of the ladies made a precipitateretreat upon deck, and there, with only theprotection of her parasol, stood with the patience of amartyr and the temper of a saint, all the weary lengthof the voyage, through dripping, drenching, never-ceasingrain ! The other, with more fear of her silksand satins, and determined to see what such a crowdteas, persisted in staying below. It was an act whichonly the highest heroism could have maintained.There was a group taking tea at a side-table, all well,very well-dressed people, and holding a conversationof such lansfuao-e ! such sentiments ! such anecdotes !and accompanied with such bursts of laughter! atwhat must have stricken people with any sense ofdecency, dumb ! And then there were those spruceyouths, so modest in the morning, now drinking potsof porter and smoking cigars. Yes, smoking cigars,though the laws of the cabin, blazoned aloft, proclaimed— " No smoking allowed in the cabin !" — Spiteof all cabin, or cabinet, or parliamentary laws, theydrank, they smoked, they rolled voluminous cloudsfrom one to another; and when requested to desist,said — " O, certainly! It is perfectly insufferable forpeople to smoke in such company; they ought to beturned out." And then all laughed together at theirr2318 SUNDAY INown wit. The captain was called, and begged to enforcehis own law ; and they cried, " O yes, captain !certainly, certainly," and then laughed again ; and thecaptain smiled, and withdrew : for what captain couldseriously forbid smoke and drink that were purchasedof himself?These drapers' apprentices, and shorten, for suchthey seemed, gloried in annoying the whole company;and for this purpose, they placed themselves by theopen window, so that the draft carried the smokeacross all the place. There did but prove to be onereal gentleman in the whole troop, who accommodatedthe lady with a seat — for not a soul besideswould stir — and said, as he saw her annoyance ; forwith all her endurance, this was visible — " Madam,M'hat a hell we have got into !"And such, thought I, is a specimen of the populaceof the mighty and enlightened London ! Truly theschoolmaster has work enough yet before him.It was a party in a parlour,Crammed just as they on land are crammed ;Some sipping punch, some sipping tea,All noisy, and all damned !Our fair friends wished to see the character of thecommon people in their Sunday recreations, and theysaw here a specimen that, I feel persuaded, will satisfythem for life. One, at least, saw this ; for the otherstood stoically silent upon deck, and saw nothing butrain ! rain ! rain ! O the weary time of that voyage !amid oaths and clamour, vulgarity in all its shapesof swaggering, or maudlin foolishness, riot of action,and indecorum of speech, drinking, smoking, crushing,laughing, swearing, — a confusion carried along theTHE COUNTRY. 319fair Thames, and into the heart of London, worsethan that of Babel, and worthy of Pandemonium. Howmany thousands of such Sunday revellers, steeped indrink, and fostering vulgarity, were pouring intothat mighty heart of civilization and Christian knowledge,at the moment we joyfully skipped up Black-friarsstairs, and thanked heaven that the Goetheexperiment was over.What London exhibits on its own great scale, allour populous manufacturing towns exhibit, each inits own degree. It is curious to observe from theearliest hour of a Sunday morning, in fine weather,what groups are pouring out into the country. Thereare mechanics that, in their shops and factories, — whilethey have been caged up by their imperious necessitiesduring the week, and have only obtained thencesights of the clear blue sky above, of the green fieldslaughing far away, or hav only caught the waftingof a refreshing gale on their fevered cheek as theyhurried homeward to a hasty meal, or back again tothe incarceration of Mammon, — have had their soulsinflamed with desires for breaking away into the freecountry. These have been planning, day after day,whither they shall go on Sunday. To what distantvillage ; to what object of attraction. There havecome visions of a neat country ale-house to them ; itsclean hearth, sanded floor ; its capital ale, and aromaticpipe after a long walk ; its pure unadulterated fare,sweet bread, savoury rashers of bacon, beef steaks andonions, and all M-ith most mouth-watering odours.Others have seen clear hurrying trout-streams, ordeep still fish-ponds, lying all along wild moors, oramid tangled woods ; and they have determined to320 SUNDAY INbe with them. They will take angle and net; theywill strip off clothes, and take the trout with theirhands, from under the grassy banks of their little swiftstreams. They will have a dash at the squire's carp,when he and all his people are at church. And, inother seasons, mushroom gathering, and nutting, andall kinds of what is called sabbath-breaking, comebefore them with an unconquerable impetus. Forto their minds — neglected, but full of strong desiresand pent-up energies — nature's delights, wild pursuits,bodily refreshments, and the enjoyment of one day'sfull freedom from towns, red walls, dry pavements,shops, masters, and even wives and children, aremixed up into a strange, but wonderfully bewitchingexcitement. These are going off, before the world ingeneral is awake, at four, five, or six o'clock in amorning, in clusters of twos and threes, sixes andsevens, with long and eager strides, stout sticks intheir hands, and faces set towards the country with adetermined expression of fresh-air huntress. Andthere, again, are going the bird-catchers ; two orthree of them, with two or three children with them,perhaps. They have some far-off green lane, or furzycommon, or airy down in their mind, to which theyare hastening with their cages, carried under a pieceof green baize, or blinded with a handkerchief. Allthe way will they stalk on at a four-mile rate, andthese little lads — the least not more than five yearsold, — will go on trotting after them, and never thinkof weariness till all the sport is over, and they aremaking their way homeward in the evening. Thenshall you see them dragged along by one of theirfather's hands; for the men will not slacken pace forTHE COUNTRY. 321them, but pull them along with them ; and you willsee those little legs go on, trot, trot, trot, till youthink they will actually be worn to the stumps beforethey reach home. These men and eager lads youwill find in some solitary spot seven or eight miles off,if you go out so far, seated silently under a tall hedgeor old tree, or in some moorland thicket, watchingtheir apparatus, which is placed at a distance ; theirtame bird, of the species they are seeking to take,chained by its leg to a crossed stick, or a boughthrust into the ground. There it is, hopping aboutand chirping in the sunshine ; and around stand cagescontaining other decoy birds, and other cages readyto receive the unsuspicious birds, that, attracted bythe hopping and chirping of their captive kinsmen,will presently come and alight near them, and speedilyget entangled in the limed twigs that are disposedabout, or will find the net that is ready spread forthem, come swoop over them. Every person whohas walked the streets of London, has seen the crowdsof these little captives, larks, woodlarks, linnets, goldfinches,nightingales, etc., in the shops, which havebeen thus caught on all the great heaths and downs,for twenty miles round the metropolis, by fowlers,who are nearly always thus employed there.Then, again, you see another Sunday class ; tradesmen,shopkeepers, and their assistants and apprenticesall those who have friends in the country, — onhorseback or in gigs, driving off to spend the daywith those that come occasionally and pay them avisit at markets and fairs. The faces of these are setfor farm and other country houses within twenty milesround. There is not a horse or gig to be had for322 SUNDAY INlove or money at any of the livery-stables on a Sunday.These hebdomadal instigators, — these gooddinner eaters, fruit-devourer, ,pipe-smokers, and loungers in gardens, ,crofts, orchards — these soi-disant judgesof cattle, crops, dogs, guns, game, — these haunters ofcountry-houses, complimenters of country beauties,and lovers of good country fare, — have got them all.Yes, yes, many a pleasant Sunday in the country dothese men spend after their fashion, — none of theworst, if none of the holiest ; and yet they go to thevillage church too sometimes, and wonder that sofine a preacher should be hidden in such a place.Towards nine or ten o'clock in the evening, they willbe pouring back into the town as blithely as theyrolled out in the morning, being now primed with allthose good things that lured them away so sharplyafter breakfast.And, when they were gone, how sunnily andcheerily passed the day in the town ; the merry bellsall ringing, the gay people all abroad, streamingalong the smooth pavements to church or chapel, orfor the forenoon and evening promenade, in theirfresh and handsome attire. Such troops of lovelywomen, such counterpoising numbers of goodly andwell-dressed men : all squalor, and poverty, and trouble,and distress shrunk backward into the alleys anddens out of sight; all cares and statesmanship shutup in the closed shops and warehouses; and nothingbut ease, leisure, bravery of equipment, and shew ofwealth, walking in the face of the sun, as if there wasno reason why they should not walk there for ever.The very beggars are gone, like swallows in autumnTHE COUNTRY. 323not one to be seen, except in the secret rendezvouswhere they pass one long day of luxurious idleness.The barrack has sent forth its troop of soldiers intheir rich full-dress. They have marched with soundingmusic to the great church, with their usual crowdof boys and idle men after them. And then, morning,noon, or evening, you have seen a group ofpeople collect in the market-place, or some openstreet, that has grown and grown into a large, densecrowd : and then you have seen a man suddenlyappear, with bare head, and book in hand, in thecentre. This is some field-preacher; one of manyhundreds that on this day, in towns, villages, rurallanes, or on heaths and commons, go out to preach tothem who are too indifferent, or too shabby, to comeinto a respectable place of worship.We often think how strangle it would have been tohave lived in the days of the Reformation, or of thePuritans, when men full of zeal went to and fro,through the length and breadth of the land, to denouncethe dominant form of religion, and preachrepentance and salvation from the Bible. We havenot the opposition and the persecution now, or weshould have just such men and such scenes. Thereis such freedom for every man to choose his ownmode of worship, and the religiously inclined have somany modes to choose from, and to associate themwith a circle of people so much after their own hearts,that they have no impulse to seek further; no, not toseek after those who have no particular desire to befound; they think it enough that they have chapel-roomand open doors for those who will come. It ischiefly, therefore, the poor that are left to seek after324 SUNDAY INthe poor ; that feel it incumbent to " go out into thehighways and hedges and compel them to come in."The mechanic, who has been labouring hard all theweek in his worldly vocation, now shaves and washes,and dresses the best he may, and goes forth, fearingnot the sneers and the scorn of the great and learned,of the worldly-wise and genteel, but comes into thevery face of them, and before their gay windows inthe open square ; often before the lofty church andmajestic cathedral, whose organ - tones are deeplypealing in his ears. There he lifts up his homelyfeatures, his rudely clipped head ; there he lifts uphis horny hand that has for many a year dealt sturdystrokes to inanimate matter, and now deals, with tenfoldzeal, strokes as hard to hearts as hard. There helifts up his voice in no finely modulated or practisedtones, but with earnest pleadings and awful threatening,and unfolding of God's judgments on thewicked and careless ; and then, with as earnest andaffectionate expositions of his mercies, arrests, terrifies,melts, and fills with new sensations and desiresthe hearts of his fellows in the lowest regions ofhuman life, who have lived beyond the sound ofheavenly promises, and of God's love and fear, inagreat measure, "because no one cared for theirsouls."The wise may wonder ; the learned may curl thelip of classical pride; the gay and the happy, wholive in splendid houses, and worship in splendid pewsand beneath high and arched roofs, may pass by, andnot even glance on the poor illiterate preacher andhis spell bound audience; but that man is, after all, apatriot and a scholar; a good subject of the realm — aTHE COUNTRY. 325good servant of heaven; and will probably effect morereal benefit in one day, than a dozen of us, who thinksufficiently well of our services to the commonwealth,shall effect in all our lives : and till some comprehensiveplan is adopted, by which the Sabbath may layall its advantages, all its holy peace, all its knowledgeand heavenly fruition, before every man, Moman andchild, in this great empire, he must and shall do whathe can to supply the deficiency. With all his ignorance,— and he has much, — he has learned what isnecessary for the good of his own spirit, and thestrength of natural sympathy has taught him the wayto communicate it to the hearts of his fellows. Heknows the language, the style, the tone of sentiment,and the species of argument that the soonest reachesthem. He knows their resentments and their wants,for he has been pursued by>the same needs, taintedby the same corruptions, baptized into the same distresses; he has an experimental knowledge that noman of another class can have. With all his extravagance,— and he has much, — he has not half theamount that we daily see in more dignified places;and for the wildness, the error, the eccentricity of hisdoctrines, ah ! how much more readily could we matchthem in those after whom carriages roll, and the worldruns, and on whom honours and wealth are heaped asan inadequate reward. See there, ho\v he extends hisarms ! how he beats the air ! how he strains everymuscle, and exerts every fibre of his frame, till theperspiration rolls from his heated brow ; how hethunders, and makes the whole great area ring withthe outbreak of his terrors, his adjurations, and his appeals! And yet, from the simple table on which he326 SUNDAY INis mounted shall no folly proceed, that has not itscounterpart in the most dignified pulpit, wholly freedand that is a world of advantage — from the freezingindifference that fills thousands with its torpidity.For the seamen, London and Liverpool, and otherports, offer their floating or seamen's chapels, wherethey may hear the gospel preached in a language thatgoes straight to their hearts and understandings, butwhich a landsman would attempt in vain. Like thelower orders in general, they have a language and anexperience of their own, and the man who preachesto them in another language, and with other imagery,cannot keep alive their attention, however eloquent,or however learned ; and he who attempts their languagewithout a practical knowledge of their life,only excites their ridicule. It is even necessary,occasionally, to accommodate the language of scriptureto their ideas and experience. A very popularpreacher once requested permission to address thesailors in their floating chapel at Liverpool, and,attempting seamen's language, told them that, he whosecured an interest in Christ, cast anchor on a rock !At once all eyebrows were elevated in amazement,and broad grins overspread every face. " Hear him!Hear him ! " they cried, one to another, " he talks ofcasting anchor on a rock!" Yet was there no uncommonhardness, or propensity to scoffing in thesemen ; on the contrary, it was admirable to see, whenCaptain Scores, the well-known northern voyager,addressed them, how they kindled with interest, andmelted down in emotion; when he told them howChrist preached in a ship, how he loved the marinersof his days, the tears started from their eyes, andTHE COUNTRY. 327rolled over scores of hardy cheeks that had faced thefiercest gales, and been tanned by the hottest suns.It was, and is still, I doubt not, delightful to see suchan audience. There was the smart sailor and hissmart lass; others with their wives and families; andold men who had spent the greatest portion of a longlife on the seas. Such a collection of black and curlyheads, of bushy whiskers, of the thin and white hairof age, of eyes gleaming with youth and life, ordimmed by the extremity of years ! — such an intentand childlike throng of listeners ! all so little accustomedto artifice, — to conceal or feel shame for theiremotions, — that the changes of their expressions wereas rapid and striking as those of the sun and wind ontheir own element. There sate some happy fathers,with their children on their knees, as though they sawso little of them, had found them so lately, or mustleave them so soon, that they could not have themnear enough. There sate strong men, touched to thedepth of their hearts by the pathos of the preacher,leaning against the side of the cabin, and weepingunrestrained tears, or listening, with lips apart, inbreathless attention; and there sate women, who,when winds and tempests were mentioned, turned afond, anxious look to some dear one sitting by them;and others, who, when the voyagers at sea wereprayed for, clasped their hands, and looked to heavenunutterable things. Great must be the comfort andthe blessing of thus bringing Christianity to the knowledgeof our seafaring men. Great has been itseffect amongst the fishermen of Cornwall, as any onemay see, who will visit the crowded chapels of St.Ives, and other places.SUNDAY INBut there is still another class of preachers thatmay be encountered on Sundays : the disciples of Irving.None of your simple mechanics, but gentlemengentlemen in appearance, in manners, in education.You will see such a one pulling out his pocket Bible,in some public situation, and beginning to address thetwo or three that happen to stand near. The singularityof the thing soon attracts others ; there beginsto be a moving from all parts towards that spot, tillthere is, at length, a large and dense crowd. Thereinthe midst of this wondering and promiscuous circle,in the most cultivated tones, with the most properaction, and in the purest language, you hear, perhaps,the Honourable and Reverend himself, " dealingdamnation round the land;" depicting his audience inthe most fearful colours, as fallen, utterly corrupt,blackened with every imaginable sin, and wanderingon the very brink of hell. In the opinionof some of these preachers, all the world is lying inignorance and sin ; all other preachers of all othercreeds are blind leaders of the blind ; to him and hisfew coadjutors alone has the mystery of godliness beenrevealed; "they are the men, and wisdom shall diewith them." I must confess that, to me, this coldCalvinism, this abusive and declamatory zeal, thoughcoming from very gentlemanly mouths, is not a thousandthpart so attractive as the warm-hearted, liberal,and affectionate addresses of the illiterate mechanic.Nay, to me it is excessively repulsive ; and I wouldmuch rather find myself in some far-off village, insome green lane, or on the heath, where such areholding their summer camp-meeting. There at least,are warmth and enthusiasm ; there at least, if there beTHE COUNTRY. 329extravagance, is also an exhibition of much character,and plenty of the picturesque. A crowd of rusticpeople is assembled ; a wagon is drawn thither for astage, and in it stand men with black skull-caps, orcoloured handkerchiefs tied upon their heads to preventtaking cold after their violent exertions ; men ofthose grave and massy, or thin, worn, and sharp features,that tell of strong, rude intellects, or active andconsuming spirits ; men, in whose bright, quick eyes,or still, deep gaze, from beneath shaggy broads, youread passions that will lighten, or a shrewdness thatwill tell with strong effect. In their addresses you arecontinually catching the most picturesque expressions,the most unlooked-for illustrations, — often the mostirresistibly amusing. I heard one edifying hisaudience with an account of the apples of the DeadSea, gathered most likely, at a tenth transmission,from Adam Clarke's Commentaries. "Ay," said he,"sin is fair to look at, but foul to taste. It is likethose apples that grow by the Red Sea. They areyellow as gold on one side, and rosy-cheeked as a fairmaid of a morning on the other; but bite them, —yes, I say bite them, and they are full of pepper andmustard !"Another was talking of God's goodness, and applyingChrist's illustration : " ' If you ask your father forbread, will he give you a stone?' Now, my brethrenI don't mean a stone of bread, — Christ didn't meana stone of bread : for, may be, it was not sold by thestone in his time ; and he would not be a bad fatherneither, that gave you a stone of bread at a time ;but I mean a stone from the road, — a real pebble, ascold as charity, as bare as the back of my hand, andas hard as the heart of a sinner."330 SUNDAY INNow, none but those who had known the immensevahie of a stone of bread, would be likely to think ofsuch a thing, or to guard against such a mistake. Butwith such laughable errors, with much ignorance andoutrageous cant, there is often mixed up a rude intellectualstrength, and a freshness of thought that neverknew the process of taming and trammelling callededucation, and that fears no criticism ; and flashes ofpoetical light, that please the more for the rudeness oftheir accompaniment. There are Yeomen, too, thatexhort in soft voices and pathetic tones on such occasions; and, suddenly the crowd will divide itself intoseveral companies, and go singing to different parts ofthe field. Their hymns have a wild vivacity, a metaphoricboldness, and, strange as it may seem, a greaterspirituality about them than those of any other Englishsect that I have come in contact with. It is wellknown that they are set to some of the finest and liveliest,and most touching song-tunes; and hence, perhapspartly their startling effect; having divested themselvesof that dry and dolorous monotony that hangs aboutsectarian hymns in general. They describe the Christianlife under the figure of battles and campaigns,with " Christ, their conquering captain" at their head ;as pilgrimages, and night-watches ; and hence theiraddresses are full of the most vivid imagery. I wellremember, in the dusk of a fine summer evening, themoon hanging in the far western sky, the dark leavesof the brook-side alders rustling in the twilight air,hearing, from the dim heath where they were holdingtheir camp-meetings, the wild sound of one of thesehymns. It was the dialogue of a spirit questioningand answering itself in the passage of death, and theTHE COUNTRY. 331entrance Into the happy land, and the chorused wordsof "All is well! — All is well!" came over the shadowywaste with an unearthly effect.Singing then, such hymns, — but on these occasionschiefly of supplication or triumph, — they kneel down,each company in a circle ; the leaders pray ; and it iscurious to see what looks of holy jealousy are castfrom one circle to another, as the voice of one leaderpredominates over those of the others by its vehemence,its loudness, or its eloquence ; drawing speedilyaway all the audience of the less gifted. It isscarcely now to be expected that we shall ever find aWhitfield, a Wesley, a Fox, or a Bunyan, on suchan occasion, but from the effect of the enthusiasm, theearnestness, the wild energy and rude eloquence, thatI have seen in a few humble men, I can well imagine,with Lord Byron, what must be the impression madeby one strong mind under the broad blue sky, andamid the accompanying picturesqueness of scene andpeople.But let us away into the far, far country ! Intothe still, pure, unadulterated country. Ah ! hereindeed is a sabbath ! What a sunny peace, what acalm yet glad repose lies on its fair hills ; over all itssolemn woods ! How its flowery dales, and deep, secludedvalleys reflect the holy tranquillity of heaven IIt is morning ; and the sun comes up the sky as if heknew it was a day of universal pause in the workingsof the world ; he shines over the glittering dews, andgreen leaves, and ten thousand blossoms; and thebirds fill the blue fresh air with a rapture of music.The earth looks new and beautiful as on the day ofits creation ; but it is as full of rest as if it drew near332 SUNDAY Intoits close — all its revolutions past, all its turbulencehushed, all its mighty griefs healed, its mysteriousdestinies accomplished ; and the light of eternityabout to break over it with a new and imperishablepower. Man rests from his labours, and everythingrests with him. There lie the weary steeds that havedragged the chain, and smarted under the lash — thathave pulled the plough and the ponderous wagon, orflown over hill and dale at man's bidding; there theylie, on the slope of the sunny field ; and the verysheep and cattle seem imbued with their luxuriousenjoyment of rest. The farmer has been walkinginto his fields, looking over this gate and that fence,into inclosures of grass, mottled with flowers like acarpet, or rich green corn growing almost visibly;at his cattle and his flock ; and now he comes backwith leisurely steps, and enters the shady quiet of hishouse. And it is a shady quiet. The sun glancesabout its porch, and flickers amongst the leaves onthe wall, and the sparrows chirp, and fly to and fro ;but the dog lies and slumbers on the step of the door,or only raises his head to snap at the flies that molesthim. The very cat, coiled up on a sun-bright borderin the garden, sleeps voluptuously: — within, all iscleanness and rest. There is none of the runningand accepting of the busy week-day : the pressing ofcurds, and shaping and turning of cheese ; the rollingof the barrel-churn ; the scouring of pails ; the pumping,and slopping, and working, and chattering, andsinging, and scolding, of dairy-maids. All that canbe dispensed with of these matters, is dispensed with,and what must be done is done quietly, and is earlyaway. There is a clean, cool parlour ; the openTHE COUNTRY. 333window lets in the odour of the garden — the yet cooland delicious odour, and the hum of bees. Flowersstand in their pots in the window; gathered flowersstand on the breakfast table ; and the farmer's comelywife, already dressed for the day, as she sees himcome in, sits down to pour out his coffee. Over thecroft-gate the labourers are leaning, talking of thelast week's achievements, and those of the week tocome ; and in many a cottage garden the cottagers,with their wives and children, are wandering up anddown, admiring the growth of this and that; andevery one settles in his own mind, that his cabbages,and peas, and beans are the best in the whole country; and that, as for currants, gooseberries, apricots,and strawberries, there never were such crops sincetrees and bushes grew.But the bells ring out from the old church tower.The pastor is already issuing from his pleasant parsonage; groups of peasantry are already seen streamingover the uplands towards the village. In thelanes, gay ribbons and Sunday-gowns glance frombetween the trees, and every house sends forth itsinhabitants to worship. Blessings on those old greyfabrics, that stand on many a hill, and in many alowly hollow, all over this beloved country; for muchas we reprobate that system of private, or political patronageby which unqualified, unholy, and unchristianmen have sometimes been thrust into their ancientpulpits, I am of Sir Walter Scott's opinion, that noplaces are so congenial to the holy simplicity of Christianworship as they are. They have an air of antiquityabout them — a shaded sanctity, and stand so venerablyamid the most English scenes, and the tombs ofVOL. 11. s334 SUNDAY INgenerations of the dead, that we cannot enter themwithout having our imaginations and our hearts powerfullyimpressed with every feeling and thought thatcan make us love our country, and yet feel that it isnot our abiding place. Those antique arches, thoselow massy doors, were raised in days that are longgone by ; around those walls, nay, beneath our veryfeet, sleep those, who in their generations, helped,each in his little sphere, to build up England to herpresent pitch of greatness. We catch glimpses of thatdeep veneration, of that unambitious simplicity ofmind and manner that we Avould fain hold fast amid ourgrowing knowledge, and its inevitable remodelling ofthe whole frame-work of society. We are made tofeel earnestly the desire to pluck the spirit of faith,the integrity of character, and the whole heart of loveto kin and country, out of the ignorance and blindsubjection of the past. Therefore is it that I havealways loved the village church, that I have delightedto stroll far through the summer fields; and hearstill onward its bells ringing happily, to enter and sitdown amongst its rustic congregation, — better pleasedwith their murmur of responses, and their artless butearnest chant, than with all the splendour and paradeof more lofty fabrics. Therefore is it that I long to seethepeople rescued from the thraldom of aristocraticpatronage, that they may select at their own will, thepious and pure hearted to fill every pulpit in the land,and station in every parish a lover of God, a lover ofthe country, and a lover of the poor.But Sunday morning is past: the afternoon is rollingaway ; but it shall not roll away without its dower ofhappiness shed on every down, and into every beautiesCOUNTRY. 335ful vale of this fair kingdom. Closed are the doors ofthe church, but opened are those of thousands andtens of thousands of dwellings to receive friends andkindred. And around the pleasant tea-table, happygroups are gathering in each other's houses, freedfrom the clinging, pressing, enslaving cares of the sixdays ; and sweetly, and full of renewing strength tothe heart does the evening there roll away. Anddoes it not roll as sweetly where, by many a cottage-door,the aged grandfather and grandmother sit withtwo generations about them, and bask in anotherglorious Sabbath sunset ? And is it not sweet Herefriends stroll through the delicious fields, in high orcheerful talk ; along the green lane, or broom-emboldenedhill-side ; or down into the woodland valley,where the waters run clear and charmingly, amid thedipping grass and the brooklime; and the yellowbeams of the descending sun glance serenely amongstthe trees ? And is it not sweet, where, on somesequestered stile, sit two happy lovers, or where theystray along some twilight path, and the woodbine andthe wild-rose are drooping their flowery boughs overthem, while earth and heaven, supremely lovely inthemselves, take new and divine hues from their ownpassionate spirits ; and youth and truth are theirs : thepresent is theirs in love, the future is theirs in highconfidence : all that makes glorious the life of angelsis theirs for the time ? Yes ! all through the breadthof this great land, — through its cities, its villages, itsfair fields, its liberated millions are walking in theeye of heaven, drinking in its sublime calm, refreshedby its gales, soothed by the peaceful beauty of theearth. There is a pause of profound, holy tranquillity,336 SUNDAY INin which twilight drops down upon innumerable roofs,and prayers ascend from countless hearths in city andin field, on heath and mountain, — and then, 'tis gone ;and the Sabbath is ended.But blessings, and ten thousand blessings be uponthat day ; and let myriads of thanks stream up to thethrone of God, for this divine and regenerating giftto man. As I have sate in some flowery dale, withthe sweetness of May around me, on a week-day, Ihave thought of all the millions of immortal creaturestoiling for their daily life in factories and shops, amidthe whirl of machinery and the greedy cravings ofmercantile gain, and suddenly this golden interval oftime has lain before me in all its brightness, — a time,and a perpetually recurring time, in which the irongrasp of earthly tyranny is loosed, and Peace, Faith,and Freedom, the angels of God, come down andwalk once more amongst men !Ten thousand blessings on this day, the friend ofman and beast. The bigot would rob it of its healthfulfreedom, on the one hand, and coop man up inhis work-a-day dungeons, and cause him to walk withdowncast eyes and demure steps ; and the libertinewould desecrate all its sober decorum on the other.God, and the sound heart and sterling sense of Englishmen,preserve it from both these evils ! Let usstill avoid Puritan rigidity, and French dissipation.Let our children and our servants, and those who toilfor us in vaults, and shops, and factories, betweenthe intervals of solemn worship have freedom to walkin the face of heaven and the beauty of earth, for inthe great temple of nature stand together, Health andPiety. For myself, I speak from experience, it hasTHE COUNTRY.always been my delight to go out on a Sunday, andlike Isaac, meditate in the fields, and, especially, inthe sweet tranquillity and amid the gathering shadowsof evening; and never in temple or in closet, didmore hallowed influences fall upon my heart. Withthe twilight and the hush of earth, a tenderness hasstolen upon me ; a desire for everything pure andholy ; a love for every creature on which God hasstamped the wonder of his handiwork ; but especiallyfor every child of humanity; and then have I beenmade to feel that there is no Oratory like that whichhas heaven itself for its roof, and no teaching like theteaching of the Spirit which created, and still overshadowsthe world with its infinite wings.CHAPTER XIV.CHEAP PLEASURES OF COUNTRY LIFE.To the real lover of the country there needs no greatevents, no exciting circumstances to effect his happiness.The freshness of the country and the profoundnessof its quiet, are to him full of happiness. Thewhole round of the seasons, the passage of every day,the still walk amongst fields and woods, and by runningwaters, are to him sources of perpetual pleasures.When "the winter is over and gone," he sees withjoy the increased light amongst the breaking cloudsand dispersing fogs; he feels with delight the mildertemperature ; he passes by, and observes the firstbursting from the warm southern banks of green,luxuriant plants, — the arum, the mercury, the crispchervil, the wrinkled leaves of the primrose, the blossomedbranch of the apricot and peach on the sunnywalls of the cottage, and the almond in the garden andshrubbery, like a tree of rosy sunshine, ere a leaf isyet seen ; these things he sees with a feeling that hasmore true delight in it than ever was known to citydrawing-room or palace. To me, the most ordinaryPLEASURES OF COUNTRY LIFE. 339walk in the country is, and always has been a luxury.I remember what joy these things gave me when aboy, and now they give me again a boy's heart. Iremember the enjoyment I experienced when an oldsportsman used to take his gun on his arm on a Saturdayafternoon, when my village school made holiday,and led me up long lanes between high mossy banks,where the little runnels come rushing and chimingalong, between high, over hanging hedges; andthrough wide, still, shady woods; and across fieldsdeep with greenest grass, and bright with sunshine,and all the glory of spring; and everywhere pointedout to me the nests of birds, each built in its peculiarsituation ; the robin and the yellow-hammer on thebank; blackbirds and throstle in the hedges, or underthe roots of some old tree overhanging a stream, orset amongst the boughs of the young fir-trees in theplantations. I remember how I used to delight inthe depth of rich grass and flowery weeds in the openfields and along the sunshiny hedges ; in the hedgesthemselves, all clad in their young leaves, sprinkledwith glittering morning dews, and perhaps wavingwith the utmost prodigality of hawthorn bloom. Iremember too, with what earnest delight I used togaze on the bushes of the wild-rose briar, and admirethe singular beauty of its finely-cut and emerald-greenleaves, amongst which the whitethroat framedits gauzy nest. All this I remember : and while Ithink of it, I seem to hear the lark singing in theclear air above me, as he used to do, with aJoy we never can come near :and I now see more clearly what it was that producedsuch an effect upon me. It was that beauty, that340 CHEAP PLEASURESwide-spreading, cheering, heart-strengthening beautywhich God hath showered on the face of the earth,to make us feel his presence in his works; and tolearn to love him as we go along the most solitarypaths, and to rejoice in his goodness, where the worldcomes not between us and the perception of it. Itwas that beauty, which is indeed a revelation fromheaven, that then made itself felt in my young heart,and has only grown more dear to me every year andevery day, and, I trust, has not been wanting of allthat good effect M'hich it is intended it should produce,by weaning us from worldly pleasures, by bringingus to feel habitually the presence of love, and providence,and divine purity, as we go along in solitudeand thought; in short, in keeping alive in our heartsthe freshness of their feelings and the strength oftheir better hopes. All this I remember, and it islike the light of a perpetual summer morning in thefar-off horizon of memory ; and I say, all these deliciousfeelings have gone with me through life, and do,and will, go with all those who love nature with afilial love.The first glimpses of spring have in our eyes andhearts an indescribable charm. There is a freshnessand a mellowness in the earth then, after the frostsand rains of winter, that give a beauty to it that itpossesses at no other period of the year. I never seeit, and smell the odour of the upturned soil, withoutseeming to feel renewed our ancient kinship with theearth whence we sprung, which gives us such manifoldblessings all our natural lives, and takes us to itspeaceful bosom when we lie down wearied, wasted,and heart-worn. When the labourer cuts his ditches,OF COUNTRY LIFE. 341and piles up his banks anew, there is a beauty in thedark, clear, smooth earth which his spade cleaves soshiningly. As the children of the village hunt overthe steep banks for violets or snail-shells, or the earlyrobin's nest, your eye is made conscious of the beautyof those banks, with their crumbling mould andspringing plants. As the drainer cuts his drain inthe greensward of the meadows; as the ploughmanturns up the broad lea, all is rich and beautiful. Andthen, as the hedges and trees clothe themselves intheir new and delicate foliage ; as the winds comesinging sonorously ; as the grass and flowers springbeneath your feet; as April now smiles out joyouslyand bright, and now broods still and beneficent, witha gloom in its sky so unlike the gloom of autumn orwinter — a gloom casting a dark shade on the distantlandscape, while, in other quarters, the light comesbursting and gushing through the thinner places ofthe clouds; and fields lie hushed amid light mists, andscattered with a silvery dew in such a living, prolificgreenness, that you feel that the birth of millions offlowers is rapidly maturing; that violets must bespringing in legions along the hedges and in thecopses; and that the old, yellow English daffodil isnodding in tufts in village crofts, and over the marginsof mossy wells.At such times, so deeply do we feel the entrancinginfluence of spring, that we cannot help breaking outinto an affectionate apostrophe in praise of her :All sadness from my heart is gone-allsadness, and all fears,Till I forget that thou art oneWho detest out our years.s 2342 CHEAP PLEASURESAnd then, when May comes in, and we walk abroadsome fine, sunshiny, breezy, yet balmy day, — balmyin hollows and dells, and along southern uplands;fresh blowing on the ridges of the downs — breezy inthe forest glades; and hear the ringing notes of theblackbird and thrush, and the lark calling to highheaven itself in uncontrolable joy; and see peasantsout in fields and gardens ; women, from the lady ofthe hall to the dame of the cottage, drawn out to begenial lookers-on, and directors in the renewal offlower-borders, in the sowing of seeds and plantingof shrubs ; and see old men sitting on stone or woodenbenches on the warm side of the house, or leadingsome little chill by the hand down the lane, — twolinks come strangely together, from the extremities ofthe chain of human life ; one not having yet arrivedat the troubles of humanity, the other past them, yetwhat a wide, dark care-land lying between them ! —to see groups of children scattered here and there overthe happy fields, tracing the hedge-sides, or the clearstreams, or running to secure the first cowslips, whiletheir clear voices come ringing from the distant steepsand hill-tops, why — there is happiness to the nature-lovingand man-loving spirit that is as far beyond thepower of human expression, as God's goodness isbeyond mortal comprehension.There is a season of early spring marked by a successionof flowers that has something in it to me moretenderly poetical than any other part of the year. Itis that between the appearance of the snowdrop andthe cowslip, with all the intermediate links of thecrocus, the violet, the primrose, the anemone, and theblue-bell. They have, in themselves, such delicateOF COUNTRY LIFE. 343grace, and are surrounded in our minds by so manypoetical associations, and they mark the fleet passingof a period of so much anticipation, that they are seenwith a delight at their re-appearance, and a regret thatthey must so soon be gone by. Then too, they havethe world almost all to themselves. They are thefew beloved children of the early time. All theirmore gorgeous and joyous kindred are still slumberingin the earth. They come forth and salute usamid the naked landscape, amid wild, chill winds andbeating rain. When the cowslip disappears it is nolonger so ; all is greenness and sunshine ; a thousandblossoms hang on the forest bough, or flutter on theearth; and the delicacy of our perceptions is lost inthe profusion of beauty.But then, in that calmer season, when May has puton all its wealth and splendour ; when the fields aredeep with grass, and golden and purple with flowers ;when the hawthorn is a miracle of beauty and sweetness,perfuming the whole air, what paradises ofdelight are gardens, warm, flowery, odorous, — happywith the hum of bees : and old orchards, where youmay witness what Coleridge so feelingly describes inanoble blank-verse letter to his brother : —As now, on some delicious eve,We in our sweet sequestered orchard-plotSit on the tree crooked earth-ward; whose old boughs,That hang above us in an barbarous roof.Stirred by the faint gale of departing May,Send their loose blossoms slanting o'er our heads !And thus it is through every season. In June andJuly, the glow and perpetual beauty of the country;the abundance of grass and flowers; the charm of844 CHEAP PLEASURESriver sides, of angling in woodland streams ; the magnificenceof thunder-storms ; the breaking out of coolnessand freshness after them ; the delights of runningwaters ; bathing and sailing ; the fragrance of fieldsand gardens ; the beauty of summer moonlight ; thepicturesque cheerfulness of hay-harvest; the enjoymentof rich mountain scenery; rambling amongstthe brightness of morning dews, along valleys, pastthe outstretched feet of heathy hills ; lying on somemoorland slope conscious of all the singular hush andglow of noon; watching all the varying lights andhues, listening to the varied sounds of evening inglens, now basking in the yellow calm sunshine, nowdeep in gloom; amid towering crags, by the dash ofwaters, or on some airy ridge that catches the lastglow of heaven, taking in a vast stretch of scenes thatdefy alike the power of pen and pencil.Ah ! slowly sinkBehind the western ridge, thou glorious sun !Shine in the slant beams of the sinking orb,Ye purple heath-flowers ! richer burn, ye clouds !Live in the yellow light, ye distant groves !And kindle, thou blue ocean ! So my friendStruck with deep joy may stand, as I have stood.Silent with swimming sense ; yea, gazing roundOn the wild landscape, gaze till all doth seemLess gross than bodily ; a living thingWhich acts upon the mind, and with such huesAs clothe the Almighty Spirit, when he makesSpirits perceive his presence !Coleridge.And then the corn-harvest with all its happy humangroups, and rich colours; the calm, steady splendourof autumn days ; the deepening silence of the decayingyear, its returning storms, and pictorial tints; theOF COUNTRY LIFE. 345very gloom and awfulness with which the year retreats,sending the spirit inwards. In all these scenesand chancres, the soul of the lover of Nature luxuriates;and even finds beauty and strength in thestern visitations of winter. He goes with Nature inall her rounds, and rejoices with her in all. Thereneeds for him no great event, no combination ofstirring circumstances ; it is not even necessary to himthat he be poet, or painter, or sportsman ; if he havenot the skill, or faculty of any, he has the spirit of all.For him, there are spread out in earth and heavenpictures such as never graced the galleries of art. Hesees splendours, and scenes painted by the hand ofthe Almighty, for whose faintest imitations the connoisseurwould pay the price of an estate. To himevery landscape presents beauty; to him every galebreathes pleasure ; and every change of scene orseason is a new unfolding of enjoyment. He knowsnothing of the heart-burnings and jealousies whichinfest crowded places. He is not saddened by thesight of wickedness, or the experience of ingratitudeand deceit. He is exempt from the ennui of polishedsociety ; the sneers of its unkindly criticism ; and thehollowness of its professions. He converses with theGreat Spirit which lives through the universe, andfills the hearts that open to its influence, with purity,humanity, the sweetest sympathies, the most holydesires ; and overshadows them with that profoundpeace and that inward satisfaction, which are themselvesthe most substantial happiness.That these are no vain imaginations, but positiverealities scattered abroad for universal acceptance asmuch as the blessings of air and sunshine, we have346 CHEAP PLEASURESonly to open the works of our best writers to be convincedof; — to see how the expression of their happinessbreaks from them continually. It is this overflowingand irrepressible gladness of a heart resting onnature which gives such a charm to the writings ofWhite and Evelyn, and good old Izaak Walton.And the poets — they are full of it. Listen to them,and then consider the nobility of their views, and thelofty purity of their souls, and then admit the powerand depth of that influence which lives in nature andspeaks in Christianity.So shalt thou see and hearThe lovely shapes and sounds intelligibleOf that eternal language which thy GodUtters ; who from eternity doth teachHimself in all, and all things in himself.Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee,—Whether the summer clothe the genial earthWith greenness, or the redbreast sit and singBetwixt the tufts of snow in the bare branchOf mossy apple-tree, while the nigh thatchSmokes in the sun-thaw ; whether the eave-drops fall,Heard only in the traces of the blast ;Or if the secret ministry of frostShall hang them up in silent iciclesQuietly shining to the quiet moon. Coleridge.And for the cordial, substantial, heart-filling contentmentwhich is gathered from the quietness of rurallife, hear what Sir Henry Wotton, a most accomplishedman, who had seen much of court life, bothat home and abroad, says.Would the world now adopt me for her heir ;Would beauty's queen entitle me the fair ;Fame speak me Fortune's minion ; could I vieAngels* with India ; with a speaking eye,Piece of money value ten shillings.OF COUNTRY LIFE. 347Command bare heads, bowed knees ; strike justice dumb.As well as blind and lame ; or give a tongueTo stones by epitaphs; be called " great master"In the loose rhymes of every poetaster —Could I be more than any man that lives,Great, fair, rich, wise, all in superlatives;Yet I more freely would these gifts resign.Than ever fortune would have made them mine ;And hold one minute of this holy leisureBeyond the riches of this empty pleasure.Welcome pure thoughts ; welcome ye silent groves ;These guests, these courts my soul most dearly loves.Now the winged people of the sky shall singMy cheerful anthems to the gladsome spring;A prayer-book now shall be my looking-glass.In which I will adore sweet virtue's face.Here dwell no hateful looks, no palace cares,No broken vows dwell here, nor pale-faced fears ;Then here I'll sit, and sigh my hot love's folly.And learn to affect a holy, melancholy :And if contentment be a stranger then,I'll ne'er look for it but in heaven again.Such are the pleasures that lie in the path of thelover of the country; pleasures like the blessings ofthe Gospel, to be had without money, and withoutprice. There are many, no doubt, who will deemthem dull and insignificant; but the peace which theybring' " passeth understanding," and we can make atriumphant appeal from the frivolous and the dissipated,to the Mise and noble of every country andage.CHAPTER XV.LINGERING CUSTOMS.Many precious ritesAnd customs of our rural ancestryAre gone, or stealing from us.Wordsworth.How rapidly is the fashion of the ancient rural life ofEngland disappearing ! Every one who lived in thecountry in his youth, and looks back to that periodnow, feels how much is lost ! How many of thebeautiful old customs, the hearty old customs, thepoetical old customs are gone ! Modern ambition,modern wealth, modern notions of social proprieties,modern education, are all hewing at the root of thepoetical and picturesque, the simple and cordial inrural life ; and what are they substituting in theirstead ? We will endeavour, anon, to shew what theyare doing, and what they are leaving undone; justnow let us try to seize on the fluttering apparitionof primitive custom, and bid it a hearty good-bye,before it is gone for ever. I have, in another place,LINGERING CUSTOMS. 349shown low all the more fanciful and refined of ourvillage festal habits have vanished. The May-daydances, and gathering of May-branches — the scatteringof flowers on holiday occasions in village streets,and about our houses. Even the planting of flowersabout the graves in our village churchyards, once socommon in England, is now rarely to be seen. Camdenin his Britannia, and John Evelyn, mention thatit was the custom of their times in Surrey, but whoin Surrey sees anything of the kind now ? You maymeet with a solitary shrub, or with graves bounddown with withes and briars ; but nothing of thatgeneral planting of flowering shrubs which you see inWales. It is the fate of champaign countries, tohave their rustic customs sooner obliterated than thoseof mountain regions. The Scotch still retain theirpenny-weddings and Hallowed, the Welsh theirregular wedding customs, and funeral customs as singular; but how wonderfully have the simple customson these occasions of our English hamlets dwindledin our days ! Washington Irving, in an interestingpaper in the Sketch-book, speaks of a practice insome villages of hanging up in the churches at thefuneral of a maiden, gloves and garlands cut in paper.In what church is that done now-a-days? And yet,though I never saw a funeral in which so beautifuland appropriate a practice was retained, I well recollectseeing those gloves and garlands hanging in thechurch of my native village in Derbyshire ; and Ihave heard my mother say, that in her younger daysshe has helped to cut and prepare them for the funeralof young women of the place. The garlands wereoriginally of actual flowers — lilies and roses — and the350 LINGERING CUSTOMS.gloves of white kid. For these had become substitutedsimple Mdiite paper. There was a garland then,of imitative roses and lilies wreathed round a bow ofpeeled willow — a pair of gloves cut in paper, and awhite handkerchief of the same material on Mdiichwas written some texts of Scripture, or some stanzasof poetry applicable to the occasion, and to the hopeof immortality in the deceased; and these were notunfrequently chosen for the purpose by the dyingmaiden herself. These emblems of purity and evanescentyouth were laid on the coffin during the funeralprocession, as the sword and cap of the soldier on his,and were then suspended in the body of the church;and there hung, till they fell through time, or till allwho had an interest in the deceased were dead ordeparted. In all the village churches into which Ihave been in various parts of the kingdom, I do notrecollect seeing any of those maiden trophies, exceptin this one : and they, on the coming of a new incumbent,were removed in a general church-cleaningmany years ago.And yet, where is it that our old customs, andthe impress of past times and generations, linger sostrongly as about our village churches in England !Entering one of them in some retired district on aSunday, you seem to step back into a past age. Thequaint old place — its rude and ancient pillars andarches — its oaken pews and pulpit, grown almostblack with years ; the massy font, the grim, grotesquehuman heads for corbels, every one differing from theother, where the mason seems to have indulged his humorousfancy without regard to the sacred character ofthe house in which they were to figure— the contrast-lingeringCUSTOMS. 351ing, though often faded splendour of the squire's pew ;the heavy tombs with procumbent effigies of knightand dame — the mural tablets to the memory of departedrectors ; the hatchment in sign of some once-importantpersonage gone to his long home — and thehalf worn stones on which you tread,Where many a holy text around is strewn,To teach the rustic moralist to die.And then, the simple congregation ! All in their bestattire, in cut and texture guiltless of modern fashion :the clergyman, M'ho with the air of a gentleman, hasprobably caught somewhat of the Doric air of theregion ; and the old clerk with his long coat, and longhair combed over his shoulders, doling out his responsesM'ith a peculiar twang, to which an ancientparish clerk can only attain. Then the little music-loftwith its musicians, consisting of a bass-viol, abassoon and hautboy, and the whole congregationsinging with all their heart and soul. These are remnantsof antiquity that arc nowhere else to be found.There is a paper in Blackwood's Magazine for Aprilof this year, called " Church Music and other Parochial,"which gives you a picture of things whicheverybody who has gone to a thoroughly old-fashionedcountry church has seen over and over. The oldclerk, the writer says, always reads Cheering andSepherims, and most unequivocally — " 1 am a Lionto my mother's children," and truly he sometimeslooks not unlike one : and when told by the clergymanthat he must take him to task to teach him toread and give the responses differently, he replies —Why, sir, if I must read just like you, there wouldn'tbe a bit of difference between us."352 LINGERING CUSTOMS.Such is the peculiar elocution of the true old parishclerk that even a dog is sensible of it. I wanderedinto a rustic church where I accidentally saw the congregationcollecting, having at my heels a little favouritespaniel. The church stood in the middle of afield at some distance from the hamlet, and 1 did not seewhere to secure the dog during the service ; 1 thereforetrusted to his general good behaviour, and madehim lie down under the seat. Here he slept veryquietly for some time ; but at the very first sound ofthe clerk's voice, which was of the genuine traditionaltone, up he jumped and began to bark most vociferously.I kicked him with my heel; menaced himwith look and hand ; set my foot on him — held hismouth — but all was in vain. While the clergyman,who, I must confess shewed great forbearance, perceivingthat I was a stranger, and who moreover betrayedby a suppressed smile that he also perceivedthe true cause of the dog's irritation, was reading thelessons, the dog was perfectly still; again the clerksaid "amen," and again up started Fido and barkedas loud as ever. The case was hopeless — nothing remainedbut to retire.In some of these rustic temples you sometimes seethings that would electrify a city audience with surprise.I once saw a venerable clergyman on theedge of Yorkshire perpetrate a pun in the midst ofthe service with all gravity. As he was reading themorning lessons, a fellow who had probably been alittle elated over-night, or not improbably the samemorning, suddenly cried out — " Arise and shine !" —The rector paused and said, " Who VA'as that?" " Itwas Joseph Twigs, sir," responded some one. " ThenLINGERING CUSTOMS. 353Tioig him out!" rejoined the rector as glibly and yetas gravely as possible. A smile, and indeed a generaldisplay of open mouths and grinning teeth appearedin his congregation — but Joseph Twigs was twiggedout, and the rector went on.Around these old buildings cling all the ancientsuperstitions. They are as much haunted as ever.They are as prolific of stories of ghosts and apparitionsas ever. There are yet young people who goand watch in those old porches on St. Mark's eve tosee whom they shall marry, and will sow hempseedbackward at midnight round the whole church for thesame purpose. In many parts of the country nonewill be buried on the north side of the church ; andaccordingly that side of the churchyard is commonlyone unbroken level of greensward, although all therest be crowded to excess with graves. The north-sideof the church, by immemorial custom is theallotted portion of the suicide and the outcast. Accordinglyin many churchyards that part is purposelyvery small. It is in many so little visited that it is awilderness, grown in summer breast-high with mallows,nettles, chervil, elder bushes,Hemlocks and darnels dank.The writer of the article in Blackwood's Magazinejust mentioned says, " I have often tried to make outthe exact ideas the poor people have of angels — forthey talk a great deal about them. The best that Ican make of it is, that they are children, or children'sheads and shoulders winged, as represented in churchpaintings, and in plaster-of-Paris on ceilings. Wehave a goodly row of them all the length of one LINGERING CUSTOMS.irij^, and it cost the parish, or rather the then ministerI believe, who indulged them, no trifle to have theeyes blacked, and nostrils, and a touch of light red inthe cheeks. It is notorious and scriptural, they think,that the body dies, but nothing being said about thehead and shoulders, they have a sort of belief thatthey are preserved to angels — which are no otherthan dead young children." There is no doubt thatnearly all the idea which many country people possessof cherubim and angels is derived from these plasterheads, or from those cherubim with full-blown cheeksand gilded wings, and those gilded angels with longtrumpets depicted on grave-stones. Ministers preachabout angels and spirits as things which everybodycomprehends, but which they have no actual conceptionof only as they see them represented by thechisels and gold-leaf of country masons; and thestory of the country fellow who had shot an owl, andwas thus accosted by his wife — " Don't thee knowwhat thee hast done ? Why', thee hast killed one ofar parson's cherabums !" is not so outre as it mightappear to many.But we must leave these superstitions to the winterfireside of the hamlet. More of the old customsconnected with funerals than with any other events,remain in primitive districts. In Derbyshire, whenthe body is laid out, the nurse who attended thedeceased, and has performed this last office, goes roundto "bid to the berlin" (funeral). The names of theparties to be invited are given to her, and away shetrudges from house to house, over hill and dale, sometimesto a considerable distance. She delivers hermessage, and names the day and hour. RefreshmentsLINGERING CUSTOMS. 355are forthwith set before her. However she may protestthat she wants nothing — can eat nothing, out come,at least, the sweet loaf, and currant or ginger wine.The family gathers round as she sits, to hear all particularsof the illness ; how it came on ; what doctorwas employed; all the progress of the complaint;which leads probably to whole histories of similarillnesses which they have known,— all the sayings ofthe deceased; the end he made, which is generallydescribed by saying, " he died like a lamb !" — " Whatsort of a corpse is it?" which generally is answeredby the information that "he looks just like himselffor all the world — with a most heavenly smile on hiscountenance." All these matters are drunk in withgreat interest, and with many solemn wishes that theymay all make as comfortable an end. Some trifle,sixpence or thereabout, is given to the nurse, and onshe trudges to the next place. There is no doubt butthat the death of an individual in one of these rusticplaces is felt ten times as much by his acquaintanceas that of a citizen by his. The bustle of persons andevents in city life so break down the force of theevent, and so much sooner elbow it out of mind.In the country the moment a passing bell is heard totoll, you see every individual all attention ; every onecries " hush." They stand in the attitude of profoundlisteners. The bell, by some signals which they allunderstand, proclaims to them the sex, and marriedor single state of the deceased, and then counts outhis or her age.* Having ascertained these particulars,• The fourme of the Trinity was found in manne, that wasAdam our forefather, of earth on personne; and Eve, of Adam, theseconde persone; and of them both was the third persone. At the356 LINGERING CUSTOMS.they begin to speculate, for they already know everybodythat is ill in the parish, and thus generally discoverpretty certainly before any other intelligencereaches them whose bell it is. That bell is sufficienttext for the discourse of the day. They run over allthe biography of the individual, and bring up manyan anecdote of him and his contemporaries, which hadlong slept in their minds. When those invited to thefuneral arrive, a substantial meal is often given, followedby wine and cake : and besides the customarydistribution of scarfs, husbands and gloves, a packet ofsponge-cake made on purpose, of a prescriptive sizeand shape, and called " berlin-cake," is delivered toevery one before the setting out of the funeral, totake home with him, wrapped in fine writing paper,and sealed with black wax. Nothing can be moresolemn than the behaviour of all the spectators as thetrain passes along the road, all passengers stoppingtill the funeral is gone by; all taking off their hats,and watching its onward course in silence. In someplaces the old custom of chanting a psalm as theyproceed towards the church-yard is still kept up, andnothing can be more impressive than the effect of thatchant, as it comes mingled with the solemn tolling ofthe bell over some neighbouring hill, or along a quietvalley of a summer's evening. "When the trainreaches the church-yard gate, it halts, and if the clergymanbe not ready to receive it, the coffin is sometimesset down upon trestles or chairs, and the companydetli of a manne three belles shulde be ronge, as his knell, in woreof the Trinetie ; and for a woman, who was the secondepersone of the Trinelee, two belles should be rungen.Ancient Homily.LINGERING CUSTOMS. 357waits till the clergyman appears. It seems to belooked upon as an established mark of respect for theclergyman to meet the funeral at the gate, and it isbeautiful to see the serious and unhurried manner inwhich the country clergyman of the more pure andprimitive districts goes forth to receive the dead toits resting-place, repeating aloud as he precedes thefuneral to the church, a portion of the service for theoccasion.The funeral of the young in the country has somethingparticularly writing in it — the coffin being borneby six of the deceased's own age. That of a young-girlis more particularly so — the coffin being coveredwith a white pall, the six bearers being dressed inwhite, with white hoods, the chief mourners in blackwith black hoods.Nothing can, in fact, be more widely different infeeling and effect than town and country funerals. Intown a strange corpse passes along, amid thousands ofstrangers, and human nature seems shorn of thatinterest which it ought, especially in its last stage, topossess. In the country, every man, woman, andchild foes down to the dust amid those who haveknown them from their youth, and all miss them fromtheir place. Nature seems in its silence to sympathisewith the mourners. The green mound of the ruralchurchyard opens to receive the slumberer to a peacefulresting-place, and the yews or lindens which heclimbed when a boy in pursuit of bird's-nest, moth, orcockchaffer, overshadow, as it were, with a kindredfeeling his grave.There is one good custom which the present agehas rapidly obliterated — that of leaving open theVOL. II. T358 LINGERING CUSTOMS.country churchyard. In towns, there is perhaps lessattraction to a church-yard in the mass of strangecorpses which are there congregated, and the wildernessof bare flags which cover them ; and there maybemore cause for the vigilant prevention of the violationof the sanctity and decorum of the spot. Butwhy must the country church-yard be shut up ? Whyshould that generally picturesque and quiet place beprohibited to the stranger or the mourner? Some ofthe church-yards in these kingdoms are amongst themost romantic and lovely spots within them. Whatancient, quiet, delicious spots have I seen of this kindamongst our mountains, and upon our coasts ! Whatprospects landward, and seaward, do some of themgive ! How sweetly lies the rustic parsonage oftenalong their side ; its shrubbery lawn scarcely separatedfrom the sacred ground. Why should these be closed?There have been depredations," say the authorities.Then let the beadle see to it ; let the offenders bepunished; let the parish school and the minister teachbetter manners; but let these haunts of the sad or themeditative, be open to our feet as they were to thoseof our fathers. I must confess that I strongly sympathisewith my brother, Richard Howitt, in thefeelings expressed in Tait's Magazine, for June 1836.The yew trees, which adorned, with a solemn gracefulness,the church-yard of my native place, are cutdown; the foot-paths across it are closed; the wallsare raised; for stiles, there are gates locked, andtopped with iron spikes. A wider barrier than deathis interposed betwixt the living and the dead. Imust confess that I like it not. Why should mandestroy the sanctities of time and nature? Beautifulis the picture drawn by Crabbe : —LINGERING CUSTOMS. 359Yes '; there are real mourners. I have seenA fair, sad girl, mild, suffering, and serene ;Attention through, the day her duties claimed.And to he useful as resigned she aimed.Neatly she dressed, nor vainly seemed to expectPity for grief, or pardon for neglect ;But when her wearied parents sank to sleep,She sought her place to meditate and weep.She placed a decent stone his grave above,Neatly engraved — an offering of her love :For that she wrought, for that forsook her bed,Awake alike to duty and the dead.Here will she come, and on the grave will sit.Folding her arms in long abstracted fit ;But if observer pass, will take her round,And careless seem, for she would not be found.*' Where is now the free and uninterrupted admissionfor such mourners ? Grief is a retiring creature,who ' would not be found,' and will not knock at thedoor of the constituted authorities for the keys: shewill look lingeringly at the impassable barriers andretire. Easy of access were churchyards imtil lately,with their pleasant footpaths, lying, with the tranquillityof moonlight, in the bosom of towns andvillages; old, simple, and venerable, — trodden, it maybe,too frequently by unthinking feet — but able atall times to impress a feeling of sacredness — fraughtas they were with the solemnities of life and death —on bosoms not over religious ; and now, to a fancifulview, they seem more the prisons than the resting-placesof the dead."360 LINGERING CUSTOMS.We have said that we will look at what educationand other causes are doing, and what they are leavingundone in the change of character which they areeffecting in the rural population. It appears by theReports of the Poor-law and Charity Commissionersthat education progresses more in the northern andmanufacturing districts than in the southern andagricultural ones. This is, no doubt, very much thecase ; and what education is leaving undone in thesedistricts is, that it acts too timidly, too much in thespirit of worldly wisdom. It is afraid of making thepeople too intellectual ; of raising their tastes, lest itshould spoil them as Gibeonites, hewers of wood anddrawers of water. My own experience is, that this isa grand mistake : that you cannot give them too pureand lofty a standard of taste ; and that, especially,our best and noblest poets, as Milton, Shakspeare,Wordsworth, Cowper, Southey, Campbell, Burns,Bloomfield, etc. should be put into their hands, andparticularly into those of the agricultural population.What can be so rational as to imbue the minds ofthose who are to spend their lives in the fields withallthose associations which render the country doublydelightful? It is amazing what avidity they evincefor such writers when they are once made familiarwith them ; and whoever has his mind well storedwith the pure and noble sentiments of such writers,will never condescend to debase his nature by theft,idleness, and low habits. The great alarm has alwaysbeen that of lifting the poor by such knowledge abovetheir occupations, and filling their heads with airynotions. I can only point again to the agriculturalpopulation of Scotland, where such knowledge abounds.LINGERING CUSTOMS. 361If the labourers have not the genius of Burns, manyof them have a great portion of the manly and happyfeeling with whichHe walked in glory and in joy,Following his plough along the mountain side.There is every reason, so far as experiment goes,to suppose that the same effect would follow in England.Where are there men so sober and industriousas those artizans who are now the steadiest frequentersof Mechanics' Libraries ? I have given, in the firstchapter of the Nooks of the World, a striking instanceof the effects of such reading on an agriculturallabourer. Through my instigation several intelligentfamilies have made themselves acquainted with thismeritorious man, and speak with admiration of hismanly and superior character. Let the experimentbe repeated far and wide !But education itself yet wants introducing to a vastextent into the agricultural districts. The commissionersgive a deplorable picture of the neglect of theagricultural population in the counties bordering onthe metropolis. In some parts of Essex, Sussex,Kent, Buckinghamshire, Berks, etc., schools of anydescriptions are unknown ; in others not more thanone in fifteen of the labourers are represented as ableto read. In this county, Surrey, much the same stateof things exists. I have been astounded at the veryfew labourers that you meet with that can read ; andI think I see some striking causes for this neglect ofthe labouring class in the peculiar state of societyhere — it has no middle link. A vast number of thearistocracy reside in the county from its proximity totown ; and besides these, there are only the farmers862 LINGERING CUSTOMS.and their labourers ; the servants of the aristocraticestablishments — a numerous and very peculiar class ;and the few tradesmen who supply the great houses.The many gradations of rank and property which arefound in more trading, manufacturing, and mixeddistricts do not here exist. It seems as if the Normansand the Saxons had here descended from ageto age ; two races, distinct in their habits as their condition,and with no one principle of amalgamation.The aristocracy shut themselves up in their housesand parks, and are rarely seen beyond them except intheir carriages, driving rapidly to town, or to eachother's isolated abodes. They know nothing andtherefore can feel nothing for the toiling class. Theeffect is visible enough. The working classes growup with the sense that they are regarded only asnecessary implements of agriculture by the aristocracyand they are churlish and uncouth. They havenot the kindliness, and openness of countenance andmanner that the peasantry of more socially favourabledistricts have. The farmers too, seem little to employthem as house-servants, fed at their own table. Youdo not hear of those jolly harvest-suppers, which youmay still find in many old-fashioned places, wheremaster and man feast and rejoice together over thein-gathered plenty. So far as downright rusticitygoes, there is as much of that within a dozen miles ofLondon as in the farthest county of England ; but thepeasants seem to have lost much of the sentimentwhich those of more distant counties possess. Theyhave their wakes and fairs on their extensive commonsand greens, and leap in bags, and have wheelbarrowraces, and races of women for certain articles of femaleLINGERING CUSTOMS. 363apparel, gipsies with their lucky-bags and will-pegs ;but as to anything of a poetical cast, I do not see it.What a fall from the funeral train going chanting apsalm on its way to the churchyard, to one which Isaw the other day in this neighbourhood. The coffinwas laid on a cart and secured with ropes ; one shaggyhorse went jostling it along ; another cart followed,occupied by the chief mourners, half a dozen of themhuddled together, and the rest succeeded on foot, in arude and straggling company.In many villages I see no church at all; and wherethey are seen, how different to the fine old churchesof most parts of England. As you cast your eyesover a wide landscape, you look in vain for those talltaper spires and massy towers which rise here andthere in most English scenery ; and find perhapssomewhere a solitary little erection resembling a littlewooden dovecote. The piety of these parts neverexpended itself much in church-building. The villagesthemselves are often very picturesque. Theyare frequently scattered along extensive commons,amidst abundant woods and grey heaths ; generallyburied in their old orchards, and built with many pictorialangles and projections; often thatched, and consistingof old framed timber-work, or wood altogether,with gardens full of flowers, and goodly rows of beehives.Vines run luxuriantly over their very roofs,and in autumn hang with a prodigality of grapes ; andas to the country itself nothing can be more pastorallyand sylvan sweet than this counts Its grey heathsand pine woods, in one part, remind you of Scotlandits commons, in others, covered with the greenestturf and scattered with oaks, have the appearance of364 LINGERING CUSTOMS.old forests; and wherever you go, you get glimpsesinto fine woodland valleys, and of old solitary hallsstanding far off in the midst of them ; grey farm houses;old water-mills ; the most rustic huts; some pastoralstream like the Mole, which goes wandering aboutthrough this scenery, fringed with its flags and ,and with its bull-rushes bending in itscopious stream, as if it were loath to leave it ; in shortit is a region full of the spirit of the poetry of Keats,a region lying as it might lieBefore the faery broodsDrove Nymph and Satyr from the prosperous woods ;Before King Oberon's bright diadem,Sceptre and mantle, clasped with dewy gem,Frighted away the Dryads and the FaunsFrom rushes green, and brakes, and worshipped lawns, —From beechen groves, and shadows numberless.But the people themselves seem lost in their umbrageoushamlets, and on their commons, unthought of.There is the village of Oxshott, some three mileshence. — Go through it on a Sunday, when the agriculturalpeople are all at leisure, and there they are asthick as motes in the sun, in the middle of the villagestreet. There appears to be no church, nor any inhabitantsbut farmers and labourers. Boys, girls,men and women, all seem to be out of doors, and allin their every-day garbs. The colour of tawny soiledslops and straw-hats gives, as a painter would say, theprevailing tint to the scene. The boys are busyenough playing at ball, or cricket. The men seem topass their time sitting on banks and stiles, or gossipingand smoking in groups. Scarcely a soul willmove out of the way to let you pass on. The intel-lingeringCUSTOMS. 365actual condition of this obscure hamlet is strikinglyindicated to every passer through, by a large schoolhousebearing on its front, cut in stone, this proud title—the Royal Kent School, founded in 1820;" —but which has been since so far amounted, that itswindows are broken to atoms, and it is at once recentand in ruins ! This state of things should not besuffered to continue. The vast wealth of the aristocracyliving hereabout, and the ignorance around them,very ill accord. Amongst the affluent families in thecounty there are, no doubt, many who would beanxious to secure an education to the rural children, ifthey actually hieio that it was needed ! In the villageof Esher this has recently been done : let us hopethat other places will "go and do likewise." *Since writing the above, I have met with the followingstatements, in Mr. Frederick Hill's excellentwork on National Education. They are in his accountof Mr. William Allen's School of Industry at Lind-field,in Sussex ; and are, at once, most confirmatoryof the view I have taken of the state of things in thiscounty, and of the remedy to be applied. To thebenevolent and wealthy landed proprietors they arefull of encouragement.We visited the school at Lindfield, in July 1831,and it had then been established several years. Beforefixing on the spot where to build his school, Mr. Allensent an intelligent young man on a tour through the• T am told by intelligent people, who have spent the greater part oftheir lives here, that the farmers are particularly jealous of the peasantryreceiving any education, — they conceive it would spoil them asbeasts of burden. This shews what is the deplorable ignorance ofthis class too, of the rural population.T 2.306 LINGERING CUSTOMS.county, to find out where a school was most Wanted.After a diligent search, Lindfield was pitched upon asthe centre of a district in which the peasantry were inavery low state of ignorance. Lindfield is on theroad from London to Brighton ; distant from Londonabout thirty-seven miles, from Brighton fifteen.Not only did Mr. Allen receive no assistance inbuilding his school, but most of the wealthy inhabitantsendeavoured to thwart him ; while among* thepeasantry themselves, the most preposterous storieswere afloat respecting his designs. These poorpeople had been so little accustomed to see personsact from other than selfish motives, that they could notbelieve it possible that any one would come and erectalarge building, at great cost and trouble to himself,merely from a desire of promoting their good. Theyfelt sure that all this outlay was not without somesecret object ; and at last they explained all, much totheir own satisfaction, by referring it to the followingnotable project. — The building was to be applied tothe diabolical purpose of kidnapping children ; a highpalisade was to be thrown up all round it, and othermeasures taken to prevent entrance or escape. Thenthe school was to be opened, and everything carriedon smoothly, and with great appearance of kind andgentle treatment, until such a number of children hadbeen collected as would satisfy the rapacious desiresof the wretches who had hatched the wicked scheme ;when all at once the gates were to be closed uponthem, and the poor innocents shipped off to some distantland !Greatly indeed must a school have been wantedwhere such unheard-of absurdity could circulate andLINGERING CUSTOMS. 367obtain credence. At length the buckling, a most substantialand commodious one, was completed, thoughfew indeed were those who at once ventured withinthe dreaded bounds. However, by dint of perseverance,this number was gradually increased. The fewchildren who did come, began in a short time to takehome with them sundry pence, which they had earnedin plaiting straw, making baskets, etc. ; arts they werelearning at school. The boys began to patch theirclothes and mend their shoes, without their parentshaving a penny to pay for the work. Meanwhilethere came no authentic accounts of ships lying inwait on the neighbouring coast, nor had even thedreaded iron palisades raised their pointed heads.Little by little, the poor ignorant creatures becameassured that there was nothing to fear, but, on thecontrary, much practical good to be derived fromsending their children to the school ; and that strangeand incredible as it might seem, the London ' gem-man' was really come among them as a friend andbenefactor. A breach being thus fairly made in themud-bank of prejudice, it was not long before thewhole mass gave way. In short, the scheme provedso completely successful, that at the time we visitedthe school, almost every child whose parents livedwithin a distance of three miles, was entered as apupil, the total number on the list being no less than300. The children are at school eight hours eachday ; three being employed in manual labour, andfive in the ordinary school exercises. There is a provisionfor a diversity of tastes in the classes of industry; indeed the most unbounded liberality is manifestin all the arrangements. Some are employed as shoesLINGERING CUSTOMS.makers, others as tailors, and others again, at platting,basket making, weaving, printing, gardening, or farming.The children work very cheerfully, and arefound to like the classes of industry better than theschool.The first employment to which the little workersare put is platting straw. When they are au fait atthis, which is generally at the end of a few months,they are promoted to some other craft ; the one ofhighest dignity being that of printer. Before leavingschool the child will become tolerably expert atthree or four trades. Those M'ho work on the farmhave each the sole care of a plot of ground, measuringone-eighth part of an acre, and each is required todohis own digging, sowing, manuring, and reaping.An intelligent husbandman, however, is always onthe ground, to teach those who are at fault. Theplots of land were all clean and in nice order; andfrom the variety of produce, oats, turnips, mangelwurzel,potatoes, and cabbages, the whole had a curiousand amusing appearance, reminding one of thequilted counterpanes of former years. We foui\d thesystem of maturer rent in use; each boy being allowedone half of the produce for himself, the other halfbeing paid for the use of the land, the wear and tearof tools, etc. One lad, twelve years old, had in thisway received no less a sum than twenty-three shillingsand sixpence, as his share of the crop of the precedingyear ; and we were told that such earnings wereby no means uncommon."CHAPTER XVLCONCLUDING CHAPTER.She smiles, including in her wide embraceCity, and town, and tower, and sea with shipsSprinkled ; be our companion while we trackHer rivers populous with gliding life ;While, free as air, o'er printless sands we march,Or pierce the gloom of her majestic woods;Roaming, or resting under grateful shade.In peace and meditative cheerfulness.IForclsii'ortk.We have now taken a comprehensive view of therural life of England ; of the mode in which " gentleand simple," rich and poor, pass their life in theVOL. II. T 3370 CONCLUDING CHAPTER.country ; of the sports, the pastimes, the labours andvarious pursuits which fill up the round of rural existence; of the charms and advantages which thereawait the lovers of peace, of poetry, of naturalbeauty, and of pure thoughts : and I think it mustbe confessed that though other countries may boast amore brilliant climate, none can offer a more variedand attractive beauty ; other modes of life may bemore exciting, but none can be more calmly delightful,none more conducive to a healthful andmanly spirit.The more we see of our own country, the more dowe love it ; and it is for this reason, that in closingthese volumes, I cannot take leave of my readerswithout advising them to do as I have done, — see asmuch of it as they can. There is no part of it but isfilled with some high historical or literary association :it is the land where brave men have contended andpoets sung, and philosophers and politicians have meditatedworks and measures, of which the world is nowreaping the honour and enjoyment ; there is no partof it but has some trace of those manners and dialectswhich belong to the living of a thousand years ago, andtherefore are most interesting motives to our tracingback the stream of time and beholding the growthof our country's fortunes from age to age ; there isno part of it, but has its swarming cities, or itsfields smiling like a garden beneath the triumphanteffect of British tillage, — or its wild hills and forests,that, untouched by the plough, are left to be fruitfulof free thoughts, of poetic feelings, of picturesquebeauty and magnificence, of health to the hearts andspirits of our countrymen and countrywomen, necesseCHAPTER. ,'57 1say to generate those high thoughts and maintainthose endeavours that shall yet lead noble England tothe height of its destined honour.It is glorious, indeed, to visit the countries of ancientart and renown — Greece, Italy, Egypt, or sacredPalestine — my spirit kindles at the very mention ofthem, — yet whether it were my privilege or not totraverse those glorious regions, I should still wish towander over every hill, and through every busy cityof my native land. To me, I repeat, there is no partof this illustrious country but opens some new feelingof affection. As I pass over her plains, I am filledwith admiration of that skill and indefatigable industrywhich have covered them with such affluence of cattle,such exuberant grass, such depths of waving corn ;as I pass by her rural halls and hamlet abodes, I findmyself perpetually on classic ground, amid the homesof poets and patriots ; when I enter her cities, I amstruck with all their busy and swarming children, withtheir endless manufactures; their institutions for rebuttinghuman evils, and raising the human character;with rich men carrying on gigantic enterprises of commerceor national improvement, and poor men associatingto ascertain and defend their rights. Theseare all animating objects of notice; and, 1 will tellthose who may not hope to see much of foreign regions,that there is enough in merry England to fillthe longest life with delight, go where they will. Iwould have those who are young and able, to taketheir knapsacks on their backs, and with a stick intheir hand, they may find pleasures worth enjoying,go which way they Mall in these islands, though theydo as many an adventurer has done, set up their staff37*2 CONCLUDING CHAPTER.as an indicator, and march off in the direction in whichit falls.*What a summer's delight there lies in any one suchprogress. Suppose you took your route from the metropolisthrough the south and west. How delightfulare the richly cultivated fields, the green hop-grounds,the hanging woods of Kent ; how pleasant the heathyhills and scattered woodlands of Surrey ; the thicklystrewn villas of the wealthy, the vine-covered cottagesand village greens of the poor. Are not the flowerylanes and woody scenery of Berkshire, and the opendowns of Wiltshire worth traversing ? What a sweetsylvan retirement in the one; what an airy, wide-spreadingamplitude of vision in the other ! It were.worth somewhat to read Miss Mitford's living sketchesin her own sweet neighbourhood; it were worth agreat deal more to meet Miss Mitford herself, as shelives amongst her simple neighbours, who know howmuch she is their friend, or amongst her wealthy andJamais je n'ai tant pense, tant existe, tant veii, tant cte moi, sijose ainsi dire, que dans ceux voyages que j'ai faits seul et a pied.La marche a quelque chose qui anime et alive mes idees ; je ne puispresque penser quand je reste en place ; il faut que mon corps soit enbrahe pour y mettre mon esprit. La vue de la campagne, la successiondes aspects agreeable, le grand air, le grand appetit, la bonnesanta que je gagne en marchant, la libere du cabaret, I'eloignementde tout ce qui me fait sentir ma dependance, de tout ce qui me rappellea ma situation, tout cela degage mon ane, me donne une plusgrande audaee de penser, me jette en quelque sorte dans Immensitydes metres pour les combined, les choisir, me les appropriate sans geneet sans crainte. Je dispose en maitre de la nature entire; mon coeur,errant objet en objet, s'unit, scientific a ceux qui le flatten, s'entouredamages charmantes, s'enivre de sentiments delicious. Si pour lesfixer je amuse a les desire en moi-meme, quelle vigueur de pinceau,quelle fraicheur de coloris, quelle energie expression je leurdonne ! Rousseau.CONCLUDING CHAPTER. 378educated ones, who know how much she deserves oftheir esteem and admiration. Would it be nothingto ramble amongst the ancient wails of Winchester,every spot of which is as thickly strewn with historicalrecollections, as it is venerable in presence?Would it be nothing to climb those downs, and seearound far-spreading greenness, sinking and swellingin the softest lines of beauty ; and below, vales,stretching in different directions, contrasting theirrich woodiness most strikingly with the bare solitudesof the down? To see the venerable cathedral liftingits hoary head from the vale, and numbers of subjectchurches shewing their lunnbler towers and spiresall along the valleys; and catch the glitter of thosestreams which water those valleys, as they wind tothe sun. I have trodden these downs and dales insummer weather with feelings of buoyant delight,that admit of no description. There is Stonehengestanding in the midst of Salisbury Plain, which isworth a long pilgrimage to see. To see ! Yes, andto feel in all its lonely grandeur, with all its savageand mysterious antiquity upon it. It is a walk fromSalisbury, that, on a spring or autumn day, with acongenial spirit, were enough to make that a life'spleasant memory. Ascend first from that truly oldEnglish city, along whose streets and past almost everydoor run living": streams of most beautiful water fromthe sweet brimful Avon — to the ramparts of Old Sarum.What a stupendous work of antiquity you stand upon;what a scene lies all around you ! How beautifullyrises that noble cathedral above the subject city; howfinely the magnificent spire above the fabric itself!And en passant, what a feature of fair and solemn CONCLUDING CHAPTER.city is the cathedral in our English cities! As youapproach them, and see afar off these noble monumentsof past science towering aloft in sublime dignity,you are at once reminded that you are on classicground ; that you are about to enter a place whereour ancestors worked out some portion of the nationalfame ; and are thereby awakened from other thoughtsto look about you for all that is worthy of notice.But that is but a passing tribute to the grave beautyof those glorious old piles — they deserve more; butother objects now call us on. See what green andwatered valleys allure you forward. See where thedowns stretch their solitary heads amid the clear andspiritual hues of the sky. And as you go on, thechime of flocks, and the discovery of sweet hamlets,and the voices of their children at play, and the tinkleof the plough-team bells, shall make you feel that therural peace and delight of Old England are as strongin her heart as ever. For myself, the smallest peculiarityof rural fashions and habits in different parts ofthe country attracts my attention, and gives me a certaindegree of pleasure. The sight of herds of swinegrazing in the wide fields of Berkshire and Hampshireas orderly as sheep do, is what, at the first viewgives an agreeable surprise to the man from the midlandand northern counties, where it is never seen.The sight of the clematis, which flings its flowerymasses over hedges, and copses ; of myrtles, hydrateduchies, and other tender plants, blossoming inthe gardens of the south : the appearance of differentbirds and insects, as the chough, the nightingale ingreater frequency, the wood-lark sending its voicefrom the distant uplands; the large stag-beetle, andCONCLUDING CHAPTER. 375Other insects ; these, and other things observed in onepart of the island which are never met with in another,small matters though they be in themselves,all give a novel interest to some new spot, and someagreeable hour. Nay to me, I say, the very varyingof rural costumes and implements, are objects of interest.Those odd ladders in Berkshire, stretching atthe feet to a width of sometimes two yards, and thentapering up rapidly ; as if Berkshire peasants couldnot stand on such ladders as all England beside standson. The licht wag-ons and carts in the south, so differentfrom the heavy ones of the midland counties ;and some of them so painted and adorned in frontwith large roses, and other flowers ; and their teams,with bells at their bridles, and frames of bells overthe leader's head, and barbaric top-knots on theirheads, and scarlet fringes and tassels on their gears ;and tails, all bound up with ribbons, and curious platting.The wagoners, each in his straw hat, and whiteslop, withHis carters-whip that on his shoulder rests,In air high towering with a boorish pomp,The sceptre of his sway.Horses at plough,' harnessed with a simple collar ofstraw, and a few ropes. Oxen with their heavywooden yokes ploughing in one part of the country asprimitively as they did in the days of Alfred, ay, or ofKing David ; and shepherds with their crooks in another,shew to those who never saw them but in books,that some of our oldest practices still remain.The various constructions of bill hooks, shovels,and wheel barrows which prevail in different quarters376 CONCLUDING CHAPTER.of the island, contribute to the picturesque: from theclumsy rudiment of a barrow seen in Cornwall, whichlies on the ground without legs, and the sides of whichare cut out of two pieces of wood rudely tapering offinto handles ; through all the various shapes of thatlittle vehicle, up to its most perfect one. The shovelsused by the labourers in the West of England, withhandles as tall as themselves, would make the men ofthe midland counties stare; and the billhook of thosecounties, M'ith a back edge as well as a front one,would be equally strange to the chopsticks of Surreyand Sussex. The various modes of country employment,promote the same effect. The ploughmanwhistling after his team ; the shepherds on the downsdriving their white flocks before them like a rollingcloud, to evening fold or morning pasture ; the dwellerson heaths and moors, paring the turf for fuel, orcutting from the peat-beds their black bricks, andpiling their black pyramids on the waste. Everydifferent district displays its peculiar employment.Durham and Northumberland exhibit their extensiveand curious coal mines; Yorkshire and Lancashiretheir weaving and spinning ; the hills of Derbyshiretheir lead mines ; Nottingham and Leicester shirestheir coals aofain ; Lincoln and Norfolk their vast cornfarms ; the Southern downs their shepherds ; Devonand Cornwall their tin and copper mines ; Gloucesterand Somerset display their fields of teazle again, indicatingthat there our finest broad-cloths are made ;Stafford and Warwick shires swarm with collieries,iron founders, and potteries; and so on. Each districthas its peculiar pursuit and occupation pointedout by nature, and all these things give variety to theCONCLUDING CHAPTER. 377country and its inhabitants, and scatter everywhereinteresting subjects of inquiry for the passer-by.I say then, cross only the south of England, andhow delightful were the route to him who has the loveof nature and of his country in his heart ; and noimperious cares to dispute it with them. Walk up, asI have said, from Salisbury to Stonehenge. Sit downamid that solemn circle, on one of its fallen stones : —contemplate the gigantic erection, reflect on its antiquity,and what England has passed through and becomewhile those stones have stood there. Walkforth over that beautiful and immense plain, — see thegreen circles, and lines, and mounds, which ancientsuperstition or heroism have everywhere traced uponit, and which nature has beautified with a carpet ofturf as fine and soft as velvet. Join those simpleshepherds, and talk with them. Reflect, poetical asour poets have made the shepherd and his life, — whatmust be the monotony of that life in lowland countiesday after day, and month after month, and yearafter year, — never varying, except from the genialityof summer to winter ; and what it must be then, howdreary its long reign of cold, and wet, and snow !When you leave them, plunge into the New Forestin Hampshire. There is a region where a summermonth might be whiled away as in a fairy-land.There, in the very heart of that old forest you findthe spot where Rufus fell by the bolt of Tyrell, lookingvery much as it might look then. All around youlie forest and moorland for many a mile. The fallowand red deer in thousands herd there as of old. Thesquirrels gambol in the oaks above you; the swinerove in the thick fern and the deep glades of the378 - CONCLUDING CHAPTER.forest as in a state of nature. The dull tinkle of thecattle-bell comes through the wood ; and ever andanon, as you wander forward, you catch the bluesmoke of some hidden abode, curling over the tree tops;and come to sylvan bowers, and little bough-overshadowedcottage-es, as primitive as any that the reignof the Conqueror himself could have shewn. Whathaunts are in these glades for poets : what streamsflow through their bosky banks, to soothe at once theear and eye enamoured of peace and beauty. Whatendless groupings and colourings for the painter. AtBoldre you may find a spot worth seeing, for it is theparsonage once inhabited by the venerable WilliamGilpin, the descendant of Barnard Gilpin, the apostleof the north; the author of " Forest Scenery," — andnear it is the school, which he built and endowed forthe poor from the sale of his drawings. Not verydistant from this stands the rural dwelling of one ofEngland's truest-hearted women, Caroline Bowles, —and not far ois you have the woods of Nettle Abbeythe Isle of Wight, the Solent, and the open sea.But still move on through the fair fields of Dorsetand Somerset, to the enchanted land of Devon. Ifyou want stern grandeur, follow its north-westerncoast; if peaceful beauty, look down into some one ofits rich vales, green as an emerald and pastured byits herds of red cattle ; if all the summer loveliness ofwoods and rivers, you may ascend the Tamar or theNavy, or many another stream ; or you may stroll onthrough valleys that for glorious solitudes, or fairEnglish homes amid their woods and hills, shall leaveyou nothing to desire. If you want sternness andloneliness, you may pass into Dartmoor. There areCONCLUDING CHAPTER. 379wastes and wilds, crags of granite, views into far oft'districts, and the sounds of waters hurrying away overtheir rocky beds, enough to satisfy the largest hungeringand thirsting after poetical delight. I shall neverforget the feelings of delicious entrancement withwhich I approached the outskirts of Dartmoor. Ifound myself amongst the woods near Haytor Crags.It was an autumn evening. The sun, near its setting,threw its yellow beams amongst the trees, and lit upthe ruddy tors on the opposite side of the valley intoa beautiful glow. Below, the deep dark river wentsounding on its way with a melancholy music, and asI wound up the steep road all beneath the gnarledoaks, I ever and anon caught glimpses of the windingvalley to the left, all beautiful with wild thicketsand half shrouded faces of rock, and still on highthese glowing ruddy tors standing in the blue air intheir sublime silence. My road wound up, and up,the heather and the bilberry on either hand shewingme that cultivation had never disturbed the soil theygrew in ; and one sole woodlark from the far-ascendingforest to the right, filled the wide solitude withhis wild autumnal note. At that moment I reachedan eminence, and at once saw the dark crags of Dartmoorhigh aloft before me, and one large solitaryhouse in the valley beneath the woods. So fair, sosilent, save for the woodlark's note and the moaningriver, so unearthly did the whole scene seem — thatmy imagination delighted to look upon it as an enchantedland, — and to persuade itself that that housestood as it would stand for ages, under the spell ofsilence, but beyond the reach of death and change.But even there you need not rest — there lies a land380 CONCLUDING CHAPTER.of grey antiquity, of desolate beauty still before you—Cornwall. It is a land almost without a tree. Thatis, all its high and wild plains are destitute of them,and the bulk of its surface is of this character. Somesweet and sheltered vales it has, filled with noble wood,as that of Tressilian near Truro ; but over a great portionof it extend grey heaths. It is a land where thewild furze seems never to have been rooted up, andwhere the huge masses of stone that lie about its hillsand valleys are clad with the lichen of centuries.And yet how does this bare and barren land fasten onyour imagination ! It is a country that seems to haveretained its ancient attachments longer than any other.The British tongue here lingered till lately — as theruins of King Arthur's palace still crown the stormysteep of Tintagel ; and the saints that succeeded theheroic race, seem to have left their names on almostevery town and village.It were well worth a journey there merely to seethevast mines which perforate the earth, and passunder the very sea; and the swarming population thatthey employ. It were a beautiful sight to see thebands of young maidens, that sit beneath long sheds,crushing the ore, and singing in chorus. But farmore were it worth the trip to stand at the Landson that lofty, savage, and shattered coast, withthe Atlantic roaring all round you. The Hebridesthemselves, wild and desolate, and subject to obscuringmists as they are, never made me feel more shippedinto a dream-land than that scenery. At one momentthe sun shining over the calm sea, in whose transparentdepths the tawny rocks were seen far down.Right and left extend the dun cliffs and cavernousCONCLUDING CHAPTER. 381precipices, and at their feet the white billows playinggracefully to and fro over the nearly sunken rocks, asthrough the manes of huff sea-lions. At the nextmoment all wrapt in the thickest obscurity of mist;the sea only cognizable by its sound ; the dun cragslooming through the fog vast and awfully, and allround you on the land nothing visible, as you traceback your way, but huge grey stones that strew thewhole earth. In the midst of such a scene I came toa little deserted hut, standing close by a solitary mereamongst the rocks, and the dreamy effect becamemost perfect. What a quick and beautiful contrastwas it to this, as the very same night I pursued myway along the shore, the clear moon hanging on thedistant horizon, the waves of the ocean on one handcoming up all luminous and breaking on the strand inbillows of fire, and on the other hand the sloping turfsown with glow-worms for some miles, thick as thestars over-head.I speak of the delight which a solitary man maygather up for ever from such excursions ; that willcome before him again and again in all their beautyfrom his past existence, into many a crowd and manya solitary room ; but how much more may be reapedby a congenial band of affectionate spirits in such acourse. To them, a thousand different incidents orodd adventures, flashes of wit and moments of enjoymentcombine to quicken both their pleasures andfriendship. The very flight from a shower, or thedining on a turnip-pie, no very uncommon dish in therural inns of Cornwall, may furnish merriment for thefuture. And if this one route would be a delicioussummer's ramble, with all its coasting and its CONCLUDING CHAPTER.ports into the bargain, how many such stretch themselvesin every direction through England. Thefair orchard-scenes of Hereford and Worcester, inspring all one region of bloom and fragrance, — thehills of Malvern and the Wrekin. The fairy dalesof Derbyshire ; the sweet forest and pastoral scenes ofStaffordshire; the wild dales, the scars and tarns ofYorkshire ; the equally beautiful valleys and hills ofLancashire, with all those quaint old halls that arescattered through it, memorials of past times, and allconnected with some incident or other of Eno-Hshhistory. And then there is Northumberland — theclassic ground of the ancient ballad — the country ofthe Percy — of Chevy Chace — of the Hermit of Walworth— of Otterburn and Wimbledon — of Flodden,and many another stirring scene. And besides allthese are the mountain regions of Cumberland, ofWales, of Scotland, and Ireland, that by the powerof steam, are being brought every day more withinthe reach of thousands. What an inexhaustiblewealth of beauty lies in those regions ! These, ifeverj^ other portion of the kingdom were reduced byploughing and manufacturing and steaming to theveriest common-place, these, in the immortal strengthof their nature, bid defiance to the efforts of anyantagonist, or reducing spirit. These will still remainwild and fair, the refuge and haunt of the painter andthe poet — of all lovers of beauty, and breathers afterquiet and freshness. Nothing can pull down theirlofty and scathed heads; nothing can dry up thoseeverlasting waters, that leap down their cliffs and runalong their vales in gladness ; nothing can certainlyexterminate those dark heaths, and drain off thoseCONCLUDING CHAPTER. 383mountain lakes, where health and liberty seem todwell together; nothing can efface the loveliness ofthose regions, save the hand of Him \vho placed themthere. I rejoice to think that while this great nationremains, whatever may be the magnitude of the designsfor the good of the world in which Providence purposesto employ it, — however populous it may benecessary for it to become, — whatever the machineryand manufactories that may be needfully at work init; that while Cumberland, Wales, Scotland, andIreland continue, there will continue regions of indestructiblebeauty — of free and unpruned nature, sofair that those who are not satisfied therewith, wouldnot be satisfied with the whole universe. More sublimityother countries may boast, more beauty hasfallen to the lot of none on Good's globe. And whata satisfaction it is, to see that our poetry of late yearshas awakened the public mind to a full sense of ournatural advantages. It may be said that many traversethe continent who never see their own country, but itcannot be said that the beauty of our own fair islandsis overlooked. On the contrary, every one whotravels through them himself, sees how increasing arethe numbers who do the same. To many a point ofbeauty and historic interest I have been, from thevery Land's-end to John Groat's; and I do notknow one spot of any claims to attention, which I didnot find numerously visited from the earliest spring tolate in the year. I once was at Loch Katrine earlyin April, and there were arrivals of several carriagesa day. I was at the Land's-end late in October, andas I reached the Logan Rock, a very interestingparty of young people were just coming away from it.384 CONCLUDING CHAPTER.As I have said, I walked up to Stonehenge fromSalisbury in order to enjoy it in all its solitude. Thiswas late in the autumn ; yet I found a large partythere, and the shepherds assured me that every day,and all day long it would continue so till severeweather set in. When Dr. Johnson went as far asthe Hebrides, it was reckoned a rare thing. In thesummer of 1836 I visited Staffa and lona in companywith seventy persons; and all summer long, three orfour times a-week, do those places see scarcely lessthan a hundred English people land upon them.Who indeed does not know how every pleasant placeon our coasts, how the Peak of Derbyshire, how allWales, the Highlands of Scotland and many parts ofIreland are annually thronged with people, who breakaway from towns and trade to refresh their spirits withthe invigorating spirit of the mountains, and with thesights and sounds of ocean? Nay, such is the pressureof the tourist current, that wherever steam vesselsreach in the mountain districts — it is one of the mostludicrous scenes imaginable to see a packet come tothe pier, and its whole swarm of passengers leapashore and proceed at full gallop to storm the inns forbeds and accommodation. I have myself, as I believeI have before stated, been forced in the throng up tothe very attics of one of these inns by the rush ofpeople, who filled the whole stair-case, and indeedhouse, calling out for beds, while the poor landladywas wringing her hands in despair of reducing theclamorous chorus into some sort of order.Ludicrous as this recital however is, the spirit whichoccasions it is an excellent one. It is full of healthand good moral feeling. It is one which, if it goes on.CONCLUDING CHAPTER. 385hand in hand with our machinery and our literature,must produce the happiest effects. I trust that thesevolumes will add their quota to that love of thecountry which I would desire to see possessing acorner of every human being's heart. While thatis there, I am sure there must be an undecayed portionof the original heart of humanity, — a remnantat least, of that tone of spirit which makes heavendesirable, and which is capable of enjoying it. Hethat loves the country as God has made it, in all itsvarying beauty and immortal freshness, must loveGod and man too ; and while he seeks in mountainsolitudes and on sea shores, relief from the wearinessof too long jostling in the crowd, will find withdelight how this very solitude will quicken his appetitefor human society, and his perception of thecomforts and home-pleasures of towns. I declare, thatwhen I have been for weeks roaming amongst forestsand mountain wastes, I feel, on coming into a city, asense of its life, activity, and social condition whichwas before become comparatively dim. As I have enteredone in the early morning, and have seen the neatyoung housemaids, rubbing the knockers and cleaningdown the steps of their masters' doors, and havecaught glimpses, as I passed along, of well oil-clothedpassages, and well carpeted rooms, and fires alreadyburning cheerfully, — I have felt a sense of the comfortsand pleasantness of English homes that I haverarely felt besides. Or at evening, as we passwhere blinds are yet undrawn, and where fires are seenwarmly illumining fair rooms, and happy faces arecongregated around them, who has not felt the samething ?VOL. II. UCONCLUDING CHAPTER.But we must now close these volumes; and howcan that be more fitly done than by ending as webegan, and acknowledging with a rejoicing thankfulness," that the lines have indeed fallen to usin pleasant prices," in a land which it would bedifficult to pronounce more blessed in its literature, itsreligious spirit, or in the splendid dowry of its naturalbeauty.LONDON:Printed by Manning and Smithson, Ivy-lane, Paternoster row.