THE RURAL LIFE OF ENGLANDBYWILLIAM Hewitt,AUTHOR OF "THE BOOK OF THE SEASONS, ETC.IN TWO VOLUMES.— VOL. I.LONDON:Hangman, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS.1838.£RLONDON:PRINTED BY MANNING AND SMITHSON,IVy-LAKE, Paternoster-row.DAM.'O, dear Britain ! O my mother isle !Needs must thou prove a name most dear and holyTo me, a son, a brother, and a friend,A husband, and a father ! who revereAll bonds of natural love, and find them allWithin the limits of thy rocky shores.native Britain ! O my mother isle !How shouldst thou prove aught else but dear and holyTo me, who from thy lakes and mountain rills.Thy clouds, thy quiet dales, thy rocks and seas,Have drank in all my intellectual life.All sweet sensations, all ennobling thoughts,All adoration of the God in nature.All lovely and all honorable things.Whatever makes this mortal spirit feelThe joys and greatness of its future being.There lives not form nor feeling in my soulBorrowed from my country. O divineAnd beauteous island ! thou hast been my soleAnd most magnificent temple, in the which1 walk with awe, and sing my stately songs.Loving the God who made me,Coleridge.TOTHOMAS AND PHEBE Hewitt,OF HEANOR,IN THE COUNTY OF DERBY.My dear Parents,There are no living persons to whom thesevolumes can be with so much propriety inscribed as toyou. To you my heart desires to present some visibletoken of that affection and gratitude which animate it inreviewing all the good it has derived from you. It wasto your inculcation, but far more to the spirit of yourdaily life, — to the purity, integrity, independent feeling,and simple religion, — in fact, to the pervading and perpetualatmosphere of your house, that I owe everythingwhich has directed me onward in life : scorning whateveris mean ; aspiring after whatever is generous andnoble ; loving the poor and the weak, and fearless of thestrong ; in a word, everything which has not only prolongedlife, but blessed and sanctified it. FollowingVlll DEDICATION.your counsels and example, I have striven not so muchfor wealth as for an independent spirit and a pure conscience.Do I not owe you much for these? Butbesides this, it was under your roof that I passed achildhood and youth the happiest that ever were passed ;it was there that I imbibed that love of nature, whichmust live though it cannot die with me. But beyondthis, the present volumes are descriptive of that rurallife to which your ancestors for many generations, andyourselves to an honourable old age, have been invariablyand deeply attached. To you, therefore, forthese and a thousand other kindred reasons,The present Volumes are inscribed,By your affectionate Son,THE AUTHOR.PREFACE.In sending these volumes to press, it would be ungratefulnot to avow my satisfaction in the great andcontinued popularity of the " Book of the Seasons."The cordiality, indeed, with which both my own andMrs. Hewitt's writings have been received by thepublic, is the more gratifying, seeing that we havelived, in a great measure, apart from the literarycircles, — have belonged to no coterie; had no connexionwith the influential of the critical press — andat the time of the publication of our first volume, didnot actually know one literary person. We havenot, therefore, had the benefit of that interest whichnaturally springs from personal intercourse with literaryparties. Whatever kindness has been shewn toour writings — and it has been both great and greatlyfelt, — with, it is true, some exhibitions of criticalspleen, to us quite unaccountable — has been shewn toour writings themselves.Whilst acknowledging this, there is one fact thatPREFACE.I am bound not to pass over without notice. Inavailing myself of occasional passages from the worksof contemporaries, I have but one simple rule ; andthat is, uniformly to acknowledge the loan. It is aglorious rule, " to do as you would be done by :" andI regret to have to complain, that that golden rule hasnot been very nicely observed towards me. The Bookof the Seasons has been, by several writers, freelydrawn upon for descriptions of nature, and the seasons,without the slightest acknowledgment. I believeevery original anecdote and trait of birds and otheranimals, has been extracted, and repeated so frequently,without any intimation of whence they areborrowed, that any one now reading the Book of theSeasons for the first time, would naturally imaginethat I myself had borrowed them of others. In oneof the last volumes of Time's Telescope that appeared,after that interesting work had ceased to bevmder the management of my worthy friend JohnISIillard, free and unacknowledged use of such thingswas made. In one of the Companions to the BritishAlmanac, the tables of the migrations of birds whichhad cost me much labour to construct, were takenentire, and in the following volume the borrower felicitatedhimself on being the happy author of thesetables ! In one of the books of Mr. Jesse, I observedthe anecdote of the landrail, taken from the Book ofthe Seasons (p. 223), without any acknowledgmentwhence it came, and probably without his knowing it.I am bound to notice these facts, for the maintenonXIonce of literary right. If such a system be permittedwith impunity, it will soon become necessary to set upwarning boards against trespassers in books as wellas in gardens and grounds. It is pleasant enough tosee one's self quoted, — not quite so pleasant to seeone's self plundered. I am perfectly sensible of thecompliment of being quoted; but it ceases to be acompliment when unaccompanied by a fair acknowledgment.But enough : I make these remarks reluctantly,and I trust that I shall not have occasion torenew the subject; but rather that opportunity willbe offered me, from time to time, to remove any errorsthat may have crept into this work, and to render it,by additional information, a perfect portraiture ofEnglish country life.My object in these volumes has been to presentto the reader a view of the Rural Life of Englandat the present period, as seen in all classes and allparts of the country. For this purpose I have notmerely depended upon my acquaintance with rurallife, which has been that of a great portion of my ownlife from boyhood, but I have literally travelled, anda great deal of it on foot, from the Land's-end to theTweed, penetrating into the retirements, and witnessingthe domestic life of the country in primitiveseclusion and under rustic roofs. If the mountainsand valleys, the fair plains and sea-coasts, the hallsand farm-houses, the granges, and cottages of shepherds,miners, peasants, or fishermen, be visited inthese volumes with a tenth part of the enjoymentXll PREFACE.with which I have visited them in their reality, theymust be delightful books indeed ; for no moments ofmy existence have been more deliciously spent, thanthose in which I have wandered from spot to spot ofthis happy and beautiful island, surveying its ancientmonuments, and its present living men and manners.It will be seen on the title-page, that the embellishmentsof these volumes are both designed andengraved by Samuel Williams: the only exceptionsbeing, that I am indebted to our accomplished friendMiss Tapley, of Birmingham, for the sketch onthe title-page of the first volume ; and for those ofthe Charcoal-burner's Hut, and Morgan Lewis's lastView of the Fairies, to our excellent young friendMiss Trellis, of Neath Abbey. The embellishmentsaltogether must, I think, for their beauty andspirit, excite general admiration.W. H.West-end Cottage, Esher, Surrey,November 2\st, 1837.CONTENTS.VOLUME I. — PART I.LIFE OF THE ARISTOCRACY.CHAPTER I.PagePre-eminence of England as a Place of Country Residence — ItsPolitical and Moral position — The Conveniences conferredby the Perfection of the Arts on Social Life — Its Literature,Spirit of Freedom, Religious Feeling, and PhilanthropicInstitutions — The Delightfulness of its Country Residences;with its Parks, Lawns, Woods, Gardens, etc. — The Varietyof Scenery in a small compass — Advantages of its Climate,notwithstanding all just cause of complaint — Its Soil sanctifiedby Noble Deeds, and Intellectual Renown — Real superiorityof England as a Place of Residence ; shewn by itseffects on Foreigners — Willis's Description of its Effect onhim. YCHAPTER II.Enviable Position of the English Country Gentleman as regardsall the Pleasures and Advantages of Life — Every Art andEnergy exerted in his Favour — by them his House surroundedwith Delights — The News, and the Luxuries of theWorld brought to his Table — Books, Music, Paintings athis command — Farming, Gardening, Planting, Field-sportsall within his grasp — Scenes which offer themselves to extendhis Pleasures — The Service of his Country open to him —Facilities for Travel — Pursuits and Pleasures afforded, byCountry Life, to Ladies. - - - - --15XIV CONTENTS.CHAPTER III. PageLife of the Gentry in the Country — Effect of the Annual Visitof the Aristocracy to Town — Pleasure of Re-assembling attheir Country Houses — Impressions of our Country Housesand Country Life on Foreigners — The German Prince'sdescription of the Dairy at Woburn Abbey — Willis's descriptionof the Mode of Life at Gordon Castle — The peculiarCharms of this kind of life. 25CHAPTER IV.Routine of Country Sports — Hunting, Shooting, Coursing, pursuedin a different style to that of our Ancestors — Each itsown Season, Apparatus, and Appointments — English Sportsmencommunicate their Knowledge through the Press — TheExtinction of Falconry — The perfection of Fox-hunting inthis Country — Manner in which some Old Sportsmen amusethemselves during the Summer — Favour into which Anglinghas risen of late years — Our Tourist-Anglers — Grouse-shooting:its exciting Nature — Symptoms of the approachof the l"2th of August in England, the same as exhibited inScotland — Sportsmen on their way to the Highlands by thePacket — The contrast between them and PedestrianizingStudents — Tom Oakleigh's description of the commencementof Grouse-shooting on the Moors — Other features ofit both there and in Scotland— Return for Partridge Shooting— A Word with the Too-Sensitive. - - - - 41CHAPTER V.Scientific Farming : its State, Implements, and Admirers, Ancientand Modern — Agricultural Pursuits delighted in bythe greatest Men of all Ages — Attachment of the RomanNobility to them — Cicero's enthusiastic Encomiums onCountry Affairs — Farming now practised as a Science —Vast Improvements during the last Century — Multiplicityof its Modern Implements — Benefits derived from Chemistryand Mechanics — Progressive Improvements in Tillage, Breedof Cattle, Wool, Machinery, etc. by Tub, Menzies, Bakewell,Lord Somerville, Coke, Duke of Bedford, the Galleys,etc. — By Periodicals and Associations — Men to whomAgricultural Interests are peculiarly Indebted — Charactersof the Duke of Buccleugh and Lord Somerville, by SirWalter Scott — Anecdote of the Duke of Portland. - - 69CHAPTER VI.Planting : its Pleasures — Vast Effect of the Writings of Evelynin England, and Dr. Johnson in Scotland — Evidences ofthe growth of the Planting Spirit in all parts of the Kingdom— Wordsworth's Complaint of the Larch in the LakeCountry — Larch Plantations of the Duke of Athol — HisCONTENTS. XVPagecalculated Profits—Monteith of Stirling's Calculations ofthe Profits of 100 Acres of Oak Planting in seventy years —Anecdote of an extensive Planter. - - - - 82CHAPTER VII.Gardens— Pleasures of them — Retrospective View of EnglishGardens — Influence of our Imaginative Writers on theirCharacter — Writers before the Reign of Elizabeth — TheRoman Style of Gardens under the name of Italian, Frenchand Dutch Gardens, prevalent till the 18th Century, overturnedby the Writings of Addison, Pope, and Walpole, andby the Works of Bridgman, Kent, and Brown — Gardens ofHampton Court, Nonsuch, Theobaldss, etc., as described byHentzner in 1598— The Old Style of Gardens appropriateto the Old Houses and the Character of the Times — Advantagesof the Prevalence of different Tastes at differentPeriods pointed out — Laborious Lives and Travels of ourearlier Gardeners and Botanists — Our Old Gardens interestingobjects in different parts of the Kingdom — Their ClassicalAntiquity pleaded in their favour. - - - - 93CHAPTER VIII.Country Excitements — Diminution of the Enjoyment of CountryLife by Petty Rivalries and Jealousies ; and by the Neglectof Walking — Racing a great cause of Excitement to theGentry in the Country — The Present State of the Turf, asshewn by Nimrod — Variety afforded by Race and CountryBalls, Musical Festivals, etc. — Confirmation — Parade ofAssize Time — The Sheriff's Pageant. - - - - 107PART II.LIFE OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION.CHAPTER I.The English Farmer : his Character, and Mode of Life — Pictureof the approach to a Market Town on a Market Day-farmersgoing in and coming out — Contrast between thespace occupied by the Concerns of the Farmer and the CityTrader — Enviable Aspect of the Farmer's Abode — HisLife and Soul in his Profession — His Conversation — A greatCharm in Nature working with him — Delight which Poetsand Great Men have found in Farming — The Intellectualgrade of the Farmer — Pressing Hospitalities of Farmers andXVI CONTENTS.Pagetheir Wives — A Sketch of one Day's Feasting at a Farmhouse— Dinner, and its chaos of Good Things — Tea, andthe arrival of Fresh Guests — Who they are — Traits ofCharacter both in Men and Women of this Class — TheDance, and the Departure. . 121CHAPTER II.The English Farmer as operated upon by Modern CircumstancesComplaint of Cobbett that the Farmer is spoiled by modernRefinement — In what degree this is true — Men of allRanks to be found amongst Farmers — The Old Farmer inretired parts of England as Rustic as ever — Effects of PoliticalEconomy — Evils of the Large Farm System — TheFarmer in a Healthy State of the Country — Drawbackson the Pleasantness of Farm Houses — The Remedy easy —Advantages and Disadvantages of Large Farms stated —Instance of the Success of a Small Farmer, and its obviousCauses — Just equilibrium of Interests, and an open field forEnterprise necessary to National Prosperity. - - - 138CHAPTER IlFarm Servants, and their mode of Life — A Peak-of- Derbyshire-man'sAddress to his Guest — The Plodding Farmer and hisWife — The Journal of a Farmer's Day, by Mr. Robinson ofCambridge— Mode in which Farm-servants, both Men andWomen, are brought up — Ordinary course of the Farmer-man'sLife — The same in Harvest — Sketch of him as preparingfor Plough, or for the Team — Custom of going outwiththe wagon to deliver Corn, etc. — Anecdote of a "Statesman's"Wife in Cumberland. - - - - --149CHAPTER IV.The Bondage System of the North of England — Manner inwhich it strikes a Stranger from the South — Bands of Womenworking in the Fields — Mode of Maintaining the Hinds —Description of their Cottages — Cottage of the Herd ofMiddleton — Cobbett's surprise on discovering the BondageSystem — His view of its Effects on the Population and Productivenessof the Country — Curious Coach Scene nearMorpeth — Cobbett's Address to the Chopsticks of the Southon the State of the Bondage District — Bondage Farms andFarm-yards — Lodgings of the Hinds — Their allowance ofCorn and Pease — The Schoolmaster paid in Meal — PrecariousNature of the Tenure of their Houses — EnormousRent of the Land — The Farm-yards, Cornfactories — Scantinessof the Population compared with the AgriculturalDistricts of the South — Hardships of the System on theHinds — A Certificate required from the last Master — Thesame custom in the Collieries of the Midland Counties —Concluding Remarks. - - - - - --163CONTENTS. XVllCHAPTER V. PageThe Terrors of a Solitary House — Sense of Insecurity which aTownsman feels in a Solitary House at Night — Wide differencein our feeling of such a place by Day and by NightNervous Fancies excited by them on Stormy Nights —Decrease of Burglaries and Highway Robberies throughModern Improvements — Noble Defence of his House byColonel Purcell — Attack of the House of a Welsh Gentleman,Mr. Powell, and his Murder — Fact related by aMinister of the Society of Friends — Sturdy Rogues — Frightof an Old Gentleman with one — Cowardice inspired byliving in a Solitary House — Superstitions generated bysuch Places — Concluding Remarks - - - 183CHAPTER VI.Midsummer in the Fields — The Spiritual effect of Green Fieldsat Midsummer — True Wisdom of Izaak Walton — DeliciousHaunts of the Angler at this Season — Profound repose ofTrees — Rich Mosaic of Fields — Sound of Birds at thisSeason — Mowers at work — Delights of Brook sides, withtheir Plants and Insects — Curious Metamorphosis of MidgesBeauty of Dragon-flies — Summer Birds — Feelings connectedwith this fleeting Season . - - 212PART III.PICTURESQUE AND MORAL FEATURES OF THE COUNTRY.CHAPTER I.Gipsies: their History and Present State — Gipsies part andparcel of the English Landscape — An essential Portion ofour Poetry and Literature — Uses made of them by manykinds of Writers — Gipsy Adventure of Sir Roger de Coverley— Gipsy Sketches by Wordsworth, Cowper, Crabbe, andothers — Inquiries after their Origin — The notion of thePatrick Shepherd of it — Arab-like Character of Gipsies —Researches of Grellman and Buttner into the Gipsy OriginAccount of their Numbers, Treatment, and Habits in allNations — Their Language — Various Names by which theyare and have been known — M. Haste's Theory of theirAntiquity — Pointed out by Herodotus and Strabo — Causesof their nitre numerous appearance in Western Europeabout the Year 1400 — Their first entry into France in1427, as described by Pasquin — Banished by ProclamationThe same policy pursued in other Countries — Crueltiespractised on them in Spain — Order to drive them from• • •Xvi CONTENTS.PageFrance with Fire and Sword — Attempt to Expel them fromSweden, Denmark, Italy, and England — Entry respectingthem in the Parish Records of Uttoxeter — The Inquiries ofMr. Hoyland into their History and Condition — His Visitsto their Haunts at Norwood and London — Their AnnualProgresses from London through various Counties — Mr.Hoyland's Researches in Scotland — The Border Countrytheir chief Resort — Letter of Sir Walter Scott respectingthem — Remarkable Scene with them at Riding the Marchesnear Yetholm — Sir Walter Scott's Recognition of one ofthem at Kelso Fair— The Family of the Faas— Old WillFaa, the Gipsy Kings Journey to see the Laird on hisDeath-bed — Meg Merrilies one of their Clan — The Author'sVisit to Yetholm — The Gipsy Houses : the Feud betweenthem and the Shepherds — Old Will Faa, the present KingThe Importance given him by Sir Walter Scott's WritingsHis Smuggling and Fighting — His Portrait by Sir MartinArcher Shee — General Review of their Numbers and Conditionin these Kingdoms — Camp near Nottingham, andDeath of the Gipsy King — Peculiarities of the wholeRace — Their estimated Numbers in Europe — Children sentto School in London — Gipsy Wife reading her Bible toher Children — Feelings naturally presented by the sightof a Gang — Curious accidental Meeting of the Author withtwo Ladies of Rank acting the Gipsies in Surrey - - 219CHAPTER II.Nooks of the World, or a Peep into the Back Settlements ofEngland — Beauty and Repose of many such Places to theeye — Their Intellectual slumber — Wordsworth's Descriptionof a Farmer-lad — The Books generally to be foundin primitive Cottages — Worst state of Morals in Districtspartly Agricultural and partly Manufacturing — Exertionsof the Methodists — The Effect of Political Pressure on theWorking Class — Necessity of sound Education — The Effectof it in Scotland — Rural Book Societies recommended —An Example of the effect of Reading on a Working Man —Sordid Character of the People of some Property in obscureHamlets — A Physician living in a Dove Cot — Sketch of aCountry Proprietor and his Family — The Farmer BrothersThe Land Agent's account of a curious Dinner Scene atthe Squire's — A worthy Example of the Old School ofCountry Gentlemen — Education the great need of theRural Districts. 251CHAPTER III.Nooks of the World : Part II. — Life in the Dales of Lancashireand Yorkshire — Wide Contrast between the Aspect andCondition of the Agricultural and Manufacturing Districts —Poverty and Rudeness of some Parts of Lancashire — Half-wildChildren in the Lancashire Hills — Old Factory SystemWild Country between Lancashire and the YorkshireCONTENTS. XIXPageDales — General Character of the Dales — Primitive Simplicityof the People — Formerly much visited by George FoxA Friend's Meeting — Dent Dale — Singular Appearanceof the Bed of the River Dent — Rural Occupation andVehicles — Population of a Dale divided into little Communities— Customs at a Birth — Knitting Parties — KnittingSongs — Other Particulars of their Knitting Habits — Instancesof Eccentricities of Character — Dislike of FactoriesEvery Person and House has its Name — Singular Storyof Deception practised on a rich Widow — Peculiar Customsof the Dales — Their Hospitality - . . 285CHAPTER IV.Old English Houses — General Impression of them — The strongHistoric Interest connected with them — A delightfulRecord of such Abodes might be written — Feelings thatarise in passing through them — Their various Styles,Furniture, Pictures, Tapestry, and Arms, Memorials of theChanges of National Power and Manners — Passages of mostTragical Interest indicated by many of our Family PicturesTreasures of Ancient Art collected in our Noble HousesHorace Walpole's wish, that all our Noble Mansions werecongregated in London — Beneficial Influence of the CountryResidence of the Aristocracy — Feelings of Horace Walpoleon visiting his Father's House at Houghton - . 32-2CHAPTER V.Hardwicke Hall — The Author's Visit to it on the presentDuke's coming of Age — Scenes which presented themselves— A Second Visit with a Party of Friends — A ThirdVisit after the Lapse of Twenty Years — Present Aspect ofthe Place — Building Maniacs Bess of Haidwicke — Remainsof the Old Hall of Hardwicke — Gog and Magog — ArabellaStewart, and Queen of Scots imprisoned there — Chapel —Old Tapestry — Family Gallery — Good Taste by which theHouse is kept in its Original State — Statue of the Queenof Scots — Mrs. Jameson's Account of Hardwicke — TheDuke there — His Apartments — Contrast of different Agespresented by such Houses as Hardwicke, Haddon, andChatsworth .-. 333CHAPTER VI.Annesley Hall, and Hucknall— Annesley Hall, the abode ofMary Chaworth, most singularly overlooked by Visitors toNewstead — Tomb and Funeral of Lord Byron — Scene in theVault on the Evening of the Funeral — Moore's Visit to theTomb — Variety of Visitors shewn by the Book kept by theClerk — Inscription by Lord Byron's Sister — InterestingSignatures — Annesley Hall — The Hill mentioned byByron in "The Dream "curious Mistake by Moore —The " Diadem of Trees in circular array," cut down byXX CONTENTS.PageMary Chaworth's Husband — A Mechanic's Exclamation onhearing of it — Interesting Aspect of the Old Place in itsWoods — State of Desolation in which it was found by theAuthor — The Old House-keeper — Description of theInterior — Superstitions of the Place — Paper Cuttings on theDrawing-room Screen — Likeness of Mary Chaworth thereonFine Old Terrace — Scene of Lord Byron's last Interviewwith Mary Chaworth — Her melancholy after-life here —Impressions during the Visit to this Place ■ - 348CHAPTER VILNewstead Abbey — Picturesque approach to it. — Recollection ofa former Visit — The Desolation of the Place then — Byron'sown Description of it — The Gallery — The Library — Scullsand Crucifix — Dog's Tomb — The Satyr Statues — EccentricCharacter of the former Lord Byron — Anecdotes of LordByron's Minority — Paintings connected with the Poet'sHistory — General good taste displayed by the presentPossessor of the Abbey — Exceptions to this Taste — GeneralDescription of the Abbey from Don Juan — Houses ofFletcher and Ashton — Tree inscribed by Lord Byron —Demolition of the Mill — Concluding Remarks on the OldHouses of England, and List of the most remarkable - 376CHAPTER ViiCharacteristics of Park Scenery .-. -. 393PART I.RURAL LIFE, PURSUITS, And ADVANTAGES OF THEGENTRY OF ENGLAND.CHAPTER I.PRE-EMINENCE OF ENGLAND AS A PLACE OFCOUNTRY RESIDENCE.Let every man who has a sufficiency for the enjoymentof life, thank heaven most fervently that he livesin this country and age. They may tell us of thebeauty of southern skies, and the softness of southernclimates; but where is the land which a man wouldrather choose to call himself a native of — because itVOL. I. B2 ENGLAND AS A PLACE Oi"combines more of the requisites for a happy anduseful existence ; more of the moral, social, aft intellectualadvantages, without which fair skies or soitclimates would become dolorous, or "at best, indifferent?I say, let every man gratefully rejoice, who has themeans of commanding the full blessings of Englishlife, — for alas ! there are thousands and millions of ourcountrymen who possess but a scanty portion of these ;whose lives are too long and continuous a course oftoil and anxiety to permit them even to look roundthem and see how vast are the powers of enjoymentin this country, and how few of those sources of ease,comfort, and refined pleasure are within their reach.I trust a better day is coming to this portion of ourpopulation ; that many circumstances are working togetherto confer on the toiling children of these kingdomsthe social rewards which their unwearied industryso richly merits ; but for those who already hold in theirhands the golden key, where is the country like England? If we are naturally proud of making portion ofa mighty and a glorious kingdom, where is the kingdomlike England? It is a land of which the mostambitious or magnanimous spirit may well say with ahigh emotion — " That is my country !" Over whatan extent of the earth it stretches its territories; overwhat swarming and diversified millions it extends itssceptre ! On every side of the globe, lie its outspreadregions ; under every aspect of heaven, walk its free ortributary people. In the West Indies; in the vasterdominions of the East; in America and Australia;through each wide continent, and many a fair island !But its political and moral power extends even farbeyond these. What nation is there, however great,-^;-COUNTRY RESIDENCE. 3that does not look with breathless anxiety to themovements of England ; what country is not bound'^■^■l Vtp with it in the strongest interests and hopes ; whatcountry is there which does not feel the influence ofits moral energy ? Through all the cities and forestsof Republican America, the spirit of England, as well^"'. I as its language, lives and glows. France, Germany,and even Russia to the depths of its frozen heart, feelthe emanations of its free and popular institutions.Every pulse of love which beats here — every principleof justice that is more clearly recognized — every sentimentof Christianity that is elevated on the broadbasis of the human heart, hence spreads through theearth as from a centre of moral life, and produces inthe remotest regions its portion of civilization.Hence do I love my country ! — and partakeOf kindred agitations for her sake;She visits oftentimes my midnight dream ;Her glory meets me with the earliest beamOf light, which tells that morning is awake.It is something to make a part, however small, ofsuch a nation. It is something to feel that you havesuch a scope of power and beneficence in the earth.But when you add to this, the food laid up for theheart and the intellect in this island — the wealth ofliterature and science ; the spirit of freedom in whichthey are nourished, and by which they are prosecuted ;the sound religious feeling which has always distinguishedit as a nation ; the philanthropic institutionsthat exist in it — every true heart must felicitate itselfthat its lot is cast in this kingdom.Such are the moral, political, and intellectual advantagesof English life, vrhich must make any nobleENGLAND AS A PLACE OFminded and reflecting man feel, as he considers hisposition in the scale of humanity, that he is ''a citizenof no mean city :" but our social advantages are notawhit behind these. Can any state of society bewell conceived on which the arts and sciences, literature,and general knowledge can shed more socialconveniences and refined enjoyments ? In our houses,in our furniture, in all the materials for our dresses,in the apparatus for our tables and the endless varietyof good things by which they are supplied, for whichevery region has been traversed, and every art inbringing them home, or raising them at home, hasbeen exerted ; in books and paintings ; in the wonderfulprovision and accumulation of every article inour shops, that the real wants or the most fancifuldesires of men or women may seek for ; in our gardens,roads, the beautiful and affluent cultivation ofthe country, — what nation is there, or has there been,which can for a moment bear a comparison withEngland ?Ye miserable ancients, had ye these?And this we may ask, not merely as it respects gas,steam, the marvellous developments of chemistryand electro-magnetism, by which the mode and embellishmentof our existence have been so muchchanged already, and which promise yet, changes toovast to be readily familiarised to the imagination,—but of a thousand other privileges and conveniencesin which England is pre-eminent. It is, however, toour rural life that we are about to devote ourattention ; and it is in rural life that the superiority ofEngland is, perhaps, more striking, than in any otherCOUNTRY RESIDENCE. 5respect. Over the whole face of our country thecharm of a refined existence is diffused. There isnothing which strikes foreigners so much as thebeauty of our country abodes, and the peculiarity ofour country life. The elegancies, the arts and refinementsof the city are carried out and blended, fromend to end of the island, so beautifully with thepeaceful simplicity of the country, that nothingexcites more the admiration of strangers than thoserural paradises, the halls, castles, abbeys, lodges,and cottages in which our nobility and gentryspend more or less of every year. Let PrinceBuckler Muskaw, Washington Irving, Willis, CountPecchio, Rice, and others, tell you how beautiful, intheir eyes, appeared the parks, lawns, fields, andthe whole country of England, cultivated like agarden. It is true that our climate is not to beboasted of for its perpetual serenity. It has had nolack of abuse, both from our own countrymen andothers. We are none of us without a pretty livelymemory of its freaks and changes, its mists andtempests ; its winters wild as the last, and its springsthat are often so late in their arrival, that they findsummer standing in the gate to tell them they are nolonger wanted. All this we know; yet which of usis not ready to forgive all this, and to say \\'ith a fullheart,England, with all thy faults, I love thee still ! "Which of us is not grateful and discerning enoughto remember, that even our fickle and imperfectclimate has qualities to which England owes muchof its glory, and we, many a proud feeling and victor.I. c6 ENGLAND AS A PLACE OFpious energy? Which of us can forget, that thisabused climate, is that which has not enervated by itsheats, has not seduced by its amenities, has not depopulatedby its malaria, so that under its banefulinfluence we have become feeble, listless, reckless ofhonour or virtue ; the mean, the slothful, the crouchingslaves of barbarians, or even effeminate despots :it is that which has done none of these things; producedno such effects as these ; but it is that whichhas raised millions of frames strong and muscular andcombatant, and enduring as the oaks of its rocky hills;that has nerved those frames to the contempt alikeof danger and effeminacy; and has quickened themwith hearts full of godlike aspirations after a virtuousglory. What a long line — what ages after ages, ofinvincible heroes, of dauntless martyrs for freedomand religion, of solemn sages and lawgivers, of philosophersand poets, men sober, and prescient, andsplendid in all their endowments as any country everproduced ; — what a line of these has flourished amidthe glooms and severities of this abused climate ; andwhile Italy has sunk into subjection, and Greecehas lain waste beneath the feet of the Turk — haspiled up by a succession of matchless endeavours thefame and power of England, to the height of itspresent greatness.In our halls is hungArmoury of the invincible knights of old :We must be free or die, who speak the tongueThat Shakspeare spake ; the faith and morals holdWhich Milton held. In everything we are sprungOf earth's best blood, have titles manifold.And will any man tell me that the spirit of ourCOUNTRY RESIDENCE. 7climate, has had nothing to do with begetting andnourishing the energy which has borne on to immortalitythese great men; which has quickened us with"earth's best blood ;" which has given us " titles manifold?" The gloom and desolate majesty of autumn —the wild magnificence of thunder-storms, with theirvivid lightnings, their awful uproar, the lurid darknessof their clouds, and the outshining of rainbows — havethese had no effect on the meditations of divines andthe songs of poets? Has the soul-concentratingpower of winter driven our writers into their closets invain? Have the fireside festivities of our darkestseason ; has the blazing yule-clog, and the merrimentof the old English hall — things which have grownout of the very asperity of the climate, left no tracesin our literature? Did Milton, Bacon, Spenser,Shakspeare, and such spirits, M^alk through our solemnhalls, whether of learning, or religion, or baronialpomp, all of which have been raised by the verygenius of a pensive climate ; or did they climb ourmountains, and roam our forests, amid winds thatroared in the boughs and whirled their leaves at theirfeet, and gather thence no imagery, no similies, novigour of thought and language, such as still skiesand flowery meadows could not originate ? Let usturn to the lays and romances of Scott and Byron,and see whether brown heaths and splintered mountains;the savage ruins of craggy coasts, moaningbillows, mists, and rains ; the thunder of cataracts,and the sleep of glens, all seen and felt under thealternations of seasons and of weather, such only asan unsettled climate could show, have not tingedtheir spirits, and therefore their works, with hues of8 ENGLAND AS A PLACE OFan immortal beauty, the splendid product of a boisterousclimate. Why they are these influences, whichhave had no small share in the creation of such menasBurns, Bloomfield, Hogg, and Clare — the shepherd-poetsof a free land, and an out-of-door life. Yes,we are indebted to our climate for a mass of good,a host of advantages of which we little dream, till webegin to count them up.And are all our experiences of the English climatethose of gloom ? Are there no glorious sunsets, nosummer evenings, balmy as our dreams of heaven, nolong sunny days of summer, no dewy mornings,whose freshness brings with it ideas of earth in itsyouth, and the glades of Paradise trod by the fairfeet of Eve ? Have we no sweet memories of youthand friendship, in which such hours, such days, inwhich fields of harvest, hay-harvest and corn-harvest,with all their rejoicing rustic companies, lie in thesunshine ? Are there none of excursions through themountains, along sea shores, of sailing on fair lakes,or lying by running waters in green and flowerydales, while over-head shone out skies so blue andserene that they seemed as though they could neverchange? In every English bosom there lie manysuch sweet memories; and if we look through thewhole of one of the worst seasons that we have, whatintervals of pleasant weather we find in it. One ofthe great charms of this country too, dependent on itsclimate, is that rich and almost perpetual greenness,of which strangers always speak with admiration.But what of climate ? There are other claims onour affections for this noble country, which were itsclimate the most splendid under heaven, would yetCOUNTRY RESIDENCE. 9cast it far into the shade. That which binds usclosely to it, next to our living ties, is that every inchof English ground is sanctified by noble deeds, andintellectual renown; but on this topic Isis, Hovvitthas, in her Wood-Leighton, put into the mouth ofa worthy clergyman of Staffordshire, words that willbetter express my feelings, than any I can now use.I know not how it is ; I cannot comprehend thefeeling, with which many quit this noble country foreverfor strange lands. And yet it may be said, thathundreds do it every day ; and for thousands it mayindeed be well. For those who have had no prospectbut the daily struggle for existence ; for those whoseminds have not been opened and quickened into asense of the higher and more spiritual enjoymentswhich this country affords ; for the labouring many,the valleys of Australia, or the vast forests andprairies of America may be alluring. But to me, —and therefore, it seems, equally to other men withlike tastes and attachments — to quit England, noble,fearless, magnanimous and Christian England, wouldbe to cut asunder life, and hope, and happiness atonce. No ! till I voyage to " the better land," Icould never quit England. What ! after all the agesthat have been spent in making it habitable andhome-like ; after all the blood shed in its defence,and for the maintaining of its civil polity; after allthe consumption of patriotic thought and enterprise,the labours of philosophers, divines, and statesmen, tocivilize and Christianize it ; after the time, the capital,the energies employed, from age to age, to cultivateits jBelds, dry up marshes, build bridges, and lay downroads, raise cities, and fill every house with the ENGLAND AS A PLACE OFducts of the arts and the wealth of literature; canthere be a spot of earth that can pretend to a titheof its advantages, or a spot that creates in the heartthat higher tone necessary for their full enjoyment ?Why, every spot of this island is sanctified, not onlyby the efforts of countless patriots, but as the birthplaceand abode of men of genius. Go where youwill, places present themselves to your eyes which arestamped with the memory of some one or other of thoseburning and shining lights," that have illuminatedthe atmosphere of England with their collectivesplendour, and made it visible to the men of farthestclimates. Even in this secluded district, which, beautifulas it is, is comparatively little known or spokenof, amongst the generality of English people, howmany literary recollections surround you ! To saynothing of the actors in great historical scenes ; theTalbots, Shrewsbury, Dudley, and Bagots of formerages; or the Anson, Vernon, St. Vincent, andPages of the later and present ones ; in this countywere born those excellent bishops, Hurd and Newton,and the venerable antiquary and herald, Elias ashore.To say nothing of the quantity of taste andknowledge that exist in the best classes of society hereabout,we have to-day passed the houses of ThomasGisborne and Edward Cooper, clergymen who havedone honour to their profession by their talents, andthe liberality of their sentiments. In that antiquatedFault Hall, once lived old Squire Burton, the brotherof the author of the '' Anatomy of Melancholy ;" andthere is little doubt that some part of that remarkablework was written there. By that Dove, Izaak Walton,that pious old man, that lover of the fields, and his-countryRESIDENCE. 11dorian of the worthies of the church, used to strolland meditate, or converse with his friend CharlesCotton, a Staffordshire man too. In the woods ofWotton, which are very visible hence by daylight,once wandered a very different, but very distinguishedperson, the wayward Rousseau. In Uttoxeter, thatgreat, but ill-used, and ill-understood astronomer,FJamstead, received the greater part of his education ;and from Lichfield, the spires of whose cathedral wehave seen to-day, went out Johnson and Garrick,each to achieve supremacy in his own track of distinction.And there, too, lived Anna Seward, who,with all her egotism and faults of taste, was superiorto the women of her age, and had the sagacity toperceive amongst the very first, the dawning fame ofSouthey and Sir Walter Scott.If this comparatively obscure district can thusboast of having given birth or abode to so many influentialintellects, what shall not England — entire andglory-crowned England? And who shall not feelproud to own himself of its race and kindred ; and,if he can secure for himself a moderate share of itscommon goods, be happy to live and die in it !"Thus it is all England through. There is no partof it, in which you do not become aware that theresome portion of our national glory has originated.The very coachmen as you traverse the highways,continually point out to you spots made sacred bymen and their acts. There say they, was born, orlived Milton or Shakspeare, Locke or Bacon, Popeor Dryden ; that was the castle of Chaucer ; there,now, lives Wordsworth, Southey, or Moore. ThereQueen Elizabeth was confined in her youth, here she12 ENGLAND AS A PLACE OFconfined Mary of Scotland in her age. There Wickliffelived, and here his ashes were scattered in the airby his enemies. There Hooker watched his sheepwhile he pondered on his Ecclesiastical Polity. Herewas born Cromwell, or Hampden — here was thefavourite retreat of Chatham, Fox, Pitt, or otherperson, who in his day exerted a powerful influenceon the mind or fortunes of this country. Theseperpetual monitions that we are walking in a landfilled from end to end with glorious reminiscences,make country-residence in England so delightful.But the testimony of foreigners is more conclusivethan our own ; and therefore, we will close thischapter with the impression which the entrance intoEngland made on two Americans — WashingtonIrving and Mr. Willis. Irving's mind was full of theinspiration of the character of England as he hadfound it in books. " There is to an American, avolume of associations with the very name. It is theland of promise, teeming With every thing of which hischildhood has heard, or on which his studious yearshave pondered. The ships of war, that prowled likeguardian giants along the coast; the headlands ofIreland, stretching out into the Channel ; the Welshmountains, towering into the clouds ; all were objectsof intense interest. As we sailed up the Mersey, Ireconnoitred the shores with a telescope. My eyedwelt with delight on neat cottages, with their trimshrubberies and green grass-plots. I saw the moulderingruin of an abbey overrun with ivy, and thetaper spire of a village church rising from the brow ofa neighbouring hill — all were characteristic of England."That is the feeling of an American, arrivingCOUNTRY RESIDENCE. 13here directly from his own country : this is that ofone coming from the European Continent. Mr.Willis says, on landing at Dover: " My companionled the way to an hotel, and we were introduced byEnglish waiters (I had not seen such a thing in threeyears, and it was quite like being waited on by gentlemen)to two blazing coal fires in the coffee-room ofthe * Ship.' O, what a comfortable place it appeared !A rich Turkey carpet snugly fitted ; nicely rubbedmahogany tables ; the morning papers from London ;bell-ropes that looidd ring the bell ; doors that wouldshut; a landlady that spoke English, and was kindand civil ; and, though there were eight or ten peoplein the room, no noise above the rustle of a newspaper,and positively rich red damask curtains, neithersecond-hand nor shabby, to the windows ! A greatercontrast than this, to the things that answer to themon the Continent, could scarcely be imagined. Thefires were burning brilliantly, and the coffee-room wasin the nicest order when we descended to our breakfastat six the next morning. The tea-kettle singing onthe hearth, the toast was hot, and done to a turn, andthe waiter was neither sleepy nor uncivil — all, again,very unlike a morning at an hotel in La belle France.England is described always very justly, and alwaysin the same words, 'it is all one garden.' There isscarce a cottage, between Dover and London (seventymiles) where a poet might not be happy to live. Isaw a hundred little spots I coveted with quite aheart-ache. Everybody seemed employed, and everybodywell-made and healthy. The relief from thedeformity and disease of the way-side beggars of theContinent was very striking."c 214 ENGLAND AS A RESIDENCE.It is through this England, thus worthy of our love,whether as seen by our own eyes, or the eyes ofintelligent foreigners, that we are about to makeour progress, visiting plain and mountain, farm andhamlet, and making acquaintance with the dwellings,habits, and feelings of both gentle and simple.CHAPTER II.ENVIABLE POSITION OF THE ENGLISH COUNTRYGENTLEMAN, AS REGARDS ALL THE PLEASURESAND ADVANTAGES OF LIFE.Alexander of Macedon said if he were not Alexander,he would choose to be Diogenes ; Alexanderof Russia also said if he were not Alexander, he wouldchoose to be an English gentleman. And truly, itwould require some ingenuity to discover any earthlylot like that of the English gentleman. The wealthand refinement at which this country has arrived, havethrown round English rural life every possible charm.Every art and energy is exerted in favour of theEnglish gentleman. Look at the ancient castle, orthe mansion of later ages, and then at the dwelling ofthe private gentleman now, and what a difference !The castle with its dungeon-like apartments, its fewloop-holes for windows, its Myalls, mounds, moats,drawbridges, and other defences to keep out the hostileprowlers that a semi-savage state of society brought,ever and anon, around it. Look at its naked walls,its massy, lumbering doors, its floors spread withrushes, and the rude style in which bed and boardwere constructed and served; and then turn your eyes16 POSITION OF THEon the modern mansion of the country gentleman !What a lovely sight is that ! What a bright andpleasant abode, instead of that heavy, martial pile.What a fair country — what a peaceful, well-orderedpopulation surround it, instead of dreary forests, andsavage hordes ! And look ao^ain at the mansion of thefeudal ages ; see its large, cheerless, tapestried halls,its ill-fitting doors and windows, through which thewintry winds come whistling and careering. Whatnaked, or rush-strewn floors still ; what rude fashion offurniture, and vessels for the table ; what a rude styleof cookery; what a dearth of books; what a miserableand scanty display of portraits on the walls, makingthose they are intended to represent, look grim andhard as a generation of ogres. I'hen again, look atthe modern mansion. What a snug and silken nestof delight is that. See what the progress of the artsand civilization has done for it. How light and airilyit rises in some lovely spot. How it is carpeted anddraped with rich hangings and curtains. What softand elegant beds: what a superior grace in the fashionof furniture, and all household utensils. Silver andgold, brass and steel, porcelain and glass, into whatrich and beautiful shapes have they been wrought byskilful hands for all purposes. See what a variety ofrooms; what a variety of inventions in those rooms,which artificial and refined wants have called intoexistence. What books enrich the fair library ; whatglorious paintings grace its delicately papered walls.Hark ! music is issuing from instruments of novel andmost ingenious construction. And all around what asplendidly cultivated country ! What lovely gardens,in which flowers from every region are blowing. HereCOUNTRY GENTLEMAN. 17is a vast change ! — a vast advance from the rude lifeof our ancestors ; and the more we look into the presentstate of domestic life, the more we shall perceivethe admirable perfection of its economy and arrangements.What was the life of our great nobility formerlyin their country halls ? With little intercoursewith the capital ; in the midst of huge forests, andalmost impassable roads ; hunting and carousing weretheir chief pleasures and employments, amid a throngof rude retainers. Look now at the mode of life ofa private gentleman of no extraordinary revenue.When he comes down in a morning he finds on hisbreakfast-table the papers which left London probablyon the previous evening, bringing him the news ofthe whole world. There is nothing which is goingon in Parliament, in the courts of law, in publicmeetings in the capital, or in any town of the kingdom,no birth, marriage, death, or any occurrence ofimportance, but they are all laid before him ; there isnothing done or said in the mercantile, the literary,the scientific world, nothing which can affect theinterests of his country in the most remote degree;nothing, indeed, which can thoroughly affect the wellbeingof men all the world over, but there it is too.He sits in the midst of his woods and groves, in thequietness of the country a hundred miles from thecapital, and is as well acquainted with the movementsand incidents of society as a reigning prince could havebeen some years ago, by couriers, correspondents,spies, fast-sailing packets, and similar agencies, maintainedby all the aid and revenues of a nation. Andfor his morning meal, China and the Indies, east andwest, send him their tea, coffee, sugar, chocolate, and18 POSITION OF THEpreserved fruits. Lapland sends its reindeer tongues ;Westphalia its hams; and his own rich land abundanceof rural dainties. When breakfast is over, ifhe ask himself how he shall pass the day, what numerousand inexhaustible resources present themselvesto his choice. Will he have music ? The ladies ofhis family can give it him in a high style of excellence.Does he love paintings ? His walls, and those of hiswealthy neighbours are covered with them. Thereare said to be more of the works of the great Mastersaccumulated in our English houses than in all theworld besides. Is he fond of books ? What a massof knowledge is piled up around him ! Greece,Rome, Palestine, Arabia, India, France, Germany,Italy, every country, ancient or modern, which hasdistinguished itself by its genius and intelligence, haspoured into his halls its accumulated wealth of heartand imagination. There is hoarded up in his libraryfood for the most insatiate spirit for an eternity. Inthe literature and science merely of this country, hepossesses more than the enjoyment of a life. Thinkonly of the works of our historians and divines, of ourtravellers, — our natural, moral, and scientific philosophers;of the wit, the pathos, the immense extent ofinventions and facts in our general literature ; of theglorious and ennobling themes of our great poets.What a mighty difference is there between the existenceof one of our old baronial ancestors, who couldnot read, but as he sate over his winter fire solaced hisspirit with the lays of a wandering minstrel; and ofhim who has at his command all the intellectual splendour,power and wit, the satire, the joyous story, thehumour, the elegance of phrase and of mind, the pro-countryGENTLEMAN. 19found sentiment and high argument of such men asChaucer, Milton, Shakspeare, Spenser, Addison,Steele, Pope, Dryden, Ben and Sam Johnson, Goldsmith,Beaumont and Fletcher, Cowper, and the noblepoets of the present day. Is it possible that ennui cancome near a man who can at any moment call to his presenceour Jeremy Taylors and Tillotsons, our Barrows,Burnes, and Stillingfleets — our travellers from everycorner of the earth, and our great novelists with theireverlasting inventions? Why, there is more delightin one good country library, than any one mortal lifecan consume. If a man's house were situated in adesert of sand, the magic of this divine literaturewere enough to raise around him an elysium of perpetualgreenness.But it is not merely within-doors that the singularprivileges of an English gentleman lie. He needonly step out, and he sees them surrounding him onevery side. His gardens, by the labours and discoveriesof centuries, by the genius of some men whohave blended the spirit of nature most happily withthat of art, and by the researches of others who havecollected into this country the vegetable beauty andwealth of the whole world, have been made moredelightful than those of Albinus or Armada. Lookat his glazed walls, his hot and green houses, whichsupply his table With the most delicious dessert. Butgo on, — advance beyond the boundaries of his gardens,and the pleasant winding walks of his shrubberies, andwhere are you ? In the midst of his park, his farms,his woods, and plantations. Now every one knowsthe healthful and perpetual recreation to be found inany one of these places ; the intense delight which20 POSITION OF THEmaiiy of our country gentlemen take in them, andthe beauty and pre-eminence of our English parks,farms, and woods, in consequence. We shall speakmore particularly of them presently ; but it must nothere be forgotten what a boundless field of enjoyment,and increase of wealth, science has of late yearsopened to the amateur farmer, and to the countrygentlemen in general. To their fields, agriculturalchemistry, mineralogy, botany, vegetable physiology,entomology, etc. have brought new and inexhaustiblecharms. They have, in a manner, enlarged the territoriesof the smallest proprietor into kingdoms ofboundless extent and interest. In the study of soils,their defects and remedies ; in the selection of plantsmost consonant to the earth in which they are togrow, or the adaptation of the earth to them ; in theinquiry into the mineral wealth that lies below thesurface ; in cultivating an acquaintance with thevarious animals and especially insects, on whose presenceor absence depends in a great degree the propergrowth or destruction of crops and young woods : inall these the country gentleman has a source ofnoble and profitable employment for the main partunknown to his ancestors, and worthy of his mostearnest pursuit.But if all these means of happiness were notenough to satisfy his desires, or did not chime in withIns taste, see what another field of animating andpraiseworthy endeavour lies before him still, in theofficial service of his country. Retaining his characterof a country gentleman, he can accept the officeof a magistrate, and become, if so disposed, a realbenefactor and peace-maker to his neighbourhood.COUNTRY GENTLEMAN. 21But lie need not stop here. There is no country,not excepting British America, where the path ofpublic service lies so open to a man of fortune, or isso wide in its reach. He can enter parliament ; andresiding part of the year in the country, can during theother part take his place in an assembly, that for theimportance of its discussions and acts has no fellow ;for there is no other legislative assembly in the wholeworld where, with similar freedom of constitution, thesame mighty mass of human interests is concerned —to which the same vast extent of influence is appended.I need do no more in proof of this, than merely point tothe position of England amid the nations of the earth ;her wealth and activity at home; her enormous territoriesabroad. Over all this, — over this extent ofcountry, over these millions of beings, there is not asingle country gentleman who has the ambition, butwho may be called to exercise an influence. Here is afield of labour, enough of itself to fill the amplestdesires, and by which, if he have the talent, any manof fortune may rise to the highest pitch of rank anddistinction.But if the country gentleman have not the ambition,or the love of so active a life ; if he desire toenjoy himself in a different way, there is yet abundantchoice. He may travel, if he please ; and what a richexpanse of pleasures and interests lies before him inthat direction. In our own islands there is a varietyof scenery not to be rivalled in the same space in anyother part of the world. The mountains, the lakes,the rivers of Wales, Scotland, Ireland, those of Cumberlandand Derbyshire; the rich plains; the busycities, with all their arts and curious manufactures ;22 POSITION OF THEour ports, with all their interesting scenes; the varioushistorical and antiquarian objects : the numerousbreeds of cattle, sheep, and horses ; the varied kindsof vegetable products, and modes of farming; —these, to a mind of any taste and intelligence, offerplentiful matter of observation in short summer excursions.And what splendid roads, fleet horses, convenientcarriages and excellent inns, are ready to conveyhim on the way, or receive him for refreshment. Ifhe is disposed to go abroad, who has the money, or theeducation, to give facility and advantage to travel inevery region like the English gentleman ? — Such arethe privileges and pleasures attendant on the countrygentleman of England. In all these he has, or mayhave, the society of women whose beauty and intelligenceare everywhere acknowledged; and for the ladiesof England living in the country, there are books,music, the garden, the conservatory — an abundance ofelegant and womanly occupations. There are drivesthrough woods and fields of the most delicious character; there is social intercourse with neighbouringwealthy families, and a host of kind offices to poorones, which present the sweetest sources of enjoyment.I think the extraordinary blessings and privilegesof English rural life have never been sufficiently considered.It is only when we begin to count them upthat we become aware of their amount, and surpassingcharacter. What is there of divine sentiment orearthly knowledge, of physical, intellectual, or religiousgood ; what is there of generous, social, reflective,retiring or aspiring; what is there of freshnessand beauty ; of luxurious in life, or preparatory to apeaceful death; what is there that can purify theCOUNTRY GENTLEMAN. 23spirit, ennoble the heart, and prompt men to a wiseand extensive beneficence, which may not be found inEnglish rural life ? It has everything in it Which isbeautiful, and may become glorious and godlike.Such golden deeds lead on to golden days,Days of domestic peace — by him who playsOn the great stage how uneventful thought ;Yet with a thousand busy projects fraught,A thousand incidents that stir the mind- To pleasure, such us leaves no sting behind !Such as the heart delights in — and recordsWithin how silently — in more than words !A Holiday — the frugal banquet spreadOn the fresh herbage, near the fountain-head.With quips and cranks — what time the woodlark thereScatters his loose notes on the sultry air,What time the king-fisher sits hushed below,Where silver-bright the water-lilies blow ; —A Wake — the booths whitening the village green.Where Punch and Scaramouch aloft are seen ;Sign beyond sign in close array unfurled.Picturing at large the wonders of the world ;And far and wide, over the Vicar's pale.Black hoods and scarlet crossing hill and dale.All, all abroad, and music in the gale: —A Wedding Dance — a dance into the night,On the barn-floor, when maiden feet are light;When the young bride receives the promised dower.And flowers are flung, herself a fairer flower;A Morning-visit to the poor man's shed,(Who would be rich while one was wanting bread?)Where all are emulous to bring relief.And tears are falling fast — but not for grief: —A Walk in Spring — Grattan, like those with theeBy the heath-side (who had not envied me?)When the sweet limes, so full of bees in June,Led us to meet beneath their boughs at noon :And thou didst say which of the great and wise,Could they but hear and at thy bidding rise,Thou would'st call up and question.24 THE COUNTRY GENTLEMAN.Graver thingsCome in their turn. Morning and evening bringsIts holy office ; and the sabbath bell,That over wood and wild, and mountain-dell,Wanders so far, chasing all thoughts unholy,With sounds most musical, most melancholy,Not on his ear is lost. Then he pursuesThe pathway leading through the aged yews,Nor unattended ; and when all are there,Pours out his spirit in the House of Prayer, —That House with many a funeral-garland hung.Of virgin white — memorials of the young jThe last yet fresh when marriage chimes were ringing,And hope and joy in other hearts were springing ; —That House where age led in by filial love, —Their looks composed, their thoughts on things above.The world forgot, or all its wrongs forgiven —Who would not say they trod the path to Heaven?Rogers Human Life.CHAPTER III.LIFE OF THE GENTRY IN THE COUNTRY.One of the chief features of the life of the nobilityand gentry of England, is their annual visit to themetropolis ; and it is one which has a most essentialinfluence upon the general character of rural lifeitself. The greater part of the families of rank andfortune, flock up to town annually, as punctuallyas the Jews flocked up to Jerusalem at the timeof the Passover ; and it may be said for the purposeof worship too, though worship of a different kind —that of fashion. A considerable portion of thembeing, more or less, connected with one or otherHouse of Parliament, go up at the opening of Parliament,generally in February, and remain there tillthe adjournment, often in July ; but the true seasondoes not commence till April.When April verdure springs in Grosvenor Square,Then the furred beauty comes to winter there. — Rogers.Much has been said of the evil effect of thisaristocratic habit, of spending so much time in themetropolis ; of the vast sums there spent in ostentatiousrivalry, in equipage and establishments ; in thedissipations of theatres, operas, routes, and gamingLIFE OF THE GENTRYhouses ; and unquestionably, there is much truth init. On the other hand, it cannot be denied thatthis annual assembling together has some advantages.A great degree of knowledge and refinement resultsfrom it, amid all the attendant folly and extravagance.The Wealthy are brought into contact with vastnumbers of their equals and superiors, and that sullenand haughty habit of reserve is worn off, which isalways contracted by those who live in solitary seclusion,in the midst of vast estates, with none buttenants and dependents around them. They are alsobrought into contact with men of talent, and intelligence.They move amongst books and works of art,and are induced by different motives to becomepatrons and possessors of these things. If they spendlarge sums in splendid houses and establishments intown, such houses and such establishments becomeequally necessary to them in the country; and it isby this means that, instead of old and dreary castlesand chateaus, we have such beautiful mansions, sofilled with rich paintings and elegant furniture, dispersedall over England. From these places, ascentres existing here and there, similar tastes arespread through the less wealthy classes, and theelegancies of life flow into the parsonages, cottages,and abodes of persons of less income and less intercoursewith society. In town, undoubtedly, a vastnumber of the aristocracy spend their time andmoney very foolishly ; but it is equally true, thatmany others spend theirs very beneficially to thecountry. Men of fortune from all quarters of thekingdom there meet, and everything which regardsthe improvement of their estates is discussed. TheyIN THE COUNTRY. 27hear of different plans pursued in different parts ofthe kingdom. They make acquaintances, and theseacquaintances lead to visits, in which they observe,and copy all that can add to the embellishment oftheir abodes, and the value and productiveness oftheir gardens and estates. If many acquire a relishonly for Newmarket, and the gaming club, and astrong distaste for the quiet enjoyments of the country ;many, on the other hand, come down to their estatesafter a season of hurry and over-excitement, with afresh feeling for the beauty and repose of theircountry abodes. The possessors of great houses andestates, invite a party to spend the recess, or especially,the shooting season with them. Thus theworld of fashion is broken up and scattered from themetropolis into a multitude of lesser circles, and intoevery corner of the empire. I can conceive nothingwhich bears on its surface the aspect of the perfectionof human society, so much as this assembling of achoice party of those who have nothing to do but toenjoy life, in the house of some hospitable wealthyman, in some one of the terrestrial paradises of thiskingdom, — far off, in some retired vale of England,where the country and its manners remain almost assimple and picturesque as they did ages ago. Insome fine Elizabethan mansion some splendid baronialcastle, as Warwick, Alnwick, or Ray; or insome rich old abbey; amid woods and parks, orseated on one of our wild coasts ; or amid the mountainsof Wales or Scotland, with all their beautifulscenery, rocks, hanging cliffs, dashing water-falls,rapid rivers, and fairy wildernesses around them.Here, assembled from the crush and rush of London28 LIFE OF THE GENTRYin its fulness, with new books and new music broughtdown with them ; with plenty of topics suggested bythe incidents of the past season in the saloons of thefashionable, and in parliament ; with every luxurybefore them ; with fine shrubberies and parks, andwith every vehicle and facility for riding and drivingthrough field or forest, or sailing on river or ocean ;if people are not happy in such circumstances, whereis the fault?And imagine the possessor of a noble estate comingdown to receive his friends there. To a high andgenerous mind there must be something very delightful.When he enters his own neighbourhood, heenters his own kingdom. The very market townthrough which he last passes, is probably, totally orthree-fourths of it his property. If he be a kind andliberal man, the respect which is there testifiedtowards him, has in it the most cordial of flatteries.When he touches his own land, everything acknowledgeshis absolute sway. On all sides he sees symptomsof welcome. Wherever he looks, they are thewoods, the parks, the fields of his ancestors, and nowhis own, that meet his eyes. The freshness and greennessof the fields, the sombre grandeur of the woods,the peaceful elegance of his house, all the odours offlowers breathing through the rooms, and the sight ofrich fruits on his walls and in his hot-houses ; after theheat, dust, crowding, noise, political contention, andturning night into day, of London, must be peculiarlygrateful. Here he is sole lord and master; and fromhim, he feels, flow the good of his dependent people,and the pleasures of his distinguished guests. Thesame whereIN THE COUNTRY. 29Far to the south a mountain vale retires,Rich in its groves, and glens, and village spires ;Its upland lawns, and cliffs with foliage hung,Its wizard stream, nor nameless nor unsung;And through the various year, the various day.Where scenes of glory burst and melt away. — Rogers.The hamlet, which shews its thatched roofs andlowly smoking chimneys near, is all his own ; nay,the rustic church is part and parcel of the familyestate. It was probably built and endowed by hisancestors. The living is in his gift, and is perhapsenjoyed by a relative, or college chum. The verychurchyard, with its simple head-stones, and greenmounds, is separated often only by a sunk fence fromhis grounds. It blends into them, and the old greytower lifts itself amongst trees which form one majesticmass with his own. The sabbath-bell rings, andhe enters that old porch with his guests ; he sees thebanner of some brave ancestor float above his head,and the hatchments and memorial inscriptions ofothers on the walls. What can be more delicatelyflattering to all the feelings of a human creature;what lot can be more perfect ?The ease and perfect freedom from ceremony inthese rural gatherings is a feature which has alwaysexcited the admiration of foreigners. Every guesthas his om-u apartment, where he can retire at pleasure,and after taking his meals in common can spendthe day as he chooses. But, as I have before said,we see our own customs and manners better in thedescriptions of foreigners, because they are describedby them as they are seen, with the freshness ofnovelty. Prince Buckler Muskau speaks with enthusiasmof the country houses and park scenery ofVOL. I. D30 LIFE OF THE GENTRYEngland. His book, indeed, is full of such picturesof country life and scenery. The beautiful dairieswhich he sometimes found in noblemen's parksdelighted him extremely. Thus he speaks of the oneat Woburn Abbey : — " The dairy is a prominent andbeautiful object. It is a sort of Chinese temple,decorated with a profusion of white marble, andcoloured glasses ; in the centre is a fountain, andround the walls hundreds of large dishes and bowls,of Chinese and Japan porcelain of every form andcolour, filled with new milk and cream. The 'consoles'upon which these vessels stand, are perfect modelsfor Chinese furniture. The windows are of ground-glass,with Chinese painting, which shews fantasticallyenough by the dim light."But the testimony of Mr. Willis as an American,and therefore accustomed to a life and sentimentmore allied to our own, is still stronger. His accountof his visit to Gordon Castle is a perfect example ofall such scenes, and is an exact counterpart of theGerman Prince's description of the English "vie dechateau," in his third volume, p. 311.The immense iron gate, surmounted by theGordon arms; the handsome and spacious stonelodges on either side ; the canonically fat porter, inwhite stockings and grey livery, lifting his hat as heswung open the massive portal, all bespoke theentrance to a noble residence. The road within waseds:ed with velvet sward, and rolled to the smoothnessof a terrace walk; the winding avenue lengthenedaway before with trees of every variety of foliage;light carriages passed me, driven by gentlemen orladies, bound on their afternoon airing ; a groom ledIN THE COUNTRY. 31up and down lwo beautiful blood-horses, prancingalong with side-saddles and morocco stirrups; andkeepers with hounds and terriers, gentlemen on foot,idling along the walks, and servants in differentliveries, hurrying to and fro, betokened a scene ofbusy gaiety before me. I had hardly noted thesevarious circumstances, before a sudden curve in theroad brought the castle into view, — a vast stone pilewith castellated wings ; and in another moment I wasat the door, where a dozen lounging and powderedmenials were waiting on a party of ladies and gentlemento their several carriages. It was the momentfor the afternoon drive.The last phaeton dashed away, and my chaiseadvanced to the door. A handsome boy, in a kind ofpage's dress, immediately came to the window,addressed me by name, and informed me that hisGrace was out deer-shooting, but that my room wasprepared, and he was ordered to wait on me. Ifollowed him through a hall lined with statues, deers'horns, and armour, and was ushered into a largechamber looking out on a park, extending with itslawns and woods to the edge of the horizon. A morelovely view never feasted human eye.' Who is at the castle ?' I asked, as the boybusied himself in unstrapping my portmanteau. ' O,a great many, sir' — he stopped in his occupation, andbegan counting on his fingers a long list of lords andladies. 'And how many sit down to dinner?'Above ninety, sir, besides the Duke and Duchess.'That will do ;' and off tripped my slender gentleman,with his laced jacket, giving the fire a terriblestir-up in his way out, and turning back to inform methat the dinner hour was seven precisely.32 LIFE OF THE GENTRYIt was a mild, bright afternoon, quite warm forthe end of an English September, and with a firein the room, and a soft sunshine pouring in at thewindows, a seat at the open casement was far fromdisagreeable. I passed the time till the sun set,looking out on the park. Hill and valley lay betweenmy eye and the horizon ; sheep fed in picturesqueflocks ; and small fallow-deer grazed near them ; thetrees were planted, and the distant forest shaped bythe hand of taste ; and broad and beautiful as wasthe expanse taken in by the eye, it was evidently oneprincely possession. A mile from the castle-wall, theshaven sward extended in a carpet of velvet softness,as bright as emerald, studded by clumps of shrubbery,like flowers wrought elegantly in tapestry ; and acrossit bounded occasionally a hare, and the pheasants fedundisturbed near the thickets, or a lady with flowingriding-dress and flaunting feather, dashed into sightupon her fleet blood-palfrey, and was lost the nextmoment in the woods, or a boy put his pony to itsmettle up the ascent, or a gamekeeper idled intosight with his gun in the hollow of his arm, and hishounds at his heels. And all this little world ofenjoyment and luxury and beauty lay in the hand ofone man, and was created by his wealth in thosenorthern wilds of Scotland, a day's journey almostfrom the possession of another human being ! Inever realised so forcibly the splendid results of wealthand primogeniture.The sun set in a blaze of fire among the pointedfirs crowning the hills ; and by the occasional pranceof a horse's feet on the gravel, and the roll of rapidwheels, and now and then a gay laugh and manyIN THE COUNTRY. 33voices, the different parties were returning to theCastle. Soon after, a loud gong sounded throughthe galleries, the signal to dress, and I left my musingoccupation unwillingly to make my toilet for anappearance in a formidable circle of titled aristocrats,not one of whom I had ever seen, the duke himself astranger to me, except through the kind letter ofinvitation lying on the table.I was sitting by the fire, imagining forms andfaces for the different persons who had been namedto me, when there was a knock at the door, and atall, white-haired gentleman, of noble physiognomy,but singularly cordial address, entered with a broadred ribbon across his breast, and welcomed me mostheartily to the castle. The gong sounded at the nextmoment, and in our way down, he named over hisother guests, and prepared me, in a measure, for theintroductions which followed. The drawing-roomwas crowded like a soiree. The duchess, a tall andvery handsome woman, with a smile of the mostwinning sweetness, received me at the door, and Iwas presented successively to every person present.Dinner was announced immediately, and the difficultquestion of precedence being sooner settled than Ihad ever seen it before in so large a party, we passedthrough files of servants to the dining-room. It wasa large and very lofty hall, supported, at the ends, bymarble columns, within which was stationed a band ofmusic playing delightfully. The walls were linedwith full-length family pictures, from old knights inarmour to the modern dukes in kilt of the Gordonplaid; and on the sideboards stood services of goldplate, the most gorgeously massive, and the most34 LIFE OF THE GENTRYbeautiful in workmanship I have ever seen. Therewere, among the vases, several large coursing-cups,won by the duke's hounds, of exquisite shape andornament.I fell into my place between a gentleman and avery beautiful woman, of perhaps, twenty-two, neitherof whose names I remembered, though I had but justbeen introduced. The duke probably anticipated asmuch, and as I took my seat, he called out to me,from the top of the table, that I had on my right,Lady , ' the most agreeable woman in Scotland.*It was unnecessary to say that she was the mostlovely.I have been struck everywhere in England withthe beauty of the higher classes, and as I lookedaround me upon the aristocratic company at the table,I thought I had never seen ' Heaven's image double-stampedas man, and noble,' so unequivocally clear.* * * The band ceased playing when the ladiesleft the table ; the gentlemen closed up, conversationassumed a merrier cast, coffee and liqueurs werebrought in when the wines began to be circulatedmore slowly, and at eleven there was a general moveto the drawing-room. Cards, tea, music, filled upthe time till twelve, and then the ladies took theirdeparture, and the gentlemen sat down to supper. Igot to bed somewhere about two o 'clock ; and thusended an evening, which I had anticipated as stiff andembarrassing, but which is marked in my tablets asone of the most social and kindly I have had the goodfortune to record on my travels."I arose late in the morning, and found the largeparty already assembled about the breakfast table. IIN THE COUNTRY. 35was struck on entering, with the different air of theroom. The deep windows opening out upon thepark, had the effect of sombre landscapes in oakenframes ; the troops of liveried servants, the glitter ofplate, the music, that had contributed to the splendourof the scene the night before, were gone. The dukesat laughing at the head of the table, with a newspaperin his hand, dressed in a coarse shooting-jacketand coloured cravat; the duchess was in a plainmorning dress and cap of the simplest character ; andthe hieli-born women about the table, whom I hadleft glittering with jewels and dressed in all theattractions of fashion, appeared in the simplest coiffureand a toilet of studied plainness. The ten or twelvenoblemen present were engrossed with their letters ornewspapers over tea and toast, — and in them, perhaps,the transformation was still greater. The soigne manof fashion of the night before, faultless in costumeand distinguished in his appearance — in the full forceof the term — was enveloped now in a coat of fustian,with a coarse waistcoat of plaid, a gingham cravat, andhob-nailed shoes, for shooting; and in place of thegay hilarity of the supper-table, wore a face of calmindifference, and eat his breakfast, and read the paperin a rarely broken silence. I wondered as I lookedabout me, what would be the impression of manypeople in my own country, could they look in uponthat plain party, aware that it was composed of theproudest nobility and the highest fashion of England.Breakfast in England is a confidential and unceremonioushour, and servants are generally dispensedwith. This is to me, I confess, an advantage it hasover every other meal. I detest eating with twenty36 LIFE OF THE GENTRYtall fellows standing opposite, whose business it is towatch me. The coffee and tea were on the table,with toast, muffins, oat cakes, marmalade, jellies, fish,and all the paraphernalia of a Scotch breakfast ; andon the sideboard stood cold meats for those who likedthem, and they were expected to go to it and helpthemselves. Nothing could be more easy, unceremonious,and affable than the whole tone of the meal.One after another rose and fell into groups in thewindows, or walked up and down the long room, and,with one or two others, I joined the duke at the headof the table, who gave us some interesting particularsof the salmon-fisheries of the Spey. The privilegeof fishing the river within his lands is bought of himat the pretty sum of eight thousand pounds a-year."The ladies went off unaccompanied to their walksin the park and other avocations ; those bound forthe covers, joined the game-keepers, who were waitingwith their dogs in the leash at the stables ; andsome paired off to the billiard-room. Still sufferingfrom lameness, I declined all invitations to the shootingparties, who started across the park, with the dogsleaping about them in a frenzy of delight, andaccepted the duke's kind offer of a pony phaeton todrive down to the kennels. The duke's breed, bothof setters and hounds, is celebrated throughout thekingdom. They occupy a spacious building in thecentre of a wood, a quadrangle enclosing a court, andlarge enough for a respectable farm-house. Thechief huntsman and his family, and perhaps a gamekeeperor two, lodge on the premises, and the dogsare divided by palings across the court. I was ratherstartled to be introduced into the same enclosure withIN THE COUNTRY. 37a dozen gigantic blood-hounds, as high as my breast,the keeper's whip in my hand, the only defence. Iwas not easier for the man's assertion, that, without it,they would ' have the life out of me in a crack.'They came around me very quietly, and one immensefellow, with a chest like a horse, and a head of thefinest expression, stood up and laid his paws on myshoulders, with the deliberation of a friend about tofavour me with some grave advice. One can scarcebelieve that these noble creatures have not reasonlike ourselves. Those slender, thorough-bred heads,large, speaking eyes, and beautiful limbs and gracefulaction, should be gifted with more than mereanimal instinct. The greyhounds were the beautiesof the kennel, however ; I never had seen such perfectcreatures. The setters were in the next division, andreally they were quite lovely. The rare tan andblack dog of this race, with his silky floss hair, intelligentmuzzle, good-humoured face, and caressing fondness,quite excited my admiration. There werethirty or forty of these, old and young, and a friendof the duke's would as soon ask him for a church-livingas for the present of one of them. The formerwould be by much the smaller favour. Then therewere terriers of four or five breeds, of one family ofwhich, long-haired, long-bodied, short-legged, andperfectly white little wretches, the keeper seemedparticularly fond. # * * *The routine of Gordon Castle was what each onechose to make it. Between breakfast and lunch, theladies were generally invisible, and the gentlemenrode or shot, or played billiards, or kept in theirrooms. At two o'clock, a dish or two of hot gamed238 LIFE OF THE GENTRYand a profusion of cold meats, were set on the smalltable's in the dining-room, and everybody came infor a kind of lounging half-meal, which occupiedperhaps an hour. Thence all adjourned to the ,under the windows of which were drawnup carriages of all descriptions, with grooms, outriders,footmen, and saddle-horses for gentlemen andladies. Parties were then made up for driving orriding, and from a pony-chaise to a phaeton-and-four,there was no class of vehicle which was not at yourdisposal. In ten minutes the carriages were usuallyall filled, and away they flew, some to the banks ofthe Spey, or the sea-side, some to the drives in thepark, and with the delightful consciousness, that,speed where you would, the horizon scarce limitedthe possession of your host, and you were everywhereat home. The ornamental gates flying openat your approach, miles distant from the castle ; theherds of red-deer trooping away from the sound ofwheels in the silent park ; the stately pheasants feedingtamely in the immense preserves ; the haresscarcely troubling themselves to get out of the lengthof the whip ; the stalking gamekeepers lifting theirhats in the dark recesses of the forest, — there wassomething in this, perpetually reminding you of privileges; which, as a novelty, was far from disagreeable.I could not at the time bring myself to feel,what perhaps would be more poetical and republican,that a ride in the wild and unfenced forest of my owncountry would have been more to my taste.The second afternoon of my arrival, I took a seatin the carriage with Lord A., and we followed theduchess, who drove herself in a pony-chaise, to visitIN THE COUNTRY. 39a school on the estate. Attached to a small gothicchapel, a five minutes' drive from the castle, stood abuilding in the same style, appropriated to the instructionof the children of the duke's tenantry. Therewere a hundred and thirty little creatures, from twoyears to five or six, and, like all infant schools, inthese days of improved education, it was an interesting:and affection sight. The last one I had been in,was at Athens, and though I missed here the darkeyes and Grecian faces of the ^gean, I saw healthand beauty, of a kind which stirred up more imagesof home, and promised, perhaps, more for thefuture. * * * *"The number at the dinner table of GordonCastle was seldom less than thirty; but the company-wascontinually varied by departures and arrivals.No sensation was made by either one or the other.A travelling-carriage dashed up to the door, was disburdenedof its load, and drove round to the stables,and the question was seldom asked, 'Who is arrived?'You are sure to see at dinner — and an addition ofhalf a dozen to the party, made no perceptible differencein anything. Leave-takings were managed inthe same quiet w-ay. Adieus were made to the dukeand duchess, and to no one else, except he happenedto encounter the parting guest upon the staircase, orwere more than a common acquaintance. In short,in every way the gene of life seemed weeded out,and if unhappiness or ennui found its way into thecastle, it was introduced in the sufferer's own bosom.For me, I gave myself up to enjoyment with anabandon I could not resist. With kindness andcourtesy in every look, the luxuries and comforts of a40 LIFE OF THE GENTRY, ETC.regal establishment at my freest disposal ; solitudewhen I pleased, company when I pleased, — the wholevisible horizon fenced in for the enjoyment of a household,of which I was a temporary portion, and noenemy except time and the gout, I felt as if I hadbeen spirited into some castle of felicity, and had notcome by the royal mail-coach at all."This is one of the most perfect and graphic descriptionsof English aristocratical life in the country,which was ever written. It is, indeed, on the highestand broadest scale, and is not to be equalled by everycountry gentleman ; but in kind and in degree, thesame character and spirit extend to all such life, andI have therefore taken the liberty of transcribingMr. Willis's sketch as completely as my limits wouldadmit. Nothing, were a volume written on the subject,could bring it more palpably and correctly beforethe mind of the reader ; and I think that if there beaperfection in human life it is to be found, so far asall the goods of providence and the easy elegancies ofsociety can make it so, in the rural life of the Englishnobility and gentry.^— T- "^^-^,,»^-t^:>."^^^^.-^^^^B^S'ft 'r'K:^^ v::^^ij^^J^ffi^fi^^J'- •■"'•■:;-, " —^ /I9HI^BHIHSm^ s^':::.^-''- ^3£-;^^W^^-<*fi'^^i':^Sc-,' '"^ /^.-i«teiiiS4a*S**i#V*-tC- >E,»mi>'?-'CHAPTER IV.THE ROUTINE OF COUNTRY SPORTS.In my last chapter I took a view of the variety givento rural life by the annual visit to town : but if agentleman have no desire so to vary his existence ;if he love the country too well to leave it at all, mostplentiful are the resources which offer themselves forpleasantly speeding on the time. If he be attachedmerely to field sports, not a moment of the wholeyear but he may fill up with his peculiar enjoyment.Racing, hunting, coursing, shooting, fishing, all offerthemselves to his choice ; and rural sports, as every-vol.I. D .34-2 ROUTINE OFthing else in English life, are so systematized ; everythingbelonging to them is so exactly regulated ; alltheir necessary implements and accessories, are broughtto such an admirable pitch of perfection by the advancementof the arts, that the pleasures of the sportsmanare rendered complete, and are diffused overevery portion of the year. Field sports have longceased to be followed in that rude and promiscuousmanner which they were when forests overrun thegreater part of Europe, and hunting was almostnecessary to existence. Parties of hunters no longergo out with dogs of various kinds — greyhounds,hounds, spaniels, and terriers, all in leash, as ourancestors frequently did, ready to slip them on anykind of game which might present itself, and withbows also ready to make more sure of their prey.We have no battues, such as are still to be found insome parts of the continent, and which used to be thecommon mode of hunting in the Highlands, when thebeasts of a whole district were driven into a smallspace, and subjected to a promiscuous slaughter ; ascene such as Taylor the water-poet, describes himselfas witnessing in the Braes of Mar ; nor such asthose perpetrated by the King of Naples in Austria,Bohemia, and Moravia, in which he killed 5 bears,1820 boars, 1950 deer, 1145 does, 1625 roe-bucks,1121 rabbits, 13 wolves, 17 badgers, 16,354 hares,354 foxes, 15,350 pheasants, and 12,335 partridges.Such scenes are not to be witnessed in this country.Every field sport is here become a science. Hunting,coursing, shooting, each has its own season, its well-definedbounds, its peculiar horses, dogs, and weapons.Our horses and dogs, by long and anxious attentionCOUNTRY SPORTS. 43to the preservation of their specific characters, and tothe improvement of their breed, are become preeminent,each in their own department. Our sportingnobility and gentry have not contented themselveswith becoming thoroughly skilful in everything relatingto field diversions; but have many of themcommunicated their knowledge through the press totheir countrymen, and have thus furnished our librarieswith more practical information of this kind thanever was possessed by any one country at any onetime; and contributed to make these pursuits aseffective, elegant, and attractive as possible. It isnot my province to go into the details of any particularsports ; for them I refer the reader to Daniel,Beckford, Col. Thornton, Sir John Bright, Col.Hawker, Tom Oakleigh, Nimrod, and the sportingmagazines. My business is to shew how gentlemenmay and do spend their time in the country. And inthe mere catalogue of out-of-door sports, are therenot racing, hunting, coursing, shooting, angling?Hawking once was an elegant addition to this list ;but that has nearly fallen into disuse in this country,and may be said to exist only in the practice of SirJohn Bright, and the grand falconer of England,the Duke of St. Albans. Archery too, once the greatboast of our forests, and the constant attendant on thehunt, has, as a field exercise, followed hawking. Ithas of late years been revived and practised by thegentry as a graceful amusement, and an occasion forassembling together at certain periods in the country;but as an adjunct of the field sports it is past for ever.Racing, every one knows, is a matter of intenseinterest with a great portion of the nobility, gentry,44 ROUTINE OFand others; and those who delight in it, know wheretofind Newmarket, Epsom, Ascot Heath, Doncaster,and other places, often to their cost : almost e very-countyand considerable town, has its course andannual races. These, however, to the country gentleman,unless he be one whose great and costly passionis for breeding and betting on race-horses, are butoccasional excitements : the rest run their round ofseasons as regularly as the seasons themselves; andplace a lover of field sports in the country at anypoint of the year, and one or more of them are readyfor his enjoyment. Is it winter? He has choice ofall, except it be angling. Hunting, coursing, shooting,are all in their full season. Hunting, as I havesaid, is more confined in its range than it wasanciently ; but it is more regular, less fatiguing, lesssavage in its character, more complete in its practiceand appointments. There is now neither the boar,the bear, nor the wolf to try the courage of our youth,and stag and buck hunting may be considered as rareand almost local amusements, — but we may quote thewords of a great authority as to the position whichhunting occupies amongst the rural sports of England.There is certainly no country in the world, wherethe sport of hunting on horseback is carried to such aheight as in Great Britain at the present day, andwhere the pleasures of a fox-chase are so well understood,and conducted on such purely scientific principles.It is considered the beau ideal of hunting bythose who pursue it. There can be no doubt, thatit is infinitely superior to stag-hunting, for the realsportsman can only enjoy that chase, when the deer issought for, and found like other game which are pur-countrySPORTS. 45sued by hounds. In the case of finding an out-lyingfallow-deer, which is unharboured in this manner,great sport is frequently afforded ; but this is rarelyto be met with in Great Britain : so that fox-huntingis now the chief amusement of the true British sportsman: and a noble one it is — the artifices and dexterityemployed by this lively, crafty animal, to avoidthe dogs, are worthy of our admiration, as he exhibitsmore devices for self-preservation than any otherbeast of the chase. In many parts of this and thesister Island, hare-hunting is much followed, but fox-huntersconsider it as a sport only fit for women andold men, — but, although it is less arduous than thatof the fox-chase, there are charms attached to it whichcompensate for the hard riding of the other."I do not enter here into the question of cruelty inthis sport, nor into the other question of injuryresulting from it to crops and fences, on which groundsmany so strongly object to hunting, and on the formerground, indeed, to all field sports. Lord Byron,for instance, thought hunting a barbarous amusement,fit only for a barbarous country. It is not myintention to undertake the defence of this old Englishsport from the standing charge against it, we here haveonly to deal with it as a feature of rural life; andthough one cannot say much in praise of its humanity,it cannot be denied that it is a pursuit of a vigorousand exciting: character. A fine field of hunters intheir scarlet coats, rushing over forest, heath, fence orstream, on noble steeds, and with a pack of beautifuldogs in full cry, is a very picturesque and animatingspectacle.Through the winter, then, up to the very approach46 ROUTINE OFof spring, hunting offers whatever charms it possesses ;pheasant, woodcock and snipe shooting, in the woodsand by the streams are in all their glory. It is thetime for pursuing all manner of wild fowl in fens andalong the sea-coast; and if any one would know whatare the eager and adventurous pleasures of that pursuit,let him join some old fowler for a week amongst thereeds of Cambridge, Huntingdon, or Lincolnshire, —now laying his traps and springes, now crouchingamongst the green masses of flags and other waterplants, or crawling on hand and knees for a shot atteal, widgeon, or wild duck ; now visiting the decoys,or shooting right and left amongst the rising andcontorting snipes. Or let him read Col. Hawker'sdelightful description of swivel shooting on the coasts,the mud-launches and followers of the sea flocks bynight. Those are sports that require a spice ofenthusiasm and love of adventure far above the pitchof the ordinary sportsman.When spring arrives, and warns the shooter togive rest to the creatures of his pursuit that they maypair, produce, and rear their broods ; as he lays downthe gun, he can take up the angle. Many a keenand devoted old sportsman, however, never knowswhen to lay down the gun. Though he will nolong-er fire at game, he likes through the spring andsummer months to carry his gun on his arm throughthe woods, to knock down what he calls vermin, —stoats, weasels, polecats, jaj'^s, magpies, hawks, owls;all those creatures that destroy game, or their youngbroods, or suck their eggs. He is fond of spying outthe nests of partridges and pheasants, and from time totime marking their progress. It is a grand anticipateSPORTS. 47time pleasure to him M'hen, passing along the furrowof the standing corn, his okl pointer, or favouritespaniel starts the young birds just able to take thewing, and he counts them over with a silent exultation.He is fond of seeing to the training of hisyoung dogs, of selecting fresh ones, of putting hisfowling-pieces, and all his shooting gear in order.There are some old sportsmen of my acquaintance,who, during what they call this idle time, have madecollections of curious birds and small animals whichmight furnish some facts to natural history. An olduncle of mine in Derbyshire, who has shot away afine estate, I scarcely ever recollect to have seen outof doors without his gun ; I saw him lately, when inthat country, a feeble, worn-out old man, just able tototter about, but still with the gun on his arm. Forthose, however, who can find it in their hearts to layaside the gun at the prescribed time, and yet long forrural sports, what can so delightfully fill up the springand summer as the fishing rod ? There is no ruralart, except that of shooting, for which modern scienceand invention have done so much as angling. SinceIzaak Walton gave such an impetus to this taste byhis delicious old book, it has gradually assumed a newand fascinating character. A host of contrivanceshave been expended on fishing tackle. What splendidrods for simple angling, trolling, or fly-fishing, arenow offered to the admiring eyes of the amateur !what a multitude of apparatus of one kind or other !what silver fish and endless artificial flies ! Anglinghas become widened and exalted in its sphere withthe general expansion of knowledge and the improvementof taste. It has associated itself with the pleadsROUTINE OFsures and refinements of literature and poetry. Allthose charms which worthy Izaak threw round it, havecontinued to cling to it, and others have grown uparound them. The love of nature, the love of travelhave intertwined themselves with the love of angling.Angling has thence become, as it were, a new andmore attractive pursuit — a matter of taste and scienceas well as of health and pleasure. It is found that itmay not only be followed by the tourist withoutdiverting him from his primal objects, but that it addsmost essentially to the delights of a summer excursion.Since Wordsworth and John Wilson set uptheir " Angler's Tent" on the banks of Wast Water,"at the head of that wild and solitary lake, which theyhad reached by the mountain path that passes from Eskdale," making: an anplinof excursionof seven days amongst the mountains of Westmorland,Lancashire, and Cumberland, having " theirtent, large panniers filled with its furniture, provisions,etc., loaded upon horses, which, while the anglers,dio separated every morning, pursued each his ownsport up the torrents, were carried over the mountainsto the appointed place, by some lake or stream, wherethey were to meet again in the evening;" andthat solitary trade,Mid rural peace in peacefulness pursued,Through rocky glen, wild moor, and hanging wood.White flowering meadow, and romantic glade ;since Sir Humphrey Davy went angling and philosophizingin the mountain tarns, and along the troutand salmon streams not only of Scotland and Ireland,but of France and Switzerland, the enthusiasm forangling has grown into a grand and expansiveCOUNTRY SPORTS. 49passion. We have our " Anglers in Wales," our"Anglers in Ireland;" Stephen Oliver has flourishedhis lines over the streams of the north, Jesse over thegentle and majestic Thames. The only wonder is,that, as our countrymen walk to and fro through allknown regions of the earth, we do not hear of anglersin the Danube — the Sister— the Indus— the Joliba, —of trolling in La Plata, and fly-fishing in SouthAfrica and Australia. All that will come in its owngood time: meanwhile let us remind our countryfriends of the further blessings which await them,even should all the rapid streams of our mountainrivers and rivulets. Loch Leven trout, Loch Fineherrings, and salmon pulled flouncing from the crystalwaters of the Teeth or the Shannon, to be crimpedand grilled by most delicious art, satiate them beforethe summer is over. The 12th of August approaches !the gun is roused from its slumber — the dogs arehowling in ecstasy on their release from the kennel —the heather is burst into all its crimson splendour onthe moors and the mountains, and grouse-shooting isat hand once more !That sentence is enough to make a sportsman startto his feet if it were but whispered to him in hisdeepest after-dinner doze. In " The Book of theSeasons" I asserted that sportsmen felt the animatinginfluence of nature and its beauty in their pursuits.For that passage many have been the gentle lecturesof the tender-hearted ; but that it was a true passagehas been shewn by the thanks which many sportsmenhave given me for that simple vindication, and by therepeated quotation of the whole article in their books.That they do feel it, is plainly shewn in many papers50 ROUTINE OFof the sporting magazines ; but nowhere more vividlythan in "The Oakleigh Shooting Code." If theunction with which the paper on grouse-shooting iswritten in that book were more diffused through worksof the like nature, vain would be all arguments tocheck the love of shooting. The feeling on thissubject has been evidenced by the avidity with whichthat part of the book has been quoted far and wide.But the spirit of the picturesque is not more prominentin these chapters than in the description of OakleighHall, and of the " wide-ranging treeless view of thesmooth-turfed limestone hills, the white rocks breakingout in patches, so characteristic of Derbyshire."But we are pausing on our way to the Highlands ;and surely nothing can be so inspiring and excitingin the whole circle of sporting scenes as a trip to themoors and mountains of the north, in the height ofsummer — in the beauty of summer weather, and inthe full beauty of the scenery itself. If the season isfine — the roads are dry — the walks are dry — the bogsare become, many of them, passable, the heather is infull bloom, the fresh air of the mountains, or thewaters in sailing thither, the rapid changes of scene,the novel aspects of life and nature in progressingonward, by the carriage, the railway, the steamer,with all their varying groups of tourists and pleasure-seekers,of men of business and men of idleness, arefull of enjoyment. To the man from the rich monotonousLowlands, from the large town, from theheart of the metropolis perhaps, from the weary yokeof business public or private, of law, of college study,of parliament and committees, what can be morepenetrating and delicious than the breathing of theCOUNTRY SPORTS. 61fresh buoyant air, the pleasant flitting of the breeze,the dash of sunny waters, the aspect of mountains andmoors in all their shadow and gloom, or in theirbrightness as they rise in their clear still beauty intothe azure heavens, or bask broad and brown in thenoon-sun ? There go the happy sportsmen ; seatedon the deck of some fast-sailing steamer, with humangroups around them ; they are fast approaching theland of the mountain and the flood." They alreadyseem to tread the elastic turf, to smell the heatherbloom, and the peat fire of the Highland hut; toclimb the moore hill, to hear the thunder of the linn,or pace the pebbly shore of the birch-skirted lake.They have left dull scenes or dry studies behind, anda volume of Walter Scott's novels is in their hands,living with all the character and traditions of themountain-land before them. Well then, is it not ablessed circumstance that our poets and romancershave kindled the spirit of these things in the heart ofour countrymen, that such places lie within our ownisland, and that science has so quickened our transitto them? Let us just note a few of the symptomswhich shew us that this memorable 12th of August isat hand. In the market towns you see the countrysportsman hastening along the streets, paying quickvisits to his gunsmith, ammunition dealer, tailor,draper, etc. He is getting all his requisites together.His dogs are at his heels. Then you see him alreadyinvested in his jacket and straw hat, driving off in hisgig, phaeton, or other carriage, with keeper or companion,and perhaps a couple of dogs stowed awaywith him. You see the keeper and the dog-cart ontheir way too. As you get northward these signs62 ROUTINE OFthicken. In large towns, as Manchester, Liverpool,Glasgow, Edinburgh, you see keeper-like lookingmen, with pointers and setters for sale tied up to somepalisade, or lamp-post, at the corner of a street. Butwoe to those who have to purchase dogs under suchcircumstances. It is ten to one but they are grievouslygulled ; or if they should chance to stumble upon atolerable dog, there is not time for that mutual knowledgeto grow up which should exist between thesportsman and his companion of the field. He thatsees beforehand his trip to the hills, should beforehandhave all in readiness : he who on a summer ramble issmitten with a sudden desire of grouse-shooting, musthowever, do the best he can.When you pass into Scotland the signals of thetime grow more conspicuous. In the newspapers,you see everywhere advertisements of Highland tractsto be let as shooting-grounds. When you get intothe Highlands themselves, you find in all the innsmaps of the neighbouring estates, divided into shootinggrounds for letting. It is very probable that theincome derived from this source by the Highlandproprietors frequently far exceeds the rental of thesame estates for the grazing of sheep and cattle. Thewaters and the heaths seem to be the most profitableproperty of a great part of the Highlands. Almostevery stream and loch is carefully preserved and letas a trout or salmon fishery, many of them for enormoussums ; and so far is this carried, that sportsmenwho are not inclined to pay eighty or a hundred poundsa-year for a shooting ground, complain that Ireland isthe only country now for shooting in any degree offreedom. Many gentlemen join at a shooting ground ;COUNTRY SPORTS. 53and it is a picturesque sight to see them, and theirdogs and keepers, drawing towards their particularlocations as the day approaches.On the 10th of August, 1838, we sailed up theGrand Caledonian Canal from Fort William to Invernessin the steam-packet with a large party of thesegentlemen. Of their number, principally militarymen —Captains, and colonels, and men at arms,some notion may be formed from the fact that we hadon board upwards of seventy dogs, mostly beautifulsetters ; a perfect pyramid of gun-cases was piled onthe deck, and dog-carts and keepers completed thescene.One of the singular features of English life at thepresent moment is the swarming of summer touristsin all interesting quarters. In these Highland regionsthe consequent effect is often truly ludicrous. Intoone miserable village, or one poor solitary inn, pour,day after day, the summer through, from seventy to ahundred people. The impossibility of such a placeaccommodating such a company is the first thing whichstrikes every one. The moment, therefore, that thevessel touches the quay, out rushes the whole throng,and a race commences to the house or village to securebeds for the night. Such is the impetus of the rushthat the first arrives are frequently driven by the"pressure from without" up the stairs to the veryroof. A scene of the most laughable confusion isexhibited. All are clamouring for beds ; nobody canbe heard or attended to; and generally all who can,burst into rooms which are not locked up, and takeforcible possession. Such scenes, any one who has54 ROUTINE OFgone up this canal, or to the Western Isles must haveseen, — at Oban, at Tobermory, and at Inverness,which last place boasts three inns, and where, on ourarrival with a hundred fellow passengers, we foundthree hundred others had just landed from a Londonsteamer ! Our sportsmen, however, who were wellaware of the statistics of the north, had written beforehand,and secured bed-rooms at all the sleepingplaces, which were duly locked up against theirarrival, and they sate very composedly to witness therace of worse-informed mortals.On this occasion a very characteristic contrast waspresented between the sportsmen, and a number ofstudents who were on board at the time. Thesestudents, many of whom spend the college recess inpedestrianizing through the Highlands, have a characteralmost as peculiar to themselves as the GermanBlirschen. In twos and threes, with their knapsackson their backs, they may be seen rambling on, whereeverthere is fine scenery or spots of note to be visited.They step on board a packet at one place, and gooff at another, steering away into the hills ; ready totake up their quarters at such abode as may offer — theroad-side inn or the smoky hut of the Gael. Whereveryou see them, they are all curiosity and enthusiasm;all on fire with the sublime and beautiful —athirst for knowledge, historical, antiquarian, traditionary,botanical, geological — anything in the shapeof knowledge. They are the first to climb the hill,to reach the waterfall, to crowd round every spot oftragic interest ; everywhere they go agog with imagination,and everywhere they lament that they donot feel adequately, the power, and beauty, andCOUNTRY SPORTS. 65grandeur of the objects of their attention. Such agroup we had on board. On the other hand, thesportsmen had but one object, which absorbed all theirinterests and faculties. They cared not at thatmoment for the Fall of Foyers, saw scarcely thesplendid mountains and glens around. Their soulswere in the brown hills of their shooting grounds —the fever of the 12th of August was upon them.They kept together, talking of guns, dogs, grouse,roebuck ; all their conversation was larded andillustrated with the phraseology of their own favouritepursuit. They Averse, many of them, clad in a closejacket and trowsers of shepherd's tartan, with theirtelescope slung at their backs. They seemed tolook on the students as so many hair-brained andromantic striplings — the students on them, as so manycreatures of the chase. As we proceeded, the fieryNimrod were, one after another, put out at theopening of beautiful glens, and at the foot of wildmountains where their huts lay, and the vesselreceived a considerable accession of silence by thedeparture of their keepers, who, having found aHighland piper on board, got up a dance in thesteerage cabin, and kept that end of the vessel prettywell alive both day and night. Having thus broughtthem to their grounds, there can be no better narratorof what passes there than Thomas Oakleigh.On the eleventh of August, the sportsman arrivesat his shooting quarters ; probably some isolatedtavern, 'old as the hills,' — if such a house as thegrouse-shooter occasionally locates himself in, in thenorthern or midland counties of England, or in Scotland,where oatcake and peat supply the place of56 ROUTINE OFbread and fuel, can be called a tavern. The place,humble in character, has been the immemorial resortof sportsmen in August, although during the rest ofthe year, sometimes many months elapse ere a customer,save some itinerant salesman calling for hismug of beer, * darkens the door.' * * * At thehouse will be found all the keepers, and tenters, andpoachers, and young men from the country round,assembled, amounting in the whole to not more thansome eight or ten persons, all knowing ones, eachanxious to display his knowledge of the number andlocality of the broods, but each differing, wide as thepoles asunder, in his statement, except on four points,in which all are agreed, viz. — That the hatching seasonhas been finer than was ever known before ! That thebroods are larger and more numerous than there eidercounted before ! That the birds are heavier and strongerthan were ever seen before ! and that they ivill, on the followingday, lie better than they ever did on any previousopening day in the recollection of the oldest person present !Each successive season being, in their idea, more propitiousthan its precursor ! Anxiety and expectationare now arrived at a climax. At night, the blithe andjocund peasantry mingle with their superiors : theirpursuits are for once something akin. In the field-sportsthey can sympathise together : the peasant andthe peer associate ; the ploughboy and the squire talkfamiliarly together ; it is the privilege of the former,his prescriptive right. The circling cup, and lightheartedand hilarious laugh promiscuously go round !This night distinctions are unknown — and would thatit were oftener so ! * * * Long before midnight,all who can obtain beds retire, though not an eyeCOUNTRY SPORTS. 57is drowsy. The retainers lie on sofas, elbow-chairs,or whatever else presents itself; but sleep) is almost astranger during the night. The soldier before battle,is not more anxious as to the result of the morrow,than is the sportsman on the night of the 11th ofAugust ! Morning dawns, ' and heavily with mistscomes on the day.' The occupiers of benches and chairsare first on the alert: the landlady is called; breakfastis prepared — the dogs are looked at, ail is tumult,noise, and confusion. Reckless must he be that canrest longer in bed — ' the soothe moor-cocks closelycrow;' breakfast is hastily dispatched — next is heardthe howling and yelping of dogs, the cracking ofwhips, the snapping of locks, the charging, and flashing,and firing of guns, and every other note of preparation.The march is sounded, and away theywind for the heather and hills, true peep -d-day boys,far, far from the busy, money-getting world, tobreathe empyrean air; to enjoy a sport that should bemonopolized by princes — if, indeed, princes could befound deserving of such a monopoly ! Every personthe shooter meets with seems this day to have thrownoff his sordid cloak, and to be divested of those meanerpassions which render life miserable : all are nowwarm, open-hearted, frank, sincere, and obliging.The sportsman's shooting dress is a shibboleth, whichintroduces him alike to his superiors, to his fellows,and his inferiors : an acquaintance is formed at firstsight: there are no distant looks, no coldness, no outpouringof arrogance, or avarice, or pride ; but ahappy rivalry exists, to eclipse each other in thenumber and size of birds killed — the chief object ofemulation being: to kill the finest old cock. Let usVOL. I. E58 ROUTINE OFbe understood to express that this happy state ofthings, subsists only so long as the shooter's peregrinationsare circumscribed by the limits of his ownor friend's manor. The moment he becomes a borderer,a very different reception awaits him ! To thesportsman in training, full of health and strength, andwell appointed, it is of little consequence whetherthere be game or not. The inspiriting character ofthe sport, and the wild beauty of the scenery, sodifferent from what he is elsewhere in the habit ofcontemplating, hold out a charm that dispels fatigue !He feels not the drudgery. To him the hills arelovely in every aspect; whether beneath a hot,autumnal sun, with not a cloud to intercept the torridbeam, or beneath the dark canopy of thunder-clouds ;whether in the frosty morn or in the dewy eve —whether, when through the clear atmosphere he surveysas it were in a map, the countries that lie stretchedaround and beneath him, or when he wanders darklyon, amidst eternal mists that roll continuously pasthim — still a charm pervades the hills. The sun shinesbrighter, and the storm rages more furiously than inthe valleys ! The very sterility pleases : and to himwho has been brought thither by the rapid means oftravelling now adopted, from some bustling mart oftrade, or vortex of fashion, the novelty of lonelinessis agreeably exciting ! The stillness that reignsaround is as wonderful to him as the solidity of landto the stranded sailor ! Scarcely is there a change ofscene — stillness and solitude, hill and ravine, sky andheather, everywhere magnificent, the outline everywherebold, and adhere the view terminates amid rocksand crags, frequently sublime ! At noonday, nearCOUNTRY SPORTS. 59some rocky summit, perchance on the shepherd's stone,the shooter seats himself, and shares his last sandwichwith his panting dogs. We will suppose him to beon the boundary of the muir-lands : on one hand hesees an unbounded expanse of heathery hills, by nomeans monotonous if he will look upon them with theeye of a painter, for there is every shade of yellow,green, brown, and purple, — the last is the prevailingcolour at this season, the heather being in bloom :nor are the hills monotonous, if he looks at them withthe eye of a sportsman, for by this time (we supposehim to have been shooting all the morning) he willhave performed many feats, or at any rate will havemet with several adventures, and the ground beforehim is the field of his fame. He now looks withinterest on many a rock, and cliff, and hill, whichlately appeared but as one of so many ' crags, knolls,and mounds confusedly hurled !' He contemplatesthe site of his achievements, as a general surveys afield of battle during an interval of strife; the experienceof the morning has taught him a lesson, andhe plans a fresh campaign for the afternoon, or themorrow or probably the next season, should the samehills be again destined to be the scene of his exploits.The shooter looks down on the other hand from hisrocky summit, and, in the bright relief, through thewhite rents in the clouds, sees the far-off meadowsand hamlets, the woods, the rivers, and the lake. Herises, and renews his task. The invigorating influenceof the bracing wind on the heights, lends thesportsman additional strength — he puts forth everyeffort, every nerve is strained — he feels an artificialglow after nature is exhausted, and returns to the cot60 ROUTINE OFwhere he had previously spent a sleepless night, toenjoy his glass of grog, and such a snooze as thecitizen never knew !"This is a graphic and true picture of the outset ofgrouse-shooting ; but it is but one amongst many ofthe exciting situations and picturesque positions whichthis fine sport presents. There is a wide differencetoo, between the grouse-shooting of the north ofEngland and of the Highlands. On the Englishmoors, the majority of shooters who assemble there,are the friends or acquaintances of the proprietors,or of their friends and acquaintances, who have receivedinvitations, or procured the favour to shoot foraday or two at the opening of the season. Theoutbreak on the morning of the 12th, is thereforeproportionably multitudinous and bustling. Thethrong of the people on the preceding evening,crowded into the inns and cottages in the neighbourhoodwhere the best shooting lies, is often amazing.Many sportsmen, who on other occasions would thinkscorn to enter such a hovel, or jostle in such a crowd,may be seen waiting in patient endurance, in a situationin which a beggar would not envy him. Otherswill be seen stretched on their cloaks on the floor,while their dogs are occupying their beds, or the softbottom of a huge old chair ; their great anxiety being,to have their dogs fresh and able for the coming day.At the faintest peep of dawn, which is about threeo'clock at that season, loud is the sound of guns onall sides, going off farther and farther in the distance.At noon, on some picturesque and breezy hill, youmay see a large party congregated to lunch, whereprovisions and drink have been conveyed by appoint-countrySPORTS. 61ment. There ten or a dozen sportsmen seated on theground, all warm in body and mind — their dogswatching eagerly for their share of the feast, whichis thrown them with liberal hand — their guns rearedagainst some rock — their game thrown picturesquelyon the moorland turf — Flibbertigibbets, with theirasses who have brought up the baskets of provisions,the keg of beer, and bottles of porter, are runningabout and acting the waiters in a style of genuineoriginality ; while keepers and markers are at oncelunching and keeping an eye on the dogs, lest theyare too troublesome to their masters ; who are alltalking together with inconceivable ardour of theirindividual achievements. The situation, the mixtureof men and animals, of personages and costumes, allgo to make up a striking picture. On the Englishmoorlands, however, grouse-shooting is but as it werea brilliant and passing flash. As the enjoyment ofthe sport is generally a matter of grace and friendship,and is sought by numbers who can only devote to theexcursion, at the best, a few days, it is a scene ofanimation and havoc for a week or ten days, and thenits glory is over. During this time, however, thekeepers on many estates make a rich harvest, bypresents from gentlemen for attendance and guidanceto the best haunts of the game — by the loan of dogsat good interest to such as have not come well provided,or have met with accidents, or whose dogs, asis sometimes the case, unused to this kind of sportand scenery, have bolted and disappeared at the firstgeneral discharge of guns ; and by furnishing, subrose, grouse at a guinea a brace to certain lucklessbraggadochioes, who have boastingly promised to62 ROUTINE OFvarious friends at home plenty of game from themoors ; and have not been able to ruffle a singlefeather ! In the Highlands the scene is different.The grounds are more generally rented by individualsor parties ; they are wider and wilder, and both fromtheir extent and distance from the populous districtsof England are more thinly scattered with shooters.There, some of the sportsmen take their families totheir cottages on their shooting-ground, and on whichthey have probably bestowed some trouble and expense- to render them sufficiently comfortable andconvenient for a few months' occasional summer sojourn,and what in nature can afford a more deliciouschange from the ordinary course and place of life ?Up far amongst the wild mountains and moorlands,amid every fresh and magnificent object — amid fairylandglens of birch and hills of pine, the sight ofcrystal, rapid, sunny streams, and the sound of waterfalls,in the lands of strange and startling traditions.To intelligent children full of the enjoyment of lifeand healthful curiosity, in such scenery everything iswonderful and delightful ; to ladies of taste, such a lifefor a brief season must be equally pleasant. Thereare some ladies, indeed, of the highest rank, who arein the regular habit of spending a certain portion ofevery year in the Highlands ; and one in particular,of ducal rank, who at that season rambles far and wideamongst the cottages and the beautiful scenery of hernative hills, telling her daughters, that if they thereindulge in English luxuries, they must prepare themthemselves, — such is the simplicity of her mountainresidence and establishment; and they take their Cook'sOracle, and wonderfully enjoy the change. TheCOUNTRY SPORTS. 63language and costume of the inhabitants are those ofa foreign country ; every object has its novelty, andthe little elegancies of books, music, and furniturewhich can be conveyed to such an abode, strike allthe more from the stern nature without. Then thereis the finest fishing in the lochs and mountain-streams,the most delightful sailing in many places,and in the woods there are the shy roebuck and sometimesthe red-deer to be pursued. The grouse andblack-cock shooting season is, therefore, longer andsteadier there ,• but the full perfection of its enjoymentis to be found, perhaps, after all, only by thehappy mortal who makes one of the select partycollected at one of the great Highland houses of thearistocracy, where the best shooting, every requisiteof horses, dogs, attendants, etc., is furnished — andwhere, after the fatigues of the day the sportsmanreturns to his own clean room, to an excellent dinner,music, and refined society. But, amid all theseseductions, nothing will make the thorough Englishsportsman forget the 1st of September. Back hecomes, and enters on that regular succession of partridge,pheasant, woodcock, snipe, and wild-fowlshooting, of hunting and coursing, which diversify andfill up the autumn and winter of English rural life.To these pleasures then we leave him.A WORD WITH THE TOO SENSITIVE.1 have not attempted to defend the hunter, the courser,or even the shooter, in the preceding chapter, fromthe charge of cruelty which is perpetually directed64 ROUTINE OFagainst them — they are a sturdy, and now a veryintelligent people ; often numbering amongst themmany of our principal senators, authors, and men oftaste, and very capable of vindicating themselves ; butI must enact the shield-bearer for a moment, for thatvery worthy and much abused old man Izaak Walton,and the craft which he has made so fashionable. Spiteeven of Lord Byron's jingle about the hook andgullet, and a stout fish to pull it, they may say whatthey will of the old man's cruelty and inconsistency —the death of a worm, a frog, or a fish, is the height ofhis infliction, and what is that to the ten thousanddeaths of cattle, sheep, lambs, fish, and fowl of allkinds, that are daily perpetrated for the sustenance ofthese same squeamish cavillers ! They remind meof a delicate lady, at whose house I was one day, andon passing the kitchen door at ten in the morning,saw a turkey suspended by its heels, and bleedingfrom its bill, drop by drop. Supposing it was justinits last struggles from a recent death-wound, Ipassed on, and found the lady lying on her sofa overwhelmedin tears over a most touching story. I wascharmed with her sensibility; and the very delightfulconversation which I held with her, only heightenedmy opinion of the goodness of her heart. On accidentallypassing by the same kitchen door in theafternoon, six hours afterwards, I beheld, to myastonishment, the same turkey suspended from thesame nail, still bleeding, drop by drop, and stillgiving an occasional flutter with its wings ! Hasteningto the kitchen, I inquired of the cook, if sheknew that the turkey was not dead. " O yes, sir,"she replied, " it won't be dead, may-happen, these twoCOUNTRY SPORTS. 65hours. We always kill turkeys that way, it so improvestheir colour ; they have a vein opened underthe tongue, and only bleed a drop at a time !" " Anddoes your mistress know of this your mode of killingturkeys ?" " O yes, bless you sir, it's our regular way;missis often sees 'em as she goes to the gardens —and she says sometimes, ' Poor things ! I don't liketo see 'em, Betty ; I wish you would hang themwhere I should not see 'em!" I was sick! I wasdizzy ! It was the hour of dinner, but I walkedquietly away,And ne'er repassed that bloody threshold more !I say, what is Izaak Walton's cruelty to this, andto many another such perpetration on the part of thetender and sentimental? What is it to the grindingand oppression of the poor, that is every day going onin society, — to the driving of wheels and the urgingof steam engines, matched against whose iron powerthousands daily waste their vital energies ? What isit to the laying on of burdens of expense and troubleby the exactions of law, of divinity, of custom, —burdens grievous to be borne, and which they whoimpose them, will not so much as touch with one oftheir little fingers?They sit at home and turn an easy wheel,And set sharp racks to work to pinch and peel.John Keats.These things are done and suffered by humanbeings, and then go the very doers of these things,and cry out mightily against the angler for prickingthe gristle of a fish's mouth !e366 ROUTINE OFI do not mean to advocate cruelty — far from it !I would have all men as gentle and humane as possible; nor do I argue that because the world is full ofcruelty, it is any reason that more cruelty should betolerated : but I mean to say, that it is a reason whythere should not be so much permission to the greaterevils, and so much clamour against the less. Is theremore suffering caused by angling than by takingfishes by the net ? Not a thousandth, — not a tenthousandth part ! Where one fish is taken with ahook, it may be safely said that a thousand are takenwith the net : for daily are the seas, lakes, and riversswept with nets ; and cod, haddock, halibut, salmon,crabs, lobsters, and every species of fish that suppliesour markets, are gathered in thousands and ten thousands— to say nothing of herrings and pilchards bymillions. Over these there is no lamentation ; and yettheir sufferings are as great — for the suffering doesnot consist so much in the momentary puncture of ahook, as in the dying for lack of their native element.Then go these tender-hearted creatures and feastupon turtles that have come long voyages nailed tothe decks of ships in living agonies ; upon crabs,lobsters, prawns, and shrimps, that have been scaldedto death ; and thrust oysters alive into fires ; and fryliving eels in pans, and curse poor anglers before theirgods for cruel monsters, and bless their own soulsfor pity and goodness, forgetting all the fish-tormentsthey have inflicted !Ay, but " — they turn round upon you suddenlywith what they deem a decisive and unanswerableargument — " Ay, but they cannot approve of makingthe miseries of sentient creatures a pleasure." What !COUNTRY SPORTS. 67is there no pleasure in feasting upon crabs that havebeen scalded, and eels that have been fried alive?In sucking the juices of an oyster, that has gaped infiery agony between the bars of your kitchen grate ?But the whole argument is a sophism and a fallacy.Nobody does seek a pleasure, or make an amusementof the misery of a living creature. The pleasure isin the pursuit of an object, and the art and activityby which a wild creature is captured, and in all thoseconcomitants of pleasant scenery and pleasant seasonsthat enter into the enjoyment of rural sports ; — thesuffering is only the casual adjunct, which you wouldspare to your victim if you could, and which anyhumane man will make as small as possible. And overwhat, after all, do these very sensitive persons lament?Over the momentary pang of a creature, which formsbut one atom in a living series, every individual ofwhich is both pursuing and pursued, is preying, or ispreyed upon. The fish is eagerly pursuing the fly,one fish is pursuing the other, and so it is through thewhole chain of living things, and this is the order andsystem established by the very centre and principleof love, by the beneficent Creator of all life. Thetoo sensitively humane, will again exclaim — " Yes,this is right in the inferior animals : it is their nature,and they only follow the impulse which their Makerhas given them." True; but M'hat is right in themisequally right in man ; — the argument applies withdouble force in his case. For, is there no suchimpulse implanted in him? Let every sportsmananswer it ; let the history of the world answer it ;let the heart of every nine-tenths of the human raceanswer it. Yes, the very fact that we do pursue such68 COUNTRY SPORTS.sports, and enjoy them, is an irrefragable answer. Theprinciple of chase and taking of prey, which is impressedon almost all living things, from the minutestinsect to the lion of the African desert, is impressedwith double force on man. By the strong dictatesof our nature, by the very words of the Holy Scriptures,every creature is given us for food ; our dominionover them, is made absolute. The amiableCowper asserted that dogs would not pursue game, ifthey were not taught to do so. We admit the excellentnature of the man, but every day proves that, inthis instance, he was talking beyond his knowledge.Every one who knows anything of dogs, knows, thatif you bring them up in a town, and keep them awayfrom the habits of their own class to their full growth,the moment they get into the country, they will pursueeach their peculiar game, with the utmost avidity,and after their own manner. There is then, unquestionably,an instinctive propensity in one animal toprey upon another — in man pre-eminently so — and itis not the work of wisdom to quench this tendency,but to follow it with all possible gentleness andhumanity.CHAPTER V.SCIENTIFIC FARMING.Res rustica, sine dubitalione, proxima, et quasi ensanguinedSapientia est. — Columella, De Re Rustica.Ob, blessed, who drinks the bliss that Hymen yields, -And plucks life's roses in his quiet fields. — Ebcnezer Elliott.There may be a difference of opinion as to the strictutility or wisdom of the pursuits noticed in the lastchapter ; — of the excellence and rationality of thosewhich form the subject of this, there can be none.Nothing' can be more consonant to nature, nothingmore delightful, nothing more beneficial to the country,or more worthy of any man, than the georgiaoccupations which form so prominent a feature in therural life of England. Whether a country gentlemanseek profit or pleasure, in them he can, at any time,find them. While he is increasing the value of hisestate, he is in the midst of health, peace, and a seriesof operations which have now become purely scientific,and have called in to their accomplishment variousother sciences and arts. In every age of the worldagricultural pursuits have formed the delight of thegreatest nations and the noblest men. Some of the70 SCIENTIFIC FARMING.most illustrious kings and prophets of Israel weretaken from the fold or the plough. David and EHshaare great names in the history of rural affairs. KingUzziah " built towers in the desert, and digged manywells, for he had much cattle both in the low countryand in the plains ; husbandmen also, and vinedressersin the mountains, and in Carmel, for he loved husbandry."How delightful are the associations whichthe literature of Greece and Rome has thrownaround country affairs ! Homer, Hesiod, and Theocritus— how elysian are the glimpses they give us intorural life ! how simple, how peaceful, how picturesque !Laertes, that venerable old monarch, pruning hisvines, and fetching young stocks from the woods forhis fences. Eumeus, at his rustic lodge, entertaininghis prince and his king. Hesiod himself, wanderingat the feet of Helicon, less impressed with the sublimityof the poet than with the spirit of the husbandman! He shews us the very infancy of agriculture :Forget not when you sow the grain, to mindThat a boy follows with a rake behind ;And strictly charge him, as you drive, with careThe seeds to cover, and the birds to scare.Works and Days, B.2.The harrow, an implement well known to KingDavid, for he put the subjected Ammonites under it,was unknown then in Greece ! They raked in thegrain. That was but the second stage in the progressof tillage ; the first undoubtedly being that in whichtheir plough was a pointed stick, and their harrow abush ; as the most ancient drawing of hay-forks shewsthat they were forked sticks cut from the thicket. Butto leave those primitive times of Greece, — there is noSCIENTIFIC FARMING. 71nation that at once acquired so vast a military renownand yet retained such a passion for the peaceful pursuitsof agriculture as Rome. Nothing is so soon familiarizedto the mind of the school-boy as the fact of theirgenerals, dictators, and emperors tilling their ownlands — leaving them with reluctance for state honours,and retiring to them with gladness to end their daysin meditative tranquillity. Cicero tells us that courierswere first introduced by them, to run between thecapitol and their farms, that they themselves mightleave them only on most important occasions. Almostevery one of their writers on rural affairs whose workshave reached us were men of distinction in the state.Varro was consul ; Cato, the most remarkable man ofhis time, filled the highest offices; Columella andPalladius were men of note ; and Pliny, a patricianofficer, was governor of Spain. But what is moreremarkable even is, that such men as Virgil, Horace,and Cicero, men of imaginative genius, and so involvedin court life, or the business of government, should besuch passionate lovers of rural concerns. Every oneknows how their writings overflow with the praises ofcountry life, and what delight they took in their farmsand villas. Cicero seems as though he could neverhave done with telling us of the pleasure he took infarming. "I might expatiate," he says, "on thebeauty of verdant groves and meadows, on the charmingaspects of vineyards and olive-yards, but to say allin one word, there cannot be a more pleasing, or amore profitable scene that that of a well-cultivatedfarm. In my opinion, indeed, no kind of occupationis more fraught with happiness, not only as thebusiness of husbandry is of singular utility to mankind,72 SCIENTIFIC FARMING.but, as I have said, being attended with its ownpeculiar pleasures. I will add too, as a further recommendation,and let it restore me to the good graces ofthe voluptuous, that it supplies both the table and thealtar with the greatest variety and abundance. Accordingly,the magazines of the skilful and industriousfarmer are plentifully stored with wine and oil, withmilk, cheese, and honey; as his yards abound withpoultry, and his fields Much flocks and herds of kids,lambs, and pockets. The garden also furnishes himwith an additional source of delicacies, in allusion towhich the farmers pleasantly call a certain piece ofground allotted to that particular use, their dessert. Imust not omit, likewise, that in the intervals of theirmore important business, and in order to heighten therelish of the rest, the sports of the field claim a shareof their amusements. * * * Of country occupations Iprofess myself a warm admirer. They are pleasuresperfectly consistent with every degree of advancedyears, as they approach the nearest of all others tothose of the purely philosophical kind. They arederived from observing the nature and properties oftheir own earth, which yields a ready obedience tothe cultivator's industry, and returns with interestwhat he deposits in her charge." — De Senectute.He then goes on to tell us what delight he took inthe cultivation of the vine ; in watching the springingand progress of corn ; the green blade pushing forth,shooting into a knotted stem, nourished and supportedby the fibres of the root, terminated in the ear inwhich the grain is lodged in regular order, anddefended from the depredations of birds by its beardedspikes. He tells us that he could name numbers ofSCIENTIFIC FARMING. 73his most distinguished friends and neighbours, andsome of them at very advanced ages, dio take suchinterest in all that is going on at their farms, thatthey will be present at every important agriculturaloperation — many of them engaged in improvementsof which they will see neither the benefit nor the end.And what," says he, " do these noble husbandmen,when they are asked for what purpose they dig andplant, reply — ' In obedience to the immortal gods, bywhose bountiful providence we received these fieldsfrom our ancestors, and whose will it is that we shoulddeliver them down with improvement to posterity !' "And this generous and high sense of duty it waswhich animated the Romans during the better portionof their republic, and kept alive their virtue and theirsimplicity of life, so far as to give them power todespise wealth, and to command the fortunes of othermen. Cicero is delighted with this noble principle,and he reverts with enthusiasm to the picture ofMantis Curious, who, after having conquered theSamnites, the Sabines, and even Pyrrhus himself,passed the honourable remainder of his age in cultivatinghis farm. He adds, " 1 can never behold hisvilla without reflecting with the highest degree ofadmiration both on the singular moderation of hismind, and the general simplicity of the age in whichhe flourished. Here it was, while sitting by his fireside,that he nobly rejected the gold which was offeredhim on the part of the Samnites, and rejected it withthis memorable saying, ' that he placed his glory, noton the abundance of his own wealth, but in commandingthose amongst whom it abounded'" With equalexultation he refers to the enthusiasm into which74-scientific FARMING.Xenophon in his treatise of Economics breaks forcein the praise of agriculture, and relates the interviewof Lysander the Spartan ambassador with Cyrus theyounger, as told by Socrates to his friend Critobulus,in which Cyrus assures Lysander that all the trees,shrubs, etc. which he admired in his garden wereplanted by his own hand.But if such were the charms which agriculture hadfor the Roman nobility, how much greater ought itto possess for the nobles and gentlemen of England !Amid all the advantages and recreations which havebeen pointed out in the preceding chapters as surroundingthe country life of modern England, that ofscientific farming is certainly one of the greatest. Itis a pursuit full of interest and variety, at once natural,philosophical, and dignified. It is difficult to imaginea man of wealth and education more usefully orhonourably employed than in directing the cultureand improvement of his estate. Agriculture is nowbecome, indeed, as Cicero termed it in his day, " thenearest of all employments to the purely philosophicalkind," It is a science which requires a first-rateeducation to prosecute it to its full capability, to makethe other arts and sciences of modern times bear uponit, and co-operate with it, so as to add something toits progression, or even to apply beneficially theknowledge of its already established principles andpractices. It is no longer an occupation which requiresa man to forego the refined pleasures of society, tobury himself amid woods and wildernesses in someobscure hamlet far from the enjoyments and intelligenceof the world. As we have already seen, locatehimself where he will in these islands, the arts, theSCIENTIFIC FARMING. 75elegancies, the news and knowledge of civilized lifewill penetrate to him by swift agencies, and give himall the real advantages of the city in the peace andfulness of his retirement. And what a noble art isagriculture now become ! Look at the manner it isnow practised by the most skilful of its professors.Let any one just turn over the leaves of Mr. London'sEncyclopaedia of Agriculture, and trace the progressof its implements only, from the plough of the ancientsin the shape of a mere pick, to the almost endlessmachines which the active brains of men and theiradvancing knowledge of mechanics have given to thescientific farmer. Let any one turn to the list ofengravings of farming apparatus in the same excellentwork, amounting to about 300, and he will obtain someidea of the amount of science and invention now devotedto the use of the agriculturist. There are no men whohave availed themselves of the progress of the arts andof general knowledge more than they. Mechanics,chemistry, hydraulics, steam, all have been seized upon,to developed the principles, or facilitate the operationsof agriculture. Within the last century the strideswhich have been made in this interesting departmentof knowledge are admirable. The Netherlands may besaid to have been the mother of our modern agricultureScotland its nurse. Tub's system of horse-hoeingand drill husbandry has been introduced by Dawson,and has brought after it a numerous train of drills, dib-being-machines, horse-hoes, ploughs, rollers, suffers,carriers, watering-machines, brakes, drill-harrows,etc., which we now see almost everywhere where theold system of plain ploughing, harrowing, and broadcastsowing prevailed to the infinite loss of seed and76 SCIENTIFIC FARMING.growth of weeds. Then comes the thrashing machineinvented by Menzies, and improved by Meikle fromstage to stage, successively adapted to horses, wind,water, and eventually the giant power of steam, thusgiving to the operations of the barn a rapidity equalto the skill and neatness displayed in the field. Thescientific genius of Sir Humphrey Davj^, Thompson,Fourcroy, Parmentier, Kirwan, Gay Lussac, andmany other eminent chemists, have been employed toinvestigate more accurately the real nature of soilsand manures, and a vast increase of productive powerhas been the result. Bones, a source of fertility till oflate entirely wasted, have done wonders; rape-dust,malt-dust, oil, fish, salt, wood and peat ashes, soot,gypsum, and many other substances, have been madethe active agents of human subsistence. The bestmixture of crops has been determined by numerousexperiments ; and the benefits of stall-feeding clearlydemonstrated. Mangel-wUrzel, trifolium incarnate,a plant that from its rich crimson hue would be anornament of our fields even were it not a profitableproduction, and other vegetables, have been added tothat plenteous growth of clover, tills, lucerne, rape,turnips, etc., with which modern tillage has enrichedboth summer and winter stalls. The improvement ofthe breed of cattle and sheep by Bakewell of Dilly,and the Cubes; the growth of finer and better woolsby the introduction and crossing with the Merino byLord Somerville and others, have been as remarkableas the superior cultivation of the soil. The science ofdraining has found devotees equally ardent, and hasproduced the most striking consequences. In manyinstances the mere act of draining has quadrupled theSCIENTIFIC FARMING. 77produce of land. In the weald of Kent, land whichproduced only a rental of five shillings an acre, hasbeen raised by this process to five-and-twenty. Andall these objects have been watched over, canvassed,and stimulated by the establishment of agriculturalsocieties, agricultural journals and newspapers, andploughing matches. Agricultural associations are nowto be found in almost every county, and in differentdistricts of the same county, which offer premiums onthe best specimens of horses, cattle, and sheep ; thebest ploughing, and the most steady and industriousfarm and household servants. It is a new feature inrural life, to see the whole farming population of adistrict hastening on a given day, gentlemen, farmers,and farm servants all in their best array, to some onespot where the cattle are shewn, the ploughing isdone, the prizes are awarded by umpires chosen fromthe most skilful, and the different parties then goingto a good dinner, and a long talk and hearty toastingof all the interests of agriculture.It is really too, as curious to see on our scientificfarms the vast variety of implements and machineswhich these causes have produced ; — ploughs — about adozen and a half swing-ploughs, and upwards of adozen wheel-ploughs of different constructions, andby different patentees; harrows, drills, cultivators.Every species of soil and crop has its peculiar apparatus; in the field and the farm-yard ; for gettingseed into the ground, clearing and dressing whenthere, for thrashing it out and cleaning it for market;for sowing peas, beans, turnips, carrots, parsnips, etc.,for chopping, slicing, and preparing them for cattle ;their machines for tedding hay, for stacking it with78 SCIENTIFIC FARMING.least possible risk, for cutting and steaming it ; forploughing up weeds, ploughing up moorlands, andeven roads ; for reaping by wholesale, and raking by-wholesale; for tapping deep springs, and guttering thesurface for the escape of top-water ; there are their machinesfor paring and levelling lumpy lands ; for cross-cuttingfurrows to make rough mossy land take seedbetter; their channels, sluices, and schemes for irrigation.And then, who shall tell all their implements forhay-binding, rope-twisting, furze-pounding for cattle ;their novel churns, their batteries, their new-fangledmole-traps, their poultry-feeders, and pheasant-feeders,by which those birds are enabled to help themselvesfrom tin boxes supplied with grain for them, withoutfeathered depredators being able to go shares withthem. Truly Solomon might say that men now-a-dayshave sought out many inventions !But who shall calculate all the thoughts and thelabours of such men as Fitzherbert, Tusser, Gooch,Pratt, Hartley, Weston, Markham, Sir Walter Raleigh,Sir John Norton, John Evelyn, Porridge,Stillingfleet, Harte, Arthur Young, Maxwell, LordKames, Sir John Sinclair, etc. etc.? Who shallaggregate and estimate the numerous valuable suggestionsand articles of anonymous writers in thejournals; and the personal labours and fosteringinfluence of such men as the late Duke of Buccleugh,the Dukes of Bedford and Portland, the late LordSomerville, Mr. Coke of Oldham, now the Earl ofLeicester, and many other noblemen and gentlemenwho have spent their lives in the unostentatious butmost meritorious endeavour to perfect the agriculturalscience of England? With the exception of natusFARMING. 79raises, there are no men whose pursuits seem to meto yield them so much real happiness as intelligentagriculturists M^hose hearts are in the business ; andthough there are men whose offices or professionsplace them more in the public eye, there are nonewho are more truly the benefactors of their country.Such were Lord Somerville and the Duke of Buckas described by Sir Walter Scott ; and thereis a passage in his memoir of the latter noblemanwell worth the notice of those who propagate or believein the nonsense of the economists on the non-influenceof absenteeism. "In the year 1817, whenthe poor stood so much in need of employment, afriend asked the Duke why his grace did not prepareto go to London in the spring ? By way of answer,the Duke showed him a list of day-labourers thenemployed in improvements on his different estates,the number of whom, exclusive of his regular establishments,amounted to nine hundred and forty-sevenpersons. If we allow to each labourer two persons,whose support depended on his wages, the Duke wasin a manner foregoing, during this severe year, theprivilege of his rank, in order to provide with moreconvenience for a little army of nearly three thousandpersons, many of whom must otherwise have found itdifficult to obtain subsistence. The result of suchconduct is twice blessed; both in the means which itemploys, and in the end which it attains in the generalimprovement of the country. This anecdote forms agood answer to those theorists who pretend that theresidence of proprietors on their estates is a matter ofindifference to the inhabitants of that district. Hadthe Duke been residing, and spending his revenue80 SCIENTIFIC FARMING.elsewhere, one half of these poor people would havewanted employment and food ; and would probablyJive been little comforted by any metaphysical argumentsupon population, which could have been presentedto their investigation." — Scott's Prose Works,vol. 4.Many such things may be daily heard of the presentDuke of Portland, in the neighbourhood ofWarbeck Abbey, in Nottinghamshire; which convinceyou that he is one of those men that contriveto pass through life without much noise, but reapinghappiness and respect in abundance, and while gratifyingthe taste for rural occupation, conferring themost lasting benefits upon the country. I shall closethis section of this chapter with the substance of onesuch act as related to me some years ago. In themanner of relation it may therefore differ somewhatfrom that in which originally told, but in fact I believeit to be perfectly correct. The Duke found that oneof his tenants, a small farmer, was falling, year afteryear, into arrears of rent. The steward wished toknow what should be done. The duke rode to thefarm ; saw that it was rapidly deteriorating, and theman, who was really an experienced and industriousfarmer, totally unable to manage it, from poverty.In fact, all that was on the farm was not enough topay the arrears. " John," said the duke, as the farmercame to meet him as he rode up to the hous?, " 1 wantto look over the farm a little." As they went along," Really" said he, "everything is in very bad case.This won't do. I see you are quite under it. Allyour stock and crops won't pay the rent in arrear. Iwill tell you what I must do. I must take the farmSCIENTIFIC FARMING. 81into my own hands. You shall look after it for me,and I will pay you your wages." Of course therewas no saying nay, — the poor man bowed assent.Presently there came a reinforcement of stock, thenloads of manure, — at the proper time, seed, and woodfrom the plantations for repairing gates and buildings.The duke rode over frequently. The man exertedhimself, and seemed really quite relieved from a loadof care by the change. Things speedily assumed anew aspect. The crops and stock flourished ; fencesand outbuildings were put into good order. In twoor three rent days, it was seen by the steward's booksthat the farm was paying its way. The duke on hisnext visit, said, " Well, John, I think the farm doesvery well now. We will change again. You shallbe tenant again, and as you now have your head fairlyabove water, I hope you will be able to keep it there."The duke rode off at his usual rapid rate. The manstood in astonishment; but a happy fellow he was,M'hen on applying to the steward he found that hewas actually re-entered as tenant to the farm just asit stood in its restored conditions I will venture tosay, however, that the duke himself was the happierman of the two.VOL. I.CHAPTER VLPLANTING.'' Jock, when ye Viae naetliing else to do, ye may be aye stickingin a tree; it will be growing, Jock, when ye Ve sleeping'"Heart of Mid Lothian.What we have just said of the pleasures and benefitof scientific farming, may be said also of planting ; itis but another interesting mode of employing time bylanded proprietors, at once for recreation and theimprovement of their estates. What, indeed, can bemore delightful than planning future woods, where,perhaps, now sterile heather, or naked declivitiespresent themselves; clothing, warming, diversifyingin imagination your vicinity; then turning yourvisions into realities, and watching the growth of yourforests? Since John Evelyn wrote his eloquentSylva, and displayed the deplorable condition of ourwoodlands, and since Dr. Johnson penned his sarcasticTour to the Hebrides, both England and Scotlandhave done much to repair the ravages made in thecourse of ages in our woods. A strong spirit on thesubject has grown up in the minds of our landedgentry, and vast numbers of trees of all kinds suitableto our climate have been planted in different parts ofthe island. The Commissioners of Woods and ForestsPLANTING. 83have made extensive plantations of oak in the NewForest, and other places. In the neighbourhood of allgentlemen's houses we see evidences of liberal planting:and the rich effect of these young woods is well calculatedto strengthen the love of planting. In this partof Surrey, wood, indeed seems the great growth ofthe country. Look over the landscape from RichmondHill, from Claremont, from St. George's, or St. Anne'sHill, and it is one wide sea of wood. The same is thecase in the bordering regions of Buckingham and Berkshires. Richmond Park, Hampton-court Park, BushyPark, Claremont and Esher Parks, Garlands, Painshill,Windsor, Ockham, Bookham, the whole wide country iscovered with parks, Moods, and fields, the very hedgerowswhich are dense, continuous lines trees. Lookinto the part of Kent approaching the metropolis fromthe heights of Norwood, and the prospect is the same.Many of the extensive commons hereabout, as Book-hamand Streatham commons, are scattered with fineoaks, some of them very ancient, and diversified withthickets and green glades, and rather resemble oldforests and parks, than commons as seen elsewhere.Then again, the sandy heaths of Surrey are covered inmany places with miles of Scotch firs. There certainlyis no want of wood in these parts. In the sandywastes of Old Sherwood Forest in Nottinghamshire,many thousand acres, principally of larch, have beenplanted on the estates of the Dukes of Portland andNewcastle, Lord Scarborough, Earl Manners, Cols.Need, Wildman, and other proprietors. Even thecold hills of the Peak of Derbyshire have been plantedin some parts extensively ; and lands in those districtswhich were literally unproductive, are now a source of84 PLANTING.considerable income from the thinning of the woods.In Scotland the same change is very visible. Allalong the borders the good lands are beautifully cultivated,the bad extensively planted. From the drearyflats about Gretna Green to the borders of Northumberlandand Berwickshire, this is the case. Passinginto Scotland by the Cheviot, we saw extensive woodson the border lands of the Duke of Northumberland,Earl Mandeville, Mr. Collingwood, Mr. St Paul, etc.The cold and wild tract between Kelso and Edinburghpresents cheering appearances of the extension of theplanting spirit. In the counties of Argyle, Ross, andInverness, which Monteith of Stirling, in his Forester'sGuide, particularly points out as wanting wood,we were struck with the great extent of plantingalready done. Every summer tourist up the Clydesees how much the woods round Roseneath havesheltered and beautified it — and the woods aroundInverary Castle are, to a great extent, very splendid —while all the way thence to Oban you pass throughmountain glens and over moorlands enriched withwoods. The Duke of Athol, about Athol and Duckedhas planted upwards of 15,000 acres. I've Duke ofMontrose has been a great planter. Sir Walter Scotswas a diligent planter, as the young woods roundAbbotsford testify ; and there are no moments of hislife in which we can imagine him happier than whenmounted on his pony he progressed through his plantationsat his leisure, with his pruning knife in hishand. But what he did on his own estate is trivial towhat he did by his writings. He may be said to haveplanted more trees by his pen than any nun alivehas with his spade. He himself tells us that thePLANTING. 85simple words put into the mouth of the Laird ofDumbiedikes, and placed as a motto at the head ofthis chapter, induced a certain earl to plant a largetract of country.In the neighbourhood of Dingwall, Beuley, Beaufort,— from Inverness to Culloden, — in short, inalmost every part of the Highlands, — you find extensiveyoung woods of larch and pine. Many ofthese, it must be confessed, have apparently beenmade with more regard to profit than beauty. Inmany of the sweet strath, and along the feet of themountains, the long monotonous reaches of larch — anunbroken, unvaried succession of pointed pyramids —present but an indifferent contrast to the free slopesof beauty which the native growth of the birchesexhibits; dotting glens and embosoming lochs wish afairyland loveliness. As they become large, and arethinned properly, or rather, where they are plantedthinly, on the plan of the Duke of Athol, this defectmay be remedied. Scotch firs, when large, assume awild forest majesty ; and larches in mountainoussituations, of an ancient growth, have an Alpinesweep of boughs that is extremely picturesque andgraceful ; but young crowded firs of any kind are tooformal for beauty.Mr. Wordsworth, in his Guide to the Lakes ofWestmoreland and Cumberland, complains grievouslyof the injury done to the scenery there, by the injudiciousplanting of larch. " Larch and fir plantationshave been spread, not merely with a view to profit,but in many instances for the sake of ornament. Tothose who plant for profit, and are thrusting everyother tree out of the way, to make room for their86 PLANTING.favourite, the larch, I would utter first a regret, thatthey should have selected these lovely vales for theirvegetable manufactory, when there is so much barrenand irreclaimable land in the neighbouring moors,and in other parts of the island, which might havebeen had for this purpose at a far cheaper rate. — Itmust be acknowledged that the larch, till it has outgrownthe size of a shrub, shews, when looked atsingly, some elegance of form and appearance, especiallyin spring, decorated, as it then is, by the pinktassels of its blossoms ; but, as a tree, it is less thanany other pleasing. Its branches — for boughs it hasnone — have no variety in the youth of the tree, andlittle dignity even when it attains its full growth;leaves it cannot be said to have, consequently affordsneither shade nor shelter. In spring, the larchbecomes green long before the native trees, and itsgreen is so peculiar and vivid, that, finding nothingto harmonize with it, wherever it comes forth a disagreeablespeck is produced. In summer, when allother trees are in their pride, it is of a dingy, lifelesshue ; in autumn, of a spiritless unvaried yellow ; andin winter, it is still more lamentably distinguishedfrom any other deciduous tree of the forest, for theyseem only to sleep, but the larch seems absolutelydead. If an attempt be made to mingle thickets, oracertain proportion of other forest trees, with thelarch, its horizontal branches intolerant cut themdown, as with a scythe, or force them to spindle uptokeep pace with it. The terminating spike rendersit impossible that the several trees, where planted innumbers, should ever blend together so as to form amass, or masses of wood. Add thousands to tens ofPLANTING. 87thousands, and the appearance is still the same — acollection of separate individual trees, obstinately-presentingthemselves as such ; and which, fromwhatever point they are looked at, if but seen, maybecounted upon the fingers. Sunshine, or shadow,has little power to adorn the surface of such a wood ;and the trees not carrying up their heads, the windraises amongst them no majestic undulations."There is much truth in these remarks, and theycannot be too much borne in mind by all planterswhere picturesque beauty is an object. On drearymoors, where the larch is planted merely for profit,and where the tout^ensemhle cannot readily be attained,woods of it often present a great degree of pleasantnessby contrast. They give you green glades andnarrow footpaths, between heath and fern, theirslender boughs hanging above you, especially in thefreshness of their foliage, very agreeably. As amatter of profit, and for the value of its timber, fewspecies of wood can compete with it. The followingextract from the Transactions of the HighlandSociety, gives a very striking view of its importance.Larch will supply ship-timber at a great heightabove the region of the oak ; and while a seventy-fourgun ship will require the oak timber of seventy-fiveacres, it will not require more than the timber of tenacres of larch ; the trees in both cases being sixty-eightyears old. The larch, at Ducked, grows at theheight of 1300 feet above the level of the sea ; thespruce at 1200; the Scotch pine at 700; and deciduoustrees at not higher than 500. The larch, incomparison with the Scotch pine, is found to producethree and three-quarter times more timber, and that88 PLANTING.timber of seven times more value. The larch also,being a deciduous tree, instead of injuring the pastureunder it, improves it. The late Duke of Athol,John the Second, planted in the last year of his life,6500 Scotch acres of mountain ground solely withthe larch, wldch in the course of seventy-two yearsfrom the time of planting, will be a forest of timberfit for the building of the largest class of ships in hismajesty's navy. It will have been thinned out toabout 400 trees per acre. Each tree will contain atthe least fifty cubic feet, or one load of timber, whichat the low price of one shilling the cubic foot, onlyone half of its present value, will give loot. peracre, or in all, a sum of 6,500,000/. sterling. Besidesthis, there will have been a return of 11. per acre fromthe thinnings, after deducting all expense of thinnings,and the original outlay of planting. Further still,the land on which the larch is planted, is not worthabove nine pence or one shilling per acre. After thethinnings of the first thirty years, the larch will makeit worth at least ten shillings per acre by the improvementof the pasturage, on which cattle can be keptsummer and winter."That is pretty well. This calculation is madeupon land stated at \s. per acre, planted with larch;but Monteith, an experienced timber planter andvaluer, gives us for oak planted on land of \l. peracre yearly rent, the following statement.If the proprietor, for instance, plants 100 acresof ground, the trees being placed four feet distantfrom each other, each acre will contain 3422 plants.If it be planted M'ith hard woods, chiefly oaks, and afew firs to nurse them up, supposing it is a plantationPLANTING. 89purely for profit, the expense of plants and planting,per acre, will he 61. £ 600Rent of land for ten years, at 1/. per acre, per annum . 1000Interest on rent 225£expenses of thinning, pruning, and trainingup for 10 years, at 1/. per acre, perannum 1000Total expenditure £ 2825Deduct produce of 1000 trees thinnedfrom each acre, during the first 10years, at 2/. per acre . . . . £ 200Deduct value of 2422 trees left on theground after the first 10 years, at71. lOs. per acre . . . . 750 950Total outlay at the end of 10 years ^1875To which add expense of thinning andpruning for the next 10 years at 21,per acre jB 200Rent of the land for the same period at1/. per acre, per annum . . . 1000Interest on the rent for the same period 275Interest on 1875/. for 10 years . . 937Total outlay for 20 years £ 4287Deduct produce of 1000 trees thinned outduring the last 10 years, from eachacre, at 6d. each, or 25/. per acre £ 2500Deduct for 1422 trees which fall to beenhanced in value during the last 10years, and will come to at least sol. 1 Is.per acre 3555 6055^ei768Deduct from this the value of these 1000trees as they were estimated at the endof the first 10 years, at 31. 2s. per acre . . . 310Thus leaving a balance in favour, of iG1458f290 PLANTING.Hitherto the amount of gain is comparatively small,but this calculation continued according to the growthof the trees for ten years more, will leave the balanceno less than 23,667Z. And to the end of forty yearsfrom first planting, the round sum of 41,000Z. "Thesecalculations," says Monteith, " may to those whohave paid no attention to the subject, excite wonderif not doubt, but in making them, the author has beencareful to lessen rather than exaggerate the profits :and if the plantation shall have been carried to theage of sixty or seventy years, and properly thinned,etc., the value will be double what it was at fortyyears." Thus, if 100 acres in seventy years ^villyield 80,000/. planted with oak, 6000 acres will yieldabout 5,000,000/. ; while 6000 acres of the larch plantationsof Athol in the same period are calculated toyield about 6,000,000/. There is sufficient agreementto lead us to suppose the calculations probablyaccurate, and what a splendid inducement to judiciousplanting do these calculations present !The following facts, given in the " EncyclopaediaBritannica," (vol. i. art. agriculture), are also particularlyinteresting to the planter. Mr. Papier, in thefourth volume of the Bath Papers, computes thevalue of fifty acres of oak timber in 100 years, to be12,100/., which is nearly 2/. lOs. annually per acre;and if we consider that this is continually accumulating,without any of that expense or risk, to whichannual crops are subject, it is probable that timber-plantingmay be accounted one of the most profitablearticles in husbandry. Evelyn calculates the profitof 1000 acres of oak land in 150 years at no less than670,000/.PLANTING. 91The following table shews the increase of treesfrom their first planting. It was taken from theMarquis of Vanstone's plantation, begun in theyear 1765, and the calculation made in 1780. It isabout six acres in extent, the soil partly a swampymeadow upon a gravelly bottom. The measureswere taken at five feet above the surface of theground; the small trees having been occasionallydrawn for posts and rails, as well as rafters for cottages,and when peeled of the bark will stand well forseven years.Circumference inFeet in height. Feet. Inches.Lombardy Poplar . 60 to 80 . 4 8Abel 50 — 70 . 4 GPlane 30 — 60 . 3 6Acacia 50 — 60 . 2 4Elm 40 — 60 . 3 6Chestnut 30 — 50 . 2 9Weymouth Pine 30 — 50 . 2 5Chester Ditto 30 — 50 . 2 5Scotch Fir 30 — 50 . 2 10Spruce 30 — 50 . 2 2Larch 50 — 60 . 3 10From this table it appears that the planting oftimber trees, when the return can be waited fortwenty years, will undoubtedly repay the originalcost of planting as well as the interest of the moneylaid out, M'hich is better worth the attention of theproprietor of land, as the ground on which they growmay be supposed good for cattle also.In Argyleshire, there are probably 40,000 acresof natural coppice wood which are cut periodically;commonly every nineteen or twenty years, and areunderstood to return about \L an acre annually.^2 PLANTING.Very extensive plantations have been formed by theDuke of Argyle, and other proprietors. About thirtyyears ago those of his grace were reckoned to contain2,000,000 trees, worth then 45. each, amounting tothe enormous sum of 400,000/.I knew a certain old military officer, who, duringhis early years was a captain in a militia regiment.His brother officers were a gay set of fellows, andwere continually drawing on their private incomes,and often coming to him to borrow money ; but hemade it a rule never to spend more than his own pay,and as to money he never had any to lend. He wentdown to his estate every spring and autumn, andplanted as many acres of trees as his rental wouldallow him. His planting gave him a perpetual pleaof poverty. At a certain age he retired on his half-pay.A large family was growing around him, buthis woods were growing too. Many a time have Iseen him, mounted on an old brood mare, with a sortof capacious game-bag across her loins, with his gunslung at his shoulder, his saws and pruning-knivesstrapped behind his saddle, going away into his woods :and keeping the calculations of Monteith, and of thelarch plantations of Athol in mind, I can now imaginethe profound satisfaction which the old gentleman,through a long course of years, must have felt in thedepths of his forest solitudes. He is still living, atan advanced age. His family is large, and has beenexpensive; but his woods were large too, and no doubttheir thinningss have proved very grateful thinningss ofhis family charges.CHAPTER VII.GARDENS.We must now wind up, in a few words, what we haveto say of the country life of the gentry, and these wordsmust be on their gardens. In these, as in all thoseother sources of enjoyment that surround them, perfectionseems to be reached. They live in the midstof scenes which, while they appear nature itself, arethe result of art consummated only by ages of labour,research, science, travel, and the most remarkablediscoveries. Nothing can be more delicious than therural paradises which now surround our countryhouses. Walks, waters, lawns of velvet softness,trees casting broad shadows, or whispering in theVOL. 1. F 394 ■ GARDENS.stirrings of the breeze; seclusion and yet airiness;flowers from all regions, besides all the luxuries whichthe kitchen-garden, the orchard, conservatories, hothouses,and sunny walls pour upon our tables, are soblended and diffused around our dwellings, that nothingon earth can be more delectable. It is impossible,without looking back through many ages ofEnglish life, to form any idea of the real advantageswhich we enjoy of this kind, — of the immense stridewe have made from the bare and rio^id life of ourancestors. How many of the fruits or flowers, orculinary vegetables, which we possess in such excellenceand perfection, did this country originally produce? Few, indeed, of our indigenous flowers areretained in our gardens, few of our vegetables besidesthe cabbage and the carrot; and what were the ancientBritish fruits besides the crab and the bullace?But we have only to look back to the feudal times tosee the wide difference between our gardens andthose then existing ; for all that could be enjoyed ofa garden must be compressed within the narrowboundary of the castle moat. Everything withoutwas subject to continual ravage and destruction ; andthough orchards M^ere planted without, and suffered totake their chance, the ladies' little parterre occupiedsome sheltered nook of the court, or space betweengrim towers :Now was there made fast by the tours wall,A garden faire, and in the corners setAn herbert grew; with landis long and small,Railit about, and so with trees setWas all the place, and hawthorn hedges knew,That lyfe was now, walking there for bye,That might within scarce any wight espy.The Quail, by James I. of Scotland.GARDENS. 95And the plot of culinary herbs occupied some shelteredspot within the moat; which, when it is recollectedhow many other requisites of existence anddefence were also compressed into the same space —soldiers, arms, and machines of war; sleeping andeating rooms; room for the stabling and fodder ofhorses, and often of cattle ; space for daily exercise,martial or recreative ; bowls, tilting or tennis, — whencooped up by their enemies, or made cautious bycritical times, small indeed must have been the spaceor the leisure for gardens. Even in 1540, Lelandin his Itinerary, tells us that our nobility still dweltin castles, and there retained the usual defences ofmoats, and drawbridges. This was especially thecase, the nearer they approached to the Scotch orWelsh borders ; though in the vicinity of Londonvillas and palaces had long sprung up. At WrexhillCastle, near Holden, in Yorkshire, he says, " Thegardens within the mote, and the orchards withoutwere exceeding fair. And yn the orchards weremounts, opere tojyiario, writhen about with degrees likethe turnings in coil shells, to come to the top withoutpain." The career, indeed, by which our gardenshave reached their present condition, has been, as Ihave said, the career of many ages, revolutions, andstupendous events. It is not only curious, but mostinteresting to trace all those circumstances which havecontributed to raise horticulture to its present eminence,— the great national events, the extension ofdiscovery, of the arts, of general knowledge ; the deeppondering in cells and fields; the achievements ofgenius, of enterprise ; the combinations of science,and the variations of taste which have brought it to96 GARDENS.what it is. The history of our gardening is, in fact,the history of Europe. The monks, whose religiouscharacter gave them an extraordinary security, asthey were the first restorers of agriculture, so theywere the first extended and improvers of our gardens.Their long pilgrimages from one holy shrine toanother, through France, Germany, and Italy, madethem early acquainted with a variety of culinary andmedicinal herbs, and with various fruits ; and amongstthe ruins of abbeys we still find a tribe of placesthat they thus naturalized. The crusades gavethe next extension to horticultural knowledge; thegrowing commerce and wealth of Europe fostered itstill farther ; and the successive magnificent discoveriesof the Indies, America, the isles of the Pacific andAustralia, with all their new and splendid and invaluableproductions, raised the desire for such thingsto the highest pitch ; and made our gardens andgreen-houses affluent beyond all imagination. Whathosts of new and curious plants do they still send usevery season ! From every corner of the earth arethey daily reaching us : the average value of theplants in Lodge's gardens is calculated at 200,000/.But what a blank would they now be but for themighty spirit of commerce, the thirst of discovery,and of traversing distant regions, which animate suchnumbers of our countrymen, and send them out toextend our geography, geology, and natural history,or to prosecute astronomical and philosophical scienceunder every portion of the heavens? And besidesthese causes, how much is yet to be accounted for bythe tastes of peculiar ages— out of the peculiar studiesof the times, and the singular genius of particularGARDENS. 97men thence arising. The influence of poets andimaginative writers upon the character of our gardenshas been extreme. Whether an age were poeticalor mathematical, made a mighty difference in thegarden-style of the time. C. Matins, the favouriteof Augustus Caesar, introduced the fashion at Romeof clipping trees into shapes of animals and othergrotesque forms; Pliny admired the invention, andcelebrated it under the name of topiary-work; and sostrongly did it take hold on the spirits of men, thatit descended to all the nations of Europe, and wasnot exploded by us till the last century. Sir HenryWotton, the tasteful and poetical courtier of QueenElizabeth, and ambassador of James to Venice, withnotions of the fitness of a garden far beyond his age,yet thought it "a graceful and natural conceit' inMichael Angelo to make a fountain-figure in theshape of " a sturdy washerwoman, washing and windingof linen clothes, in which act, she wrings out thewater which made the fountain." And again Addison,followed by Pope and Walpole, overturned thisancient fondness for pleached walks, and tonsuredtrees, and quaint fountain-figures, whether of Neptune,Miles, or washerwomen. Then the greatchange of the social system, from the feudal andmilitary to civil and domestic, produced a correspondentchange in the culture of gardens. While thecountry was rent to pieces by contentions for thecrown, there could be little leisure or taste forgardens ; but when men became peaceful, and collectedtheir habitations into clusters, they naturallybegan to embellish both them and their environs.From the reign of Edward III. to that of Henry98 GARDENS.VIII. we look over a large space, and find but slightimprovement in horticulture, and scanty traces of itsliterature. A bushel of onions in Richard ll's reigncost twelve shillings of our present money : HenryVII. records himself in a MS. preserved in theRemembrance Office, that apples were in his day oneand two shillings each, a red one fetching the highestprice ; and Henry VIII. 's queen, Catherine, when shewanted a salad, sent to Flanders for it. The veryfirst book which was written on the culture of the soilin this country, appears to be Walter de Henry's —De Economic sive Husbandry." Then cameNicholas Dollar's books, " De Arbour plantations,and De generation Arbour et modo generate etplantandi," and some other MS. writings. RichardII. rewarded botanical skill in the person of JohnBray with a pension. Henry Calcoensis in the fifteenthcentury composed a Synopsis Herbaria, andtranslated Palladius De Re Rustica into Gaelic. Inthe sixteenth century William Norman, Vice-provostof Eton, wrote Herbarium Synonyms and indexes toCato, Varro, Columella, and Palladius; and in thesame century Wynkin de Worde printed " MasterGroshede's Boke of Husbandry," which containedinstructions for planting and grafting of trees andvines. Arnold's Chronicle in 1521, had a chapter onthe same subject, and how to raise a salad in anhour ; and Pinson published the " Boke of Surveyingand Improvements." Then came Dr. Sullen, Dodo-news,Sir Anthony Fitzherbert and Tusser ; and thatis the history of gardens and their literature till thetime of Henry VIII.; but thence to the eighteenthcentury, — to the days of Bridgman and Kent, whatGARDENS. 99multitudes of grand, quaint, and artificial gardenswere spread over the country. Nonsuch, Theobaldss,Greenwich, Hampton-court, Hatfield, Moor-Park,Chatsworth, Beaconsfield, Cashiobury, Ham, and manyanother, stood in all that stately formality whichHenry and Elizabeth admired, and in which ourSurreys, Leicester, Essexeses ; the splendid nobles ofthe Tudor dynasty, the gay ladies and gallants ofCharles H.'s court, had walked and talked, flutteredin glittering processions, or flirted in green alleys andbowers of topiary-work ; and amid figures, in leador stone, fountains, cascades, copper trees droppingsudden showers on the astonished passers under,stately terraces with gilded balustrades, and curiousquincunx, obelisks, and pyramids — fitting objects ofthe admiration of those who walked in high-heeledshoes, ruffs and cardinals, with fan in hand, or intrunk-hose and laced doublets."The palace of Nonsuch," said Hentzner in 1598,is encompassed with parks full of deer, deliciousgardens, groves ornamented with trellis-work, cabinetsof verdure (summer-houses, or seats cut in yew), andwalls so embowered by trees, that it seems to be aplace pitched upon by pleasure herself to dwell inalong with health. In the pleasure and artificialgardens are many columns and pyramids of marble;two fountains that spout water, one round, the otherlike a pyramid, upon which are perched small birdsthat stream water out of their bills. In the grove ofDiana is a very agreeable fountain, with Actaeonturned into a stag, as he was sprinkled by the goddessand the nymphs, with inscriptions. Here is,besides, another pyramid of marble full of concealed100 GARDENS.pipes, which spurt upon all who come within theirreach." In the gardens of Lord Burleigh, at Theobald,he tells us are nine knots, artificially andexquisitely made, one of which was set for the likenessof the king's arms. One might walk two miles inthe walks before he came to the end.In Hampton-court, was a fountain with syrens andother statues by Fanelli. At Kensington were bastionsand counterscarps of clipped yew and variegatedholly, being the objects of Mender and admirationunder the name of the siege of Troy. At Chatsworththe temporary cascade, the water-god, the copper-tree,and the jets-d'eau, still remain in all their glory.The hands of Bridgman, Kent and Brown, and thepens of Addison, Pope and Walpole, have put allthis ancient glory of Roman style to the flight ; anddriven us, perhaps, into danger of going too far afternature. The winding walks, the turfy lawns, thebowery shrubberies, the green slopes to the marginof waters, the retention of rocks and thickets wherethey naturally stood, — all this is very beautiful, andmany a sweet elysian scene do they spread aroundour English houses. But in imitating nature we areapt to imitate her as she appears in her rudest places,and not as she would modify herself in the vicinity ofhuman habitations. We are apt to make too littledifference between the garden and the field; betweenthe shrubbery and the wood. We are come to thinkthat all which differs from wild nature is artificial, andtherefore absurd. Something too much of this, Ithink, we are beginning to feel we have had amongstus. It has been the fashion to cry down all gardens asugly and tasteless, which are not shaped by our modernGARDENS. 101notions. The formalities of the French and Dutchhave been sufficiently condemned. For my part, Ilike even them in their place. One would no morethink of laying out grounds now in this manner, thanof wearing Elizabethan ruffs, or bag-wigs and basket-hiltedswords; yet the old French and Dutch gardens,as the appendages of a quaint old house, are in myopinion, beautiful. They are like many other thingsnot so much beautiful in themselves, as beautifulby association — as memorials of certain characters andages. A garden, after all, is an artificial thing; andthough formed from the materials of nature, may beallowed to mould them into something very differentfrom nature. There is a wild beauty of nature, andthere is a beauty in nature linked to art ; one looksfor a very different kind of beauty in fields andmountains, to what one does in a garden. The onedelights you by a certain rude freedom and untamedmagnificence ; the other, by smoothness and eleganceby velvet lawns, bowery arbours, winding paths,fair branching shrubs, fountains, and juxta-position ofmany rare flowers.It appears to me that it is an inestimable advantageas it regards our gardens, that the former taste of thenation has differed so much from its present one.Without this, what a loss of variety we should havesuffered ! If the taste of the present generation hadbeen that of all past ages, what could there have beenin the gardens of our past kings, nobles, and historicalcharacters to mark them as strongly and emphaticallyas they arc now marked ? They now, indeed, seemto belong to men and things gone by ; and I would assoon almost see one of our venerable cathedrals rased102 GARDENS.with the ground, as one of these old gardens rootedup. There is something in them of a sombre andbecoming melancholy. They are in keeping withthe houses they surround, and the portraits in thegalleries of those houses. When we wander throughthe pleached alleys, and by the time-stained fountainsof these old gardens, perished years indeed seem tocome back again to us. In the centre of some vastavenue of majestic elms or limes, sweeping theirboughs to the ground, " the dial-stone aged and green"arrests our attention, and points, not to the presenthour, but to the past. Our historic memories are intimatelyconnected with such places. Our Towards,Essexeses, Surreys, and Wolsey, were the magnificentfounders and creators of such places ; and insuch, Shakspeare and Spenser, Milton and Bacon andSidney mused. It is astonishing what numbers ofour poets, philosophers, and literati, are connectedwith the history of our gardens by their writings, orlove of them. Sir Henry Wotton, Parkinson, Ray,John Evelyn, Sir Walter Raleigh, Bacon, Addison,Pope, Sir William Temple, who not only wrote " theGarden of Epicurus," but so delighted in gardeningthat he directed in his will that his heart should beburied beneath the sun-dial in his garden at Moor-parkin Surrey, where it accordingly was depositedin a silver box : Horace Walpole, Locke, Cowley,Whetstone, Charles Cotton, Waller, Bishop Fleetwood,Spence, the author of Polynesia, Gilpin ofthe Forest Scenery, Mason, Dr. Darwin, Cowper,and many others, have their fame linked to the historyor the love of gardens.There is something very interesting too, in theGARDENS. 103biography of our old patriarchs of English gardening.There is scarcely one of those large nurseries andgardens round London but is connected with them,as their founders, or improvers — as the Tradesmanof Lambeth, — London and Wise of Crompton, —Philip Miller of Chelsea, — Gray of Fulham, — Furberof Kensington, — Lee of Hammersmith. It is cheeringto observe how much our monarchs, from HenryVIH. to George IH. were, with their principal nobility,almost to a man, whatever was their character inother respects, not even excepting the dissipatedCharles H., munificent patrons of gardening, andfounders of grand gardens. It is interesting to readof the giant labours, and now apparently curious locationsof our early gardeners and herbalists. HowDr. Turner imbibed botanical knowledge from LucasLinus at Bologna, and came and established a"garden of rare plants" at Kew ; while Mrs. Gapehad another at Westminster, which furnished the firstspecimens for Chelsea garden. How Ray, andLibel, and Penny roamed everywhere in search ofnew plants. How Dedimus Mountain published his"Gardener's Labyrinth:" how Sir Hugh Pratt, ofLincoln's-inn, gentleman, wrote the Jewel Houseof Art and Nature, the Paradise of Kew, and theGarden of Eden, and had, moreover, a garden in St.Martin's Lane. How the " Rei Rustics" of ConradHeresbach, counsellor to the Duke of Cleve, wastranslated by Barney Goose, and reprinted byGrease Markham, gentleman, of Gotham in Nottinghamshire.How old John Gerard travelled,when young, up the Baltic, and had his " PhysickGarden" in Lowborn. How John Parkinson travelled104 GARDENS.forty years before he wrote his " Paradise," and wasappointed by Charles I. for his Theatre of Plants,Botanical Regius Primaries. How Gabriel Plates,though styled by his contemporaries, "an excellentgenius," and "of an adventurous caste of mind," diedmiserably in the streets. How Walter Blythe ofOliver Cromwell's army wrote the " Survey of Husbandry,"which Professor Martin pronounces " anincomparable work." How Samuel Hartley, theson of a Polish merchant, the friend of Milton, ofArchbishop Usher and Joseph Meade, wrote hisLegacy," and assisted in establishing the embryoRoyal Society; how John Tradesman was in Russia,and accompanied the fleet sent against the Algerinein 1620, and collected on that occasion plants inBarbary, and in the isles of the Mediterranean ; andhow his son John, afterwards made a voyage in pursuitof plants to Virginia, " and brought many newones back with him." How their Museum, establishedin South Lambeth, and called " Tradesman'sArk," was the constant resort of the great andlearned ; how it fell into the hands of Elias Ashore,and became the Ashmolean Museum.These and such facts, shew us by what labours andsteps our present garden-wealth has been raised ; anddiffuse an interest over a number of places familiar tous.Go, indeed, into what part of the island we will,we find some object of attraction and curiosity in thegardens attached to our old houses. As the coachpasses the residence of Colonel Howard at Leven'sBridge, in Westmoreland, it stops, the passengersget out, and mount upon its top, and there behold afine old Elizabethan house, standing in the midst ofGARDENS. 105a garden of that age, with all its topiary-work, itsfountains, statues, and lawns. At Stony Hurst inLancashire, now a Jesuit's College, I was delightedto find a beautiful old garden of this description,which 1 have elsewhere described; and at MarginAbbey in South Wales, I found a fine assemblage ofOKuige trees, the very trees which Sir Henry Wottonsent from Italy as a present to Queen Elizabeth.These trees had been thrown ashore here by thewreck of the vessel, and the owner of the place, bythe queen's permission, built a splendid orangery toreceive them, which stood in the centre of a gardensurrounded on three sides by woody hills; and inwhich, fuchsias at least ten feet high, with stemsthick as a man's arm, were growing in the openair, and tulip-trees large as the forest trees around.But what gave a still greater charm to thisgarden was, that the ruins of a fine old abbey stoodhere and there on its lawn ; arches, overgrown withbushes, and the graceful pillars of a noble chapterhouse,around whose feet lay stones of ancient tombsand curious sculpture. These are the things whichgive so delicious a variety to Our English gardens:and when we bear in mind that many of those artificesand figures which we have been accustomed to treatwith contempt as Dutch, are in reality Roman; thatsuch things once stood in the magnificent gardens ofLucullus, and Sallust; that the Romans gatheredthem again from the Eastern nations; that they arenot only classical, but that, like many of the rites ofour church and religious festivals, they are the reliquesof the most ancient times, I think we shall beinclined to regard them with a greater degree of in-106 GARDENS.teres t — not as objects to imitate or to place in anycompetition with our own more natural style, but asthings which are of the most remote antiquity, andgive a curious diversity to our country abodes. Formy part, when I see even a fantastic peacock spreadingits tail in yew in some old cottage or farm-housegarden, I think of Pliny and his admiration of suchtopiary-work, and Mould not have it cut down forthe world. Even those summer-houses built in trees,such as that built by the King of Belgium in Winter-downwood, near Claremont; a sketch of which ispresented in the title-page — were Roman fancies;were formed, Pliny tells us, amid the branches of anymonarch trees that grew Matin their grounds, and thateven Caligula had one in a plane-tree near his villaat Velilrse, which he called his Nest.Here then to all the sweet nests of English gardens,new or old, we bid adieu, with blessings on theirpleasantness.CHAPTER VIII.COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.Before closing this department of my work, I mustjust glance at a few occurrences which serve to givean occasional variety to rural life, and may be classedunder the head of Country Excitements. These areraces, race-balls, county-balls, concerts, musical festivals,elections, assizes, and confirmations. It will notbe requisite to do more than merely mention thegreater part of these, for to describe at length therace-ball and county-balls, the winter concerts of thecounty town and the musical festivals, would requirea separate volume, and they indeed, after all, belongmore to the town than to the country. Having,therefore, simply pointed them out as sources of occasionalvariety to wealthy families during their stay inthe country, I shall confine myself in these concludingremarks, to those few particulars which belong moreentirely to my subject. Balls and musical exhibitionsare sufficiently alike everywhere, to need no distinctdetails here. It is enough that they serve to breakthe rural torpor of those who regard existence as onlygenuine during the London season. The applicationof the profits both of these balls, and of the musicalfestivals that have of late years been held in different108 COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.places, to the support of infirmaries, and to other publicobjects of benevolence, deserves the highest commendation.Thus dismissing these amusements,neither I nor my readers, I am sure, would wish tohave the uproar and exasperation of the county electionintroduced into this peaceful volume; enoughthat when it does come to the country Hall, it comes,often as a hurricane, and frequently shakes it to thefoundation, leaving in its track, debts and mortgages,shyness between neighbours, and rancour amongst oldfriends.It would not be giving a faithful view of countrylife, however, were we to keep out of sight all agitatingcauses, and all existing drawbacks to the felicityfor which such ample materials exist in it. Surveyingthose splendid materials, as displayed in thepreceding chapters, — those abundant means andopportunities, which the wealthy possess for enjoyingtheir lives in the country ; — it would be giving a mostone-sided view of the rural life of the rich, if we leftit to be inferred that " the trail of the serpent" wasnot to be perceived at times in the fair lawns, and upthe marble steps of rural palaces; that the greatBubbly-Jock," (Turkey-cock) which Scott contendedthat every man found in his path, did not shewhimself there. The Serpent and the Bubbly-Jockwhich disturb and poison the rural life of the educatedclasses in England, are the very same which dash withbitter all English society in the same classes. Theyare the pride of life, and the pride of the eye. Theyare that continual struggle for precedence, and thosejealousies which are generated by a false social system.Every man lives now~a-day for public observation.COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS. 109He builds his house, and organizes his establishment,so as to strike public opinion as much as possible.Every man is at strife with his neighbour, in the matterof worldly greatness. The consequence is, that afalse standard of estimation, both of men and things,is established — shew is substituted for real happiness ;and no man is valued for his moral or intellectualqualities, so much as for the grandeur of his house,the style of his equipage, the richness of his dinnerservice, and the heavy extravagance of his dinners.The result of this is, that most are living to the fullextent of their means, many beyond it, and few arefinding in the whole round of their life, that alone,which better and higher natures seek — the interchangeof heart and mind, which yields present delight,creates permanent attachments, and fills the memorywith enduring satisfaction.This, it must be confessed, is a wretched state ofthings; but it is one which every person conversant withsociety knows to exist, and which intelligent foreignerswitness with unfeigned surprise. The worst of it isthat this unnatural system of life becomes the mostsensibly felt in the country. In large towns every manfinds a sufficient circle after his own taste : there thepetty influences of locality are broken up by the multitudeof objects, and the ample choice in association.But in small towns, and country neighbourhoods,where wealthy or educated families are thinly scattered,nothing can be more lamentable, and were it notlamentable, nothing could be more ludicrous, than thestate of rivalry, heart-burning, jealousy, personal mortificationspersonal pride, from mere accidents of conditionor favour. The titled have a fixed rank, and areVOL. I. G110 COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.comparatively at their ease, but in the great mass ofthose who have wealth, more or less, without title, whatmighty and eating sore is the struggle for distinction.In the little town, or thinly-scattered neighbourhood,every one is measuring out his imaginary dignity tosee if it does not exceed, at least by some inches, thatof one or other of his neighbours. The lower youdescend in the scale, the more exacting becomes thespirit of exclusiveness. The professions look downupon the trades ; the trades on one another. Everywherethe same uneasy spirit shews itself. Nothingcan be more ludicrous, or amusing to the philosophicspectator, than to observe how leadership is assumedin every country neighbourhood, by certain wealthyfamilies ; how carefully that leadership is avoided andopposed by other families. How the majority offamilies aspire to move in one or the other circle ;what wretched and anomalous animals those feel themselvesthat are not recognized by either. How theman who drives his close carriage, looks down uponhim who only drives his barouche or phaeton; howboth contemn the poor occupier of a gig. I haveheard of a gentleman of large fortune who, for someyears after his residence in a particular neighbourhood,did not set up his close carriage, but afterwards feelingsmore agreeable to do so, was astonished to findhimself called upon by a host of carriage-keepingpeople, who did not seem previously aware of hisexistence ; and rightly deeming the calls to be madeupon his carriage, rather than himself, sent round hisempty carriage to deliver cards in return. It was abiting satire on a melancholy condition of society,the full force of which can only be perceived by suchCOUNTRY EXCITEMENTS. 1 I 1as have heard the continual exultations of those whohave dined with such a great person on such a day, andthe equally eager complaints of others, of the prideand exclusiveness they meet with ; who have listenedto the long catalogue of slights, dead cuts, and offences,and witnessed the perpetual heart-burnings incidentto such a state of things. These are the follies thatpress the charm of existence out of the hearts of thousands,and make the country often a purgatory whereit might be a paradise.There is another cause which diminishes in a greatdegree the enjoyment that might be found in thecountry, and that is, the almost total cessation ofwalking amongst the wealthy. Since the universaluse of carriages, for anything I can see, thousands ofpeople might just as well be born without legs at all.It would be easy to move them from the bed to thecarriage, — thence to the dinner-table, and again tobed. In the country, and especially in the countrynot far from towns, how rarely do you see the richexcept in their luxurious carriages ! How rarely doyou meet them walking, or even on horse-back, asyou used to do ! Sir Roger de Coverley rode onhorseback to the assizes in his day — were he livingnow, he would roll there in his carriage — lest someoneshould imagine that he had mortgaged his estate,and laid down his carriage in retrenchment. During-thetwelve Months that I have resided in this neighbourhood— a neighbourhood studded all over withwealthy houses, nothing has surprised me, and thefriends who have visited me here, so much as thegreat rarity of seeing any of the wealthy classes ontheir legs. \^'ith the exception of the Queen and her112 COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.attendant ladies, who during the then Princess's abodeat Claremont, might be every day met in the winter,walking in frost and snow, and facing the sharpest windsof the sharpest weather, I scarcely remember to havemet half-a-dozen of the wealthy classes on foot a milefrom their residences. And yet what splendid, airyheaths, what delicious woods, what nooks of bowery-foliage,what views into far landscapes, are there"all around ! It is true, as some of them have observed,that they walk in their own grounds; but whatgrounds, however beautiful, can compensate for thefresh feeling of the heath and the down; for the dimsolemnity of the wild wood ; for open, breezy hills,the winding lane, the sight of rustic cottages by theforest side, the tinkle of the herd or the sheep bell,and all the wild sounds and aspects of earth andheaven, to be met with only in the free regions ofnature? They who neglect to walk, or confinetheir strolls merely to the lawn and the shrubbery,lose nine-tenths of the enjoyment of the country.Those young men, whom it is a pleasure to see withtheir knapsacks on their backs ranging over moor andmountain, by lakes or ocean, in Scotland or Wales,taste more of the life of life in a few summer monthsthan many dwellers in the country ever dream ofthrough their whole existence. I speak advisedly,for I traverse the country in all directions, let me bewhere I will; and if any ladies think themselves toodelicate for walking, I can point them out delicateladies too that have made excursions on foot throughmountain regions of five hundred miles at a time, andrecur to those seasons as amongst the most delightfulof their lives.COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS. 113But my desire that all should make their countrylife as happy as it is capable of being made — whichmust be by living more to nature and less to fashion —by using both their physical and moral energies; byrespecting themselves, and leaving the respect ofothers to follow as the natural result of a true andpure tone of spirit — is detaining me too long. I musthasten on ; and amongst the most prominent of thecountry excitements, give a passing word to racing.If any one wishes to know how far the turf influencesthe course of country life, he has only to read thefollowing passage from Nimrod. " Deservedly highas Newmarket stands in the history of the Britishturf, it is but as a speck on the ocean when comparedwith the sum total of our provincial meetings, ofwhich there are about one hundred and twenty inEngland, Scotland, and Wales — several of them twicein the year. Epsom, Ascot, York, Doncaster, andGoodwood stand first in respect of the value of theprizes, the rank of the company, and the interestattached to them in the sporting world; althoughseveral other cities and towns have lately exhibitedvery tempting bills of fare to owners of good racehorses.In point of antiquity we believe the Rootedof Chester claims pre-eminence of all country race-meetings;— and certainly it has long been in highrepute. Falling early in the racing year — alwaysthe first Monday in May — it is most numerouslyattended by the families of the extensive and veryaristocratic neighbourhood in which it is placed ; andalways continues five days." — The Turf, p. 246.Every one who has seen the crowds of wealthypeople who flock to a celebrated race-meeting, and114 COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.throng the stand and the carriage stations, withbrilliant dresses and gay equipages, may imagine,then, how much excitement is spread through thatclass of society during their stay in the country; byone hundred and twenty race-meetings in one quarteror other of the island ; especially as the greater partof these occur during the months that they are absentfrom town. So having read the passage quotedfrom Nimrod, he has only to turn to the volume itselfa volume written with great ability ; and, makingallowance for the author's sporting predilections, inan excellent spirit, and he will thus find that coursedescribed as such a horrible resort for black-legs anddesperadoes, of traitorous jockeys, and poisoningtrainers, as makes one at once recoil from the recital,and wonder that our young nobles and gentlemenshould commit themselves and their fortunes to suchhands; or that the fair and the refined should consentto gaze on such a scene of infamy. HearNimrod's own words — " How many fine domainshave been shared amongst these hosts of rapacioussharks, during the last two hundred years ! and unlessthe system be altered — how many more are doomedto fall into the same gulph ! For, we lament to say,the evil has increased; all heretofore, indeed, hasbeen " tarts and cheesecakes" to the villanous proceedingsof the last twenty years on the Englishturf." Let us move on to less repulsive scenes.Amongst these may be reckoned the periodicalarrivals of the bishops and the judges. The arrival ofthe bishop to perform the ceremony of confirmation,is but a triennial occurrence, but it is one of the mostimposing of the rites of the church. The flocking ofCOUNTRY EXCITEMENTS. 115the clergy and their families to town ; the processionsof country children on foot, and led by the parish clerk,or schoolmaster, or in carts and other rustic vehicles;the gathering of the children of the rich towards thechurch in their white dresses, and in gay carriages ;the assembling of all classes in the common templeof their religion ; the solemnity of the address andthe imposition of hands by the prelate ; the statelymusic of the organ ; and the silent looking on of thecongregated people, all combine to produce a verystriking spectacle — a spectacle which to those whobelieve in its essentiality and efficacy, has somethingin it touching and beautiful.But perhaps the parade of the assize time, is themost picturesque of this class of occurrences. Thereis more of the old English ceremony, custom, andcostume about it. The judges who go though theland as the representatives of majesty, certainly gothrough it en prince. Nothing can be more unlikethan their progress to, and their state in, the courtsin town, and the same things in their provincial tourof justice. In town you may see the Lord ChiefJustice mount his horse at his own door, and ridequietly away towards Westminster Hall. You maysee Lord Anger in the Court of Exchequer,sitting very much at his ease in his black gown andwig of modest dimensions, dispatching business in awork-a-day manner; but in the country you findthese very men arrayed in their scarlet and ermine,seated in much greater state, and dispensing justicein a much fuller court than, except on extraordinaryoccasions, attends them in town.The high-sheriff of every county, selected from116 COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.its best families, in preparation for the arrival of thecounty judge, has put his equipage and train in order.His carriage, his horses, his harness, all have undergonea rigid examination, and are all put into thehighest condition that paint, gilding, varnish, lining,and plate can bestow ; or if he be a young man of somespirit and ambition, he has purchased a new carriage forthe occasion. His tenants and household servants,to the number of forty or fifty, have been put into anew livery in the cut of the old yeoman, and generallyof some bright or peculiar colour, green, blue,white, or delicate drab, as indeed the livery of thegentleman may be. Mounted on their horses, andwith their javelins or halberds, and preceded by twotrumpeters, who, old Aubrey can tell you, are a veryancient essential on such occasions, they escort thesheriff on his way to meet the judges. The sheriffwho has thus showily appointed what are provinciallytermed his javelin-men, has not in the meantimeneglected himself. He has put on at least a courtdress, and in cases where he has happened to be aman of taste, and a man of figure to boot, he hasput on a rich suit of the fashion of Sir Charles Grandison,or of some one of his ancestors, as he stands infull-length portraiture in his family gallery. Heissues from his hall, arrayed perhaps in a rich mulberrycoloured coat with huge embroidered cuffs andbutton-holes, huge gold buttons, and lining of primroseserge; a splendid waistcoat of gold brocadedsatin, with ample pockets and flaps reaching half-wayto his knees ; satin breeches, and silk stockings withimmense clocks ; large gold buckles at his knees andupon his shoes. Add to this his sword, his cockedCOUNTRY EXCITEMENTS. 117hat, and his cravat and ruffles of fine point lace, andyou have the high sheriff in all his glory, just as wesaw him in one of our county assize courts not manyyears ago, sitting on the right hand of the judge;and it must be confessed in admirable keeping withhis old-world robes of scarlet and ermine. Well,lie enters the county town with his troop of javelin-men,his trumpeters blowing stoutly before him. Hetakes up his lodgings there, and on the morning of thejudge's approach, he marches out in the same style,followed by a long train of the gentlemen and tradesmenof the place, who are anxious to testify theirrespect to the ancient forms of justice, and the representativeof the monarch. He advances some mileor two on the way by which the judge is to arrive.There the procession halts, generally in a positionwhich commands a view of the road by which thejudge is expected. Anon, there is a stir, a lookingout amongst them, your eye follows theirs, and yousee a carriage, dusty and travel-soiled, come drivingrapidly on. It is that of the judge. As they driveup, the javelin-men and gentlemen uncover ; thesheriff descends from his carriage ; his gowned and bewiggedlordship descends from his; the sheriff makeshis bow and his compliments; the judge enters thecarriage of the sheriff with him, his own carriage fallsinto the rear, and the procession now moves on towardsthe town, with bannered trumpets blowing, and amida continually increasing crowd of spectators. Thereis something very quaint and old English in the wholeaffair ; and as I have seen the sheriff and his trainthus, waiting the approach of the judge on somerising ground in the public road, the scene hasG 2118 COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.brought back to my imagination a feeling of the pasttimes — simpler in heart than the present, but moreformal in manner, and perhaps fonder of solemnparade. But the bells are ringing merrily to welcomethe learned judge, and thousands are thronging tosee the sight of the sheriff and his men, and to catcha glimpse of the judge's wig as the coach passes, andmany of them to wonder how the sheriff can seem somuch at his ease with such an awful man : whilewithin the strong walls of the prison, the sounds ofbells and the trampling feet of the crowds without,are causing stout hearts and miserable hearts totremble and feel chill.Well, the procession and the throng " go soundingthrough the town," and the court being openedin due form, they arrive at the judge's lodgings,whence, after a suitable time allowed for the judge'srefreshment, they proceed to church. Whatevermay be the effect of this custom of the judge'sgoing to church before proceeding to dischargehis awful duties of deciding upon the destinies ofhis fellow men, it is a beautiful one, and bespeaksin those who instituted it, a just sense of the value ofhuman life, and of the true source whence all rightjudgment must proceed. It was well, and more thanwell, that the judge should be sent to hear from theChristian minister, that the temper in which a judgeshould sit to decide the fate of his fellow-mortals,should be that of the Christian — the divine union ofjustice and mercy. It was well that he should bereminded that every act of his judgment in the courtabout to open, must one day be prejudged, in a courtand before a judge, from which there can be noappeal.COUNTRY EXCITEMENTS. 110As they move on towards the great mother-church,thousands on thousands throng to gaze. Every windowpresents its quota of protruded heads ; every flight ofsteps before the doors of houses, and every otherelevated spot, is occupied. Boys are hanging by lamp-posts,and on iron palisades, like bats. The processionused to be much enlivened by the presenceof the mayor and corporation in their robes, and withthe mace borne before them ; but the New CorporationAct has led to a woful stripping of this pageant.The sheriff selects the clergyman to preach on theoccasion, who is generally some young friend or relativewhom he wishes to bring into notice. This ceremonybeing over, the judge returns to the court; thegrand jury, selected from the gentlemen of thecounty, present their bills, and the trials proceed. Inthe sheriff's gallery may be seen some of his friends,perhaps the ladies of his family and other acquaintances,with others, all introduced by ticket; on thebench by the judge, may often be seen seated withthe sheriff, some great man or lady of the neighbourhood,especially if some trial in which one of theirown body, some disputed will which involves a largeproperty, or similar cause of interest, draws themfrom their homes, and fills the court to suffocation.While the court continues, day by day you see thetrain of javelin-men come marching on foot with thestate carriage of the sheriff, to conduct him from hislodgings to those of the judge, and back again at theclose of the court in the evening, till the trials areended; and judge, sheriff, gay carriage, with itssplendid hammer-cloth, jolly coachman, and slim footmen,in their cocked hats and flaxen wigs, javelinsCOUNTRY EXCITEMENTS.men, and crowd, all meet and vanish away, and theexcitement of the assize is over for another half-year.Such are the principal country excitements; andto these may be added those of another class, whichhave sprung up of late years, and have done muchgood — the floral and horticultural shews. These havebeen warmly patronized by the aristocracy; and itforms a striking feature in modern country life, to seecarriages and pedestrians hastening, on certain daysto certain places, where different flowers and fruits,in their respective seasons, are displayed with greattaste, and with brilliant effect. The place of meetingis sometimes at a country inn, where, on the bowling-greentents are pitched, in which the flowers or fruitsare exhibited, and the whole scene is extremely gay.Such a one I saw the other day at Kingston Hill,near Richmond Park — a Dahlia shew : on the end ofthe house an invitation to all England being gorgeouslyemblazoned in dahlia-flowers, surmounted bythe crown royal, and the good English initials Q. V. ;looking as though the worthy horticulturists meantto set the rational example of using the Englishlanguage to English people.PART II.LIFE OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION.CHAPTER I.THE ENGLISH FARMER.There are few things which give one such a feelingof the prosperity of the country, as seeing the countrypeople pour into a large town on market-day. Therethey come, streaming along all the roads that lead to itfrom the wide country round. The foot-paths are filledwith a hardy and homely succession of pedestrians,men and women, with their baskets on their arms,containing their butter, eggs, apples, mushrooms,walnuts, nuts, elder berries, blackberries, bundles ofherbs, young pigeons, fowls, or whatever happens tobe in season. There are boys and girls too, similarlyloaded, and also with baskets of birds' nests in spring,cages of young birds, and old birds, baskets of tamerabbits, and bunches of cowslips, primroses, and allkinds of flowers, and country productions imaginable.122 THE ENGLISH FARMER.The carriage-road is equally alive, with people ridingand driving along; farmers and country gentlemen,country clergymen, parish overseers, and various otherpersonages, drawn to the market-town by some real orimagined business, are rattling forward on horseback,or in carriages of various kinds, gigs, and spring-carts,and carts without springs. There are carriers' wagons,and covered carts without end, many of them shewingfrom their open fronts, whole troops of women snuglyseated; while their dogs chained beneath, go strugglingand barking along, pushing their heads forward intheir collars every minute as if they would hangthemselves. This is in the morning; and in the afternoon,you see them pouring out again, and directingtheir course to many a far-off hamlet and old-fashionedabode. But there is a wide difference between comingin and going out. The wagons and carts goheavily and soberly, for they are laden with good solidcommodities, groceries and draperies, mops, brushes,hardware and crockery, newspapers for the politicians,and sundry parcels of teas, sugars, and soaps, and suchet ceteras for the village shops; but the farmers goriding and driving out three times as fast as they camein, for they are primed with good dinners, and strongbeer. They have chaffered, and smoked, and talkedwith the great grazier, and the great corn-factor, andtheir horses are full of corn too, and avv'ay they go, infours and fives, filling the whole width of the road,and raising a dust, if there be the least dust to beraised, or making the mud fly in all directions; awaythey go, talking all together, while their horses aretrotting at such a pace as one would think would shakethe very teeth out of their heads. The sober foot-theENGLISH FARMER. 1"23people who are trudging homeward more soberly thanthey came, say, as they fly past, "One wouldn'tthink times very bad neither." And the carriers holdtheir horses' heads as they rush past, and smiling significantly,say, just as they are gone past, — "Welldone my lads ! that 's it ; go it, my lads, go it ! Yoride, though your horses go a-foot !"There is no class of men, if times are but tolerablygood, that enjoy themselves so highly as farmers.They are little kings. Their concerns are not huddledinto a corner, as those of the town tradesman are. Intown, many a man who turns thousands of pounds perweek, is hemmed in close by buildings, and cuts nofigure at all. A narrow shop, a contracted warehouse,without an inch of room besides to turn him, on anyhand ; without a yard, a stable, or outhouse of anydescription ; perhaps hoisted aloft, up three or fourpair of dirty stairs, is all the room that the wealthytradesman often can bless himself with ; and there,day after day, month after month, year after year, heis to be found, like a bat in a hole of a wall, or a toadin the heart of a stone, or of an oak tree. Spring,and summer, and autumn go round ; sunshine andflowers spread over the world ; the sweetest breezesblow, the sweetest waters murmur along the vales, butthey are all lost upon him ; he is the doleful prisoner ofmammon, and so he lives and dies. The farmer wouldnot take the wealth of the world on such terms. Hisconcerns, however small, spread themselves out in apleasant amplitude both to his eye and heart. Hishouse stands in its own stately solitude; his officesand outhouses stand round extensively, without anystubborn and limiting contraction ; his acres stretch124 THE ENGLISH FARMER.over hill and dale; there his flocks and herds arefeeding ; there his labourers are toiling,— he is kingand sole commander there. He lives amongst thepurest air, and the most delicious quiet. Often whenI see those healthy, hardy, full-grown sons of the soilgoing out of town, I envy them the freshness and therepose of the spots to which they are going. Ampleold-fashioned kitchens, with their chimney-corners ofthe true, projecting, beamed and seated construction,still remaining; blazing fires in winter, shining onsuspended hams and flitches, guns supported on hooksabove, dogs basking on the hearth below ; cool, shadyparlours in summer, with open windows, and odoursfrom garden and shrubbery blowing in ; gardens wetwith purest dews, and humming at noon-tide withbees ; and green fields and verdurous trees, or deepwoodlands lying all round, where a hundred rejoicingvoices of birds or other creatures are heard, and windsblow to and fro, full of health and life-enjoyment. Howenviable do such places seem to the fretted spirits oftowns, who are compelled not only to bear their burthenof cares, but to enter daily into the public strife againstselfish, evil, and ever-spreading corruption. Whenone calls to mind the simple abundance of farm-houses,their rich cream and milk, and unadulterated butter,and bread grown upon their own lands, sweet as thatwhich Christ broke, and blessed as he gave to hisdisciples ; their fruits ripe and fresh-plucked from thesunny wall, or the garden bed, or the pleasant oldorchard ; when one casts one's eyes upon, or calls toone's memory the aspect of these houses, many of themso antiquely picturesque, or so bright-looking and comfortable,in deep retired valleys, by beautiful streams,THE ENGLISH FARMER. 125or amongst fragrant woodlands, one cannot help sayingwith King James of Scotland, when he met Johnny-armstrong: —What want these knaves that a king should have?But it is not its outward and surrounding advantagesmerely, which gives its zest to the life of the farmer.He is more proud of it, and more attached to it thanany other class of men, be they whom they may, areof theirs. The whole heart, soul, and being of thefarmer are in his profession. The members of otherprofessions and trades, however full they may be oftheir concerns, have their mouths tied up by theetiquette of society. A man is not allowed to talk ofhis trade concerns except at the risk of being laughedat, and being set down as an egotistic ignoramus. Butwho shall laugh at or scout the farmer for talking ofhis concerns ? Of nothing else does he, in nine casesout of ten, think, talk, or care. And though he maybecalled a bore by all other classes, what concerns ithim ? for other classes are just as great bores to him,and he seeks not their company. The farmers are alarge class, and they associate and converse principallywith each other. "Their talk is of bullocks," it istrue, but to them it is the most interesting talk of all.What is so delightful to them as to meet at eachother's houses, and with bright glasses of nectarousale, or more potent spirit sparkling before them, andpipe in mouth, to talk of markets, rents, tithes, newimprovements, and the promise of crops ? To walkover their lands of a Sunday afternoon together, andpronounce on the condition of growing corn, turnips,and grass ; on this drainage, or that neighbour's oddmanagement; on the appearance of sheep, cattle, and1'26 THE ENGLISH FARMER.horses. And this is to be excused, and in a greatdegree to be admired. For those are no artificialobjects on which they expend their lives and souls;they are the delightful things of nature on which theyoperate; and nature operates with them in all theirlabours, and sweetens them to their spirits. This isthe grand secret of their everlasting attachment to,and enjoyment of agricultural life. They work withnature, and only modulate and benefit by her functions,as she takes up, quickens, and completes thework of their hands. There is a living principlein all their labours, which distinguishes them frommost other trades. The earth gives its strength tothe seed they throw into it — to the cattle that walkupon it. The winds blow, the waters run for them ;the very frosts and snows of winter give salutarychecks to the rankness of vegetation, and lighten thesoil, and destroy what is noxious for them ; and everyprinciple of animal and vegetable existence andorganization co-operates to support and enrich them.There is a charm in this which must last, while thespirit of man feels the stirrings of the spirit and powerof God around him. It may be said that rude farmersdo not reason on these things in this manner. No, inmany, too many instances I grant it; but they feel.There is scarcely any bosom so cloddish but feelsmore or less of this, and by no other cause can anexplanation be given of the enthusiasm of farmers fortheir profession. It is not because they can soonerenrich themselves by it — that they are more independentin it — that they have greater social advantages init. In all these particulars the balance is in favour ofthe active and enterprising tradesman ; but it is thisTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 127charm which has infused its sweetness into the bosomsof all rural people in all ages of the world. From thedays of the patriarchs to the present, what expressionsof delight the greatest minds have uttered on behalf ofsuch a life. Think of Homer, Theocritus, Virgil,and Horace ; of Cicero, whom I have elsewherequoted, and of the many great men of this country,some of whom too I have noticed, who have devotedthemselves with such eagerness to it.That farmers are as intelligent as a parallel gradeof society in large towns I do not mean to assert ;that they are as truly aware of, and as united todefend their real interests I will assert as little. Theirsolitary and isolated mode of existence weighs againstthem in these points ; but that they have generally asounder morality than a similar class of townsmen isindisputable. They have a simplicity of mind as wellas manners that is more than an equivalent for thepolish and conventional customs of society, and withthis a cordiality that is very delightful, and very rarelynow to be found — the good, homely heartiness of OldEnglish days.They, indeed, so vividly enjoy the common blessingsof life, from their vigorous health, and initiatedappetites, as well as from the cravings oftheir inner being, finding their food in the dailycommunion with nature, instead of that book-knowledgewhich is so extensively diffused through allclasses of the city, and which, too commonly, while itquickens the intellect, and widens the sphere ofobservation, I am sorry to say, deadens the humansympathies and distorts the heart — that they make somuch of their kindness appear in heaping upon youi28 THE ENGLISH FARMER.bodily comforts and refreshments as is often truly-ludicrous.They would have you eat and drink forever.One meal succeeds to another with a profusionand an importunity of hospitality that are overwhelming.They eat their bread with a sweetness and acapacity, generated by their active and laborioushabits, that we, who lead more sedentary lives, andwith minds and energies dissipated by a hundredobjects unknown to them, have no idea of. People ofall other classes place a great portion of their happinessin giving and eating great feasts ; but a farmer seemsto think all the good things of life are involved infeasting, and would feast you not once a year, butevery day, and all day long, if he could.Let us just glance at the routine of one day ofgood fellowship, such as is seen in farm-houses wherethere is plenty, and yet no great pretence to gentility.We have seen many such scenes.The farmer invites his friends to dine with him.He will have a party. Suppose it at some period ofthe year when lie is least busy ; for his engagementsdepending on the progress of the seasons, and hiswhole wealth being at the mercy of the elements, hecannot postpone his duties, but must take them asthey fall out. Suppose it then just before the commencementof hay-harvest, for then he has a shortpause, between the putting in of his last crop ofpotatoes or corn, shutting up his fields, and clearinghis green-corn lands, and that moment when the firstscythe enters his hay-fields, when a course of arduousand anxious labours begins, that will not cease till allhis crops are safely housed, hay, corn, beans, pease,and potatoes. Suppose at this pause in the growingTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 1'29time of summer, or after harvest, or amid the festivedays of Christmas, he feels himself comparatively atleisure, in good spirits, and disposed to enjoy himself.He and his wife arrange their plans. Invitations aresent. On market day he lays in all necessaries, —tea, coffee, prime cuts of beef and other meat ; wineand spirits ; sugar and spices. At home there is busypreparation. His garden is cleaned up: an operationof rare occurrence with a busy farmer, who thinksso much of his fields that he thinks but little of hisgarden. His stables and his rick-yard are put inorder. The very manes and tails of his horses aretrimmed, for all will have to pass under the criticalnotice of his friends, and he feels his professionalcharacter at stake. In the house there is equalactivity. There is a world of cleaning and setting inorder. Floors are scoured. The best carpets areput down. This room is found to want fresh staining;painting wants doing here and there, both withinand without. Trees also want nailing and trimmingon the walls ; and it is probable there may want somespout repairing, or tiles renewing, that have oftenbeen talked of, but nevers could have time found fortheir doing. The house and all about it look fiftyper cent, the better. The neatly cleaned walks andclosely mown grass-plots ; the brightly-cleaned windows,and the scarlet curtains, and the purely whiteblinds seen within, give an air of completeness that isvery satisfactory.And then within begin the mighty preparations forthe feast. Geese, turkeys, ducks and fowls are killedand pulled, and part are cooked, and part are madeready for cooking. If the farmer shoots, and it be130 THE ENGLISH FARMER.the season, there are hares and rabbits, pheasants andpartridges, brought to the larder; if he do not, hemakes friends with the keeper, who occasionally takesa social pipe and glass with him ; or he makes a directrequest to his landlord for this indulgence. Hamsare boiled ; pies are made ; puddings of the richestcomposition are put together. If it be Christmas,loud is the chopping of meat for minced pies; busythe mixing of spices ; and the washing and pickingof currants and raisins ; and pork-pies and sausages ofmost savoury and approved manipulation are raisedinto material existence. If the sucking-pig escapeswhipping — and we hope no honest farmer is nowcruel enough for this operation — creams and syllabusdo not; they are whipped, not to death, but into life.There are blanc-mange and jellies, crystalline andfragrant; clouted creams, and cream of strawberries,raspberries, and I know not what melting anddelicious things. And O ! such cheese-cakes, andsuch patties, and such little cakes of various namesand natures, for tea and entre mess, and dessert. I seetheoven-door open and shut, as the iron tray of nicelyladen patty-pans goes into the oven, or comes outwitha rich perfection, and with odours most delicious,most mouth-melting, most inexpressible ! The goodand skilful dame, and the no less skilful and comelydaughters, if she have them, and they are grown up toyears of discretion in these delicate and culinary arts —what is not their depth of occupation ! What glowing-looksare theirs; what speculations ; what contrivancesand anticipations ! I would fain take an easy chair insome cool corner of this milk-and-honey-flowingkitchen, and watch all their sweet employment, andTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 131hear all their sweet words in a grateful silence. Butthey are far from the end of their labours. Nuts,walnuts, apples and pears, and other fruit, according asthe season may be, are produced from their stores, orfrom the sunny walls and trees, wiped from everytrace of mould or dust from the store-room, andplaced in their proper receivers of glass, or china, orpossibly of plate. Wine and spirit decanters are tobe washed and carefully dried, and to be chargedwith their bright contents. The discovery of therichest cheese in the whole cheese-room is to be meadeby tasting; butter is to be moulded in small cakes,and imprinted with patterns of the deepest and mostelegant figure, and a thousand other things made, ordone, of which the tasting were to be desired ratherthan the catalogue to be particularized, for, wonderfuland manifold are all thy works, O thou accomplishedspouse of a wealthy farmer !What dainties has that greater oven received intoits more capacious cavern. Bread of the most exquisitefineness; and pies of varied character — fruit,pork, beef-steak, and giblet— if in Devon or Cornwall,sweet giblet, a pie that all England besidesknows not of: figgy-bread, and saffron cake of transcendantbrilliance and taste.And then comes the great day ! The guests areinvited to dinner; but they have been enjoined tocome early and they come early with a vengeance.They will not come as the guests of night-lovingcitizens and aristocrats come, at from six to nine inthe evening; — no, at ten and eleven in the morningyou shall see their faces, that never yet were ashamedof day-light, and that tell of fresh air and early hours.132 THE ENGLISH FARMER.Then come rattling in, sundry vehicles with theircargoes of men and women ; lively salutations areexchanged ; the horses are led away to the stables,and the guests into the house to doff great coats andcloaks, hats and bonnets, and sit down to lunch.And there it is ready set out. " They '11 want somethingafter their drive," says the host. " To besure," says the hostess ; and there is plenty in truth.A boiled ham, a neat's tongue; a piece of cold beef;fowls and beef-steak-pie ; tarts, and bread, cheese andbutter ; coffee for the ladies, and fine old ale for thegentlemen.Now do help yourselves," exclaims the host fromone end of the table, " I am sure you must be veryhungry after such a ride." " I am sure you mustindeed," echoes the hostess from the other, whilea dozen voices cry all at once, " Oh, really I don'tthink I can touch a bit. We got breakfast the momentbefore we set off;" and all the time deep are theincisions made into the various viands : and plentifullyheaped are plates; and bright liquor is poured intoglasses, and a great deal of talk of this and that, andinquiries after this and that person go on; a heartylunch is made, and the gentlemen are ready to setout and look about them. They are warned by thehostess to remember that dinner will be on table atoneo'clock — " exactly at one I " and assuming hatsand sticks, away they go.While they perambulate the farm, and pass learnedjudgments on land, cattle, and crops; and makebesides excursions into neighbouring lands, to someparticular experiment in management, or extraordinaryproduction of combined art and nature, ourTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 133hostess shews her female friends her dairy, her cheese -room, her poultry-yard, and discussions as scientificare going on, on the best modes of fattening calves,rearing turkey broods, and on all the most approvedmanipulations of cheese and butter. The quantitiesproduced from a certain number of cows are compared,and many wonders expressed that lands of apparentequality of richness should some yield little butterand much cheese, and others little cheese and muchbutter; facts well known to all such ladies, but noteasy of explanation by heads that pretend to seefurther into the heart of a difficulty than they do.A walk is probably proposed and undertaken throughthe garden and orchard, and flowers and fruits aredescanted on ; and all this time in the house roasting,and boiling, and baking are going on gloriously.Savoury steams are rolling about under the ceilings ;busy damsels with faces rosier than ever, are runningto and fro on the floors; stable-boys are turned intoknife-cleaners; and plough-lads into peelers of potatoes,and watchers of boiling pots, and turnspit.The hour arrives ; and a sound of loud voices somewhereat hand announces that our agricultural friendsare returned punctually to their time, with many ajoke on their fears of the ladies' tongues. Not thatthey seemed to want any dinner — no, they made sucha lunch ; but they had such a natural fear of beingscolded. Well, here they all are ; — and here are theladies all in full dress. Hands that have been handlingprime stock, or rooting in the earth, or thrustinto hay-ricks and corn heaps, are washed, and downthey sit to such a dinner as might satisfy a crew ofshipwrecked men. There are seldom any of yourVOL. I. H134 THE ENGLISH FARMER.wishy-washy soups," except it be very cold weather,and seldom more than two courses ; but then they arecourses ! All of the meat kind seems set on the tableat once. Off go the covers, and what a perplexingbut consumable variety ! Such pieces of roastbeef, veal, and lamb; such hams, and turkeys, andgeese; such game, and pies of pigeons or other thingsequally good, with vegetables of all kinds in season —peas, potatoes, cauliflowers, kidney-beans, lettuces,and whatever the season can produce. The mostpotent of ale and porter, the most crystalline and coolwater, are freely supplied, and wine for those thatwill. When these things have had ample respectpaid to them, they vanish, and the table is coveredwith plum-puddings and fruit tarts, cheesecakes,syllabus, and all the nicknackery of whipped creamsand jellies that female invention can produce. Andthen, a dessert of equal profusion. Why should wetantalize ourselves with the vision of all those nuts,walnuts, almonds, raisins, fruits, and confections?Enough that they are there ; that the wine circulatesforeign and English — port and sherry — gooseberryand damson — malt and birch— elder flower and cowslip,and loud is the clamour of voices male and female.If there be not quite so much refinement of tone andmanner, quite so much fastidiousness of phrase andaction, as in some other places, there is at least morehearty laughter, more natural jocularity, and many aRandom shot of country wit,as Burns calls it. A vast of talk there is of all thecountry round ; every strange circumstance ; everyincident and change of condition, and new allianceTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 135amongst their mutual friends, and acquaintances,pass under review. The ladies withdraw; and thegentlemen draw together; spirits take place of wine,and pipes are lighted. We know what subjects willinterest them — farming improvements and politics —and so it goes till tea-time.When summoned to tea, there are additional faces.The pastor and his wife, perhaps a son and daughter,or daughters are there ; and there is the clerk too, —the very model of respect and reverence towards hisclerical superior. Whatever that learned authorityasserts, this zealous and " dearly-beloved Moses"testifies. He calls attention to what the vicar says ;he repeats with great satisfaction his sayings. Theretoo, is the surgeon, and often the veterinary surgeon,especially as he also is often a farmer, and inintercourse with all the farmers far and near. Thismay seem an odd jumble of ranks, but it is no moreodd than true. Who that has seen anything of rurallife has not seen odder medleys ? Besides, money inall grades of society can do miracles. There areclergymen in many parishes who maintain their ownideas of dignity, and seldom move out of the circleof squires and dames ; but there are others, and inperfectly rural districts there are abundance of others,that know how to mix more freely with the yeomanryof their flocks, and lose nothing neither. If theyrespect themselves, they insure the respect, and whatis better, the attachment of their hearers.But the vicar's presence on such a day is felt.There is a more palpable approximation towardssilence; — a drawing tighter of the reins of conversationalfreedom. The great talkers of after-dinner136 THE ENGLISH FARMER.are now become great listeners, and often on suchoccasions I have seen a scene worthy of the soundsense of English yeomen ; for the pastor addresseshis observations and inquiries now to this individual,and now to that; and now converses in a tone ofpleasant humour with the ladies; so that you mayoften hear as sober discussions on the passing topicsof the day, and on the prospects of the country, andespecially of that part of it to which they belong,delivered in a homely manner perhaps, but with adiscrimination and practical knowledge that are verygratifying. And on the part of the females you shallsee so many symptoms of good-heartiness and realmatronly mind as make you feel that sense, soul, andtrue sympathies are of no particular grade, or particularstyle of life.But there must be a dance for the young, andthere are cards for the more sedate; and then again,to a supper as profuse, with its hot game, and fowls,and fresh pastry, as if it had been the sole mealcooked in the house that day. The pastor and hiscompany depart; the wine and spirits circulate; allbegin to talk of parting, and are loth to part, till itgrows late ; and they have some of them six or sevenmiles to go, perhaps, on a pitch-dark night, throughbye-ways, and with roads not to be boasted of. All atonce however, up rise the men to go, for their wives,who asked, and looked M'ith imploring eyes in vain,now show themselves cloaked and bonneted, andthe carriages are heard with grinding wheels at thedoor. There is a boisterous shaking of hands, a scoreof invitations to come and do likewise, given to theirentertainers, and they mount and away ! When youTHE ENGLISH FARMER. ' 137see the blackness of the night, and consider that theyhave not eschewed good liquor, and perceive at whata rate they drive away, you expect nothing less thanto hear the next day, that they have dashed theirvehicles to atoms against some post, or precipitatedthemselves into some quarry ; but all is right. Theybest know their own capabilities, and are at home,safe and sound.Such is a specimen of the festivities of what maybecalled the middle and substantial class of farmers;and the same thing holds, in degree, to the verylowest grade of them. The smallest farmer willbring you out the very best he has; he will sparenothing, on a holiday occasion; and his wife willpresent you with her simple slice of cake, and a glassof currant, or cowslip wine, with an impressment, anda welcome that you feel to the heart is real, and abestowal of a real pleasure to the offerer.CHAPTER II.THE ENGLISH FARMER, AS OPERATED UPON BYMODERN CAUSES AND THEORIES.CoBBETT complains that the farmer has been spoiledby the growth of luxurious habits and effeminacy inthe nation. That the simple old furniture is cast outof their houses ; that carpets are laid on their floors ;that there are sofas and pianos to be found wherethere used to be wooden benches, and the spinning-wheel; that the daughters are sent to boarding-school,instead of to market ; and the sons, instead ofgrowing up sturdy husbandmen, like their fathers, aremade clerks, shopkeepers, or some such " skirmishthings."It is true enough that the general style of livingand furnishing has progressed amongst the farmersas amongst all other classes of the community. Andperhaps there has been too much of this. But itshould be recollected that Cobbett was opposed topopular education altogether. He would have therural population physically well off, but it should bephysically only. He would have them feed andwork and sleep like their sturdy horses or oxen : butis such a state desirable? Is it not far more noble,THE ENGLISH FARMER. 139far more truly human, to have all classes partaking,as far as their circumstances will allow them, of thepleasures of mind ? I would have real knowledge gohand in hand with real religious principle and moralfeeling, and where they go, a certain and inseparabledegree of refinement of manner and embellishment ofabode will go with them. Would I have the folliesand affectations of the modern boarding-school gointo the farm-house? By no means. It is by thecirculation of healthful knowledge that all this is tobe rooted out, and the race of sinking and half-genteel,and wholly ridiculous boarding-school missesto be changed into usefully taught and really valuableand amiable women. We should avoid oneextreme as the other.It should be recollected too, that amongst farmersare to be found men of all ranks and grades. Farminghas been, and is, a fashionable pursuit. We haveducal farmers, and from them all degrees downwards.Gentlemen's stewards, educated men, are farmers;and many farmers are persons whose capital employedin their extensive concerns, would purchasethe estates of nobles. All these, of course, live andpartake of the habits, general character, and refinementsof the classes to which they, by their wealth,really belong: and amongst the medium class offarmers we find as little aspiring of gentility, asamongst the same grade of tradesmen. Nay, go intothe really rural and retired parts of the country, andthey are simple and rustic enough. Let those whodoubt it go into the dales of Yorkshire; into thePeak, and retirements of Derbyshire ; into the valesof Nottinghamshire, and midland counties ; let them140 THE ENGLISH FARMER.traverse Buckinghamshire and Shropshire; let themgo into the wild valleys of Cornwall ; ay, into thegenuine country of almost any part of England, andthey will find stone floors and naked tables, andpewter plates, and straw beds, and homely livingenough in all conscience. They may see oxenploughing in the fields with simple, heavy, woodenyokes such as were used five hundred years ago;and horses harnessed with collars of straw, and anold rope or two, not altogether worth half-a-crown,doing the tillage of large farms. They may eat aturnip-pie in one place, and oatmeal cake, or anoatmeal pudding in another, and bless their stars ifthey see a bit of butcher's meat once a week. Yes,there are primitive living and primitive habits leftover vast districts of England yet, which, we trust,under a better view of thing will receive no change,except such as springs from the gradual and soundgrowth of true knowledge.But they bring up their sons to be clerks and suchskinny-dish things" in towns. Ay, there is the rub ;and this we owe to the rage for large rentals inspiredby the war prices ; by false notions of improvementgenerated during the heyday of farming prosperity; bygentlemen making stewards of lawyers, who have noreal knowledge of farming interests, and can, therefore,have no sympathies with the small farmer, orpatience with him in the day of his difficulty, andwhose only object is to get the greatest rent at theeasiest rate. But above all, this we owe to thedetestable doctrine of political economy, by which adozen of moderate farms are swallowed up in oneovergrown one, — a desert, from which both smallTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 141farmers and labourers were compelled to depart, tomake way for machinery, and Irish labourers at fourpencea day. Where were the farmers to put theirsons when they were brought up ? The small farms,the natural resource for divided capitals and commencementsin agricultural life, were, in a greatmeasure, annihilated ; and a most useful race of menasfar as possible rooted out. Thank God ! thisabomination and worse than Egyptian plague, is nowseen through, and what is better, is felt. We shallyet have farms from fifty to a hundred acres, wheremen of small capitals may try their fortunes, andhave a chance of mounting up, instead of being thrustdown into the hopeless condition of serfs. We mayhave humble homesteads, where a father and his sonsmay work together ; where labour may await theirdays, and an independent fireside their hours of rest.Where a lowly, but a happy people may congregateat Christmas and other festivals, and the old gamesof blind-man's-buff, turn-trencher, and forfeits, maylong be pursued in the evening fire-light of rusticrooms.The farmer has had his ups and downs. Duringthe war he was too prosperous ; since then he hasbeen at times ground to the dust by low prices andhigh rents. Heaven send him a better day ! Wewould see him as he is, in a healthy state of thecountry,— a rural king, sowing his corn and reapinghis harvest with a glad heart, and amid the rejoicingof a numerous peasantry.Of the great advance in the science of farming ; ofthe various improved modes of management, and ingeniousmachines invented for facilitating the farmer'sh2142 THE ENGLISH FARMER.labours, I have spoken under the head of the country-gentleman'spursuits and recreations. One or twoother observations on the farmer and his life, may aswell be given here.One of the greatest drawbacks to the pleasantnessof their abodes, is to be found in their miry roadsand yards, and the stagnant pools and drainage thatin the greater number of instances stand somewhereabout them. One would think that the latter nuisanceswere intended by them to neutralize the effectsof so much good fresh air as they have ; to act asacheck, lest they should, surrounded as they are,by every conducive to health and longevity, reallylive too long. There is scarcely a farm-house buthas one of those drain pools, into which all the liquidrefuse of their yards runs, and into which dead dogsand cats find their way as a matter of course. Insummer, these places are green over, and often standthick with the bubbles of a pestiferous fermentation ;to all which they appear totally insensible, and mustbe really so, or they would contrive to locate themat a greater distance, or have them carried in a water-cart,and dispersed over their grass lands, where theywould be of infinite service.It is in winter that they are beset by miry roads ;and have often yards so deep in dirt that you cannotreach them on foot without getting over the shoes.They and their men stalk to and fro through a six-inchdepth of mire as if they trod on a Turkey carpet ;but I have often amused myself with imagining whatwould be the consternation of a cockney, or indeed ofany townsman only accustomed to clean roads andgood pavements, to find himself set down in theTHE ENGLISH FARMER. 143middle of one of those lanes that lead up to farmhouses,or away into their fiekls, or even in one oftheir fool-yards. But to find himself in one of these,as I have done many a time on a dark night, andwith a necessity of proceeding, — oh patience ! patience; then it is really felt to be a virtue. To slip,and plunge, and flounder on in such a darksome, deep-rotted,slipping and stick-fast road — sometimes thepuddle soaking into your shoes, and sometimes sentby the pressure of your tread as from a squirt intoyour face : — " hie labor, hoc opus est."A few hours' work now and then with an ironscraper in the yard, and a spade to let off the water inthe lanes into the ditches, and the nuisance wereprevented. One would have thought that the universalexcellence of all the highways now would havemade them sensible of the luxury of a good, dryfooting, but they seem really quite unaware of it,except you point it out, and then they will tell you ingood humour that they have road-menders at workregularly twice a-year — dry weather and frost !I must here too say a word on the subject of smallfarms. Political economists, carrying out their theoriesof the power of capital, and the division ofemployments, have written many very plausible thingsin recommendation of large farms. They tell youthat the men of capital, who alone can hold largefarms, can alone afford to avail themselves of the aidof machinery for accelerating their operations; ofexpensive manures, such as bones, the ashes of bog-earth,such as are burnt in Berks and Wiltshire ; andof new and improved breeds of sheep and cattle ; allof which require long purses, that can pay, and wait144 THE ENGLISH FARMER.for distant returns. These are all excellent reasonsfor having such men and such farms in the country,by which the march and spirit of improvement maybekept up, and from which, as from reservoirs, mayin due course, overflow the advantages they introduceto their less wealthy neighbours at a cheaper rate ;but they are no arguments at all against the retentionof less farms. It is, in fact, a well-known circumstance,that the speculative and amateur farmers generallyfarm at a greater expense than their neighbours,an expense, in most cases, never fully made up bythe returns, and often really ruinous. That enlightened,systematic views, the division of employments,and a judicious outlay of capital, not always inevery man's power, enable large farmers to sell at alower rate than smaller and poorer farmers, is to acertain degree true, but by no means to the extentsupposed. No farm which exceeds the ready anddaily survey of the cultivator will be found to producethese advantages. Beyond that extent, theremust be overlooker employed, and these must bemaintained at a great and probably greater cost thanasmall farmer lives at on his rented farm ; nor cansuch a system be expected to carry the intentions ofthe principal into effect with a success like that of hispersonal surveillance. The small farmer has motivesto exertion which do not exist in a troop of hiredlabourers. Slave labour is notoriously inferior to thelabour of freemen, because the freeman has internalmotives that the slave never can have; and in thesame manner a small farmer who labours on his ownrented farm has motives to exertion that the commonlabourer, who labours for a daily sum, cannot have.THE ENGLISH FARMER. 145If the small fair er employ any of these, he employsthem under the influence of his own eye and example,and thereby communicates a stimulus that is absent ona large-er scale of cultivation. The small farmer liveseconomically; frequently, there is no question, moreeconomically and yet better than the labourer, becausehe has all his faculties and energies at work to improvehis farm and better his condition ; circumstances that donot operate on the labourer, who receives just a baresufficiency in his wage, and sees no possibility, andtherefore entertains no hope, of accumulation. Thesmall farmer works hard himself; his children, if hehave them, assist him, and his wife too, who also is amanager and a worker. He looks round him, for hiseyes are sharpened by his interests, and observes theplans, and measures, and improvements of his wealthierneighbour, adopts what he can of them, and oftenmakes cheap and ingenious substitutes for others.Even if it were a fact, that the large farmer coulddrive the small farmer out of the country, it would beacircumstance most deeply to be deplored. It wouldextinguish a class of men of hardy, homely, and independenthabits — a serious loss to the nation. Itwould break those steps out of the ladder of humanaspiration, and the improvement of condition, thatwould have a most fatal influence on all society.An impassable gulph would be placed between thearistocracy of capital and the freedom of labour ; whichwould produce, as its natural results, insolence, effeminacy,and corruption of manners on the one side, andperpetual poverty, hopeless poverty, abjectness ofspirit, or sullen and dangerous discontent on the other.Even if, as Miss Martineau, in her interesting stories,146 THE ENGLISH FARMER.has asserted, it were true that the labourer would bebetter clothed and fed than the small farmer, wouldthe mere comfort of food and clothes make up, to menliving in a free and Christian country, and within thedaily reach of its influences, for the destruction ofthat ascending path which hope alone can travel ?There would soon, on such a system, either in agricultureor manufactures, be but two classes in thecountry, — the great capitalist and the slave. Thegreat capitalist would stand, like Aaron armed withhis serpent rod, to eat up all the lesser serpents thatattempted to lift their heads above that level whichhe had condemned them to. The mass would bedoomed to a perpetual despair of even advancingone step out of the thraldom of labour and command,and their spirits would die within them, or live onlyto snatch and destroy what they could not legitimatelyreach.But such, happily, is not the case. Circumstancesplace a limit to such things. The small farmer canand does exist, and has existed, and in many cases,flourished too, in the face of all changes, and surroundedby large farms cultivated with all the skill ofmodern art, and all the power of capital. I have seenand known such, and happier and more comfortablepeople do not exist. I do not mean by a small farm,what Miss Martineau has called such, — some dozenacres — mere cottage allotments — but farms of fromfifty to a hundred acres. There must be full employmentfor a pair of horses, or there is created by theirkeep an undue charge for labour, which is a seriouspreventive of success. But where there is that fullemployment, a small farmer may live and prosper.THE ENGLISH FARMER. 147The political economist generally reasons in straightlines. He will not turn aside to calculate the force ofincidental circumstances ; and yet, these incidentalcircumstances frequently alter a question entirely.For instance, a small farm may lie near a large town,and thereby furnish the tenant with a very lucrativetrade in milk; and such incidental circumstances,owing to a location favourable for market, and othercauses, frequently exist. Small farmers often pay attentionto sources of profit nearly, if not altogether,overlooked by larger ones. Who does not know whatsums are made by cottagers and small occupiers, ofthe produce of their gardens and orchards, by carefullylooking after it, and some one of the familybringing it to market, and standing with it themselves ;while the great farmer seldom looks very narrowly tothe growth or preservation of either, and thereforeincurs both badness of crop and waste; and if he sendsit to market, he sends it to the huckster at a wholesaleprice, to save the annoyance of standing with it.Small concerns, having small establishments, and nodignity to support, nor other cares to divert the attention,find in these sole resources frequently an incomeitself nearly equal to their expenditure.To determine questions of this kind there requiresa close examination into all their bearings, and intothe habits and feelings of those concerned. Thetruth of the matter, as regards the most profitable sizeof farms, and their general benefit to the public, seemsto be, that there should be some of various sizes, thatvarious degrees of capital and capacity of managementmay be accommodated ; that there may be a chancefor those beginning who have little to begin with, and148 THE ENGLISH FARMER.a chance of the active and enterprising rising, asactivity and enterprise should. This seems the onlysystem by which the healthful temperament of a communitycan be kept up ; and that just equilibrium ofinterests, and that ascending scale of advantagesmaintained, by which not merely the wealth, but thereal happiness of a state is promoted.CHAPTER III.Farm-servants.The clown, the child of nature, without guile,Blessed with an infant's ignorance of allBut his own simple pleasures; now and thenA wrestling match, a foot-race, or a fair. — Cowper.We have in a preceding chapter, taken a view of theEnglish farmer. We have seen him at market — inhis fields, and in his house receiving his friends to aholiday feast. If we were to go to the farm-houseon any other day, and at any season of the year, andsurvey the farmer and his men in their daily andordinary course of life, we should always see somethingto interest us ; and we should have to contemplatea mode of existence forming a strong contrastto that of townsmen ; and, notwithstanding the innovationwhich the progress of modern habits has madeon life in the country, still presenting a picture ofsimplicity, homeliness, and quiet which no other liferetains. Thousands, indeed, looking into a farmhouse,surveying its furniture, the apparatus andsupply of its table, the manners and the language ofits inhabitants, would wonder where, after all, was the150 Farm-servants.vast change said to have taken place in the habits ofthe agricultural population. O ! rude and antiquatedenough in all conscience, are hundreds of our farmhousesand their inmates, in many an obscure districtof merry England yet. The spots are not difficultto be found even now, where the old oak table, withlegs as thick and black as those of an elephant, isspread in the homely house-place, for the farmer andhis family — wife, children, servants, male and female;and is heaped with the rude plenty of beans andbacon, beef and cabbage, fried potatoes and bacon,huge puddings with « dip " as it is called, that is,sauce of flour, butter, and water boiled, sharpenedwith vinegar, or verjuice, and sweetened with brownsugar or more economical molasses—" dip," so called,no doubt, because all formerly dipped their morselinto it; a table where bread and cheese and beer,and good milk porridge and oatmeal porridge, or stir-about,still resist the introduction of tea and coffeeand such trash, as the stout old husbandman terms it.Let no one say that modern language and modernhabits have driven away the ancient rusticity, whilesuch dialogues between the farmer and guest as the followingmay be heard— and such may yet be heard inthe Peak of Derbyshire, where this really passed.Farmer at table to his guest. — Ite mon, ite !Guest. — Au have ten, mon. Au've ten till I'mweeliy brussels.Farmer. — Then ite, and trust thee out mon: auwooden we hidden to brussels thee wee.*• This is the present genuine dialect of the Peal, and is nearly aspure Saxon. It is curious to see in the southern agricultural counties,how the old Saxon terms are worn out by a greater intercoursewith London and towns-people, although the people themselves haveFarm-servants. 151It is no rare sight to see the farmer himself, withhis clouted shoon and his fustian coat, ribbed blue orblack worsted stockings, and breeches of corduroy ;to see him arousing his household, at five o'clock of amorning, and his wife hurrying the servant-wenches,as they call them, from their beds, crying, — " Up, up,boulder-heads !" that is pebble-heads, or heavy-heads,and asking them if they mean to lie till the sun burnstheir eyes out ; having them up to light fires, sweepthe hearth, and get to milking, cheese-making, churning,and what not ; while he gets his men and boys totheir duties, — in winter, to fodder the horses and cows,and prepare for ploughing, or leading out manure ;to supply the " young beast," — young cattle, in thestraw-yard with food ; to chop turnips, carrots, ,cut hay, boil potatoes for feeding pigs orbullocks ; thrash, winnow, or sack corn. In summer,to be off to the harvest-field. The wife is ready totake a turn at the churn, or to turn up her gown-sleevesto the shoulders, and kneeling down on a strawcushion, to press the sweet curd to the bottom of theamost Saxon look, with their fair complexions and light brown hair;while, as you proceed northward, the Saxon becomes more and moreprevalent in the country dialects. In the midland counties brackenis the common term for fern — in the south not a peasant ever heard it.The dialects of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and Staffordshire, areso similar to that of the Sassenach of Scotland, the Lowland Scots,that the language of Burns was nearly as familiar to me when I firstread his poems, as that of my village neighbours; and the Scotch readthat clever romance of low life, "Bilberry Tlmrland," with a greatrelish, the dialogues of which are genuine Nottinghamshire, becausethey said, it was such good Scotch. I have noticed that the plays ofthe boys in Derbyshire and in the Scotch Lowlands have similarnames, differing from the English names in general; as the Englishgame of bandy, in Derbyshire is shiny, in Scotland shinty.152 Farm-servants.cheese-pan. To boil the whey for making whey-butter,to press the curd into the cheese-vats ; place the newcheese in the press ; to salt and turn, and look afterthose cheeses which are in the different stares of theprogress, from perfect newness and white softness, totheir investment with the unctuous coating of a goodlyage. He is ready to go with the men into the farm ;she is ready to see that the calves are properly fed,and to bargain with the butcher for the fat ones ; tofeed her geese, turkeys, guinea-fowls, and barn-doorfowls ; to see after the collection of coffins : how themilk is going on in the dairy, the cream churning,and moulding of butter for sale. In some counties,especially in the west of England, numerous are thosehomely and most useful dames that you see mountedon their horses with nothing but a flat pad, or a stuffedsack under them, jogging to market to dispose of theproducts of their dairy and poultry yard, as fresh, haleand independent as their grandmothers were. As tothe farmer himself, he can hold the plough as hisfather did before him. He hates your newfanglednotions ; he despises your fine-fingered chaps, that arebrought up at boarding-schools till they are fit fornothing but to ride on smart, whisk-tailed nags to market,and carry a bit of a sample-bag in their pockets;and had rather, ten times, be . off to the hunt, or therace-course than to market at all; or to be running" aftera dog and gun, breaking down fences, and tramplingover turnip and potato crops, when they ought to bewatching that other idlers did not commit such depredations.He sits with his men, and works with hismen ; and, while he does as much as the best of themfollows the plough, the harrow, or the drill, emptiesFarm-servants. 153the manure-cart on his fellows, loads the hay or thecorn-wagon, — he many a time says to himself that the"master's eye does still more than his hand." Thecelebrated Mr. Robinson of Cambridge, who was fondof farming, gives in a letter to a friend, a most strikingview of the perpetual recurrence of the littleoccupations which present themselves to the practicalfarmer, and however apparently trivial, are really important,and full of pleasure to those whose hearts arein such pursuits. — "Rose at three o'clock; crawledinto the library, and met one who said, — ' work whileye have the light ; the night cometh, when no mancan work : my father worketh hitherto, and 1 work.'Rang the great bell, and roused the girls to milking,went lip to the farm, roused the horse-keeper, fed thehorses while he was getting up ; called the boy tosuckle the calves, and clean out the cow-house ; lightedthe pipe, walked round the garden to see what waswanted there ; went up to the paddock, to see if theweaning calves were well ; went down to the ferry tosee if the boy had scooped and cleaned the boat ; returnedto the farm, examined the shoulders, heels,traces, chais and corn of eight horses going to plough,mended the acre-staff, cut some thongs, whip cordedthe plough-boys' whips, pumped the troughs full, sawthe hogs fed, examined the swill-tubs, and then thecellar ; ordered a quarter of malt, for the hogs wantgrains, and the men want beer ; filled the pipe again,returned to the river, and bought a lighter of turf fordairy fires, and another of sedge for ovens ; huntedout the wheel-barrows, and set them a trundling ; returnedto the farm, called the men to breakfast, andcut the boys' bread and cheese, and saw the wooden.154 Farm-servants.bottles filled; sent one plough to the three roods,another to the three half-acres, and so on ; shut thegates, and the clock struck five; breakfasted; set twomen to ditch the five roods, two men to chop sods, andspread about the land, two more to throw up manurein the yard, and three men and six women to weedwheat; set on the carpenter to repair cow cribs, andset them up till winter ; the wheeler, to mend the oldcarts, cart-ladders, rakes, etc., preparatory to hay-timeand harvest ; walked to the six-acres, found hogs inthe grass, went back, and set a man to hedge and thorn ;sold the butcher a fat calf, and the suckler a lean one.The clock strikes nine ; — walked into the barley-field; barleys fine — picked off a few tiles and stones,and cut a few thistles; — the peas fine, but foul; thecharlock must be topped ; the tares doubtful, the flyseems to have taken them ; prayed for rain, but couldnot see a cloud; came round to the wheat-field, wheatsrather thin, but the finest colour in the world ; sentfour women on to the shortest wheats; ordered one manto weed along the ridge of the long wheats, and twowomen to keep rank and file with him in the furrows ;thistles many, blue-bottles no end ; traversed all thewheat-field, came to the fallow field ; the ditchershave run crooked, set them straight ; the flag-sods cuttoo much, the rush sods too little, strength wasted,shew the men how to three-corner them laid out morework for the ditchers, went to the ploughs, set thefoot a little higher, cut a wedge, set the coulter deeper,must go and get a new mould-board against tomorrow;went to the other plough, gathered up some wood andtied over the traces, mended a horse-tree, tied a thongto the plough-hammer, went to see which lands wantedFarm-servants. 155ploughing first, sat down under a bush, wondered howany man could be so silly as to call me reverend; readtwo verses in the Bible of the loving kindness of theLord in the midst of his temple, hummed a tune ofthankfulness, rose up, whistled, the dogs wagged theirtails, and away we went, dined, drunk some milk andfell asleep, woke by the carpenter for some slats whichthe sawyers must cut. Etc. etc."So spends many a farmer of the old stamp his day,and at night he takes his seat on the settle, under theold wide chimney — his wife has her little work-tableset near — the " wenches" darning their stockings, ormaking up a cap for Sunday, and the men sitting onthe other side of the hearth, with their shoes off. Henow enjoys of all things, to talk over his labours andplans with the men, — they canvass the best methodof doing this and that — lay out the course of tomorrow— what land is to be broke up, or laid down ;where barley, wheat, oats, etc. shall be sown, or ifthey be growing, when they shall be cut. In harvesttime,lambing-time, in potato setting and gatheringtime, in fact, almost all summer long, there is nositting on the hearth — it is out of bed with the sun, andafter the long hard day — supper, and to bed again. It isonly in winter that there is any sitting by the fire, whichis seldom diversified further than by the coming in of aneighbouring farmer or the reading of the weekly news.Such is the rustic, plodding life of many a farmerin England, and there is no part of the populationfor which so little has been done, and of which solittle is thought, as of their farm-servants. Scarcelyany of those got any education before the establishmentof Sunday schools — how few of them do yet.156 Farm-servants.compared with the working population of towns?The girls help their mothers — the labourers' wives —in their cottages, as soon almost as they can waddleabout. They are scarcely more than infants themselves,when they are set to take care of other infants.The little creatures go lugging about great, fat babiesthat really seem as heavy as themselves. You maysee them on the commons, or little open green spotsin the lanes near their homes, congregating together,two or three juvenile nurses, with their charges,carrying them along, or letting them roll on thesward while they try to catch a few minutes of playwith one another, or with that tribe of bairns at theirheels — too old to need nursing, and too young tobegin nursing others. As they get bigger they arefound useful in the house — they mop and brush, andfeed the pig, and run to the town for things; and assoon as they get to ten or twelve, out they go tonurse at the farm-houses ; a little older, they " go toservice;" there they soon aspire to be dairy-maids, orhouse-maids, whose ambition does not prompt themto seek places in the towns, — and so they go onscrubbing and scouring, and lending a hand in theharvest-field, till they are married to some youngfellow, who takes a cottage and sets up day-labourer.This is their life; and the men's is just similar. Assoon as they can run about, they are set to watch agate that stands at the end of the lane or the commonto stop cattle from straying, and there through longsolitary days they pick up a few halfpence by openingit for travellers. They are sent to scare birds fromcorn just sown, or just ripening, whereThey stroll the lonely Crusoe of the fields —Farm-servants. 157as Bloomfield has beautifully described them from hisown experience. They help to glean, to gatherpotatoes, to pop beans into holes in dabbling time, topickhops, to gather up apples for the cider-mill, togather mushrooms and blackberries for market, toherd flocks of geese, or young turkeys, or lambs atweaning time; they even help to drive sheep to market,or to the wash at shearing time ; they can go to the townwith a huge pair of clouted ancle-boots to be mended,as you may see them trudging along over the moors,or along the foot-path of the fields, with the strings ofthe boots tied together, and slung over the shoulder — •one boot behind and the other before; and then, theyare very useful to lift and carry about the farm-yard,to shred turnips, or beet-root — to hold a sack open —to bring in wood for the fire, or to rear turfs fordrying on the moors, as the man cuts them with hisparing shovel, or to rear peat-bricks for drying.They are mighty useful animals in their day andgeneration, and as they get bigger, they successivelylearn to drive plough, and then to hold it; to drivethe team, and finally to do all the labours of a man.That is the growing up of a farm-servant. All thistime he is learning his business, but he is learning-nothingelse, — he is growing up into a tall, long,smock-frocked, straw-hatted, ancle-booted fellow, witha gait as graceful as one of his own plough-bullocks.He has grown up, and gone to service ; and there heis, as simple, as ignorant, and as laborious a creatureas one of the wagon-horses that he drives. Themechanic sees his weekly newspaper over his pipeand pot ; but the clod-hopper, the chopstick, the haw-buck,the hind, the Johnny-raw, or by whatever name,VOL. I. I158 Farm-servants.in whatever district he may be called, is every wherethe same, — he sees no newspaper, and if he did, hecould not read it; and if he hears his master readingit, ten to one but he drops asleep over it. In fact, hehas no interest in it. He knows there is such a placeas the next town, for he goes there to statutes, andto the fair, — and he has heard of Lunnon, and theFrench, and Buonaparte, and of late years of America,and he has some dreamy notion that he should like togo there if he could raise the wind, and thought hecould find the way — and that is all that he knows ofthe globe and its concerns, beyond his own fields.The mechanic has his library, — and he reads, andfinds that he has a mind, and a hundred tastes andpleasures that he never dreamed of before — theclod-hopper has no library, and if he had, booksin his present state would be to him only so manythings set on end upon shelves. He is as muchof an animal as air and exercise, strong living andsound sleeping can make him, and he is nothing-more.Just see the daily course of his life. Harvesttimeis the jubilee of his year. It is a time of incessantand hurrying occupation — but that is a benefitto him — it is an excitement, and he wants exciting.It rouses him out of that beclouded and unimaginativedreamy state in which he stalks along the solitaryfields, or wields the flail in the barn ; digs the drainor the ditch, or flashes the fence, from day to dayand week to week. The energies that he has, andthey are chiefly physical, are all called forth. He isin a bustle. The weather is fine and warm — hisblood flows quicker. The gates are thrown open —the hay rustles in the meadow, or the golden cornFarm-servants. 159Stands in shock amid the stubble: — the waggons arerattling along the lanes and the fields. His neighboursare all called out to assist. The labourersleave everything else, and are all in the harvest-field.The women leave their cottages, and are there too.Young, middle-aged, and old, — all are there — to workor to glean. The comely maiden with her rosy face,her beaming eyes, and fair figure, brings with hermirth and joke. The stout village matrons haveeach drawn a pair of footless stockings on her armsto protect them from the sun and stubble — they havepinned up their bed-gowns behind, or doffed themselvesto the brown stays and linsey-woolsey petticoat,and are amongst the best hands in the field. Eventhe old are feebly pulling at a rake, or putting hayinto wain-row, or looking on, and telling what theyhave done in their time. The beer-keg is in thefield, and the horn often goes round. The lunch iseaten under the tree, or amongst the sheaves. In thehouse at noon, there is a great setting out of dinner ;beans and bacon, huge puddings and dumplingsare plentiful, — it is a joyous and a stirring time.There is no other season of the year in which thefarm-servant enjoys himself so much as in harvest; noteven in his few other days of relaxation — on his visit tothe fair — to the statutes — to the ploughing match, oron Mothering Sunday, when all the "servant-lads"and "servant wenches" are, in some parts of thecountry, set at liberty for a day, to go and see theirmothers. See him at any other time, and what aplodding, simple, monotonous life he leads! He risesat an early hour — we have seen in this chapter atchat an hour the Rev. Mr. Robinson had his men160 Farm-servants.up; — if he be going to work in the farmyard, hegoes out and gets to it till breakfast time : but if hebegoing to plough, or to do work at a distance, or tocarry corn home that has been sold at market by hismaster, or to fetch bones, rape-dust, or other manurefrom the town, or coals from the pit, he is up whetherit be summer or winter, at at hour at which townspeopleare often not gone to bed. In early springand autumn he gets up to plough at five and sixo'clock in a morning. It is pitch dark, and dismallycold. He strikes a light with his tinder, for lucifershe never saw, and has only heard of, as a horrible inventionfor setting ricks on fire. He slips on hisancle-boots without lacing them, and out he goes tofodder his horses, and rub them down. That done,he comes in again.The " servant wench" has lit the fire and set outhis breakfast for him and his fellows, — huge basins ofmilk porridge, and loaves as big as bee-hives, andpretty much of the same shape, and as brown as theback of their own hands. To this fare he betakeshimself with a capacity that only country air andhard labour can give. Having made havoc with asmuch of these as would serve a round family ofcitizens to breakfast, he then stretches out his hand toa capacious dish of cold fat bacon of about six inchesthick — nay, I once saw bacon on such a table actuallyten inches thick, and all one solid mass of fat. Thisis set on the top of half a peck of cold boiled beansthat were left the day before, and however strangesuch viands might seem to a townsman at six o' clockor earlier, in a morning, they vanish as rapidly as ifthey did not follow that mess of porridge, and thoseFarm-servants. 161huge hunches of bread. Well, to a certainty he hasnow done. Nay, don't be in such haste — he has notdone; he has his eye on the great brown loaf again.He must have a snack of bread and cheese ; so hetakes his knife out of his waistcoat pocket — a giganticclasp-knife, assuredly made by the knowing Sheffieldto hew down such loaves, and lie in such pockets, andfill such stomachs, and for no other earthly purpose.See ! he cuts a massy fragment of the rich curlykissing-crust, that hangs like a fretted cornice fromthe upper half of the loaf, and places it between thethumb and two fore-fingers of his left hand — he cutsa corresponding piece of cheese, and places it betweenthe little finger and the thick of his hand, and alternatelycutting his bread and cheese with his clasp-knife,(for he would not use another for that purposeon any account), as Betty sets a mug of ale beforehim, he wipes his mouth and says, as he lifts the mug,to his younger companion, who has all this time beenfaithfully and valiantly imitating him, — " Well, Jack,we must be oif, lad, — take a draught, then get thehorses out, and I'll be with thee."This is pretty well for five or six o'clock in amorning; but it is quite as likely that it is only oneor two in the morning, as it certainly is, if he begoing to a distance with a load, or for a load of anything.The breakfast is as liberally handled, andBetty mean-time has put up their "luncheons" orten-o' clocks" — huge masses of bread and cheese, orcold bacon, or cold meat, and a bottle of ale if theyare going to plough. Having now breakfasted, hehas only to lace his boots, which he generally does inthe most inconvenient posture, and not before he has16"2 Farm-servants.filled himself till it is tenfold additionally inconvenientso with a face into which all the blood in his body-seemsto rush, and with many a grunt, he accomplisheshis task, and away he goes ; — his whip cracks,his gears jingle, his wagon rumbles, and he is gone,If, however, he be going to plough, he will duly abouteleven o'clock lunch under a tree, while his horsesrest and eat their hay; and then, at three or fouro'clock, he will loose them from the plough, andreturn home to a dinner as plentiful as his breakfast ;his horses are fed, and he goes to bed. If he be goingout with corn, or for coals, he is off, as I have said,probably by two o 'clock, and in his wagon he dulytakes with him a truss of hay and a truss of straw.The hay is for his horses to eat at some way-sidepublic-house, and the straw is for payment for theirstanding in the stable. The straw is worth a shilling,and in some places, at certain seasons, eighteen-pence.If he does not take straw, he takes a shilling in money.He carries his lunch and eats it in the ale-house, andhe has a shilling for himself and companion to drink,and treat the hostler. This is a custom as old as farmsand corn-mills themselves. If it be winter weather,you shall meet him, probably, with straw-bandswrapped round his legs, or even round his hat forwarmth ; and in heavy rain his Macintosh is a sack-bag,which he throws over his shoulders, and goes ondefying the weather for a whole day. In suddensqualls and thunder showers in summer, you may seehim, and frequently a whole cluster of harvesters, takeshelter under his wagon till the storm is over. Bythe evening fire, in some farm-houses, they mendtheir shoes, or shape and polish the heads of flailsFarm-servants. 163which they have cut from the black-thorn bush, andhave had in a loft or under their bed seasoning forthe last six months, or they get into some horse-play,or they dozeTill chilblains wake them, or the snapping fire.And on Sundays they go to church in the morningto get a quiet nod. Perhaps it is to them that theapostle alludes when he says — " And your youngmen shall see visions, and your old men shall dreamdreams." For the only chance of their worship seemsto be in their dreams — the daily exposure to the airon the six days making them as drowsy as bats on theseventh. In the afternoon they lean over gates, orplay at quoits : — and there is the life of a farmer manservant,till he is metamorphosed into a labourer bymarrying and setting up his cottage, finding himself,and receiving weekly instead of yearly wages. Suchis the farm-servant, whether you see him in his white,his blue, his tawny, or his olive-green smock-frock, inhis straw-hat, or his wide-awake, according to theprevailing fashion of different parts of the country —and truly, seeing him and his fellows, we may askwith Wordsworth —What kindly warmth from touch of fostering hand.What penetrating power of sun or breezeShall e'er dissolve the crust wherein his soulSleeps, like a caterpillar sheathed in ice?This torpor is no pitiable workOf modern ingenuity : no townOr crowded city may be taxed with aughtOf sottish vice, or desperate breach of law,To which in after years he may be roused.This boy the fields produce : — his spade and hoe —The carter's whip that on his shoulder rests.In air high-towering with a boorish pomp,164 Farm-servants.The sceptre of his sway: his country's name,Her equal rights, her churches and her schools —What have they done for him ? And, let me ask,For tens of thousands, uninformed as he?*• Who would believe it, that such is the profound ignoranceamongst the peasantry even of the Cumberland hills—amongst thatpeasantry where Wordsworth himself has found his Michaels, hisMatthews, and many another man and woman that in his hands havebecome classical and enduring specimens of rustic heart and mind,that such facts as the following could occur, and yet this did occurthere not very long ago. The "statesmen," that is, small proprietorsthere, are a people very little susceptible of religious excitement ; andwe may believe, have in past years, been very much neglected bytheir natural instructors. You hear of no "revivals" amongst them,and the Methodists have little success amongst them. Some person,speaking with the wife of one of these " statesmen" on religioussubjects, found that she had not even heard of such a person as JesusChrist ! Astonished at the discovery, he began to tell her of hishistory ; of his coming to save the world, and of his being put todeath. Having listened to all this very attentively, she inquiredwhere this occurred ; and that being answered, she asked, "and whenwas it?" this being also told her, she very gravely observed — " Well,its sae far off, and sae lang since, we'll fain believe that it ista true !"CHAPTER IV.THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND.A person from the south or midland counties of Englandjourneying northward, is struck when he entersDurham, or Northumberland, with the sight of bandsof women working in the fields under the surveillanceof one man. One or two such bands, of from half adozen to a dozen women, generally young, might bepassed over ; but when they recur again and again,and you observe them wherever you go, they becomea marked feature of the agricultural system of thecountry, and you naturally inquire how it is, thatsuch regular bands of female labourers prevail there.The answer, in the provincial tongue, is — " O theyare the Bone ditches," ^. e. Bondagessss. Bondagessss !that is an odd sound, you think, in England. Whathave we bondage, a rural serfdom, still existing in freeand fair England ? Even so. The thing is astoundingenough, but it is a fact. As I cast my eyes forthe first time on these female bands in the fields,working under their drivers, I was, before makingany inquiry respecting them, irresistibly reminded ofthe slave-gangs of the West Indies : turnip-hoeing,somehow, associated itself strangely in my brain withI '2166 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFsugar-cane dressing ; but when I heard these womencalled Bondagess, the association became tenfold strong.On all the large estates in these counties, and in thesouth of Scotland, the bondage system prevails. Nomarried labourer is permitted to dwell on these estatesunless he enters into bond to comply with this system.These labourers are termed hinds. Small houses arebuilt for them on the farms, and on some of the estatesas those of the Duke of Northumberland — all thesecottages are numbered, and the number is painted onthe door. A hind, therefore, engaging to work onone of the farms belonging to the estate, has a houseassigned him. He has Al. a year in money; the keepof a cow; his fuel found him; a prescribed quantityof coal, wood, or peat to each cottage ; he is allowedto plant a certain quantity of land with potatoes; andhas thirteen boles of corn furnished him for his familyconsumption ; one-third being oats, one-third barley,and one third peas. In return for these advantages,he is bound to give his labour the year round, andalso to furnish a woman labourer at \s. per day,during harvest, and Q>d. per day for the rest of the year.Now it appears, at once, that this is no hereditaryserfdom — such a thing could not exist in this country;but it is the next thing to it, and no doubt hasdescended from it; being serfdom in its mitigatedform, in which alone modern notions and feelingswould tolerate it. It may even be said that it is avoluntary system ; that it is merely married hindsdoing that which unmarried farm servants do everywhereelse — hire themselves on certain conditionsfrom year to year. The great question is, whetherthese conditions are just, and favourable to the socialTHE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 167and moral improvement of the labouring class. Whether,indeed, it be quite of so voluntary a nature as,at first sight, appears ; whether it be favourable to theonward movement of the community in knowledge,virtue, and active and enterprising habits. Theseare questions which concern the public ; and these Ishall endeavour to answer in that candid and dispassionatespirit which public good requires.In the first place, then, it is only just to say thattheir cottages, though they vary a good deal ondifferent estates, are in themselves, in some cases, notbad. Indeed, some of those which we entered on theestates of the Duke of Northumberland, were muchmore comfortable than labourers' cottages often are.Each has its number painted on the door, withina crescent, — the crest of the Northumberland family ;and though this has a look rather savouring toomuch of a badge of servitude, yet within, many ofthem are very comfortable. They are all built prettymuch on one principle, and that very different to thelabourers' houses of the south. They are copied, infact, from the Scotch cottages. They are of onestory, and generally of one room. On one side, isthe fire-place, with an oven on one hand, and aboiler on the other; on the opposite side of thecottage, is the great partition for the beds, which aretwo in number, with sliding doors or curtains. Theceiling is formed by poles nailed across from one sideof the roof to the other, about half a yard abovewhere it begins to slope, and covered with matting.From the matting to the wall, the slope is coveredwith a piece of chintz in the best cottages; in others,with some showy calico print, with ordinary wallsTHE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFpaper, or even with paper daubed with various coloursarid patterns. This is the regular style of the hind'scottage ; varying in neatness and comfort, it must beconfessed, however, from one another by many degrees.Many are very naked, dirty, and squalid.Where they happen to stand separate, on openheaths, and in glens of the hills, nature throws aroundthem so much of wild freedom and picturesquenessas makes them very agreeable. The cottages of theshepherds are often very snug and curious. Wewent into the cottage of the herd of Middleton, atthe foot of the Cheviot, an estate formerly belongingto Greenwich Hospital. This hut was of more thanordinary size, as it was required to accommodateseveral shepherds. The part of the house on yourleft as you entered was divided into two rooms. Theone was a sort of entrance lobby, where stood thecheese-press, and the pails, and where hung upvarious shepherds' plaids, great coats, and strongshoes. In one place hung a mass of little caps withstrings to them, ready to tie upon the sleeps' headswhen they became galled by the fly in summer ; inanother were suspended wool-shears, and crooks.The other little room was the dairy, with the oddestassemblage of wooden quails or little pails imaginable.Over these rooms, a step-ladder led to anopen attic in the roof, which formed at once thesleeping apartment of the shepherds, and a storeroom.Here were three or four beds, some of themwoollen mattresses on rude stump bedsteads ; otherspieces of wicker-work, like the lower half of a pot-ratecut off, about half a yard high, filled with straw,and a few blankets laid upon it. There were lots ofTHE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 169fleeces of wool stowed away ; and lasts and awls stuckinto the spars, shewed that the herds occasionallyamused their leisure in winter and bad weather bycobbling their shoes. The half of the house on yourright hand on entering, was at all points such as Ihave before described, with its coved and mattedceiling, its chintz cornice, and its two beds withsliding doors. But the bulk of the cottages of thehinds about the great farm-houses, are dismal abodes.They are generally built in a low, and sometimes inadreary quadrangle, without those additions of gardens,piggeries, etc., which so much enrich andembellish the cottages of the labourers in many partsof the kingdom. And what is the state of feelingwithin? is it that of contentment or acquiescence?I am bound to say that many inquiries made invarious places, discovered one general sentiment ofdiscontent with the system. But in the first place,let us take a view of the general aspect of the countryunder this system as it appears to a stranger from thesouth, and here we have at hand the graphic descriptionsof Cobbett, from his tour in Scotland and thenorthern counties of England, in 1832.He does not seem to have become aware of theexistence of the system while in Durham and Northumberland.He perceived, what no man can passthrough those counties without seeing, the large-farmsystem in full operation, and with all its consequencesin its face. " From Morpeth to within four miles ofHexham the land is very indifferent ; the farms of anenormous extent. I saw in one place more than ahundred corn stacks in one yard, each having from sixto seven Surrey wagon-loads of sheaves in one stack ;170 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFand not another house to be seen within a mile or twoof the farm-house. There appears to be no suchthing as barns, but merely a place to take in a stackat a time, and thrash it out by a machine. Thecountry seems to be almost wholly destitute of people:immense tracts of corn land, but neither cottages norchurches." p. 56. This was the first glimpse of thething; it had not yet broken fully upon him ; but hehad not gone much further before the vast solitude ofthe depopulate system began to press upon his brain,and to set those indignant feelings and theorizingsat work in him, which belonged so peculiarly to hisnature. " From Morpeth to Alnwick, the country,generally speaking, is very poor as to land, scarcelyany trees at all ; the farms enormously extensive :only two churches, I think, in the whole of the twentymiles, i. e. from Newcastle to Alnwick. Scarcelyanything worthy the name of a tree, and not onesingle dwelling having the appearance of a labourer'shouse. Here appears to be neither hedging norditching; no such thing as a sheep-fold or a hurdleto be seen ; the cattle and sheep very few in number;the farm-servants living in the farm-houses, and veryfew of* them; the thrashing done by machinery andhorses ; a country without people. This is a prettycountry to take a minister from, to govern the southof England ! a pretty country to take a Lord Chancellorfrom, to prattle about poor-lacs, and aboutsurplus population! My Lord Grey, has, in fact,spent his life here, and Brougham has spent his lifein the inns of court, or in the botheration of speculativebooks. How should either of them know anythingabout the eastern, southern, or western countNORTH OF ENGLAND. 171ties ? I wish I had my dignitary, Dr. Black, here ;I would soon make him see that he has all thesenumber of years been talking about the bull's hornsinstead of his tail and buttocks. Besides the indescribablepleasure of having seen Newcastle, theShields, Sunderland, Durham, and Hexham,I have now discovered the true ground of all theerrors of the Scotch feelosojihers, with regard topopulation, and with regard to poor-laws. The twocountries are as different as any things of the samenature can possibly be ; that which applies to the onedoes not at all apply to the other. The agriculturalcounties are covered all over with parish churches,and with people thinly distributed here and there.Only look at the two counties of Dorset and Durham.Dorset contains 1005 square miles; Durham contains1061 square miles. Dorset has 271 parishes; Durhamhas 75 parishes. The population of Dorset isscattered all over the whole of the county ; therebeing no town of any magnitude in it. The populationof Durham, though larger than that of Dorset,is almost all gathered together at the mouths of theTyne, the Wear, and the Tees. Northumberlandhas 1871 square miles; and Suffolk has 1512 squaremiles. Northumberland has eighty-eight parishes ; andSuffolk has j^ue hundred and ten parishes. So here isa country one-third part smaller than that of Northumberland,with six times as many villages in it ! Whatcomparison is there to be made between states ofsociety so essentially different ? What rule is therewithregard to population and poor-laws, which canapply to both cases ? * * * * Blind andthoughtless must that man be, who imagines that all172 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFbut farms in the south are unproductive. I muchquestion whether, takings a strip three miles each wayfrom the road, coming from Newcastle to Alnwick,an equal quantity of what is called want ground inSurrey, together with the cottages that skirt it, do notexceed such strip of ground in point of produce. Yes,the cows, pigs, geese, poultry, gardens, bees, andfuel that arise from these wastes, far exceed, even inthe capacity of sustaining people, similar breadths ofground, distributed into these large farms, in thepoorer parts of Northumberland. I have seen notlest than ten thousand geese in one tract of commonin about six miles, going from Cobham towardsFarnham in Surrey. I believe these geese alone,raised entirely by care and the common, to be worthmore than the clear profit that can be drawn fromany similar breadth of land between Morpeth andAlnwick,"There are two important particulars connected withthis statement: one regards the sustenance of life, andthe other morals. Much has been said of the moralsof the hinds of Northumberland under this system,and in the main their morals may be good; but oneor two facts I can state, as it regards the moralsof the common people in general in both counties.In going over this very ground, of which Cobbetthas been speaking, we witnessed such a scene aswe never witnessed in any other part of England.We had taken our places in an afternoon coach,going from Newcastle to Morpeth. It was market-day,and we had not proceeded far out of Newcastlewhen we found that the coach in which wewere, had actually two-and-thirty passengers. TheyTHE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 173consisted of country-people, returning from market,who were taken up principally on the road. Therewere niiie inside, and twenty-three outside ; six of whomsat piled on each others knees, on the driving-hex ! Thegreater part of them were drunk; and the number oftipsy fellows staggering along the road, exceededwhat we ever saw in any other quarter. We happenedto be too at Alnwick fair, and we never saw thefarmers and drovers more freely indulge in drink andnoise. Moreover, from Alnwick to Belford we hada wealthy farmer in the coach, who was raving drunk,shouted out of the windows, chafed like a wild-beastin a cage, and presented a spectacle such as I havenever seen in a coach elsewhere. So much for themorals of that region. We are now living amongstthe very scenes Cobbett alludes to in Surrey, andwe never saw a country more abounding with peasantry,who are ignorant from neglect it is true, butappear neither unusually sottish nor disorderly. Andas to the sustenance of life, nothing so much surprisedus on settling here, as the quantity of openlands extending in all directions, though only fourteenmiles from London ; and the number of cottageseverywhere skirting them, with their walls coveredwith vines, and gardens and orchards which half burythem in abundance. The quantities of pigs, geese,ponies, and cattle reared on the greens and wastes areimmense.But Cobbett had not yet seen the finest lands,or got a glimpse of the Bondage System. He stillgoes on expressing his astonishment at the solitude,the vast farms with their steam thrashing-machines,"so that the elements seem to be pressed into the174 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFamiable service of sweeping the people from the earth,in order that the whole amount may go into the handsof a small number of persons, that they may squanderit at London, Paris, or Rome." It was only after hehad traversed the Lothians that the full discovery brokeupon him ; so that after all, he never seems to haveperceived that the Bondage system was prevalent inEngland, but speaks of it as exclusively a Scotchsystem. There is every reason to believe it a relicof ancient feudalism ; but it is certain that but for thedoctrines of the Edinburgh Economists it would havelong ago vanished from our soil. When Cobbettarrived at Edinburgh, there he seemed to take breath,and clear his lungs for a good tirade against thesystem ; which he does thus, in his first letter to theChopsticks of the south. " This city is fifty-six milesfrom the Tweed, which separates England from Scotland.I have come through the country in a post-chaise,stopped one night upon the road, and havemade every inquiry, in order that I might be able toascertain the exact state of the labourers on the land.With the exception of about seven miles, the land isthe finest that I ever saw in my life, though I haveseen every fine vale in every county in England, andin the United States of America. I never saw anyland a tenth-part so good. You will know what theland is, when I tell you that it is by no means uncommonfor it to produce seven English quarters of wheatupon one English acre ; and forty tons of turnips uponone English acre ; and that there are, almost in everyhalf mile, from fifty to a hundred acres of turnips inone piece, sometimes white turnips, and sometimesSwedes; all in rows, as straight as a line, and withouta weed to be seen in any of these beautiful fields.THE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 175"Oh ! how you will wish to be here ! ' Lord,' youwill say to yourselves, ' what pretty villages theremust be; what nice churches and churchyards. Oh !and what preciously nice ale-houses ! Come, Jack,let us set off to Scotland ! What nice gardens weshall have to our cottages there ! What beautifulflowers our wives will have, climbing up about thewindows, and on both sides of the paths leading fromthe wicket up to the door ! And what prancing andbarking pigs we shall have running out upon thecommon, and what a flock of geese grazing upon thegreen !'Stop ! stop ! I have not come to listen to you, butto make you listen to me. Let me tell you, then,that there is neither village, nor church, nor ale-house,nor garden, nor cottage, nor flowers, nor pig, norgoose, nor common, nor green; but the thing is thus:]. The farms of a whole country are, generally speaking,the property of one lord. 2. They are so large,that the corn-stacks frequently amount to more thanahundred upon one farm, each stack having in it, onan average, from fifteen to twenty English quarters ofcorn. 3. The farmer's house is a house big enoughand fine enough for a gentleman to live in ; the farmyardis a square, with buildings on the sides of it forhorses, cattle, and implements ; the stack-yard is onone side of this, the stacks all in rows, and the placeas bier as a little town. 4. On the side of the farmyardnext to the stack-yard, there is a place to thrashthe corn in; and there is, close by this, always athrashing-machine, sometimes worked by horses,sometimes by water, sometimes by wind, and sometimesby steam, there being no such thing as a barnor a flail in the whole country.176 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OF' Well,' say you, ' but out of such a quantity ofcorn, and of beef, and of mutton, there must somecome to the share of the chopsticks to be sure !'Don't be too sure yet ; but hold your tongue, andhear my story. The single labourers are kept in thismanner: about four of them are put into a shed, quiteaway from the farm-house, and out of the farm-yard ;which shed. Dr. Jameson, in his Dictionary, calls aboothie,' a place, says he, where labouring servantsare lodged. A boothie means a little booth; andhere these men live and sleep, having a certain allowanceof oat, barley, and pea meal, upon which theylive, mixing it with water, or with milk when theyare allowed the use of a cow, which they have to milkthemselves. They are allowed some little matter ofmoney besides, to buy clothes with, but never dreamof being allowed to set foot within the walls of thefarm-house. They hire for the year, under verysevere punishment in case of misbehaviour, or quittingservice ; and cannot have fresh service, without acharacter from the last master, and also from theminister of the parish !Pretty well that, for a knife and fork chopstickof Sussex, who has been used to sit round the firewith the master and mistress, and pull about andtickle the laughing maids! Pretty welW/ia^ / Butit is the life of the married labourer that will delightyou. Upon a steam-engine farm, there are perhapseight or ten of these. There is, at a considerabledistance from the farm-yard, a sort of barrack erectedfor these to live in. It is a long shed, stone wallsand pantile roof, and divided into a certain number ofsoothes, each having a door and one little window, allTHE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 177the doors being on one side of the shed, and therebeing no hack-doors ; no such thing, for them, appearsever to be thought of. The ground in frontof the shed is wide or narrow according to circumstances,but quite smooth ; merely a place towalk upon. Each distinct boothie is about seventeenfeet one way, and fifteen feet the other way,as nearly as my eye could determine. There isno ceiling, and no floor but the earth. In thisplace, a man and his wife and family have to live.When they go into it, there is nothing but the fourbare walls, and the tiles over their head, and a smallfire-place. To make the most of the room, they attheir own cost erect berths like those in a barrack-room,which they get up into when they go to bed;and here they are, a man, and his wife, and a parcelof children, squeezed up in this miserable hole, withtheir meal and their "washing tackle, and all theirother things ; and yet it is quite surprising howdecent the women endeavour to keep the place.These women, for I found all the men out at work,appeared to be most industrious creatures, to be extremelyobliging, and of good disposition; and theshame is, that they are permitted to enjoy so small aportion of the fruit of all their labours, of all theircares.But if their dwelling-places be bad, their food isworse, being fed upon exactly that which we feed hogsand horses upon. The married man receives in moneyabout four pounds for the whole year : and he has besidessixty bushels of oats, thirty bushels of barley,twelve bushels of peas, and three bushels of potatoes,with ground allowed him to plant the potatoes. The178 Tie BONDAGE SYSTEM OPmaster gives him the keep of a cow the year round ;but he must find the cow himself; he pays for his ownfuel; he must find a woman to reap for twenty wholedays in the harvest, as payment for the rent of hisboothie. He has no wheat, — the meal altogetheramounts to about six pounds for every day in the year;the oat-meal is eaten in porridge ; the barley-mealand pea-meal are mixed together, and baked into asort of cakes, upon an iron plate put over the fire;they sometimes get a pig, and feed it upon thepotatoes.Thus they never have one bit of Wheaten bread,or of wheaten flour, nor of beef nor mutton, thoughthe land is covered with wheat and with cattle. Thehiring is for a year, beginning on the 26th of May,and not at Michaelmas. The farmer takes the man,just at the season to get the sweat out of him ; and ifhe dies, he dies when the main work is done. Thelabourer is wholly at the mercy of the master, who, ifhe will not keep him beyond the year, can totallyruin him, by refusing him a character. The cow is athing more in name than reality; she may be about tocalve when the 26th of May comes : the wife may bein such a situation as to make removal perilous to herlife. This family has no home; and no home can anyman be said to have, who can thus be dislodged everyyear of his life at the will of his master. It frequentlyhappens, that the poor creatures are compelled to selltheir cow for next to nothing ; and indeed the necessityof character from the last employer, makes the man areal slave, worse oif than the negro by many degrees ;for here there is neither law to ensure him relief, normotive in the master to attend to his health, or to preservehis life.THE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 179Six days from day-light to dark these good, andlaborious, and patient, and kind people labour. Onan average they have six English miles to go tochurch. Here are therefore twelve miles to walk onSunday ; and the consequence is, that they veryseldom go. But, say you, what do they do with allthe wheat, and all the beef, and all the mutton ? andwhat becomes of all the money that they are sold for?Why, the cattle and sheep walk into England upontheir legs ; the wheat is put into ships to be sent toLondon or elsewhere ; and as to the money, thefarmer is allowed to have a little of it, but almost thewhole of it is sent to the landlord, to be gambled, orotherwise squandered away at London at Paris, or atHome. The rent of the land is enormous ; four, five,six, or seven pounds for an English acre. Thefarmer is not allowed to get much ; almost the wholegoes into the pockets of the lords; the labourers aretheir slaves, and the farmers their slave-drivers. Thefarm-yards are, in fact, factories for making corn andmeat, carried on principally by the means of horsesand machinery. There are no people ; and thesemen seem to think that people are not necessary toa state. I came over a tract of country a great dealbigger than the county of Suffolk, with only threetowns in it, and a couple of villages, while the countyof Suffolk has 29 market-towns and 491 villages.Yet our precious government seem to wish to reduceEngland to the state of this part of Scotland; andyou are abused and reproached, and called ignorant,because you will not reside in a boothie, and liveupon the food which we give to horses and hogs."pp. 102—7.180 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFThis is the description of one of the most accurateobservers of all that related to the working man thatever lived. Such is the comparison which he drawsbetween the condition of the hinds, and of the southernchopsticks. Such is his opinion of the superior conditionof the southern peasantry, that he says hewould not be the man who should propose to oneof them to adopt the condition of a hind, especiallyif the fellow should have a bill-hook in his hand.Cobbett's description is as accurate as it is graphic.Let any one compare it with my own in the earlypart of this paper, made from personal observation thisvery last summer. Such was the painful impressionleft upon Cobbett's mind, that he reverts to it againand again. He tells us of a visit made to a farmnear Dunfermline; and of the wretched abodes andfood of the men he found there ; but the last extractcontains the substance of the Bondage System.Let it be understood that the system to the Bond-ages,so called, is no hardship. They are principallygirls from sixteen to twenty years of age. Full ofhealth and spirits, and glad enough to range over thefarm fields in a troop, with a stout young fellow,laughing and gossiping, — the grievance is none oftheirs; but the poor hind's, who has to maintainthem. Just when his family becomes large, and hehas need of all his earnings to feed, and clothe, andeducate his troop of children, then he is compelled tohire and maintain a woman to eat up his children'sfood ; and to take away in her wages that little pittanceof cash that is allowed him, as many a wifewith tears in her eyes has said, to clothe the puirbairns and put them to school. But the system is notTHE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 181without its injurious effect on the Bondage herself.It has been said that the Bondagess are of service inthe hind's cottage, but the wives over the whole spacewhere the bondage system prevails tell you that theBondagess are of little or no use in the house. Theylook upon themselves as hired to work on the farm,and they neither are very willing to work in thehouse, nor very capable. They get out-of-door tastesand habits: they loathe the confinement of the house;they dislike its duties. " They are fit only," say thewomen, " to mind the bairns a bit about the door."And this is one of the evils of the system. Instead ofwomen brought up to manage a house, to care forchildren, to make a fireside comfortable, and tomanage the domestic resources well, they come tohousekeeping ignorant, unprepared, and in a greatmeasure disqualified for it. They can hoe turnips andpotatoes to a miracle, but know very little about themost approved methods of cooking them. They canrake hay better than comb children's hair: drive acart or a harrow with a better grace than rock a cradle,and help more nimbly in the barn than in the ingle.The two points of most importance are those of thehind's being compelled to have a character from thelast master, and of being at his mercy, to turn him notonly out of employ, but out of house and home. Ithink little of their having no wheaten flour. Manya hardy race of peasants, and even farmers, both inScotland and England, in mountain districts, neversee anything in the shape of bread but oat-cake. InLancashire, Yorkshire, Cumberland, and the Peakof Derbyshire, there are thousands that would notthank you for wheaten bread. The girdle-cakes,VOL. I. K182 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFas they call them, which the wives of the hindsmake, of mixed barley and pea meal, I frequently ateof and enjoyed. They are about an inch thick, andeight or ten inches in diameter, and taste perceptiblyof the pea. These, and milk, are a simple, but not adespicable food ; but the fact, that these poor peoplemust bring a character from the last master beforethey can be employed again, is one which may seemat first sight a reasonable demand, but is in factthe binding link of a most subtle and consummateslavery. I have seen the effect of this system in theDerbyshire and Nottinghamshire collieries., There,amongst the master colliers a combination was enteredinto, and for aught I know still exists, to regulate theprice of coal, and the quantity each master shouklrelatively get. This rule, that no man should beemployed except he brought a character from his lastmaster was adopted ; and what was the consequence ?That every man was the bounden slave of him inwhose employment he was; and that soon the priceof coals was raised to three times their actual value,and the labour of the men restricted to about threehalf-days, or a day and a half per week.Let any one imagine a body of men bound by onecommon interest, holding in their possession all thepopulation of several counties, and subjecting theirmen to this rule. Can there be a more positivedespotism ? The hind is at the mercy of the caprice,the anger, or the cupidity of the man in whose handhe is ; and if he dismiss him, as I said in the earlypart of this paper, where is he to go? As Cobbettjustly remarks, he has No Home; and nothing bututter and irretrievable ruin is before him. Such aTHE NORTH OF ENGLAND. 183condition is unfit for any Englishman ; such powder asthat of the master no man ought to hold. A conditionlike this, must generate a slavish character.Can that noble independence of feeling belong to ahind, which is the boast of the humblest Englishman,while he holds employment, home, character, everythingat the utter mercy of another? I have nowlaid before the reader the combined evidence of rayown observation and that of a great observer of theworking classes, both in town and country, in thenorth and the south, and I leave it to the judgment ofany man whether such a system is good or bad : butI cannot help picturing to myself what would be theconsequence of the spread of this system of large farmand bondage all over England. Let us suppose, aswe must in that case, almost all our working populationcooped up in large towns in shops and factories,and all the country thrown into large farms to providethem with corn — what an England would it then be !The poetry and the picturesque of rural life would beannihilated ; the delicious cottages and gardens, theopen common, and the shouting of children wouldvanish ; the scores of sweet old-fashioned hamlets,where an humble sociality and primitive simplicityyet remain, would no more be found; all those charmsand amenities of country life, which have inspiredpoets and patriots with strains and with deeds thathave crowned England with half her glory, wouldhave perished; all that series of gradations of rankand character, from the plough-boy and the milk-maid,the free labourer, the yeoman, the small farmer, thesubstantial farmer, up to the gentleman, would havegone too;And a bold peasantry, its country's pride,184 THE BONDAGE SYSTEM OFwould be replaced by a race of stupid and sequaciousslaves, tilling the solitary lands of vast land-holders,who must become selfish and hardened in theirnatures, from the want of all those claims upon theirbetter sympathies which the more varied state ofsociety at present presents. The question thereforedoes not merely involve the comforts of the hind, butthe welfare and character of the country at large ; andI think no man who desires England not merely tomaintain its noble reputation, but to advance in socialwisdom and benevolence, can wish for the widerspread, or even the continuance, of the BondageSystem. I think all must unite with me in saying,let the very name perish from the plains of England,where it sounds like a Siberian word. Let labour befree ; and this Truck System of the agriculturists beabolished, not by Act of Parliament, but by publicprinciple and sound policy. It is a system whichwrongs all parties. It wrongs the hind, for it robshis children of comfort and knowledge ; it wrongs thefarmer, for what he saves in labour he pays in rent,while he gains only the character of a task-master;and it wrongs the land-holder, for it puts his pettypecuniary interest into the balance against his honourand integrity; and causes him to be regarded as atyrant, in hearts where he might be honoured as anatural protector, and revered as a father.CHAPTER V.THE TERRORS OF A SOLITARY HOUSE.The citizen who lives in a compact house in thecentre of a great city ; whose doors and windows aresecured at night by bars, bolts, shutters, locks, andhinges of the most approved and patented construction; who, if he look out of doors, looks upon splendidrows of lamps ; upon human habitations all abouthim; whose house can only be assailed behind byclimbing over the tops of other houses ; or before, byeluding troops of passengers and watchmen, whomthe smallest alarm would hurry to the spot : I say, ifsuch a man could be suddenly set down in one of ourmany thousand country houses, what a feeling ofunprotected solitude would fall upon him. To sit bythe fire of many a farm-house, or cottage, and hearVOL. \.K-2186 THE TERRORS OFthe unopposed wind come sighing and howling aboutit ; to hear the trees swaying and rustling in the gale,infusing a most forlorn sense of the absence of allneighbouring abodes; to look on the simple casements,and the okl-fashioned locks and bolts, and tothink what would their resistance be to the determinedattack of bold thieves ; — I imagine it wouldgive many such worthy citizen a new and not veryenviable feeling. But if he were to step out beforethe door of such a house at nine or ten o'clock ofa winter or autumnal night, what a state of nakedjeopardy it would seem to stand in ! Perhaps allsolitary darkness; — nothing to be heard but the soundof neighbouring woods; or the roar of distant waters;or the baying of the ban-dogs at the scattered and far-offfarm-houses; the wind coming puffing upon himwith a wild freshness, as from the face of vast andsolitary moors; or perhaps some gleam of moonlight,or the wild, lurid light which hovers in the horizon ofa winter-night sky, revealing to him desolate wastes,or gloomy surrounding woods. In truth, there ismany a sweet spot that, in summer weather, and byfair daylight, do seem very paradises; of which weexclaim, in passing, " Ay ! there could I live and die,and never desire to leave it!" There are thousandsof such sweet places which, when night drops down,assume strange horrors, and make us wish for towersand towns, watchmen, walkers of streets, and gaslight.One seems to have no security in any thing. A singlehouse five or six miles from a neighbour. Mercy ! whyit is the very place for a murder ! What would itavail there to cry help ! murder ! Murder might beperpetrated a dozen times before help could come !A SOLITARY HOUSE. 187Just one such fancy as that, and what a prison !a trap ! does such a place become to a fearful heart.We look on the walls, and think them slight as cardboard; on the roof, and it becomes in our eyes nobetter than a layer of rushes. If we were attackedhere, it M^ere all over ! This gimcrack-tenementwould be crushed in before the brawny hand of athief. And to think of out-of-doors ! Yes ! of thatpleasant out-of-doors, which in the day we glorifiedourselves in. Those forest tracts of heath, and gorse,and flowering broom, where the trout hid themselvesbeneath the overhanging banks of the most transparentstreams — ugh ! they are now the very lurking-placesof danger ! What admirable concealment forliers-in-wait, are the deep beds of heather. Howblack do those bushes of broom and gorse look to asuspicious fancy ! They are just the very things forlurking assassins to crouch behind. And what isworse, those woods ! those woods that come stragglingup to the very doors ; putting forward a single treehere and there, as advanced guards of picturesquebeauty in the glowing summer noon, or in the spring,when their leaves are all delicately new. Beauty !how could we ever think them beautiful, though wesaw them stand in their assembled majesty; thoughthey did tower aloft, with their rugged, gashed, anddeeply-indented stems, and make a sound as of manywaters in their tops, and cast down pleasant shadowson the mossy turf beneath; and though the thrushand the nightingale did sing triumphantly in theirthickets. Beautiful ! they are horrible ! Their blacknessof darkness now makes us shudder. Theirbreezy roar is fearful beyond description. Let THE TERRORS OFlight, and summer sunshine come, and make themlook as pleasant as they will, we would not have awood henceforward within a mile of us. Why, uptothe walls of your house, under your very windows,may evil eyes now be glaring from behind thosesturdy boles : — they seem to have grown there just tosuit the purposes of robbery and murder. We looknow to the dogs and guns for assistance, but theygive us but cold comfort : for the guns only remindus that at this moment the muzzle of one may be atthat chink in the shutter, at that hole out of which aknot has dropped, and in another moment we are ineternity ! And the dogs ! — see, they rise ! they setupthe bristles on their backs ! they growl ! theybark ! our fears are true ! the place is beset !This may seem rather exaggerated, read by goodday-light, or by the fire of a city hearth ; but this isthe natural spirit of the solitary house. It is thatwhich many a one has felt. It has cured many a oneof longing to live in a " sweet sequestered cot ;"nay, it is a spirit felt by the naturalized inhabitantsof such solitary places. I look upon such placesto generate fears and superstitions too, in no ordinarydegree. The inhabitants of solitary houses areoften most arrant cowards; and for this there aremany causes. A sense of exposure to danger, if it benot lost by time, is more likely to generate timidityof disposition than courage. Then, the sound ofwoods and waters ; the mysterious sighing and meanings,and lumbering, that winds and other causesoccasion amongst the old walls and decayed roofs, andill-fastened doors and casements of large, old countryhouses, have a wonderful influence on the minds ofA SOLITARY HOUSE. 189the ignorant and simple who pass their lives in thesolitude of fields ; and go to and fro between theirhomes and the scene of their duties, often throughdeep and lonesome dells, through deep, overshadowedlanes, by night ; by the cross-road, and over thedreary moor : all places of no good character. Superstitiouslegends hang all about such neighbourhoods ;and traditions, enough to freeze the blood of theignorant, taint a dozen spots round every such place.In this field a girl was killed by her jealous, or onlytoo-favoured lover : to the boughs of that old oak, aman was found hanging: in that deep, dark pool,the poor blind fiddler was found drowned : in that oldstone-quarry, and under that high cliff, deeds weredone that have mingled a blackness with their name.Nay, in one such locality, the head of a woodman wasfound by some mowers returning in the evening fromtheir work. There it lay, in the green path of anarrow dingle, horrid and blackening in the sun. Itwas supposed to have been severed from the wretchedman's body with his own axe, by a band of poachers,who charged him with being a spy upon them. Thebody was found cast into a neighbouring marsh.What lonely country but has these petrifying horrors? And is it wonderful that they have their effecton the simple peasantry? especially as they are theconstant topics round the evening fire, along with athousand haunted-house and church-yard stories;ghosts, and highway-robberies, andHorrid stabs in groves forlorn,And murders done in caves. — Hood.The very means of defence sometimes become theaggravates of their evils. The dogs and guns have190 THE TERRORS OFadded to the catalogue of their tales of horror. Thedogs, as conscious of their solitary station as theirmasters, and with true canine instinct, feeling a greatcharge and responsibility upon them, set up the mostclamorous barking at the least noise in the night, andoften seem to take a melancholy pleasure, a wholenight through, in uttering such awful and long-spunhowls as are seldom heard in more secure and cheerfulsituations. These are often looked upon as prognosticof family troubles, and occasion great fears.Who has not heard these dismal bowling at old halls,and been witness to the anxiety they occasioned ?And, if a branch blown by the wind, do but scrapeagainst a pane, or an unlucky pig get into the garden,the dogs are all barking outrageously, and the familyis up, in the certain belief that they are beset withthieves ; and it has been no unfrequent circumstance,on retiring to rest again, that loaded pistols have beenleft about on tables, and the servants on coming downnext morning, with that fatal propensity to sport withfire-arms, have playfully menaced, and actually shotone another in their rashness. Such a catastropheoccurred in the family of a relative of mine, on justsuch an occasion. But truly, the horrors and depredationswhich formerly were perpetrated in such places,were enough to make a solitary house a terrible sojournin the night. A single cottage on a great heath;a toll-bar on a wild road, far from a town ; a wealthyfarm-house in a retired region ; an old hall or grange,amongst gloomy woods. These were places in whichsuch outrages were committed in former years as filledthe newspapers of the time with continual details ofterror ; and would furnish volumes of the most dreadSOLITARY HOUSE. 191ful Stories. It is said that the diminution of highway-robberiesand stopping of mails, once so frequent,has been in a great measure occasioned by the systemof banking and paper-money. Instead of travellers,carrying with them large bags of gold, a letter bypost transmits a bill to any amount, which, if interceptedis of no use to the thief, because the fact isimmediately notified to the bank, and payment prevented; and notes being numbered, makes it a matterof the highest risk to offer them, lest the public beapprised of the numbers, and the offender be secured.But the Wonderful improvement of all our roads sincethe days of Madam, the consequently increased speedof travelling — the increased population and cultivationof the country, all have combined to spoil the tradeof the public plunderer. And the press, as in otherrespects so in this, has added a marvellous influence.Scarcely has a crime of any sort against society beencommitted, but it raises a hue and cry ; handbills andparagraphs in newspapers are flying far and wide, anddexterous must be the offender who escapes. Thehouse of a friend of mine was entered on a Sundaynight, and by means of handbills four of the thieveswere secured on the Monday, and tried and transportedon the Tuesday. But fifty years ago this could nothave been done in a country place. The traveller hadto wade through mud and deep ruts, along our well-frequentedroads; and if assailed, it was impossible tofly. Desperate bands of thieves made nocturnal assaultsupon solitary houses ; and, long ere a hue andcry could be raised, they had vanished into woods andheaths, or had fled beyond the slow flight of lumberingmails, and newspapers that did not reach their readersk3192 THE TERRORS OFsometimes for a fortnight. Those were the times forfearful tragedies in lonely dwellings, which even yetfurnish thrilling themes for winter fire-sides.There is an account of the attack of the house ofColonel Purcell, which appeared in the newspapers atthe time, and was twice reprinted in the Kaliedoscope,a Liverpool literary paper ; the last time soon after thegallant Colonel's death, in 1822, which, although itbelongs to Ireland, a country whence not volumes,but whole libraries of such recitals might be imported,I shall insert here, because it so well illustrates thesort of horrors to which lonely houses were, in thiscountry, formerly very much exposed ; and from whichthey are not now entirely exempt : and because perhapsno greater instance of manly courage is uponrecord. A similar one, of female intrepidity, in ayoung woman who defended a toll-bar, in which shewas alone, against a band of thieves, and shot severalof them, I recollect seeing some years ago in thenewspapers.EXTRAORDINARY INTREPIDITY OF SIR JOHN PURCELL.At the Cork Assizes, Maurice Noonan stood indictedfor a burglary, and attempting to rob the houseof Sir John Purcell, at Highborn, on the night of the11th of March, 1812.Sir John Purcell said, that, on the night of theeleventh of March last, after he had retired to bed,he heard some noise outside the window of his parlour.He slept on the ground-floor, in a room immediatelyadjoining the parlour. There was a doorfrom one room into the other; but this having beenfound inconvenient, and there being another passageA SOLITARY HOUSE. 193from the bed-chamber more accommodating, it wasnailed up, and some of the furniture of the parlourplaced against it. Shortly after Sir John heard thenoise in the front of his house, the windows of theparlour were dashed in, and the noise, occasioned bythe feet of the robbers in leaping from the windowsdown upon the floor, appeared to denote a gangnot less than fourteen in number, as it struck him.He immediately got out of bed ; and the first resolutionhe took being to make resistance, it was withno small mortification that he reflected upon the unarmedcondition in which he was placed, being destituteof a single weapon of the ordinary sort. In thisstate he spent little time in deliberation, as it almostimmediately occurred to him, that, having supped inthe bed-chamber on that night, a knife had been leftbehind by accident, and he instantly proceeded to gropein the dark for this weapon, which happily he found,before the door leading from the parlour into the bedchamberhad been broken. While he stood in calmbut resolute expectation that the progress of therobbers would soon lead them to the bed-chamber,he heard the furniture which had been placed againstthe nailed-up door, expeditiously displaced, and immediatelyafterwards the door was burst open. Themoon shone with great brightness, and when the doorwas thrown open, the light streaming in through threelarge windows in the parlour, afforded Sir John aview that might have made an intrepid spirit not alittle apprehensive. His bed-room was darkened toexcess, in consequence of the shutters of the windows,as well as the curtains being closed ; and thus whilehe stood enveloped in darkness, he saw standing THE TERRORS OFfore him, by the brightness of the moonlight, a bodyof men well armed ; and of those who were in the vanof the gang, he observed that a few were blackened.Armed only with this case knife, and aided only by adauntless heart, he took his station by the side of thedoor, and in a moment after one of the villains enteredfrom the parlour into the dark room. Instantly uponadvancing, Sir John plunged the knife at him, thepoint of which entered under the right arm, and in aline with the nipple, and so home was the blow sent,that the knife passed into the robber's body, until SirJohn's hand stopped its further progress. Upon receivingthis thrust, the villain reeled back into the parlour,crying out blasphemously that he was killed; andshortly after another advanced, who was received in asimilar manner, and who also staggered back into theparlour crying out that he was wounded. A voicefrom the outside gave orders to fire into the darkroom. Upon which, a man stept forward with a shortgun in his hand, which had the butt broke off at thesmall, and which had a piece of cord tied round thebarrel and stock near the swell. As this fellow stoodin the act to fire. Sir John had the amazing coolnessto look at his intended murderer, and without betrayingany audible emotion whatever, which mightpoint out the exact spot which he was standing in, hecalmly calculated his own safety from the shot whichwas preparing for him. He saw that the contents ofthe piece were likely to pass closely to his breastwithout menacing him with, at least, any seriouswound, and in this state of pain and manly expectation,he stood without flinching until the piece wasfired, and its contents harmlessly lodged in the wall.A SOLITARY HOUSE. 195It was loaded with a brace of bullets and three slugs.As soon as the robber fired, Sir John made a pass athim with the knife, and wounded him in the arm,which he repeated again in a moment with similareffect; and as the others had done, the villain afterbeing wounded, retired, exclaiming that he waswounded. The robbers immediately rushed forwardfrom the parlour into the dark room, and then it wasthat Sir John's mind recognized the deepest sense ofdanger, not to be oppressed by it, however, but tosurmount it. He thought that all chance of preservinghis own life was over ; and he resolved to sellthat life still dearer to his intended murderers, thaneven what they had already paid for the attempt todeprive him of it. He did not lose a moment afterthe villains had entered the room, to act with the determinationhe had so instantaneously adopted. Hestruck at the fourth fellow with his knife, and woundedhim, and at the same instant he received a blow onthe head, and found himself grappled with. Heshortened his hold of the knife, and stabbed repeatedlyat the fellow with whom he found himselfengaged. The floor being slippery with the blood ofthe wounded men. Sir John and his adversary bothfell, and while they were on the ground. Sir Johnthinking that his thrusts with his knife, though madewith all his force, did not seem to produce the decisiveeffect, which they had in the beginning of theconflict, he examined the point of his weapon with hisfinger, and found that the blade of it had bent nearthe point. As he lay struggling on the ground, heendeavoured, but unsuccessfully, to straighten thecurvature of the knife ; but while one hand was THE TERRORS OFplayed in this attempt, he perceived that the graspof his adversary was losing its constraint and pressure,and in a moment or two after, he found himself releasedfrom it ; the limbs of the robber were, in fact,by this time unnerved by death. Sir John found thatthis fellow had a sword in his hand, and this he immediatelyseized and gave several blows with it, hisknife being no longer serviceable. At length therobbers, finding so many of their party had beenkilled or wounded, employed themselves in removingthe bodies ; and Sir John took this opportunity of retiringto a place a little apart from the house, wherehe remained a short time. They dragged their companionsinto the parlour, and having placed chairswith the backs upwards, by means of these they liftedthe bodies out of the windows, and afterwards tookthem away. When the robbers retired, Sir John returnedto the house, and called up a man-servantfrom his bed, who, during this long and bloody conflict,had not appeared, and had consequently receivedfrom his master warm and loud upbraiding forhis cowardice. Sir John then placed his daughter-in-law,and grandchild, who were his only inmates, inplaces of safety, and took such precautions as circumstancespointed out, till the day-light appeared. Thenext day, the alarm having been given, search wasmade after the robbers, and Sir John, having gone tothe house of the prisoner Noonan, upon searching, hefound concealed under his bed, the identical shortgun with which one of the robbers had fired at him.Noonan was immediately secured and sent to gaol, andupon being visited by Sir John Purcell, he acknowledgedthat Sir John " had like to do for him," andA SOLITARY HOUSE. 197was proceeding to show, until Sir John preventedhim, the wounds he had received from the knife inhis arm.An accomplice of the name of John Daniel Sullivanwas produced, who deposed to the same effect. Theparty met at Noonan's house ; that they were ninein number, and had arms ; that the prisoner was oneof the number, and that he carried a small gun.Upon the gun, which was in the court, being produced,with which Sir John had been fired at, thewitness said it was that with which the prisoner wasarmed the night of the attack ; that two men werekilled, and three dreadfully wounded. The witnessstood a long and rigorous examination by Mr. CounsellorO'Connell ; but none of the facts seemed tobe shaken, though every use was made of the guiltycharacter of the witness. The prisoner made nodefence, and Judge Mayne then proceeded to chargethe jury, and commended with approbation thebravery and presence of mind displayed throughout aconflict so very unequal and bloody, by Sir JohnPurcell. The jury, after a few minutes, returnedtheir verdict — guilty.But it was not only plunder which excited thesefearful attacks ; party and family feuds were prosecutedin the same savage spirit, even by the light ofday. I have heard my wife's mother relate thefollowing incident, which occurred in her own neighbourhood.About sixty-five years ago there lived atLlanelwth Hall, midway between Llandilo and Llan-dover, a gentleman of considerable fortune of thename of Powell. He had separated from his wife,by whom he had two daughters, — and his brother.198 THE TERRORS OFCaptain Bowen, inflamed by the animosity whichnaturally arises out of such family divisions, and supposedto be instigated by a paramour of the lady's ofthe name of Williams, engaged, in concert with thisWilliams, a band of men to accompany him on apretended smuggling expedition ; and having pliedthem well with promises of ample payment andplenty of liquor — a bottle of brandy and a pair ofnew shoes for the day — marched up to Powell's houseat twelve o'clock at noon, and at the time of Llandilofair, when the conspirators knew that Powell's servantswould be absent. The only persons actually left inthe house with him, were an old woman, and adaughter of this very Bowen's. The conspiratorsadvanced to the front door, and entered the hall,where the old woman met them. Her they seized, andbound to the leg of an old massy oak table. Powell,attracted to the hall by the noise, was immediatelyseized and literally hewn to pieces in the most horriblemanner in the presence of the old woman, and ofthe murderer's own daughter, who alarmed at theentrance of so grim a band, had concealed herselfunder this table. The girl from that hour lost hersenses, and wandered about the country, a confirmedmaniac. My informant often saw this girl at hermother's, who was kind to her, and where she oftentherefore came, having a particular seat by the firealways left for her. In a lucid interval, they onceventured to ask her what she recollected of thisshocking event. She said that she believed she hadfainted, and on coming to herself, saw her fatherstand with a hatchet over her uncle in the act to givehim another blow, and that she actually saw herA SOLITARY HOUSE. 199uncle's face hanging over bis shoulder. At this pointof the recital, the recollection of the horrors of itcame upon her so strongly, that she fell into one ofher most violent fits of madness, and they never daredto mention the subject afterwards in her presence.A fall of snow happening while the murdererswere in the house, caused them to be tracked andsecured, and Bowen and several, if not all, of hisaccomplices were executed. Williams made hisescape, and was afterwards taken as a sailor on boardan American vessel during the war, where he wasrecognised by some of his countrymen. He made,however, a second escape, as is supposed through theconnivance of some relenting neighbour, and neverwas heard of afterwards. My informant well recollectstwo of these murderers coming; to her mother'shouse at Cyfarthfa, a few days after the perpetrationof the outrage, having so long managed to elude theirpursuers. They were equipped as travelling tinkers;but they had new knapsacks, and what was more provocativeof notice at that moment, very downcast andmelancholy aspects. They felt by the looks M^iich themistress of the house fixed on them, that they weresuspected, and immediately hastened away over thehills towards Aberdare, where they were secured thenext day.A fact, related by a minister of the Society ofFriends, shews at once the primitive simplicity whichstill prevails in some retired districts, and the evidentpower of faith in Providence over the spirit of evil.In one of the thinly peopled dales of that very beautiful,and yet by parts, very bleak and dreary region —the Peak of Derbyshire, stood a single house far200 THE TERRORS OFfrom neighbours. It was inhabited by a farmer andhis family's, who lived in such a slate of isolation, sounmolested by intruders, and unapprehensive of danger,that they were hardly in the habit of fasteningtheir door at night. The farmer, who had a greatdistance to go to market, was sometimes late beforehe got back, — late it may be supposed according totheir habits : for in such old-fashioned places, wherethere is nothing to excite and keep alive the attentionbut their daily labour, the good people when the day'sduties are at an end, drop into bed almost before thesun himself; and are all up, and pursuing theirseveral occupations, almost before the sun too. Onthese occasions, the good woman used to retire to restat the usual time, and her husband returning found nolatch nor bolt to obstruct his entrance. But one timethe wife hearing some one come up to the door, andenter the house, supposed it was her husband ; but,after the usual time had elapsed, and he did not cometo bed, she got up and went down stairs, when herterror and astonishment may be imagined, for she sawa great sturdy fellow in the act of reconnoitring forplunder. At the first view of him, she afterwardssaid, she felt ready to drop ; but being naturallycourageous, and of a deeply religious disposition, sheimmediately recovered sufficient self-possession toavoid any outcry, and to walk with apparent firmnessto a chair which stood on one side of the fire-place.The marauder immediately seated himself in anotherchair which stood opposite, and fixed his eyes upon herwith a most savage expression. Her courage wasnow almost spent; but recollecting herself, she putup an inward prayer to the Almighty for protection,A SOLITARY HOUSE. 201and threw herself upon his providence. She immediatelyfelt her internal strength revive, and lookedsteadfastly at the man, who now had drawn from hispocket a large clasp-knife, opened it, and Math amurderous expression in his eyes, appeared readyto spring upon her. She however evinced no visibleemotion ; she said not a word ; but continued to prayfor deliverance, or resignation ; and to look on thefearful man with a calm seriousness. He rose up,looked at her, then at the knife ; then wiped it acrosshis hand; then again eagerly glanced at her; when,at once, a sudden damp seemed to fall upon him ;his eyes seemed to blench before her still, fixed gaze;he closed his knife, and went out At a single springshe reached the door ; shot the bolt with a convulsiverapidity, and fell senseless on the floor. When sherecovered from her swoon, she was filled with theutmost anxiety on account of her husband, lest thevillain should meet him by the way. But presently,she heard his well-known step ; his well-known voiceon finding the door fastened ; and let him in with aheart trembling with mingled agitation and thankfulness.Great as had been her faith on this occasion,and great the interposition of Providence, we may besure that she would not risk the exercise of the one, ortempt the other, by neglecting in future to shoot thebolt of the door; and her husband, at once taught thedanger of his house and of his own passage homemadeit a rule to leave the market-town at leastan hour earlier after the winter markets.The unwelcome visitant in this anecdote is one ofthat class of offenders called "sturdy rogues." Ofthe real "sturdy rogue" the city, amongst all its202 THE TERRORS OFnumerous varieties of rogues, knows nothing. Heforms one of the terrors of the solitary house. Theyare such places that he haunts, because he there findsopportunities in the absence of the men to frightenand bully the women. If he finds only a singlewoman left, as is often the case in harvest time, or atfair or market time, when all the family that can leavehave left, he then makes the terror of his presence ameans of extorting large booty. What can be morefearful than for a single individual, but especiallyfor a woman, at a lonely house, while all the men areabsent in the fields, or elsewhere, to see a hugebrawny fellow of ill looks come to the door, peeringabout with a suspicious inquisitiveness, armed with asturdy staff, followed, perhaps, by a strong sullenbull-dog, professing himself a tinker, a rag-gatherer,a rat-catcher, — anything, under which to hide evildesigns? Nothing, truly, can be more appalling,except when, under the garb of a woman, you feelassured that you have a man before you; or a troopof fellows acting the distressed tradesmen, or sailorswith nothing on their bodies, perhaps, but a pair oftrowsers, and on their heads a handkerchief tied.When such sturdy vagabonds come, and first cringeand beg in a piteous tone, till, having spied out thereal nakedness of the place, as to physical strength,they rise in their demands, hint strange things;instead of going away when desired, walk into thehouse, grow insolent, and at length downright thievishand outrageous, — these are circumstances of peculiarterror not to be exceeded in human experience, andwhich yet have been often experienced by the dwellersin solitary houses.A SOLITARY HOUSE. 203I have heard a lady describe her sensations in sucha situation. A figure in a man's hat, tied down withan India silk handkerchief, blue cloak and stuff petticoat,suddenly appeared before her, and demanded asupply of articles of female attire. She offered half-a-crownto be rid of this unpleasant guest, for therewas something about her which filled the lady withapprehension; but the money was refused, and witha gesture that threw open the cloak, and revealed thereal figure of a man, with naked arms, and in a whiteMarseilles waistcoat. The demand for women's garmentswas complied with as speedily as possible, andthe person hastily went away. The next day, thelady on going to the neighbouring town, beheld alarge handbill in the post-office window, offering areward of los. for the apprehension of a delinquentcharged with high crimes and misdemeanours, anddescribed as " a Dane well known to the nobility andgentry, having been master of the ceremonies atBrighton and Tunbridge Wells," It was the verydescription of her yesterday's guest.But when night is added to such a situation, howmuch is its fearfulness increased ! Imagine one ortwo unprotected women sitting by the fire of a lonehouse, on a winter's evening, with a consciousness ofthe insecurity of their situation upon them. Howinstinct with danger becomes every thing, every movement,every sound ! — the stirring of the trees — thewhispering of the wind — the rustling of a leaf — thecry of a bird. They are not wishing to listen, butcannot help it ; they are all sense ; all eye and ear.A foot is heard without, and is lost again ! A face issuddenly placed against a pane in the window ! the204 THE TERRORS OFlatch of the door is slowly raised in their sight, or theclick of one is heard where it is not seen. Imaginethis, and you imagine what has thrilled through theheart, and frozen the blood of many a tenant of asolitary house.These are not the least of the causes that contributeto produce that timidity of disposition which, in anearly part of the chapter, I have said to belong tomany country people. My grandfather's house wassuch a place. It stood in a solitary valley, with agreat wood flanking the northern side. It had allsorts of legends and superstitions hanging about it.This field, and that lane, and one chamber or outbuildingor another, had a character that made themall hermetically sealed to a human foot after dark-hour,as it is there called. My grandmother was a boldwoman in some respects, but these fears were perfectlytriumphant over her; and she had, on one occasion,met with an incident which did not make her feel verycomfortable alone in her house, in the daytime. AnAjax of a woman once besieged her when left entirelyby herself; who finding the doors secured against her,began smashing the windows with her fists, as withtwo sledge-hammers ; and declared she would washher hands in her heart's blood. My grandfather too,had had a little adventure which just served to shewwhat courage he had, or rather had not. In that primitivetime and place, if a tailor were wanted, he didnot do his work at his own house, but came to that ofhis employer, and there worked, day after day, tillthe job was finished ; that is, till all making and mendingthat could possibly be found about the house bya general examination of garments, was completed.A SOLITARY HOUSE. 205He then adjourned to another house, and so went theround of the parish. I know not whether the tailorsof those primitive times were as philosophical asHeinrich Johann Jung Stilling, and his fellows ofGermany, who thus went from house to house, andboth there with their employers, and on Sundays whenthey wandered into the woods, held the most interestingconversations on religion, philosophy, and literature: if this were the case, our country tailors havevery much retrograded ; and yet it would almost seemso, for my grandfather was passionately fond of ParadiseLost, and on a terrible snowy-day had beenreading it all day to the tailor, who had establishedhimself by the parlour fire, with all his implementsand work before him. He had been thus employed ;but the tailor was gone, and the old gentleman havingsupped, dropped asleep on the sofa. When he awokeit was late in the night; no one had ventured to disturbhim, but all had gone to bed. The house wasstill ; the fire burning low ; but he had scarcely becomeaware of his situation before he was aware also of thepresence of some one. As he lay, he saw a man stepout of the next room into the one in which he was.The man immediately caught sight of the old gentleman,and suddenly stopped, fixing his eyes upon him;and perhaps to ascertain whether he were asleep, hestepped back and drew himself up in the shadow ofthe clock-case. The old gentleman slowly raised himselfup without a word, keeping his eyes fixed on theshadow of the clock-case, till he had gained his feet,when with a hop, stride, and jump, he cleared the floor,and flew up stairs at three steps at a time. Here heraised a fierce alarm, crying — " there is a sturdy rogue206 THE TERRORS OFin the house ! there is a sturdy rogue in the house !"But this alarm, instead of getting anybody up, onlykept them faster in bed. Neither man, woman, norchild would stir; neither son nor servant, except tobolt every one his own chamber door. In the morningthey found the thief had taken himself off througha window, with the modest loan of a piece of bacon.This house, however, was not quite out of hearingof neighbours. Beyond the wood was a village,thence called Wood-end ; and a large horn was hungin the kitchen at the Fall, — so this house was named,which was blown on any occasion of alarm, andbrought the inhabitants of the Wood-end thitherspeedily. The cowardice which had grown upon thisfamily in such matters, — for in others they were boldas lions, and one son was actually killed in a duel, —was become so notorious, that it once brought a foodjoke upon them. The farm-servants were sitting,after their day's labour, by the kitchen fire at theclose of a winter's day. Preparation was making fortea, and there were some of those rich tea-cakeswhich wealthy country ladies know so well how tomake, in the act of buttering. Now I dare say thatthe sight of those delicious cakes set the mouths of allthose hearty working men a-watering ; but there wasa cunning rogue of a lad amongst them, who immediatelyconceived the felicitous design of gettingof them. It is only necessary to say thathis name was Jack; for all Jacks have a spice ofroguery in them. Jack was just cogitating on thisenterprise, when his mistress said, " Jack, those sheepin the Hard-meadow have not been seen to-day.Your legs are younger than anybody else's ; so upA SOLITARY HOUSE. 207and count them before you go to bed ; — it is moonlight."Jack, whose blood after the chill of the day-wascirculating most luxuriously in his veins beforethat M'arm hearth, felt inwardly chagrined that somany great lubberly fellows should be passed over,and this unwelcome business be put upon him.Ay," thought he, " they may talk of young legs,but mistress knows very well that none of thoseburly fellows dare go all the way to the Hard meadowto-night, — through the dingle ; over the brook ; andpast the hovel where old Callings was found deadlast August, with his hand still holding fast his tramp-basket,though his clothes were rotten on his back!No ! Jack must trudge, though the old gentlemanhimself were in the way !" This persuasion furnishedhim at once with a scheme of revenge, and ofcoming at the tea-cakes. He therefore rose slowly,and with well-feigned reluctance ; put on his cloutedshoes, which he had put off to indulge his feet withtheir accustomed portion of liberty and warmth beforehe went to bed; and folding round him a sack-bag,the common mantle and dread-naught of carters andfarmers in wet or cold weather, he went out. Insteadof marching off to the Hard-meadow, however, ofwhich he had not the most remote intention, he wentleisurely round to the front door, which he knewwould be unfastened ; for what inhabitants of an oldcountry-house would think of fastening doors till bedtime? He entered quietly ; ascended the frontstairs ; and reaching a large, old oaken chest whichstood on the landing-place, all carved and adornedwith minster-work, he struck three bold strokes on thelid with a pebble which he had picked up in the yardfor the purpose.208 THE TERRORS OFAt the sound, up started every soul in the kitchen."What is that?" said every one at once in consternation.The mistress ordered the maid to run andsee ; but the maid declared that she would not go forthe world. " Go you then, Betty cook — go Joe — goHarry !" No, neither Betty, Joe, Harry, nor anybodyelse would stir a foot. They all stood togetheraghast, when a strange rumbling and grinding soundassailed their ears. It was Jack rubbing the pebblea few times over the carved lid of the chest. Thiswas too much for endurance. A great fellow in aparoxysm of terror, snatched down the horn from itsnail, and blew a tremendous blast. It was not longneither before its effect was seen. The people ofWood-end came running in a wild troop, armed withbrooms, pitch-forks, spits, scythes, and rusty swords.They were already assured by the dismal blast of thehorn that something fearful had occurred, but thesight of the white faces of the family made themgrow white too. " What is the matter ! What isthe matter in heaven's name ? " " O ! such sounds,such rumblings, somewhere upstairs !" In the heat ofthe moment, if heat it could be called, it was resolvedto move in a body to the mysterious spot. Swords,scythes, pitchforks fell into due rank ; candles wereheld by trembling hands; and in a truly fearfulphalanx they marched across the sitting-room andreached the stair-foot. Here was a sudden pause; forthere seemed to be heavy footsteps actually descending.They listened — tramp ! tramp ! it was true ;and back fled the whole armed and alarmed troopinto the kitchen, and banged the door after them.What was now to be done ? Everything which fearA SOLITARY HOUSE. 209could suggest or terror could enact was done. Theywere on the crisis of flying out of the house, andtaking refuge at Wood-end, when Jack was heardcheerfully whistling as if returning from the field.Jack had made the tramp upon the stairs; for, hearingthe sound of the horn, and the approach of manyfeet below, he thought it was time to be going; andhad the armed troop been courageous enough, theyMould have taken him in the fact. But their fearssaved both him and his joke. He came up with awell-affected astonishment at seeing such a body ofwild and strangely armed folk. " What is thematter?" exclaimed Jack; and the matter was detailedby a dozen voices, and with a dozen embellishments."Pshaw!" said Jack, "it is all nonsense, Iknow. It is a horse kicking in the stable ; or a catthat has chucked a tile out of the gutter, or something.Give me a candle; I durst go!" A candlewas readily put into his hands, and he marched off,all following him to the foot of the staircase, but notasoul daring to mount a single step after him. UpJack went — " Why," he shouted, "here's nothing!"O !" they cried from below, "look under the beds;look into the closets," and look into every imaginableplace. Jack went very obediently, and duly andsuccessively returned a shout, that there was nothing ;it was all nonsense ! At this there was more fearand consternation than ever. A thief might havebeen tolerated; but these supernatural noises! Whowas to sleep in such a house ? There was nothingfor it, however, but for them to adjourn and move tothe kitchen, and talk it all over ; and torture it intoa thousand forms ; and exaggerate it into somethingVOL. I. L210 THE TERRORS OFunprecedentedly awful and ominous. The Wood-indianswere regaled with a good portion of brown-stout; thanked for their valuable services, and they setoff. The family was left alone. " Mistress," said Jack,"now you'd better get your tea; I am sure youmust want it." " Nay Jack," said she, " I have hadmy tea : no tea for me to night. I haven't a heartlike thee Jack ; take my share and welcome."Jack sate down with the servant maids, and talkedof this strange affair, which he persisted in callingall nonsense ;" and devoured the cakes which he haddetermined to win. Many a time did he laugh in hissleeve as he heard this " great fright," as it came tobe called, talked over, and painted in many newcolours by the fireside ; but he kept his counselstrictly while he continued to live there ; for he knewa terrible castigation would be the sure consequenceof a disclosure ; but after he quitted the place, hemade a full and merry confession to his new comrades,and occasioned one long laughter to run all thecountry round. The people of the Fall, backed bythe Wood-indians, persisted that the noises weresomething supernatural, and that this was an after-inventionof Jack's to disgrace them ; but Jack andthe public continued to have the laugh on their side.After all, I know not whether the world of spritesand hobgoblins may not assume a greater latitude ofaction and revelation in these out-of-the-world placesthan in populous ones ; whether the Lars andLemures, the Fairies, Robin-bedfellows, Hothousesand Barguests may not linger about the regionswhere there is a certain quietness, a simplicity ofheart and faith, and ample old rooms, attics, galleriesA SOLITARY HOUSE. 211and grim halls to range over, seeing that they hatecities, and knowledge, and the conceit that attendsupon them ; for certainly, I myself have seen suchsights, and heard such sounds as would puzzle Dr.Brewster himself, with all his natural magic, to accountfor. In an old house in which my father lived whenI was a boy, we had such a capering of the chairs, orwhat seemed such in the rooms over our heads ; suchaerial music in a certain chimney corner, as if Puckhimself were playing on the bag-pipes ; such runningof black cats up the bed-curtains and down again, anddisappearing, no one knew how ; and such a varietyof similar supernatural exhibitions, as was trulyamusing. And a friend of mine, having suffered ajoiner to lay a quantity of elm boards in a little roomnear a kitchen chimney to dry, was so annoyed bytheir tumbling and jumbling about, that when theman came the next day to fetch part of them, hedesired him to take the whole, giving him the reasonfor it. "O!" said the man, "you need not bealarmed at that — that is always the way before acoffin is wanted !" As if the ghost of the deceasedcame and selected the boards for the coffin af its the body.But enough of the terrors of solitary houses withoutthose of superstition. I close my chapter ; andyet I expect, dear readers, that in every place whereyou peruse this, you will say, " O, these are nothingto what I could have told. If Mr. Howitt had butheard so and so." Thank you, my kind and fairfriends in a thousand places — I wish I had.CHAPTER VI.MIDSUMMER IN THE FIELDS.I never see a clear stream running through the fieldsat this beautiful time of the year but I wish, like oldIzaak Walton, to take rod and line, and pleasantbook, and wander away into some sylvan, or romanticregion, and give myself up wholly to the influence ofthe season; to angle, and read, and dream by theever-lapsing water, in green and flowery meadows,for days and weeks, caring no more for all that isgoing on in this great and many-coloured world, thanif there was no world at all beyond these happymeadows so full of sun-shine and quietness. Trulythat good old man had hit on one of the ways to trueenjoyment of life. He knew that simple habits anddesires were mighty ingredients in genuine happiness; that to enjoy ourselves, we must first cast theworld and all its cares out of our hearts ; we mustactually renounce its pomps and vanities ; and thenhow sweet becomes every summer bank ; how brightevery summer stream ; what a delicious tranquillityfalls upon our hearts; what a self-enjoyment reignsall through it ; what a love of God kindles in it fromMIDSUMMER IN THE FIELDS. 213all the fair things around. They may say what theywill of the old prince of anglers, of his cruelty andinconsistency; from those charges I have vindicatedhim in another place, — we know that he was piousand humane. We know that in the stillness of hishaunts, and the leisure of his latter days, wise andkind thoughts flowed in upon his soul, and that thebeauty and sweetness of nature which surroundedhim, inspired him with feelings of joy and admiration,that streamed up towards the clear heavens above himin grateful thanksgiving. It is these things whichhave given to his volume an everlasting charm ; andthat affect me, at this particular time of the year,with a desire to haunt like places. It may be thegreen banks of the beautiful streams of Derbyshire —the Wye, or the Dove ; for now are they most lovely,running on amongst the verdant hills and boskydales of the Peak, surrounded by summer's richestcharms. Their banks are overhung with deep grass,and many a fair flower droops over them ; the foliageof the trees that shroud their many windings, is mostdelicate ; and above them, grey rocks lift their heads,or greenest hills swell away to the blue sky. And asevening falls over them, what a softness clothes thoseverdant mountains ! what a depth of shadow fillsthose hollows ! what a voice of waters rises on thehushed landscape ! But even here, in the vale ofTrent, it is beautiful. There are a thousand charmsgathered about one of these little streams that arehastening towards our fair river. They are charmsthat belong to this point of time, and that in a weekor two will be gone. The spring is gone, with allher long anticipated pleasures. The snow-drop, the214 MIDSUMMER IN THE FIELDS.crocus, the blue-bell, the primrose, and the cowslip,where are they ? They are all buried children of adelicate time, too soon hurried by.But see ! here are delights that will presently be asirrevocably gone. It is evening. What a calm andbasking sunshine lies on the green landscape. Lookround, — all is richness, and beauty, and glory. Thosetall elms which surround the churchyard, letting thegrey tower get but a passing glimpse of the river,and that other magnificent arcade of similar treeswhich stretch up the side of the same fair stream, —how they hang in the most verdant and luxuriantmasses of foliage ! What a soft, hazy twilight floatsabout them ! What a slumberous calm rests on them!Slumberous did I say ? no, it is not slumberous ; ithas nothing of sleep in its profound repose. It is thedepth of a contemplative trance ; as if every tree werea living, thinking spirit, lost in the vastness of someabsorbing thought. It is the hush of a dream-land ;the motionless majesty of an enchanted forest, bearingthe spell of an infrangible silence. And see, overthose wide meadows, what an affluence of vegetation !See how that herd of cattle, in colour and form, andgrouping, worthy of the pencil of Cuyp or Ruysdael,graces the plenty of that field of most lustrous gold;and all round, the grass growing for the scythe almostovertops the hedges in its abundance. As we trackthe narrow footpath through them, we cannot avoid alively admiration of the rich mosaic of colours thatare woven all through them — the yellow rattle — thecrimson stems and heads of the burnet, that plantof beautiful leaves— the golden trifolium — the lightquake-grass — the azure milkwort, and clover scentingMIDSUMMER IN THE FIELDS. 215all the air. Hark ! the cuckoo sends her voice fromthe distance, clear and continuous: —Hail to thee, shouting Cuckoo ! in my youthThou wert long time, the Ariel of my hope,The marvel of a summer ! it did sootheTo listen to thee on some sunny slope,Where the high oaks forbade an ampler scope.Than of the blue skies upward — and to sit.Canopied, in the gladdening horoscopeWhich thou, my planet, flung — a pleasant fit,Long time my hours endeared, my kindling fancy smit.And thus I love thee still — thy monotone,The selfsame transport flashes through my frame.And when tliy voice, sweet sybil, all is flownMy eager ear, I cannot choose but blame.may the world these feelings never tame IIf age o'er me her silver tresses spread,1 still would call thee by a lover's name,And deem the spirit of delight unfed,Nor bear, though grey without, a heart to Nature dead !Wiff'en's Aoiiian Hours.And lo ! there are the mowers at work ! there arethe hay-makers ! Green swaths of mown grass — haycocks,and wagons ready to bear them away — it issummer, indeed ! What a fragrance comes floatingon the gale from the clover in the standing grass;from the new-mown hay; and from those sycamoretrees, with all their pendant flowers. It is delicious ;and yet one cannot help regretting that the year hasadvanced so far. There, the wild rose is putting out;the elder is already in flower ; they are all beautiful,but saddening signs of the swift-winged time. Letus sit down by this little stream, and enjoy the pleasantnessthat it presents, without a thought of thefuture. Ah! this sweet place is just in its pride.216 MIDSUMMER IN THE Fields.The flags have sprung thickly in the bed of the brook,and their yellow flowers are beginning to shew themselves.The green locks of the water-ranunculusesare lifted by the stream, and their flowers form snowyislands on the surface; the water-lilies spread outtheir leaves upon it, like the pallets of fairy painters ;and that opposite bank, what a prodigal scene of vigorousand abundant vegetation it is. There are theblue geraniums as lovely as ever ; the meadow-sweetis hastening to put out its foam-like flowers, thatspecies of golden-flowered mustard occupies the connectingspace between the land and water; and harebells,the jagged pink lychnis, and flowering grass ofvarious kinds, make the whole bank beautiful. P>eryplant that is wont to shew itself at this season, is inits place, to give its quota of the accustomed characterto the spot; every insect, to beautify it with its hues,and enliven it with its peculiar sound : —There is the grashopper, my summer friend, —The minute sound of many a sunny hourPassed on a thymy hill, widen I could sendMy soul in search thereof by bank and bower,Till lured far from it by a foxglove flower,Nodding too dangerously above the crag,Not to excite the passion and the powerTo climb the steep, and down the blossom drag : —Them the marsh-crocus joined, and yellow water-flag.Shrill sings the drowsy wassailer in his dome.Yon grassy wilderness, where curls the fern,And creeps the ivy ; with the wish to reamHe spreads his sails, and bright is his sojourn,'Mid chalices with dews in every urn :All flying things a like delight have found —Where'er I gaze, to what new region turn,Ten thousand insects in the air abound,Flitting on glancing wings that yield a summer's sound.Wiffen^s Ionian Hours.MIDSUMMER IN THE FIELDS. 217The may-flies, in thousands, are come forth to theirlittle day of life, and are flying up, and droppingagain in their own peculiar way. The stone-fly isfound head downwards on the bole of that tree. Themidges are celebrating their airy and labyrinthinedances with an amazing adroitness. These little creaturespass through a metamorphosis, as they settle onyou in your summer walks by river sides, that muststrike the careful observer with admiration. Youmay sometimes see a column of them by the marginof the river, like a column of smoke j and when youcome near, numbers of them will settle upon yourclothes — small, white, and fleecy creatures. Observethem carefully, and you will see them shake theirwings, as in a little convulsive agony, press them tothe sides of their body, and fairly creep out of theirskins. These skins, fine white films, drawn like aglove from their bodies, and from their very legs,which are but like fine hairs themselves, they leavebehind, and dart oif into the air as to a new life, andwith an accession of new beauty. Dragon-flies ofall sizes and colours are hovering, and skimming, andsettling amongst the water-plants, or on some naturaltwig, evidently full of enjoyment. The great azure-bodiedone, with its large filmy wings, darts past withreckless speed; and slender ones — blue, and purple,and dun, and black, with long jointed bodies, madeas of shining silk by the fingers of some fair lady,and animated for a week or two of summer sunshineby some frolic spell, now pursue each other, and nowrest as in sleep. The whitethroat goes flying with acurious cowering motion over the top of the tall grassfrom one bush to another, where it hops unseen, andL 2MIDSUMMER IN THE FIELDS.repeats its favourite " chaw-chaw." The willow-warbler,the mocking-bird of England, maintains itsincessant imitations of the swallow, the sparrow, thechaffinch, and the whitethroat, flitting and chatteringin the bushes that overhang the stream. The landrailrepeats its continuous " crake-crake" from the meadowgrass, and the water itself ripples on, clear andmusical, and chequered with small shadows from manya leaf and bent and moving bough. We lift up ourheads — and in the west what a ruby sun — what agorgeous assemblage of sunset clouds !Readers and friends, are these not the characters ofJune fields and June brook-sides ? Do they not recalto your memory many a pleasant walk, many a pleasantplace, and many pleasant friends ? They must :for there is nothing gives us so vivid a sense of thecareering of time as the passing of spring and summer.PART III.CHAPTER I.— GIPSIES.All hail ! ye British Buccaneers !Ye English Israelites, all hail !A jovial and marauding band,Against the goodliest of the landYe go, and ye prevail.Man's cultured Eden casts ye forth.Where'er ye list to wander wide.Wild heaths and wilder glens to tread,The spacious earth before you spread.Your hearts your only guide.The Gipsy King. By Richard Howitt.The picture of the Rural Life of England must bewoefully defective which should omit those singular andmost picturesque squatters on heaths and in lanes,the Gipsies. They make part and parcel of the landscapescenery of England. They are an essentialportion of our poetry and literature. They aremoulded into our memories, and all our associationsVOL. 1 L 32'20 GIPSIES.of the country by the surprise of our first seeingthem, by the stories of their cunning, their petty larcenies,their fortune-tellings, and by the writings ofalmost all our best poets and essayists. The poetsbeing vividly impressed by anything picturesque, andpartaking of some mystery and romance, universallytalk of them with an unction of enjoyment.Romance writers have found them more profitablesubjects than his Majesty does — Scott and VictorHugo especially. But the first introduction to them,which most of us had in print, and to which the mindof every man of taste must instantly revert on seeingor hearing of them, is that most admirable and racyone in the Spectator, — that gipsy adventure of ourtruly beloved and honoured friend. Sir Roger deCoverley — that perfect model of an old English gentleman.Who does not think of this scene with apeculiar delight, especially since it has received soexquisite a representation from the pencil of Leslie ?As I was yesterday riding out in the fields with myfriend Sir Roger, we saw at a little distance from usatroop of gipsies. Upon the first discovery of them,my friend was in some doubt whether he should notexert the Justice of the Peace upon a band of lawlessvagrants ; but not having his clerk with him, who is anecessary counsellor on these occasions, and fearingthat his poultry might fare the worse for it, he let thethought drop, but at the same time gave me a particularaccount of the mischiefs they do in the countryin stealing peoples' goods, and spoiling their servants.If a stray piece of linen hangs upon a hedge, says SirRoger, they are sure to have it : if the hog loses itsway in the fields, it is ten to one but it becomes theirprey. Our geese cannot lie in peace for them.GIPSIES. 221' If a man prosecutes them with severity, his hen-roostis sure to pay for it. They generally straggleinto this part of the country about this time of the year,and set the heads of our servant-maids so agog forhusbands, that we do not expect to have any businessdone as it should be while they are in the country.I have an honest dairy-maid who crosses their handswith a piece of silver every summer, and never failsbeing promised the handsomest young fellow in theparish for her pains. Your friend the butler hasbeen fool enough to be seduced by them ; and thoughhe is sure to lose a knife, a fork, or a spoon everytime his fortune is told him, generally shuts himselfup in the pantry with an old gipsy for above half anhour once a twelvemonth. Sweethearts are the thingswhich they live upon, which they bestow very plentifullyupon all those that apply themselves to them.You see now and then some handsome young jadesamongst them, — the sluts have very often white teethand black eyes.'Sir Roger observing that I listened with greatattention to his account of a people who were soentirely new to me, told me that if I would, theyshould tell us our fortunes. As I was very wellpleased with the knight's proposal, we rid up andcommunicated our hands to them. A Cassandra ofthe race, after having examined my lines very diligently,told me that I loved a pretty maid in acorner ; that I was a good woman's man ; with someother particulars which I do not think proper torelate. My friend Sir Roger alighted from his horse,and exposing his palm to two or three that stood byhim, they crumpled it into all shapes, and diligently222 GIPSIES.scanned every wrinkle that could be made in it ;when one of them, vain was older and more sunburntthan the rest, told him that he had a widow in hisline of life. Upon which the knight cried, ' go, go,you are an idle baggage,' and at the same timesmiled upon me. The gipsy, finding that he was notdispleased in his heart, told him, after a furtherinquiry into his hand, that his true-love was constant,and that he should dream of her to night. My oldfriend cried ' Pish,' and bid her go on. The gipsytold him that he was a bachelor, but would not be solong ; and that he was dearer to somebody than hethought. The knight still repeated that she was anidle baggage, and bid her go on. ' Ah, master,'says the gipsy, ' that roguish leer of yours makes awoman's heart ache. You have not that simper aboutthe mouth for nothing.' The uncouth gibberish withwhich all this was uttered, like the darkness of anoracle, made us the more attentive to it. To beshort, the knight left the money with her that he hadcrossed the hand with, and got up again on his horse.As Mee were riding away, Sir Roger told me, thathe knew several sensible people who believed thesegipsies now and then foretold very strange things ;and for half an hour together appeared more jocundthan ordinary. In the height of his good-humour,meeting a common beggar upon the road who wasno conjurer, as he went to relieve him, he found hispocket picked ; that being a kind of palmistry atwhich this race of vermin are very dexterous."This is a perfect piece of gipsyism. Wordsworth,Cowper, Crabbe, and others of our poets, have givenvery graphic sketches of them ; but in all theseGIPSIES. 2*23descriptions you have the same characteristics, thoseof a strange, vagabond, out-of-door, artful and fortunetellingpeople. This was for a long time the only-pointof view in which they were regarded. Thatthey were a thievish and uncivilized race everybodyknew, but what was their real origin, or what theirreal country, few cared to inquire. It, in fact, quitesatisfied the public to consider them as what theypretended to be, Egyptians. In all the descriptionsI have alluded to, no reference whatever is made totheir origin. Addison alone hints that he could givesome historical remarks on this idle people, but hedoes not think it worth while. But a more inquisitiveage came. It began to strike the minds of intelligentmen, as the love of the picturesque, the love of whateverwas quiet, ancient, singular, or poetic in thefeatures of the country grew into a strong public feeling,that there was something far more curious andmysterious about these people than merely met theeye. That they were a peculiar variety of the humanspecies, and had hereditary causes, whether prejudicesor traditions, which stamped them, as distinctly andas stubbornly, a separate portion of humanity as theJews, became obvious enough. That which had beensupposed a mere gibberish in their mouths, was foundto be true Eastern language, and it was discoveredthat they not merely " infested all Europe," asAddison remarked, but all the world. In everyquarter of it they were found, exhibiting the samestrange and unchangeable lineaments, manners, andhabits ; in Egypt, as separate from the Egyptians inspeech and custom, as they are separate from theEnglish in England. Great curiosity was now GIPSIES.cited concerning them, and we get a glimpse, in thefollowing verses of the Patrick Shepherd's, of thespeculations which arose out of the consequent inquiries.Hast thou not noted on the by-way side,Where England's leaning stretch unsoiled and wide,Or by the brook that through the valley pours,Where mimic waves play lightly through the flowers,A noisy crew far straggling through the glade,Busied with trifles, or in slumber laid.Their children lolling round them on the grass.Or pestering with their sports the patient ass?The wrinkled grandam there you may espy,The ripe young maiden with her glossy eye ;Men in their prime — the striplings dark and dun,Scathed by the storms, and freckled by the sun ;O mark them well when next the group you see,In vacant barn, or resting on the lea;They are the remnant of a race of old —Spare not the trifle for your fortune told !For there shalt thou behold with nature blentA tint of mind in every lineament,A mould of soul distinct, but hard to trace.Unknown except to Israel's wandering race ;For thence, as sages say, their line they drew —O mark them well ! the tales of old are true !In these verses, which seem intended by Hogg asthe commencement of a poem on the Gipsy history,he goes on to tell us that they were a tribe of Arabsthat during the Crusades were induced to act asguides and allies of the Crusaders against Jerusalem,and were therefore compelled, on the retreat of theChristians, to flee too. It was not at all surprisingthat they should be regarded as the real descendantsof Ishmael, for they have all the characteristics of hisrace, — an Eastern people, retaining all their featuresof mind or body in unchangeable fixedness — neitherGIPSIES. 2'25growing fairer in the temperate latitudes, nor darkerin the sultry ones; perpetual wanderers and dwellersin tents ; active, fond of horses, often herdsmen,artful, thievish, restrained by no principle but that ofa cunning policy from laying hands on any man'spossessions; fond to enthusiasm of the chase aftergame, though obliged to follow it at midnight; aseverlastingly isolated by their organic or moral conformationfrom the people amongst whom they dwellas the Jews themselves. The very prophecy seemedfulfilled in them, beyond what it could be in Arabyitself, where they have been repeatedly subdued tothe dominion of some conqueror, while this tribeseems in all countries to maintain its nature as thegenuine posterity of him who was to be a wild hunterin perpetual independence.The Germans, however, who pursue every subjectof curious inquiry with the same searching perseverance,look up this gipsy mystery ; and the result oftheir researches, founded principally on their language,at present leads to the adoption of the theorythat they are a Hindu tribe. For a full view of thesubject, I must refer my readers to the works ofGrellman and Buttner, who have pursued this inquirywith great learning and zeal — to a very able summaryin Malte Brun's Geography: my limits will compelme to take a more rapid notice of it. The sum andsubstance of their case is this. They find occupationin some countries as smiths and tinkers; theymend broken plates, and sell wooden ware. A classof them in Moldavia and Wallachia lead a settled life,and gain a subsistence by working and searching forgold in the beds of rivers. Those in the Bannat of2-26 GIPSIES.Hungary are horse-dealers, and are gradually obeyingthe enactments of Joseph II., by which they are compelledto cultivate the land; but the great majority inEurope abhor a permanent residence and stated hoursof labour. The women abuse the credulity of theGerman and Polish peasants, who imagine that theycure their cattle by witchcraft, and predict fortunateevents by inspecting the lineaments of the hand. Itis lawful for the wives of the Tchinganes in Turkeyto commit adultery with impunity. Many individualsof both sexes, particularly throughout Hungary, arepassionately fond of music, the only science in whichthey have, as yet, attained any degree of perfection.They are the favourite minstrels of the countrypeople : some have arrived at eminence in cathedralsand the choirs of princes. Their guitar is heard inthe romantic woods of Spain ; and many gipsies, lessindolent than the indolent Spaniards, exercise in thatcountry the trade of publicans. They follow willinglywhatever occupations most men hate and condemn.In Hungary and Transylvania, they are the flayers ofdead horses, and executioners of criminals; the massof the nation is composed of thieves and mendicants.The total number of these savages in Europe hasnever been considered less than 300,000 ; Grellmansays 700,000; of these, 150,000 are in Turkey; 70,000in Wallachia and Moldavia ; 40,000 in Hungary andTransylvania ; the rest are scattered through Russia,Prussia, Poland, Germany, Jutland, Spain, and othercountries. Persia and Egypt are infested with them.They have appeared in Spanish America.Who then are these people ? Grellman andButtner do not hesitate to pronounce them to be oneGIPSIES. 227of the low Indian castes, Soudan or Corrects, expelledfrom their country during one of its great revolutions,probably that of Tamerlane, about the year 1400.Their habits as tinkers, musicians, horse-dealers, etc.,already alluded to, are exactly in keeping with thissupposition ; but what is far stronger evidence is, thattheir language, formerly supposed to be the gibberishof thieves and pick-pockets, is really Instance. Inthe tents of these wanderers is spoken the dialectsof the Veda, the Pranks, the Brahmans, and theBudahs. This, in different tribes, is in some degreedashed with words of Slavonic, Persia, Permian,Finnic, Wogoul, and Hungarian. The structure ofthe auxiliary verb is the same as others in the Indo-elastictongues, but the pronouns have a remarkableanalogy with the Persia, and the declension of nounswith the Turkish. Pallas infers from their dialectthat their ancient country was Mountain, and theirorigin the same as that of the Hindu merchants atpresent at Astrakhan. Bartolommeo believes theycome from Guzerat, perhaps from the neighbourhoodof Tanta, where a horde of pirates called Tchinganesstill reside. Lastly, Richardson boasts of havingfound them among the Bazigurs, a wandering tribe ofminstrels and dancers. No caste, however, bears sostrong a resemblance to them as that of the Soudan,who have no fixed abodes, but live in tents, and sellbaskets, mend kettles, and tell fortunes.The names by which they have been, or areknown in different countries are various. They callthemselves Rome, Manus, and Gadzi, each of theseappellatives being connected with a different language— the Copt, the Sanscrit, and the Celtic. In228 GIPSIES.Poland and Wallachia they are Zingani; in Italyand Hungary, Zingari ; in Lithuania, Zion's ; Zigin Germany ; Tehinganes in Turkey ; theAtehinganes of the middle ages ; in Spain they areGiants; in France, Bohemians, from their havingpassed out of Bohemia into that country. By thePersians they are called Sisech Hindoo, or BlackIndians. But the most ancient and general name isthat of Since, or inhabitants of the banks of the Lindaor Indus. The celebrated M. Haste, has indeedproved that for the last 3000 years there have beenin Europe wandering tribes bearing the name of ,or Since. He considers the modern gipsies asthe descendants of these ancient hordes. Herodotuspoints out the Shines on the north side of the Sister.Strabo describes a people called Viginti, inhabitingthe Hyrcanian mountains, near the Caspian sea.Pliny speaks of the Caucasian Sing, and of theIndian Single. Hesychius reconciles the opinions ofthe ancients, and calls the Since an Indian people.They were noted for their cowardice ; for submittingto the lash of Scythian masters, the prostitution oftheir women, whose name became a term of reproach.Different branches of the same people were scatteredthrough Macedonia, in which was a Sint district, andin Lemnos, where the Cities were the workmen ofVulcan.It will now be sufficiently obvious to the readerwhat a singular, ancient, and mysterious people arethese gipsies that haunt our lanes and commons, andform so striking and poetical a feature in our countryscenery. After all the zealous and learned researchesinto their history and origin, nothing appears alreadyGIPSIES. '229established beyond the fact, that they are ohler thanHerodotus, the most ancient of profane historians ;that for more than 3000 years they have been wanderingthrough the work as they do at present ; andthat their language exhibits incontestable evidence ofan oriental origin. The ravages of Tamerlane mayperhaps help to account for the circumstance of theirpressing upon Western Europe in 1400 in suchunusual numbers; but they were wanderers longbefore Tamerlane's days. Were they enemies ofKrishna? for they boast of having formerly rejectedChrist. They pretend that they were once a happypeople, under kings of their own ; but their traditionaryknowledge seems nearly extinct. Perhapsan increasing acquaintance with the East and Easternliterature may cast some light on the origin of thispeculiar variety of the human race. In the meantimewe may proceed to take a close view of them asthey now appear in this kingdom. From the firstmoment of their attracting the public attention in thispart of Europe, they have always exhibited the sameartful character, — a character above the trammels ofeither superstition or religion. They have thereforeadopted the most plausible pretences to effect theirpurposes ; and for a long time triumphed over thecredulity of the christian princes, at all times overthat of the common people. Their first appearancein France, as related by Pasquin is curious enough."On August 27th, 1427, came to Paris twelve penitents,Penances, as they called themselves, viz : aduke, an earl, and ten men, all on horse-back, andcalling themselves good christians. They were ofLower Egypt, and gave out, that not long before,230 GIPSIES.the christians had subdued their country, and obligedthem to embrace Christianity on pain of death. Thosewho were baptized were great lords in their owncountry, and had a king and queen there. Soonafter their conversion, the Saracens overrun thecountry, and obliged them to renounce Christianity.When the emperor of Germany, the king of Poland,and the christian princes heard of this, they fell uponthem, and obliged the whole of them, both great andsmall, to quit the country, and go to the Pope atRome, who enjoined them seven years' penance, towander over the world without lying in a bed.They had been wandering five years when theycame to Paris. First the principal people, and soonafter the commonalty, about 100, or 120 — reduced, accordingto their account, from 1000 or 1200, whenthey went from home ; the rest, with their king andqueen, being dead. They were lodged by the policeat some distance from the city, at Chapel St. Denis.Nearly all of them had their ears bored, and woretwo silver rings in each, which they said were esteemedornaments in their country. The men wereblack; their hair curled; the women, remarkablyblack ; their only clothes a large old duffle garment,tied over their shoulders with a cloth or cord, andunder it a miserable rocket. In fact, they were themost poor, miserable creatures that ever had beenseen in France; and, notwithstanding their poverty,there were amongst them women who, by lookinginto people's hands, told their fortunes, and what wasworse, they picked people's pockets of their money,and got it into their own, by telling these thingsthrough art magic, etc."GIPSIES. 231The subtlety of these modern Gibeonites cannot besufficiently admired. They did not venture to alarmthe country by coming at once in full strength into it,but sent a detachment, mounted on horseback asprinces, to pave the way by their tale of sufferings ;then came a larger troop, in true Gibeonitish condition,to excite the popular commiseration ; and thatbeing done, their numbers gradually increased; andunder these and similar pretences, they rambled overFrance for a whole century, when their real characterbeing sufficiently obvious, and their numbers dailyincreasing, they were banished by proclamation.The same policy was pursued towards them in all thecountries of Europe, if we except Hungary andWallachia. In Spain, sentence of banishment beingfound ineffectual, in 1492 an edict of exterminationwas published ; but they only slunk into the mountainsand woods, and reappeared in a while as numerouslyas before. The order of banishment not succeedingin France, in 1561 all governors of citieswere commanded to drive them away with fire andsword; and in 1612 a new order for their exterminationcame out. In 1572, they were expelled fromthe territories of Milan and Parma, as they had beforebeen driven from the Venetian boundaries. In Denmark,Sweden, and the Netherlands, repeated enactmentswere made for their expulsion. In Germanyfrom 1500 to 1577, various similar decrees werepromulgated against them. Under these laws theysuffered incredible miseries. They were imprisoned;chased about like wild beasts, and put to death withoutmercy: but, as the European states did not act inconcert, when they were driven from one they found232 GIPSIES.an asylum in another; and whenever the storm blewover, they again gradually reappeared in their oldhaunts. The Empress Theresa, and afterwards theEmperor Joseph II., seem to have been the onlysovereigns who set themselves in earnest to reclaimand civilize this singular people ; and we have seenthat in Hungary some of them are gradually submittingto the regulations made by these wise monarchs.Their introduction to this kingdom, and their aftertreatment were similar. At first they were received asprinces and kings, and excited commiseration by thetale of their ins cries. They had royal and parliamentarypasses granted them, to go through the countryseeking relief, as many of the parish records yet beartestimony. So late as 1647 there appears an entry inthe constable's accounts at Uttoxeter, in Staffordshire,of four shillings being given to forty-six Egyptians,travelling with a pass from parliament, to seek reliefby the space of six months. But when this delusionwas past, and it was seen that they had no intention ofquitting the country, they became persecuted by justicesof the peace and parish constables, as thievesand vagrants ; and the rapid enclosures of waste landsduring the war, tended greatly to break up theirhaunts, and put them into great straits.About twenty years ago John Hoyland, a ministerof the Society of Friends, being struck with commiserationfor their condition, began to inquire into theirreal character; and the researches of Grellman beingmade known to him, he visited their encampments invarious places in Northamptonshire, Hainault Forest,and Norwood near London. He also sought them outGIPSIES. 233in their winter-quarters in London ; and the result ofhis inquiries satisfied him that the English gipsies werea genuine portion of the great tribe described byGrellman ; that they possessed the same Oriental language,specimens of which he has given in his history.Mr. Hoyland could not ascertain what were the actualnumbers of these people in England. They had beenstated in parliament to be not less than 30,000, but onwhat authority did not appear ; but it was very evidentthat enclosures, and the severity of the magistrateshad reduced their numbers. Probably many of themhad emigrated. Norwood used to be their greatresort, but its enclosure had broken up that rendezvous,yet it nevertheless appeared, that considerable numberswintered in London, and at the earliest approachof spring set out on their summer progress throughvarious parts of the country, especially in the countiesof Surrey, Bedford, Buckingham, Hereford, Monmouth,Somerset, Wilts, Southampton, Cambridge,and Huntingdon.Mr. Hoyland extended his researches to Scotland,and the most prompt assistance was offered him in hisinquiries in that country. A circular was dispatchedto the sheriff of every county, soliciting, through themedium of an official organ, all the intelligence whichcould be obtained on the subject. It was found thatthere were very few gipsies in Scotland at all. Fromthirteen counties the reports were — " No gipsies residentin them." From most others the answer was, thatthey appeared there only as occasional passengers. TheBorder appeared to be their chief resort, and respectingthose Sir Walter Scott, then plain Walter Scott,addressed a very characteristic letter to the author. His234 GIPSIES.account of them tallies exactly with that he has givenin his celebrated novels. He and Mr. Smith, theBaillie of Kelso, agree in describing them as a singlecolony at Yetholm, and one family removed thence toKelso. This colony appears to have acquired a charactermore daring and impetuous than the gipsies ofEngland ; in fact, to have exhibited the true old Borderspirit: probably partly from example and partlyfrom intercourse with some of the Border families.Mr. Baillie Smith gives the following instance ofthis spirit: — "Between Yetholm and the Borderfarms in Northumberland, there were formerly, asin most border situations, some uncultivated lands,called the Plea Lands, or Debateable Lands, thepasturage of which was generally eaten up by thecorners and vagabonds on both sides of the marshes.Many years ago. Lord Mandeville and some otherof the English borderers, made their request to SirDavid Bennet and the late Mr. Wauchope, of Nid-dry,that they would accompany them at a ridingof the Plea Lands, who readily complied with theirrequest. They were induced to this, as they understoodthat the gipsies had taken offence, on thesupposition that they might be circumscribed in theirpasture for their shelties, and asses, which they hadheld a long time, partly by stealth and partly by violence.Both threats and entreaties were employed tokeep them away ; and at last Sir David obtained apromise from some of the heads of the gang, thatnone of them would shew their faces on the occasion.They, however, got upon the hills in the neighbourhood,whence they could see everything thatpassed. At first they were very quiet, but when theyGIPSIES. 235saw the English Court-Book spread out on a cushionbefore the clerk, and apparently taken in a line ofdirection interfering with that which they consideredto be their privileged ground, it was with great difficultythat the most moderate of them could restrainthe rest from running down and taking vengeanceeven in sight of their own lord of the manor. Theyonly abstained for a short time, and no sooner hadSir David and the other gentlemen taken leave ofeach other in the most polite and friendly manner, asborder chiefs are wont to do, since border feuds ceased,and had departed to a sufficient distance, than theclan, armed with bludgeons and pitchforks, and suchother hostile weapons as they could find, rushed downin a body, and before the chiefs on either side hadreached their homes, there was neither English tenant,horse, cow, or sheep left upon the premises."This account of their descent on the Plea Lands islike one of Sir Walter Scott's own vivid sketches ofborder life ; and the following anecdote, also relatedby Mr. Baillie Smith, shews how truly they hadimbibed the border spirit of clanship. " When Ifirst knew anything about the colony, old Will Faawas their king, or leader, and had held the sovereigntyfor many years. Meeting at Kelso with Mr. WalterScott, whose discriminating habits and just observationsI had occasion to know from his youth, and atthe same time seeing one of my Yetholm friends inthe horse-market, I merely said to Mr. Scott, ' Tryto get before that man with the long drab coat ; lookat him on your return, and tell me whether you eversaw him, and what you think of him.' He was sogood as to indulge me; and rejoining me said without236 GIPSIES.hesitation, ' I never saw the man that I know of, buthe is one of the gipsies of Yetholm that you told meof several years ago.' I need scarcely say that hewas perfectly right.I've descendants of Faa, now take the name ofFall, from the Messrs. Fall of Dunbar, who, theypride themselves in saying, are of the same stock andlineage. When old Will Faa was upwards of eightyyears of age, he called on me at Kelso, in his way toEdinburgh, telling me that he was going to see thelaird, the late Mr. Nisbett of Carleton, as he understoodthat he was very unwell, and himself now beingold, and not so stout as he had been, he wished to seehim once more before he died. The old man set outbythe nearest road, which was by no means hiscommon practice. Next market day some of thefarmers informed me that they had been in Edinburgh,and seen Will Faa upon the bridge (the south bridgewas not built then), that he was tossing about his oldbrown hat, and buzzing with great vociferation thathe had seen the laird before he died. Indeed Willhimself had no time to lose, for having set his facehomewards, by the way of the sea-coast, to vary hisroute, as is the general custom with the gang, heonly got the length of Nottingham when he wastaken ill and died."No one can fail to recognise in these border gipsiesthe Faas and Gordon of Guy Wandering, the desperateclan of Meg Merrilies and Derncleugh. Scott,indeed informs us that his prototype of Meg Merrilieswas Jean Gordon, an inhabitant of Kirk-Yetholm inthe Cheviot hills, adjoining to the English border.The Faas, of which family her mother was, were theGIPSIES. 237lineal descendants of John Faa, who styled himselfLord and King of Little Egypt, and with a numerousretinue entered Scotland, in the reign of Queen Mary.The difference between the English and Scotchgipsies was singularly exemplified in Jean Gordon'sown family. The English gipsies have generally hadthe policy to commit no capital offences ; but Jean'ssons were all hanged one day. Scott, in the eighthchapter of Guy Wandering, says, their mixture M'iththe Border people gave them a peculiar ferocity, quitealien to their original character. " They understoodall out-of-door sports, especially otter-hunting, fishingand finding game. They had the best and boldestterriers, and sometimes had good pointers for sale.In winter, the women told fortunes, the men shewedtricks of legerdemain ; and these accomplishmentshelped to wile away a weary or stormy evening in thecircle of the ' farmer's ha.' The wildness of theircharacter, and the indomitable pride with which theydespised all regular labour, commanded a certain awe,which was not diminished by the consideration thatthese strollers were a vindictive race, and were restrainedby no check either of fear or conscience, fromtaking desperate vengeance upon those who had offendedthem. These tribes were, in short, the Faciasof Scotland, living like wild Indians among Europeansettlements; and like them, judged of rather by theirown customs, habits, and opinions, than as if they hadbeen members of the civilized part of the community.Some hordes of them yet remain, chiefly in such situationsas afford a ready escape into a waste country,or into another jurisdiction. Nor are the features oftheir character much softened. Their numbers are,VOL. I. M238 GIPSIES.however, so greatly diminished, that instead of onehundred thousand, as calculated by Fletcher of salton,it would now perhaps be impossible to collectabove five hundred throughout all Scotland."Since writing so far, I have visited Kirk-Yetholm,and can testify to the correctness of these details. Itwas in June 1836, that I was at this remarkable hauntof this singular class of gipsies. The tribe was then,according to their regular custom, encamping, probablyfar off on the heaths of Scotland, or in the greenlanes of England ; and their houses, to the numberof about a score, stood along one side of the village,all tenantless, with closed shutters, and doors barricadedwith boards, or locked or nailed up. They hada strange look of desertion, amid the peopled village.Along the lane side leading to the neighbouring hills,extended a strip of land, divided into as many allotmentsas there were houses, in which were growingtheir crops of corn and potatoes, left, till their return,to providence and the forbearance of their neighbours;and we were assured that the tribe would not maketheir appearance here till the crops were ready to house,when they would come and get them in, and thenaway again till the setting in of winter. We foundthe feud between them and the shepherds still kept upashotly as ever, and likely to continue so, from thepeculiar location of the land above spoken of, onwhich they claim to pasture their horses. About amile from the village, lies a region of pastoral hills,most beautiful in their greenness and loftiness. Theyare covered from vale to summit with the softest andfinest turf, and their loftiest steeps are dotted withflocks. In the very midst of these hills, loftier andGIPSIES. 239more naked than the rest, rises the one which the gipsiesand other inhabitants of Yetholm claim. Nothingcould be more ingeniously contrived, if by contrivanceit had been done, to effect a constant bickering betweenthe shepherds and the Beholders. The gipsiesof course drive their horses up to their own hill, andnothing is more natural than that seeing better pastureall around them, and no fence to prevent them,they should go down and enjoy it. It is equallynatural that the shepherds should be on the look-out,and the moment they find the horses trespassing,should drive them out into the lane leading to thevillage, and close the gates behind them. This alsois expected by the gipsies, and the moment the horsesmake their appearance at the village, they are drivenback again to the hills. Here is perpetual food forresentment and hostility, and to such a height does itsometimes rise, that a gentleman of Kelso informedme that he has seen at Yetholm wool-fair such affraysbetween the gipsies and the shepherds as would out-doDonnybrook.We found a Will Faa still the reputed king of thetribe. He was an old man, having none of the commonfeatures of the gipsy — his Border blood havingdone away with the black eyes and swarthy skin ;but Will had all the propensities of the gipsy, exceptthat of encamping; smuggling, fishing, and shootingappeared to have been the business of his life. Wewere told that in an affray with the revenue officershe had defended a narrow bridge somewhere nearFlamborough Castle, while his party made their escape,and had stood fighting singly with his cudgel till itwas cut down by the cutlasses of the officers to " twa240 GIPSIES.nieces lang," and till he finally got a cut across thearm which disabled him. When we asked him of thetruth of this story, his grey eyes kindled up into awild fire, and stretching out his two arms together, heshewed us, with a significant gesture, that one was stillat least two inches longer than the other. Old WillFaa had risen into great importance through thewritings of Sir Walter Scott. He told us that SirMartin Archer Shee had been down to take his likeness.He was in daily request at the houses of theneighbouring nobility and gentry to catch trout forthem, being intimately acquainted with all the streamsof the country round, and all the arts of filling hiscreel out of them. Will, therefore, is sure to befound either by the side of one of the trout streams,or in the kitchen of some of the neighbouring halls,telling his exploits and drinking his toddy. Hisniece, who was absent with the tribe, was said to bethebelle of the camp ; a true gipsy beauty, dark andweel fared."Such is the present state of the gipsies of Englandand Scotland. Their numbers are evidently everywhereon the decrease ; yet what do remain in Englandretain all their ancient characteristics. These characteristicshave never been more accurately delineatedthan by Richard Howitt, in his poem of the " GipsyKing," in the Metropolitan Magazine for June 1836.The groups proceeding to the coronation of theirking are living.Now come in groups the gipsy tribes,From northern hills, from southern plains;And many a mannered ass is swingingThe child that to itself is singingAlong the flowery lanes.GIPSIES. 241Stout men are loud in wrangling talk.Where older tongues are gruff and tame ;Keen maiden laughter rings aloft,Whilst many an undergone is softFrom many a talking dame.Their beaver hats are weather stained, —The one black plume is sadly gay ;Their squalid brats are slung behind,In cloaks that flutter to the wind,Of scarlet, brown, and grey.The king himself is distinguished by some touchesthat are the life itself, but which I never recollectseeing: elsewhere introduced.The slouching hat our hero wore.The crown wherewith he king was crowned;Wherein a pipe and a crow's featherWere stuck in fellowship together,Was by a hundred winters browned.His sceptre was a stout oak sapling,Round which a snake well-carved was wreathed ;Cunning and strength that well bespoke.Whilst from his frame, as from an oak,Deliberate valour breathed."His footstool was the solid earth ;His court spread out in pomp before him.The heath arrayed in summer's smiles ;His empire broad, the British isles;His dome the heavens arched o'er him.Antique and flowing was his dress :And from his temples bold and bare,Fell back in many a dusky tress,As liberal as the wilderness.His ample growth of hair.Like Cromwell's was his hardy front,Where thought but feeling none, was shewn ;Where underneath a flitting grace.Was firmly built up in his face,A hardness as of stone.242 GIPSIES.They are not to be confounded with a tribe ofwandering potters, who live in tents like them. Thetrue gipsies are readily distinguished by their invariablejet-black hair, black sparkling eyes, Indian complexions,and their genuine Oriental language. Onthe extensive heaths of Surrey, since my residence inthat county, I have met with frequent camps of them.In the midland counties, although there is less wasteland, they are not unfrequently to be seen. They arethere chiefly the Lovell, Boswell, and Kemp gangs.They are great people still for kings and chiefs. Everydistrict has its king. One of these died in the summerof 1835, in their camp in Westwood Park, inNottinghamshire ; and thousands of people went tosee him lie in state. They conveyed his body in acart to Eastwood, a distance of nine miles, and wouldfain have stipulated with the clergyman for his intermentin the church ; not on account of any notion ofthe sanctity of the place, but for its security. Thisbeing refused, they chose a place in the churchyard,for which they paid a handsome sum, and ordered itto be fenced off with iron railings. An old beldameof the tribe said to me, that it was hard that he couldnot be buried in a church, as most of his ancestorshad been before him.This gang had no less than nine horses, which inthe day time grazed in the bare lanes; but if theywere not turned into the fields at night, they throvewonderfully on bad commons. The farmers complaineddreadfully of their pulling up their hedges forfuel. The whole race seems to have no fear of man ;they are troubled with no mauvaise honte. The menseldom condescend to solicit you, but the women areGIPSIES. 243always anxious to lay hold of your money under pretenceof telling your fortune ; and the moment youapproach their encampment, out comes a troop oflittle impudent, though not insolent rogues, to begeverything and anything they can. The women,many of them, in their youth, are fine strappingfigures, with handsome brown faces and most brilliantand speaking eyes — they have a peculiar poco-curateair and jaunty gait, and are extremely fond of finery.Their costume is unique, and pretty uniform, —scarlet cloaks, black velvet bonnets with large widepokes trimmed with lace ; a handkerchief thrown overthe head under the bonnet, and tied beneath the chin ;long pendant earrings, black stockings, and ankle -boots. So far from shunning any intercourse or inquiries,they approach you with a ready smile and astyle of flattery peculiar to them. "A good day toyou, sir ; your honour is born to fortune. I see that bythe cast of your countenance. It was a right luckyplanet that shone on your honour's birth !" If youknow anything of their language, they are only tooglad to talk to you in it. Accost a gipsy with*' Shaushan, Pallas?" " how do you do, brother?" andyou will see the effect.This singular race of people, of whom Grellmancalculates there are not less than 700,000 in Europe,seemed to demand a more comprehensive account inthe Rural Life of England, than has hitherto beengiven in any one work. Many of my readers, I ampersuaded, will regard them for their antiquity, themystery of their origin, the strangeness of their historyand life, with deeper feelings than they have hithertodone ; and it may be well for such as live in those244 GIPSIES.parts of the country which the gipsies haunt, to askthemselves whether something may not be done byeducation, and other means, to reclaim those wilddenizens of heaths and lanes, or to give them somegreater portion of the knowledge and benefits of civilizedlife. A considerable number have sent theirchildren to schools during the winters in London ; andthese children, though compared by one of theirschoolmasters, at their first entrance, to wild birdssuddenly put into a cage, and ready to beat themselvesagainst the bars, having no sense of restraint,soon became not only perfectly orderly, amongst thevery first for quickness and avidity in learning; butexpressed the utmost regret when obliged to leave atspring. I once saw a woman in a gipsy tent, readingthe Bible to a circle of nine children, all her own !and though, on coming near, her blue eyes and lighthair shewed her to be an English woman, the daughter,as I found, of a gamekeeper, who had marriedone of the Boswell gang, yet the interest which thechildren took in her reading of the Bible, and theinterest which she assured me the whole camp took init, were sufficient evidence that it is only for want ofbeing taught that they still remain in ignorance of thebest knowledge. They have been so long treatedwith contempt and severity, that they naturally lookon all men as their enemies. For my part, when Isee a horde of them coming on some solitary way,with their dark Indian faces, their scarlet-cloakedwomen, their troops of little vivacious savages, theirasses and horses laden with beds and tents, and, trudgingafter them, their guardian dogs, — I cannot helplooking on them as an Eastern tribe, as fugitives ofGIPSIES. 245a most ancient family, as a living enigma in humanhistory — and feeling that, with all their Arab-likepropensities, they have great claims on our sympathies,and on the splendid privileges of a Christianland.An incident which occurred to me this summer,shewed me most strikingly how next to impossible itis for the peculiar manner and costume of the Englishgipsies to be personated. In an evening drive on the27th of July, with a young friend staying Math us, aswe passed through, or by, the little rustic hamlet ofStoke D'Abernon, for it consists of houses scatteredalong one side of the road, I was struck with twosingular female figures at a little distance before us.They were both young — the one about the middlesize, the other rather taller. The taller one wasdressed in a dark cotton bed-gown, dark petticoat,grey stockings and shoes ; on her head was tied ayellow silk handkerchief, and in her hand she held, asawalking-staff', a long stout hazel wand, recently cutfrom the hedge. The other had on also a short bed-gown,but of a pink colour, striped and figured withwhite, a dark petticoat, and ankle-boots. On heihead she wore an old straw bonnet. As my eyecaught them at a distance, — the one standing with hertall stick by a pool on one side of the way, the otherin the act of begging from, or addressing, a gentlemanwho was sitting on a stile, I could not helpexclaiming, — " What have we got here ! — Maria deMoulins and Made Wildfire?" As we drew near,they came running up to us, and, one on each side ofM 2246 GIPSIES.the pony-chaise, began begging most importunately :Will you give us sixpence ? Do give us sixpence !Do, dear gentleman, give us sixpence ! Dear lady,do tell the gentleman to give us sixpence!" It wasonly necessary to give a slight glance at the faces ofthese beggars, and to hear one tone of their voices, toknow that it was a frolic — that they were ladies ofeducation and family, from some of the neighbouringcountry houses, thus dressed up. They had hair andeyes jet-black as any gipsies; and after all that hasbeen said of the beauty of some of the gipsy women —and they have a great deal — were handsomer thanany gipsies I ever saw. The taller, who appearedthe younger of the two, was a very lovely woman, ofa slender figure, the exquisite symmetry of which wasnot to be disguised by the rustic dress she had assumed.The other had, or affected, a slight lisp.Irresistible as such beggars might appear, I resolvedto refuse them, in order to see how they would keepup the attempt, and how they would take a refusal.I therefore said, laughing, " O ! I have no sixpencesfor beggars like you ; you certainly are very charmingbeggars ; you have chosen a very rustic costume ;you act your part very well indeed, and I hope youwill enjoy your frolic." All this time I kept drivingon at a good pace; but the resolute damsels still ranon, importuning for a sixpence. One soon droppedbehind — the taller one still ran on with her stick inher hand, in a voice of much softness and sweetnessstill begging for sixpence — as they were poor strangers,and had got nothing all day ! As she ran, thissort of badinage passed : — " Where do you comefrom?" " O we have come all the way from EpsomGIPSIES. 247to meet our young man here, and he has deceivedus." — " Well, I hope no young man will deceiveyou more cruelly." " Dear gentleman, if you won'tgive us sixpence, give us a penny then to buy us aglass of ale ! " " O, you are no ale-drinkers — whatshould you think of a glass of gin?" " I should likesomething, for I am very tired : and what is sixpenceto you ? — you have a very good horse in your chaise ;I have no doubt you are a gentleman of independentfortune — do give us sixpence ! " " No, 1 wish I werehalf as rich as you are." Here the fair beggarstopped, and turned round with an air of very beautifuldisdain. As she went back to join her companion,we were again struck with the grace of herform, and the buoyancy of her carriage.My impression was that these ladies were merelyacting beggars; but we soon found that they wereacting gipsies; for they offered to tell almost everybody'sfortunes, and actually did tell some. As wereturned, we met them coming up a hollow woodylane, near Bookham Common, about a mile fromwhere we left them ; and behold ! they, and the gentlemanwho was there sitting on the stile — a military-lookingman with light mustachios — were walkingfamiliarly on together. It was evident that they hadfound " their young man !" It was a group worthyof the pencil of Stothard ; and on the opposite side ofthe lane, from a cottage above it, out were come acountrywoman, and six or seven children, of differentages, in their rustic costume, and stood to look atthem — a little picture after the very heart of Collins.The moment our actresses saw us, they motioned theirescort to move off to the other side of the way, and to248 GIPSIES.walk on, as though he did not belong to them, andagain renewed their importunity as we passed. Imerely smiled, and moved my hat to them. As weproceeded, I stopped and asked of all the countrypeople I met — who was that gentleman? and who theladies dressed as beggars ? The miller thought thegentleman was from Bookham Lodge, the seat ofCaptain Blackwood — he heard a large party of gentrywas just come there ; " but the women, sir, they areDutch women ! " Dutch women ! Broom-girls, infact ! Broom-girls, with legs and arms like youngelephants ! and broad solid figures, as if cut out ofblocks of wood — how very like those slim and elegantcreatures ! But it was enough for the worthy miller,whose fortune they had offered to tell, that they hadon short bedgowns and dark petticoats. A grocerfrom Epsom, with his spring-cart, going as they doall round the country, from one gentleman's house toanother, had had his fortune told by them, and waslost in amaze at the announcement that he had hadnine children, six of which were still living — five girlsand one boy ; the very facts to a hair ! A farmer andhis wife at Stoke, never dreamt that the gentlemanwhom they had noticed belonged to these " youngbaggages of beggars," that had been sitting on thebank by the road-side opposite their house; but hiswife said one of them was the handsomest beggar sheever saw. " Ay, they were both good-looking," saidthe man, " and had famous things on." The groomat the parsonage gate "didn't know the gentlemanin the mustachios ; but the women, bless you, theywere no ladies." "Why?" " O, they carried iton too far for ladies here, I assure you." " WhatGIPSIES. 249did they do ? " " O ! they came ringing at the belllike new 'uns ; six or seven times they called us out —they would take no nay."Little did these fair ladies, when sallying out forthis frolic in the sylvan lanes of Surrey, dream, I daresay,that they should meet " a chief takin' notes,"that would put their exploits into print. Here theyare, however ; and if they should chance to see this,I must tell them, that they were very sweet nondescript,but not very perfect beggars; and far, farindeed from perfect Zinganies. For Made Wild-fires,they were not amiss ; but beggars, impudent asthey are, seldom ask for sixpences ; seldom appear innew apparel; never run by the side of carriages —that is left to beggar children. Pleading looks, and apitiful whining tone, with low genuflections, mark theyoung beggar woman, as she stands fixed at oneplace ; — her husband is dead, and she is going hometo her parents or parish ; or he is gone for a soldier,and she is following to the garrison. Lancashirewitches they would have done for capitally — but thenwitches don't tell fortunes by palmistry; their vocationis by spell and cauldron ; and as for gipsies, why it isjust as difficult to mistake the particular expressionand cultivated voice of an English lady, as it is thefeatures and voice of the real gipsy-woman. Blackeyes and black hair these ladies had ; but they hadneither the olive skin, nor the bold, easy degree airof the gipsy belle; and what do gipsies with suchbeautifully slender and delicate hands ? They wereimportunate ; but nothing but a life and an educationin the gipsy-camp, and perhaps the blood and descentof the gipsy, can give the peculiar style of palaver —GIPSIES.athe suavifer in modo — the unique flattery — the " youare born fortunate, sir" — with which the gipsy accostsyou. And the costume ! The gipsy wears nothingshort. She has a long gown, — a long red cloak — ahandkerchief tied over her head, it is true, but uponit a large flapping bonnet with lace trimming, orblack beaver hat ; — instead of that fairy form, she isgenerally strapping, tall, and strong — and instead ofthose taper ankles and small feet, which could evidentlydance down the four-and-twenty hours, shehas her lower limbs arrayed in black stockings andstout shoes that would do for a wagoner. Younggipsy women walk with sticks ! who indeed ever sawan old one with one ? Knowing now who theseladies were, I should, beforehand, have expected acloser personation of the gipsy; but the result onlyproves the difficulty of the attempt. It must, howeverbe confessed, that this was as pretty a little ruraladventure as one could desire to meet with.CHAPTER II.NOOKS OF THE WORLD; OR,A PEEP INTO THE BACK SETTLEMENTS OF ENGLAND.There are thousands of places in this beautiful kingdom,which, if you could change their situation — ifyou could take some plain, monotonous, and uninterestingtracts from the neighbourhood of large cities,from positions barren and of daily observance, andplace these in their stead — would acquire an incalculablevalue ; while the common spots would serve thepresent inhabitants of those sweet places just as wellandoften far better, for the ordinary purposes of theirlives— for walking over in the day, sleeping in duringthe night, and raising grass, cattle, and corn upon.The dwellers of cities — the men who have madefortunes, or are making them, and yet long for thequietness and beauty of the country — but especiallythe literary, the nature-loving, the poetical — would,to use a common expression, jump at them ; and, ifit were in their power to secure them, would make252 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.Iieavens-upon-eartli of them. Yes ! they are suchspots as thousands are longing for; as the day-dreamingyoung, and the world-weary old, are yearningafter, and painting to their mind's eye, daily, in greatcities ; and the dull, the common-place, the percipientof their beauty and their glory, are dwelling inthem: — paradisiacal fields and magnificent mountains;or cloudy hollows in their mottled sides; or littleclench and glens, hidden and green — overhung withwild wood — rocky, and resounding with dashing andsplashing streams; — places, where the eye sees thedistant flocks and their slowly-stalking shepherds — theclimbing goat, the soaring eagle : and the ear catchestheir far-off cries ; whence a thousand splendours andpageants, changing aspects, and kindling and dying-glories,in earth and sky, are witnessed ; the cheerfularising of morning — the still, crimson, violet, purple,azure, dim grey, and then dark fading away of dayinto night, are watched; where the high and cleargrandeur and solitude of night, with its moon andstars, and wandering breezes, and soul-entrappingfreshness, are seen and felt. Such places as these,and the brown or summer-empurpled heath, with itspatch of ancient forest; its blasted, shattered, yetliving old trees, greeting you with feelings and fanciesof long-past centuries ; the clear, rushing brook ; thebubbling and most crystalline spring; and the turfthat springs under your feet with a delicious elasticity,and sends up to your senses a fresh and forest-bornodour ; or cottages perched in the sides of glades, oron eminences by the sea — the soul-inspiring sea — withits wide views of coming and going ships, its freshNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 253gales, and its everlasting change of light and life, onits waters, and on its shores ; its sailors, and its fishermen,with all their doings, families, and dependenceevery one of them thoroughly covered and saturatedwith the spirit of picturesque and homely beauty; orinland hollows and fields, and old hamlets, lying amidgreat woods and slopes of wondrous loveliness; — if wecould but turn thing's round, and bring these near us,and unite, at once, city advantages, city society, andthem ! But it never can be ! And there are livingin them, from generation to generation, numbers ofpeople who are not to be envied, because they knownothing: at all of the amiableness of their situation.We are continually labouring to improve society —to diffuse education — to confer higher and ampler religiousknowledge ; but these people know little of allthis — experience little of its effect ; for their abodes,and natural paradises, lie far from the great tracks oftravel and commerce ; far from our great roads ; inthe most out-of-the-world places — the very nooks ofthe world.If you come by chance upon them, you are struckwith their admirable beauty, their solemn repose,their fresh and basking solitude. You cannot helpexclaiming. What happy people must these be ! But,when you come to look closer into them, the delusionvanishes. They do not, in fact, see any beauty thatyou see. Their minds have never been stirred fromthe sluggish routine of their daily life ; their mentaleye has never been unsealed, and directed to surveythe advantages of their situation. They have beenoccupied with other things. Like the farmer's lad254 Rooks OF THE WORLD.mentioned by Wordsworth, their souls have becomeencrusted in their own torpor.A sample should I giveOf what this stock produces, to enrichThe tender age of life, ye would exclaim,Is this the whistling plough-hoy whose shrill notesImpart new gladness to the morning air ? "Forgive me, if I venture to suspectThat many, sweet to hear of in soft verse.Are of no finer frame ; — his joints are stiff;Beneath a cumbrous frock, that to the kneesInvests the thriving churl, his legs appear,Fellows to those that lustily upheldThe wooden stools, for everlasting use.Whereon our fathers sate. And mark his brow !Under whose shaggy canopy are setTwo eyes, not dim, but of a healthy stare ;Wild, sluggish, blank, and ignorant, and strange ;Proclaiming boldly that they never knewA look or motion of intelligence,From infant conning of the Christ-crossbow,Or puzzling through "a Primer, line by line,Till perfect mastery crown the pains at last.The Excursion, B. 8.This, however, is one of the worst specimens of themost stupefied class — farm-servants. Wordsworthhimself makes his good and wise Wanderer, a shepherdin his youth, and describes him, when a lad, as impressedwith the deepest sense of nature's majesty.He represents him, in one of the noblest passages ofthe language, as witnessing the sun rise from somebold head-land, andRapt into still communion that transcendsThe imperfect offices of prayer and praise.And, indeed, the mountaineer must be generallyexcepted from that torpor of mind I have alluded to.The forms of nature that perpetually surround him.NOOKS OF THE WORLD. 255are so bold and sublime, that they almost irresistiblyimpress, excite, and colour his spirit within him ; andthose legends and stirring histories which generallyabound in them, co-operate with these natural influences.This awakened intellect dwells moregenerally amid the humbler and quieter forms ofnatural beauty ; in the " sleepy hollows" of morechampaign regions.It might be supposed that these nooks of the worldwould, in their seclusion, possess very much onemoral character; but nothing can be more untrue.Universally, they may seem old-fashioned, and full ofa sweet tranquillity ; but their inhabitants differ widelyin character in different parts of the country — widelyoften in a short space, and in a manner that can onlybe accounted for by their less or greater communionwith towns, less or greater degree of education extendedto them — and the kind extended. Where they arefar from towns, and hold little intercourse with them,and have no manufactory in them, they may be dull,but they are seldom very vicious. If they have hadlittle education, they lead a very mechanical sort of life;are often very boorish, and have very confined notionsand contracted wishes; are rude in manner, but not badinheart. I have been in places — ay, in this age, where a newspaper never comes ;where they have no public-house, no school, no church,and no doctor ; and yet the district has been populous.But, in similarly situated places, where yet they hada simple, pious pastor — some primitive patriarch, likethe venerable Robert Walker, of whom so admirablean account is given by Wordsworth ; where they havebeen blest with such a man amongst them, and where256 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.they have had a school ; where they knew little ofwhat was going on in the world, and where yet youwere sure to find, in some crypt like hole in the wall,or in a little fire-side window, about half a dozenbooks — the Bible, " Hervey's Meditations among theTombs," " Baxter's Saint's Everlasting Rest," " Romaine'sLife of Faith," or his "Drop of Honeyfrom the Rock Christ," " Macgowan's Life of Christ,"or " Drelincourt on Death," and such like volumes;or " Robinson Crusoe," " Philip Quare," "The Historyof Henry the Earl of Moreland," " Pilgrim's Progress,"or "Pamela;" — have you found a simplicityof heart and manner, a quiet prosperity, a nearerapproach to the Arcadian idea of rural life, thananywhere else in this country. There are yet suchplaces to be found in our island, notwithstanding theawful truth of what was said by Coleridge, that " Care,like a foul hag, sits on us all; one class presses withiron foot upon the wounded heads beneath, and allstruggle for a worthless supremacy, and all, to rise toit,more shackled by their expenses."But these are now few and far between ; and theyare certainly " nooks of the world," far from manufacturingtowns; for my experience coincides withthat of Captain Lloyd, as given in his " Field Sportsof the North :" — " Manufactures, of whatever naturethey may be, may certainly tend to enrich individuals,but, to my mind, they add little to the happiness ofthe community at large. In what parts of any countryin the world are such scenes of vice and squalidmisery to be witnessed, as in manufacturing districts ?"What he adds is very true — that, though it mayappear singular, yet it is a fact, that the farther weNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 257retreat from great towns and manufactories, a greaterdegree of comfort is generally to be observed amongstthe peasantry. It is, indeed, a strange relief to thespirit of one who has known something of the eagerstriving of the world, to come upon a spot where theinhabitants are passing through life, as it were, in adream-like pilgrimage, half unconscious of its trialsand evils — an existence which, if it have not themerit of great and triumphant virtue, has that absenceof selfish cunning, pride, sorrow, and degradation,which one would seek for in vain amid more bustlingscenes. To find the young, soberly and cheerfullyfulfilling their daily duties — nowhere affluence, buteverywhere plenty and comfort observable — and theold, in their last tranquil days, seated in their easychairs, or on the stone bench at their doors, glad tochat with you on all they have known on earth andhope for in heaven — why, it would be more easy toscathe such a place with the evil spirit of the town,than to raise it in the scale of moral life. The experimentof improvement there, you feel, would be ahazardous one. It were easy and desirable to givemore knowledge : but not easy to give it unaccompaniedby those blighting contaminations that atpresent cling to it.It is in those rural districts into which manufactorieshave spread — that are partly manufacturing andpartly agricultural — that the population assumes itsworst shape. The state of morals and mannersamongst the working population of our great towns isterrible — far more so than casual observers are awareof. After all that has been done ,to reform andeducate the working class, the torrent of corruption258 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.rolls on. The most active friends of education, themost active labourers in it, are ready to despair, andsometimes exclaim — " What have we done, after all !"There, the spirit of man is aroused to a marvellousactivity; but it is an unhealthful activity, and overpowers,in its extravagance, all attempts to direct itaright. " Evil communications corrupt good manners"faster than good communications can counteract them;and, where the rural population, in its simplicity,comes in contact with this spirit, it receives the contagionin its most exaggerated form — a desolatingmoral pestilence ; and suffers in person and in mind.There, spread all the vice and baseness of the lowestgrade of the town, made hideous by still greatervulgarity and ignorance, and unawed by the higherauthorities, unchecked by the better influences whichthere prevail, in the example and exertions of a highercaste of society.The Methodists have done much to check the progressof demoralization in these districts. They havegiven vast numbers education ; they have taken themaway from the pot-house and the gambling-house ;from low haunts and low pursuits. They have placedthem in a certain circle, and invested them with adegree of moral and social importance. They haveplaced them where they have a character to sustain,and higher objects to strive after ; where they haveceased to be operated upon by a perpetual series ofevil influences, and have been brought under theregular operation of good ones. They have rescuedthem from brutality of mind and manners, and giventhem a more refined association on earth, and a warmhope of a still better existence hereafter. If theyNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 259have not done all that could be desired, with suchmaterials, they have done much, and the countryowes them much. The thorough mastery of the evilrequires the application of yet greater power — itrequires a national power. The evil lies deeperthan the surface ; it lies in the distorted nature of oursocial relations ; and, before the population can beeffectually reformed its condition must be physicallyameliorated !There never was a more momentous and sure truthpronounced, than that pronounced by Christ — "Theywho take the sword, shall fall by the sword." If theydo not fall by its edge, they will by its hilt. It isunder this evil that we are now labouring. As anation we have fallen, through war, into all our presentmisery and crime. It is impossible that the greatEuropean kingdoms, with their present wealth andcultivated surfaces, in their present artificial state ofsociety, can carry on war without enduring evils farmore extensive, tremendous, and lasting, than themere ravaging of lands, the destruction of towns, oreven of human lives. We are, as a nation, an awfulproof of this at this moment. By the chances of war,at one time manufacturing and farming almost for theworld; prospering, apparently, on the miseries ofwhole kingdoms wrapt in one wide scene of promiscuouscarnage and anarchy, our tradesmen and agriculturistscommanded their own terms ; and hence, onthe one hand, they accumulated large fortunes, while,on the other, the nation, by its enormous military preparations— its fleets and armies marching and sailingeverywhere, prepared to meet emergencies at allpoints and in all climes ; by its aids and subsidies260 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.abroad ; by Its wasteful expenditure at home — piledup the most astounding debt ever heard of in theannals of the world. A vast working population wasnot merely demanded by this unnatural state of excitement,but might be said to be forced into existence,to supply all manner of articles to realms too busy inmutual slaughter to be able to manufacture or ploughfor themselves. Everything assumed a new and wonderfulvalue. All classes, the working classes as wellas the rest, with the apparent growing prosperity,advanced into habits of higher refinement and luxury.The tables of mechanics were heaped with loads ofviands of the best quality, and of the highest price,as earliest in the market ; their houses were crowdedwith furniture, till they themselves could scarcely turnround in them — clocks, sometimes two or three in onehouse ; chests of drawers and tables thronged into thesmallest rooms ; looking-glasses, tea-trays, and prints,stuck on every possible space on the walls ; and, fromthe ceiling depending hams, bags, baskets, fly-cagesof many colours, and a miscellaneous congregation ofother articles, that gave their abodes more the aspectof ware rooms or museums, than the dwellings of theworking class. Dress advanced in the same ratio;horses and gigs were in vast request; and the publicansand keepers of tea-gardens made ample fortunes.The war ceased. Commerce was thrown open tothe competition of the world. The Continental nationsbegan to breathe, and to look round on theircondition. Their poverty and their spirit of emulation,the sight of their own stripped condition, and of Englandapparently enriched beyond calculation at theirexpense, set them rapidly about helping themselves.NOOKS OF THE WORLD. 261This could not but be quickly and deeply felt here.To maintain our position, all manner of artificialmeans were adopted. Every class, feeling the tide ofwealth changing its course, strove to keep what it hadgot. The working class, as individually the weakest,because they had spent their gains as they came, wentto the ground. The value of every necessary of lifewas kept up as much as possible by legal enactments.The rate of wages fell. The manufacturers, impelledby the same necessity of struggling for the maintenanceof their rank, were plunged into the most eagercompetition ; the utmost pressure of reduction fell onthe labour of the operatives, who, with their acquiredhabits, were ill able to bear it. They were thrustdown to a condition the most pitiful and morally destructive— to excessive labour, to semi-starvation, topauperism. They could not send their children toschool — not so much from the expense of schooling —for that was made light by public contribution, andnew plans of facility in teaching large numbers — butbecause they wanted every penny their children couldearn, by any means, to aid in the common support.Hence, mere infants were crowded in pestilent millswhen they should have been growing in the fresh air,and were stunted and blighted in body and in mind —a system, the evil of which became so enormous as tocall lately upon the attention of the legislature, andthe indignant wonder of the nation. The parentsthemselves had not a moment's time to watch overtheir welfare or their morals ; at least sixteen hours'unremitting daily labour being necessary to the mostmiserable existence. Evils accumulated on all sides.The working class considered themselves cast off" fromVOL. I. N262 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.the sympathies of the upper classes, regarded andvalued but as tools and machines ; their childrengrew into ignorant depravity, in spite of all efforts oflaw or philanthropy to prevent them. These causesstill operate wherever manufacturing extends : and,till the condition of this great class, whether in townsor villages, can be amended ; till time for domesticrelaxation can be given to the man, and a Christian,rather than a literary, education to the boy — an inculcationof the beauty and necessity of the greatChristian principles ; the necessity of reverencing thelaws of God ; doing, in all their intercourse withtheir fellow men, as they would be done by; thenecessity of purity of life and justice of action, ratherthan the cant of religious feeling, and the blindmystery of sectarian doctrine, — the law and the philanthropymust be in vain.To the simple, and yet uncontaminated parts ofthe country, there is yet a different kind of educationthat I should rejoice to see extended. It should be,to open the eyes of the rural population to the advantagesof their situation ; — to awaken a taste for theenjoyment of nature ; — to give them a touch of thepoetical ; — to teach them to see the pleasantness oftheir quiet lives, — of their cottages and gardens, — ofthe freshness of the air and country around them,especially as contrasted with the poor and squalidalleys where those of their own rank, living in towns,necessarily take up their abode, — of the advantages inpoint of health and purity afforded to their childrenby their position, — of the majestic beauty of the day,with its morning animation, its evening sunsets, andtwilights almost as beautiful; its nightly blue altitude.NOOKS OF THE WORLD. 263with its moon and stars: — all this might be readily-doneby the conversation of intelligent people, andby the diffusion of cheap publications amongst them ;and done, too, without diminishing the relish for thedaily business of their lives. Airy and dreamynotions — notions of false refinement, and aspirationsof soaring beyond their own sphere — are not inspiredby sound and good intelligence, but by defective andbad education.The sort of education I mean has long been realizedin Scotland, and with the happiest results. There,large towns and manufactories have produced theirlegitimate effect, as with us; but, in the rm*al districts,every child, by national provision, has a sound,plain education given him. He is brought up inhabitsof economy, and sentiments of rational religion,and the most solemn and thorough morality. Theconsequence is, that almost all grow up with a senseof self-respect; a sense of the dignity of humannature; a determined resolve of depending on theirown exertions : and, though no people are so national,because they are made sensible of the beauty of theircountry, and the honourable deeds of their forefathers,yet, if they cannot find means of living at homewithout degradation, and, indeed, without betteringtheir condition, they soberly march off, and find someplace where they can, though it be at the very endsof the earth.Nothing is better known than the intelligence andorder that distinguish a great portion of the ruralpopulation of Scotland. No people are more diligentand persevering in their proper avocations ; and yetnone are more alive to the delights of literature.264 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.Amid wild mountain tracks and vast heaths, whereyou scarcely see a house as you pass along for miles,and where you could not have passed two generationsago without danger of robbery or the dirk, they havebook societies, and send new books to and fro to oneanother, with an alacrity and punctuality that aremost delightful. When I have been pedestrianizingin that country, I have frequently accosted men attheir work, or in their working dress — perhaps withtheir axe or their spade in their hands, and three orfour children at their heels — and found them wellacquainted with the latest good publications, andentertaining the soundest notions of them, withoutthe aid of critics. Such men in England would probablynot have been able to read at all. They wouldhave known nothing but the routine of their business,the state of the crop, and the gossip of the neighbourhood: but there, sturdy and laborious men,tanned with the sun, or smeared with the marl inwhich they had been delving, have not only beenable to give all the knowledge of the district ; itshistories and traditions ; the proprietorship, and otherparticulars of the neighbourhood ; but their eyes havebrightened at the mention of their great patriots,reformers, and philosophers, and their tongues havegrown perfectly eloquent in discussing the works oftheir poets and other writers. The names of Wallace,Bruce, Knox, Fletcher of Salton, the Covenanters,Scott, Burns, Hogg, Campbell, Wilson, and others,have been spells that have made them march awaymiles with me, when they could not get me into theirown houses, and find it difficult to turn back.Now, why should not this be so in England?NOOKS OF THE WORLD. 265Why should not similar means produce similar effects ?They must and would ; and by imbuing* the ruralpopulation with a spirit as sound and rational, weshould not only raise it in the social scale to a degreeof worth and happiness at present not easily imaginable,but render the most important service to thecountry, by attaching "a bold peasantry, the country'spride," to their native soil by the most powerful ofties, and rendering them both able and more determinedto live in honourable dependence on self-exertion.Book Societies, under local management, should dofor the Country what Mechanics' Libraries aredoing for the Towns — building up those habits, andperfecting those healthful tastes, for which populareducation is but the bare foundation.Wordsworth gives an account of the early years ofhis Wanderer, which, under such a system, might bethat of thousands.Early had he learnedTo reverence the volume that displaysThe mystery, the life which cannot die : —What wonder if his being thus becameSublime and comprehensive! Low desires,Low thoughts, there had no place ; yet was his heartLowly ; for he was meek in gratitude,Oft as he called those ecstasies to mind.And whence they flowed; and from them lie acquiredWisdom, which works through patience : hence lie learnedIn oft-recurring hours of sober thought'J'o look on nature with a humble heart.Self-questioned, where it did not understand,And with a superstitious eye of love.So passed the time ; yet to the nearest townHe daily went, with what small overplusHis earnings might supply, and brought awayThe book that most had tempted his desires.While at the stall he read. Among the hills,266 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.He gazed upon that mighty orb of song,The divine Milton. Lore of different kind,The annual savings of a toilsome life.His schoolmaster supplied ; books that explainThe purer elements of truth, involved.In lines and numbers, and, by charm severe,(Especially perceived when nature droops.And feeling is suppressed) preserve the mindBusy in solitude and poverty.Yet, still uppermost,Nature was at his heart, as if he felt.Though yet he knew not how, a wasting powerIn all things that from her sweet influenceMight tend to wean him. Therefore, with her hues,Her forms, and with the spirit of her forms,He clothed the nakedness of austere truth,While yet he lingered in the rudimentsOf science, and among her simplest laws :His triangles — they were the stars of heaven.The silent stars ! Oft did he take delightTo measure the altitude of some tall cragThat is the eagle's birth-place, or some peakFamiliar with forgotten years.In dreams, in study, and in ardent thought.Thus was he reared ; much wanting to assistThe growth of intellect, yet gaining more.And every moral feeling of his soulStrengthened, and braced, by breathing in contentThe keen, the wholesome air of poverty.And drinking from the well of homely life.The Excursion, B. I.Such a process I should rejoice to see producingsuch characters in England. Yes ! Milton, Thomson,Cowper, the pious and tender Montgomery, andBloomfield, one of their own kind, would be nobleand enriching studies for the simplest cottage, andcottage-garden, and field-walk. Some of our condensedhistorians, our best essayists and divines,travellers, naturalists in a popular shape, and writersNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 267of fiction, as Scott, and Edgeworth, and De Foe,mig-ht be with vast advantage diffused amongst them.Let us hope it will one day be so. And already Iknow some who have reaped those blessings of anawakened heart and intellect, too long denied to thehard path of poverty, and which render them not theless sedate, industrious, and provident, but, on thecontrary, more so. They have made them, in thehumblest of stations, the happiest of men ; quickenedtheir sensibilities towards their wives and children ;converted the fields, the places of their daily toil, intoplaces of earnest meditative delight — schools of perpetualobservation of God's creative energy andwisdom.It was but the other day that the farming-man of aneighbouring lady having been pointed out to me asat once remarkably fond of reading and attached tohis profession, I entered into conversation with him ;and it is long since I experienced such a cordial pleasureas in the contemplation of the character thatopened upon me. He was a strong man ; not to bedistinguished by his dress and appearance from thoseof his class, but having a very intelligent countenance;and the vigorous, healthful feelings, and right views,that seemed to fill not only his mind but his wholeframe, spoke volumes for that vast enjoyment andelevation of character which a rightly directed tastefor reading would diffuse amongst our peasantry.His sound appreciation of those authors he had readsome of our best poets, historians, essayists, andtravellers — was truly cheering, when contrasted withthe miserable and frippery taste which distinguishesa large class of readers ; where a-thousand-times-268 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.repeated novels of fashionable life, neither original inconception nor of any worth in their object — thelanguid offspring of a tinsel and exotic existence —are read because they can be read without the labour ofthinking. While such works are poured in legions uponthe public, like a host of dead leaves from the forest,driven along in mimic life by a mighty wind— andwhile such things are suffered to swell the Ruffians ofpublishers, and shoulder away, or discourage, the substantiallabours of high intellect — it is truly reviving tosee the awakening of mind in the common people. It is,I am persuaded, from the people that a regeneratingpower must come — a new infusion of better blood intoour literary system. The inanities of fashion mustweary the spirit of a great nation, and be thrown off;strong, native genius, from the measureless, unploughedregions of the popular mind— robust, gigantic,uneffeminated by luxury, glitter, and sloth — willrise up, and put all soulless artificialities to shame;and already mighty are the symptoms of such a changemanifested, in an array of names that might beadduced. But 1 must not be farther led away by thisseducing topic.I found this countryman was a member of ourArtisans' Library, and every Saturday evening hewalked over to the town to exchange his books. Iasked him whether reading did not make him lesssatisfied with his daily work; his answer deservesuniversal attention : — " Before he read, his work wasweary to him ; for, in the solitary fields, an emptyhead measured the time out tediously, to double itslength; but, now, no place was so sweet as thesolitary fields: he had always something pleasantNooks of the world. 269floating across his mind ; and the labour was delightful,and the day only too short." Seeing his ardentattachment to the country, I sent him the last editionof " The Book of the Seasons ;" and I must here givea verbatim et literatim extract from the note in whichhe acknowledged its receipt, because it not only containsan experimental proof of the falsity of a commonalarm on the subject of popular education, but shewsat what a little cost much happiness may be conveyedto a poor man : — " Believe me, dear sir, this kind acthas made an impression on my heart that time willnot easily erase. There are none of your works, inmy opinion, more valuable than this. The study ofnature is not only the most delightful, but the mostelevating. This will be true in every station of life.But how much more ought the j^oor man to prize thisstudy ! which if prized and pursued as it ought, willenable him to bear, with patient resignation andcheerfulness, the lot by providence assigned him. OSir ! I pity the working man who possesses not a?ose for reading. 'Tis true, it may sometimes leadhim to neglect the other more important duties of hisstation ; but his better and more enlightened judgmentwill soon correct itself in this particular, and willenable him, while he steadily and diligently pursueshis private studies, and participates in intellectualenjoyment, to prize, as he ought, his character as aman in every relative duty of life."What a nation would this be, filled with a peasantryholding such views, and possessing such a consequentcharacter as this !The sources of enjoyment in nature have been toolong closed to the poor. The rich can wander fromN 3270 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.side to side of the island, and explore its coasts, itsfields and forests — but the poor man is fettered to thespot. The rich can enter the galleries and exhibitionsof cities, and contemplate all the great works of art ;the poor ought to he taught to knoio that, if they cannotsee the works of art — statues and paintings — they cansee those of God, — if they cannot gaze on the finestforms of beauty from the chisel of the sculptor, theymay be taught to distinguish the beauty of all livingforms, — if they cannot behold splendid paintings oflandscapes, of mountains, of sea-coasts, of sunrisesand sunsets; they can see, one or other of them, allthe originals of these — originals to whose magnificenceand glory the copies never can approach. To thepoor, but properly educated man, every walk willbecome a luxury, a poem, a painting — a source of thesweetest feelings and the most elevating reflections.But there is one class in these back settlements ofEngland to whom a liberal education is most requisite,and to whom it would be most difficult to giveit — the class of smaller resident proprietors. Theeffect of the possession of property in such places issingular and most lamentable. It produces the mostimpenetrable hardness of nature — the most selfishand sordid dispositions. Everywhere, the tendencyof accumulation is to generate selfishness: but, intowns, there are many counteracting influences ; theemulative desire of vying, in mode of life, with equalsand superiors — the greater spread of informationthe various objects of pleasure and association,which keep open the avenues of expenditure, not onlyin the purse, but in the heart. Here there are none.Amusements and dissipations are self-gratulatingly de-nooksOF THE WORLD. 271bounced as gross follies and sins; objects of display,as pride. The consequence is, that habits of thestrangest parsimony prevail — the rudest furniture, therudest style of living. Men who, in a town or itsneighbourhood, would appear as gentlemen, and,perhaps, keep a carriage, there wear often cloutedshoes, threadbare and patched clothes, and a hat notworth a farthing; and all in a fashion of the mostawkward rusticity. All wisdom is supposed to lie inpenuriousness. They have abundance of maxims foreverin their mouths, full of that philosophy; as"Penny-wise and pound-foolish" — "A penny savedis a penny got" — " A pin a-day 's a groat a-year."All ideas seem absorbed in the one grand idea ofaccumulating coin, that will never be of more valueto them than so many oyster-shells. Such a thing asanoble or generous sentiment would be a surprise totheir own souls. Of such men are made the hardestoverseers of the poor; whose screwing, iron-handedadministration of relief is the boast of the parish, andhas led to the most monstrous abuses. To them allobjects are alike; they have no discrimination; theold and young, the idle and industrious, the sturdyvagabond, and the helpless and dying ! — they deem itavirtue to deny them all, till a higher power forcesthe reluctant doit from their gripe. They are surly,yet proud churls, living wrapped in a sense of theirown importance ; for they see nobody above them,except there be a squire or a lord in the parish ; andthey see little of him, and then only to make theirpassing obsequious bow ; for they are at onceTyrants to the weak, and cowards to the strong.Any education, any change, would be a blessing tothese men, that would bring them into collision with272 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.those of their own supposed standing, but with bettereducation and more liberal views and habits. Theexcess to which these causes operate in some of theseout-of~the-world places, is scarcely to be credited :they produce the strangest scenes and the strangestcharacters. Let us take a specimen or two from oneparish, that would be easily paralleled in many others.In one part of this secluded neighbourhood, youapproach extensive woods, and behold amongst thema house of corresponding air and dimensions — a mansionbefitting a large landed proprietor. If you chooseto explore the outbuildings belonging to it, you willfind there a regularly educated and authorised physician,living in a dovecot, and writing prescriptions forany that choose to employ him, for a crown, or evenhalf-a-crown, which he spends in drink. Paternalexample and inculcation made him what he is ; unfittedhim for success in his profession, and left himdependent on his elder brother, who affords him theasylum of his dovecot, yet so grudgingly that he haseven attempted to dislodge him by pulling off the roof;and the poor doctor owes his retreat, not to his brother'sgood-will, but to his own possession of a brace of formidablebull-dogs, that menace the destruction of anyassailant. The dogs lie in his chamber when youenter, with their noses on the ground, and their darkglittering eyes fixed steadily upon you, and are ready,at a signal, to spring on you, and tear you to pieces.The doctor's free potations have now deprived him ofthe power of locomotion ; he cannot quit his pigeon-house; but one of his bull-dogs he has trained to actas his emissary, and with a note suspended to his neckby a tape, he goes to certain houses in the neighbour-nooksOF THE WORLD. 273ing village, and so communicates his wishes to certaincronies of his, who are in the habit of attending tothem. The dog would tear any one to pieces thatattempted to stop him while on his master's errands,being a very strong and fierce creature ; but, if he isnot molested, he goes very civilly along to his place ofdestination, and, when the note is taken off his neckb)'^ the proper hands, returns with great punctualityand decorum.It must be said of this curiosity of a physician, thathe is the descendant of a very curious family ; whosehistory, for the last three generations, would be aregular series of eccentricities ; and the first of whom,here resident, was a celebrated piratical captain, Whois said to have come hither disguised as a peasant,seeking as secluded a country as he could find, anddriving before him an ass loaded with gold. It is certainthat he purchased very extensive estates, andthat one of his descendants was a member of the lastParliament, who, partaking of the family qualities,excited more surprise and more laughter in thehouse, than, perhaps, any man since the days of SirThomas Lethbridge.Not far thence, stands another residence. At somedistance, it appears a goodly manor-house. It is large ;with white Myalls and many antique gables , a statelyavenue of elms in front ; tall pines about it, the landmarkof the whole country round : a spacious garden,with a summer-house on the wall, seeming to havebeen built when there was some taste there for thoserural enjoyments which such a place is calculated toafford to the amiable, country-loving, and refined. Asyou come near, there appear signs of neglect and decay.274 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.Old timber, litter, and large stones lie about ; thereare broken windows, imprinted and rotting woodwork:everything looks forlorn, as if it were the residence ofpoverty on the verge of utter destitution.The fact is, the owner has landed property worthfrom thirty to forty thousand pounds. But see theman himself ! There he goes, limping across hisyard, having permanently injured one of his legs insome of his farming operations. There he goes — atall, hard-featured, weather-beaten man, dressed in thegarb of the most rustic husbandman ; strong cloutedankle-boots, blue or black ribbed worsted stockings :corduroy small-clothes: a yellow striped waistcoat,and a coat of coarse grey cloth, cut short, in a rudefashion, and illustrated with metal buttons : a hat thatseems to have been originally made of coarse wool, ordog's hair ; to have cost some four-and-sixpence somedozen years ago — brown, threadbare, and cocked upbehind, by propping on his coat collar.He has brought up a family of three sons, andnever spent on their education three pounds. Theconsequence has been just what might be expected.They came to know, as they grew up, " for quicklycomes such knowledge," their expectations ; and theyturned out rude, savage, and drunken. One marrieda servant girl, and she dying, the son brought himselfand several children to the old man's to live.Warned by this — for, with all his clownish parsimony,he has pride — the pride of property — he has put theothers on farms, and they have married farmers' daughters: but, always living in expectation of the old man'sdeath, they attend to no business; always looking forwardto the possession of his wealth, they have alreadyNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 275condemned a good part of it. If any man could bepunished, that man is, for sparing the expense of theireducation, and for the example set before them ; for,what he has made the sole object of all his thoughtsand labours, he sees them squandering, and knowsthat they will squander it all. But he himself is notguilty of all this ; he is but the victim of his owneducation, and the maxims and manners of his ancestors.If he could have seen the usefulness of educationto his sons, he could not have found in his heartto spend the necessary money ; but he could not seeit: anything further than to be able to sign a receipt,and reckon a sum of money in their heads, he calledtrash and nonsense.When his sons were growing towards men, I havechanced to pass his farm-yard, and seen him and twoof them filling a manure-cart; labouring, puffing andblowing, and perspiring, as if their lives dependedon their labour ; and the old man was urging them onwith continual curses — " Curse thy body, Dick !Curse thy body, Ben ! — Ben ! Dick ! Ben ! Dick !work, lads, work !" And these hopeful sons were repayingtheir father's curses with the same horribleearnestness.A gentleman once told me that, having to call onthis man about some money transaction, he was detainedtill twelve o'clock, and desired to stay dinner,that being his hour. Out of curiosity, he consented.Everything about the house was in the rudest andmost desolate state. I do not know whether theyhad a cloth spread on the sturdy oak table, whichsupported a set of pewter plates, a roasted fowl, and apudding in a huge brown oaken dish. The wife,276 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.stripped to her stays and quilted petticoat, was toobusy making cheese and scolding the servants to cometo dinner. The pater families and his guest sat downtogether. As he cut up the fowl, the two great lads,Dick and Ben, then about twelve and fourteen yearsof age, came, with their wild eyes staring sharply outof their bushy heads of wild hair, and hung over theirfather's chair, one on each side, with an eager expressionof voracity ; for they were not asked to sit down.The father, as if he expected them to pounce on thedinner and carry it off, kept a sharp look-out onthem ; and though, out of deference to his guest, herestrained his curses, he kept vociferating, as he"turned his head first to one and then to the other, andthen gave a cut at the fowl — " Ben ! Dick ! getaway, lads ! get away ! get away ! get away !" Butthe moment a leg and a wing were cut off, the ladsmade a sudden spring, and each seizing a joint,bounded out of the apartment, leaving the old man inwonder at the unmanageableness of his sons. Fromsuch an education who can doubt the result? — abrood of savages, the nuisance of the neighbourhood,and torment of the old man's days. To such a heightlias the old man's agony arisen at times, as he saw thewasteful conduct of his sons, that it is a pretty wellestablished fact, that on one occasion he threw himselfdown in a ditch in one of his own fields, and — did notpray to die, for he never knew the beginning, middle,or end of a prayer, but he tried to die ; but, after along and weary endeavour, finding it in vain, he gotup and hobbled off home again, saying — " Well, 1see it is as hard to die as to live. I can't die ! Ican't die ! I must even bear it, till these lads kill meNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 277by inches — and that must be a plaguy while first ; forI measure two yards of bad stuff, and I think I'm ashard as a nur,* and as tough as whitleather."Ben, now upwards of forty years of age, still liveswith the old man, working as a labourer on his farm,and is maintained with his children. Money henever sees : but his father allows him to sell bundlesof straw; and he may be seen, in an evening, withtwo bundles of straw under each arm, proceeding tothe alehouse in the next village, where he bartersthem for the evening cup. Nay, the other night, aperson encountered, as he supposed, a thief issuing.from the old man's yard, with a huge beam on hisshoulder. It was Ben, going to turn it into ale ; whodesired his neighbour to say nothing. Nothing chumore strikingly close this account than the old man'susual description of his three sons. " My son Dickhas Cain's mark on his forehead ; Ben, if ale was aguinea a-pint, and he had but one guinea in theworld, would buy a pint of ale ; and, as for Simon —he is a gentleman ! He takes a certificate to shoot.He runs with those long legs of his over threeparishes, and comes slinging home with a crow, or apine* — ay ay, Simon is a gentleman ! "In this same nook of the world might be seen,some years ago, two brothers, stout farmers — farmersof their own property — heaping curses and recriminationson each other about their possessions, in so louda voice that they have been heard half a mile oif.This enmity outlasted the elder, and burned in thebreast of the younger for years after. For it wasNur — a hard knot of wood used by boys at bandy instead of a ball.f Magpie.278 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.some years after, that he attended the funeral of aniece whom he left through life to the charity of another.When the funeral was over, they adjourned with theparson to the public-house ; and here the person whohad cared for the neglected niece, urged the unclenow to pay some part of the funeral charges. " Yes,"said he, " thou hast been at a deal of cost," (thesecountry people still retain the use of thou and thee),and here is a sixpence for the parson's glass ofbrandy and water." The astonished man pushedback the sixpence with contempt; but, at this moment,in came a lad to tell them that the grave beingmade too near that of the deceased brother, the earthhad suddenly fallen in, and broken in the lid of theold man's coffin. At this, the living brother startedup in evident delight and exclaimed — " Why, has it ?Why, has it? Thou tells me summut, lad ! thoutells me summut ! " And he gave him the sixpencehe had generously destined for the parson's glass.A scene, described to me by a professional land-agent,would seem to belong to the generation ofParson Adams and Squire Western, but it actuallyoccurred but the other day, and only seven milesfrom one of our largest county towns. This land-agentwas sent for on business by an old gentlemanof large landed estate in that county. As the gentleman'shouse was in a secluded situation, off thehighways, and it was a fine, cool, autumnal day, hetook a foot-path which led the whole way across delightfulfields, and after enjoying his walk throughmeadows and woods, arrived at the Hall with a mostvigorous appetite, just as the squire and his housekeeperwere sitting down to dinner. Of course.NOOKS OF THE WORLD. 279nothing less could take place than an invitation forhim to join them ; which he was not in the dispositionby any means to decline. I need scarcely saythat the fact of the squire and his house-keeper sittingat the same table indicates the ancient gentleman asone of the real old school. He was, in fact, a tall,gaunt, meagre old fellow, whose sole pleasure wasputting out his rents on good security, and whose solefamily consisted of his house-keeper and one oldamphibious animal, who, if he had as many heads asoccupations, would have carried at least four morethan Janus — occupying his talents, as he did, asgardener, groom, serving-man, and three or fourother personages. The whole house and everythingabout it bore amplest marks of neglect and antiquity.Not a gate, or a door, or a window, or a carpet, orany other piece of furniture, but was just as his fatherleft it fifty years before, except for the work whichtime, and such tying and patching as were absolutelyneedful to keep certain things together, had done.Our agent looked with some curiosity at the twocovers on the table before them, which being removedrevealed a single partridge and three potatoes. Thehouse-keeper having cut the partridge into quarters,gave each of the gentlemen one, and took the thirdherself. Our worthy land-agent supposing this to bebut a slight first course, was astounded to hear thesquire say, he hoped Mr. Mapleton would make adinner — for he saw what there was ! On this significanthint Mr. Mapleton made haste to dispatch hisquarter of bird, and cast eager looks on the remainingquarter in the dish. The house-keeper, indeed, wasjust proceeding to extend the knife and fork towards280 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.it, saying, perhaps Mr. Mapleton would take theother quarter, when the old gentleman said verysmartly; " Don't urge Mr. Mapleton unpleasantly —don't overdo him — I dare say he knows when he hashad enough, without so much teasing. I have madean excellent dinner indeed !"Hereupon the house-keeper's arms and weaponswere drawn back abruptly; the old gentleman rangthe bell, and the shuffling old serving-man enteredand cleared all away. As the cloth and the housekeeperdisappeared, the squire also opened a tall cupboardon one side of the fire-place, and Mr. Mapletonbegan to please his fancy with a forthcoming apparitionof wine. Having sate, however, sometime, andhearing from behind the tall door, which was drawnpartly after the old squire so as to conceal him, certainsounds as of decanting liquor, and as of a knifecoming in contact with a plate, sounds particularlyfamiliar and exciting to hungry ears, he contrived tolean back so far in his chair as to catch a view of thetall figure of the squire standing with a large plumageupon the shelf before him, into which he hadmade a capacious incision, and a glass of wine, moreover,at a little distance. This discovery naturallymaking our land-agent extremely restless, he beganto indicate his presence by sundry hems, shuffles,coughs, and drumming on his chair, which immediatelyproduced this consequence. The old squire'shead protruded from behind the cupboard door withan inquiring look; and finding the eyes of Mr. Mapletonas inquiringly fixed on him, he said — " Mr.Mapleton, will you take a glass of wine?" "Certainly,Sir, with the greatest pleasure." The wineNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 281was carefully poured out ; making various ducklings,or sobbing in the throat of the bottle as very loathto leave it, and was set on the table before Mr. Mapleton.No invitation, however, to a participation ofthe cake came; and after sitting perhaps a quarter ofan hour longer, listening to the same inviting soundsof scraping plate and decantation, he was compelledagain to shuffle, hem, and drum. This had a similarhappy effect to the former attempt; — out popped thesquire's head with a — " Would you take another glassMr. Mapleton?" "Certainly, Sir, with the greatestpleasure, I feel thirsty with my walk." The bottlewas produced, and the glass filled, but to put an endto any further intimations of thirst, the door was instantlyclosed, the key dropped into the squire's capaciouspocket, and the old gentleman forthwith enteredupon business, which, in fact, concerned thousands ofpounds.Before closing this gallery of country oddities, Imust say that, in some instances, much goodness ofheart is mixed up with this wild growth of queerness.There are very many who will know of whom I amspeaking, when I say that there was in the last generationa gentleman in one of the midland countieswho was affected with this singular species of monomania:at every execution at the county town hepurchased the rope or ropes of Jack Ketch. Theseropes, duly labelled with the name of the culprit, thedate of his execution, and the crime for which hesuffered, were hung round a particular room. Onone occasion, arriving at the town and being told thatthe criminal was reprieved, he exclaimed — " GraciousHeavens, then I have lost my rope ! " The son of282 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.this gentleman still displays a good deal of hereditaryeccentricity, but has destroyed these ropes. Nevertheless,I am told, that the carving-knife used in hiskitchen is the very sword with which Lord Byronkilled Chaworth. He still lives in the same house,and, old bachelor as he is, maintains the old Englishstyle and hospitality in a degree not often to be witnessednow. His personal appearance is unique.He is tall, with a ruddy countenance, with whitewhiskers, white waistcoat, white breeches, and whitelining to his coat. He always appears most scrupulouslyand delicately clean. His estate is large ; andwhoever goes to his house on business, finds bread andcheese and ale set before him. His house-keeper issaid to receive no regular wages, but every now andthen a fifty pound note is put into her hands, so thatshe has grown tolerably rich. It is a standing orderin the house, that every poor person, come whence hemay, who has lost a cow, and is seeking to get another,shall receive a sovereign. I have heard a gentlemansay, who knows him well, that his benevolence,particularly to young tradesmen, is most extraordinary:and that being himself once supposed to be onhis death-bed, this worthy man came, sate down byhim, cried like a child, and told him, if he had notprovided for his children just as he wished, that hehad only to tell him what he would have done, andthen and there it should be done. No relationshipwhatever existed; and this noble offer was not accepted.The same gentleman told me that it is theregular habit of this worthy example of Old Englishsimplicity and goodness of heart, every evening beforehe retires to rest, to sit quietly for a certain time inNOOKS OF THE WORLD. 283his easy chair, endeavouring to discover whether hehas done anything wrong during the day, or haspossibly hurt any one's feelings; and if he fancies hehas, he hastens the next morning to set all right. Itis delightful to have to record proofs of the yet existingspirit of ancient hospitality and simple worth ofcharacter.In conclusion, — let me observe that some of theforegoing cases are shocking ones ; but they are onlytoo true ; and such are but the events of every day inthose sleepy hollows, where public opinion has noweight, and where ignorance and avarice are handeddown from age to age. I have seen hundreds of suchthings in such places. And what mode of regenerationshall reach this class of people, who have therust of whole ages in their souls ? You cannot offerto them education, as you do to the poor. Youcannot reason with them, as with the poor. Theyhave too much pride. It can only be by educatingall around them, that you can reach them. Whenthey feel the effect of the education of the poor, theirpride will compel them to educate their children.This will be one of the many good results that willflow from the education of the poor in the backsettlements of England. Let us, then, direct thestream of knowledge into the remotest of theseobscure places. If the penny periodicals were, bysome means, made to circulate there, as they circulatein towns — the Penny Magazine and Saturday Magazine,with their host of wood-cuts and useful facts ;and Chambers' Edinburgh Journal, with its morerefined and poetical spirit — they would work a greatchange. Prints and cuts from good originals would284 NOOKS OF THE WORLD.awaken a better taste; higher ideas of the beauty ofcreated forms : for I say with Rogers —Be mine to bless the mere mechanic skillThat stamps, renews, and multiplies at will;And cheaply circulates through distant climes,The fairest relics of the purest times.We blame our populace for not possessing thesame refined taste as the French and Italians; forbeing brutal and destructive; that parks, public walks,and public buildings, cannot be thrown open to themwithout receiving injury. We ought not to blamethem for this ; for is not this the English spirit thathas been praised in Parliament? for the encouragementof which, bull-baiting, dog-fightings, cockfighting,and boxing have been pleaded for bysenators, as its proper aliment? and the Romans,with their gladiatorial shows, quoted as good precedents?Forgetting that while the Romans were a growingand a conquering people, they were a simple anddomestic people. When they had their amphitheatresand their bloody shows of battling men and beasts,they fell under imperial despotism, and thence intonational destruction. If we will have a better spirit,we must take better means to produce it. We cannever make our rural population too well informed.Ireland, with all manner of horrible outrages, Englandwith its rick-burnings, and Scotland with its orderlypeasantry, all point towards the evils of ignorance andoppression, and the national advantage and individualhappiness that are to be reaped from the spread ofsound knowledge through our rural districts.^,?i??Je-TV- ^^ y ''/CHAPTER III.NOOKS OF THE WORLD: — LIFE IN THE DALES OFLANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE.The nooks of the world M'hich we visited in our lastchapter lay in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire; wewill now change the scene a little northward. Suchsecluded and original spots we might indeed readilyundertake to discover in almost every county ofEngland ; but I can only give a few specimens fromthe great whole, and leave every one to look abouthim for the rest. Lancashire is famous for its immensemanufactures, and consequent immense population.In ranging over its wild, bleak hills, we areVOL. I. o286 LIFE IN THE DALESpresently made sensible of the vast difference betweenthe character and habits of the working class, andthe character and habits of the pastoral and agriculturaldistricts. We have no longer those picturesquevillages and cottages half buried in their gardenand orchard trees ; no longer those home-crofts, withtheir old, tall hedges; no longer rows of bee-hivesbeneath their little thatched southern sheds; thoserich fields and farm-houses, surrounded with wealth ofcorn-ricks, and herds and flocks. You have no longerthat quiet and Arcadian-looking population ; hedgersand ditchers, ploughmen and substantial farmers, whoseem to keep through life the " peaceful tenor of theirway," in old-English fulness and content. Theremay indeed, and there are, such people scattered hereand there ; but they and their abodes are not of theclass which gives the predominant character to thescenery. On the contrary, everywhere extend wildnaked hills, in many places totally unreclaimed; inothers, enclosed, but exhibiting all the signs of aneglected and spiritless husbandry ; with stuntedfences or stone walls; and fields sodden with wetfrom want of drainage, and consequently over-grownwith rushes. Over these naked and desolate hills arescattered to their very tops, in all directions, thehabitations of a swarming population of weavers ; thepeople and their houses equally unparticipant of thosefeatures which delight the poet and the painter. Thehouses are erections of stone or brick, covered withglaring red tiles, as free from any attempt at beautyor ornament as possible. Without, where they havegardens, those gardens are as miserable and neglectedas the fields; within, they are squalid and comfortless.OF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 287In some of these swarming villages, ay, and in thecottages of the large manufacturing towns too, youcan scarcely see a window with whole panes of glass.In one house in the outskirts of Blackburn, and thattoo, an ale-house, Mee counted in a window of sixtypanes, eight-and-forty broken ones ; and this windowwas of a pretty uniform character with its fellows, bothin that house, and the neighbouring ones. It is notpossible to conceive a more violent and melancholycontrast than that which the filth, the poverty, andforlornness of these weavers' and spinners' dwellingsform to the neatness, comfort, and loveliness of thecottages of the peasantry in many other parts of thekingdom. Any man who had once been through thisdistrict, might again recognize the locality if he weretaken thither blindfold, by the very smell of oatcake,which floats about the villages, and the sound of theshuttles with their eternal "latitat ! latitat !" I rangedwide over the bleak hills in the neighbourhood ofPadiham, Belthorne, Guide, and such places, and thenumbers and aspect of the population filled me withastonishment. Through the long miserable streets ofthose villages, children and dogs were thick as motesin the sun. The boys and men with their hair shornoff, as with a pair of wool-shears, close to their heads,till it stood up staring and bristly, and yet left hanginglong over their eyes, till it gave them a mostvillanous and hangman look. "What makes thoserough heads more conspicuous, is their being sofrequently red ; the testimony of nature to the ancientprevalence of the Dane on these hills. The men arebesides long and bony ; the women often of stalwartand masculine figure, and of a hardness of featureVOL. J. o *288 LIFE IN THE DALESwhich gives them no claims to be ranked amongst themost dangerous of the " Lancashire witches." Everywherethe rudeness of the rising generation is wonderfulEverywhere the stare of mingled ignorance andinsolence meets you ; everywhere a troop of lads isat your heels, with the clatter of their wooden clogs,crying — " Felled, gives a halfpenny ! "In one village, and that too the celebrated Romanstation of Rochester, our chaise was pursued byswarms of these wooden-shod lads, like swarms offlies, that were only beaten off for a moment to closein upon you again, and their sisters showed equallythe extravagance of rudeness in which they weresuffered to grow up, by running out of the houses aswe passed, and poking mops and brushes at the horses'heads. No one attempted to restrain or rebuke them,and yet what was odd enough, not one of the adultpopulation offered you the least insult, but if youasked the way, gave you the most ready directions,and if you went into their houses, treated you withperfect civility, and showed an affection for thesewild brats that was honourable to their hearts, andwanted only directing by a better intelligence. Theuncouthness of these poor people is not that of evildisposition, but of pressing poverty and continuedneglect. As is generally the case, in the pooresthouses were the largest families. Ten and elevenchildren in one small dirty hovel was no uncommonsight, actually covering the very floor till there seemedscarce room to sit down; and amid this crowd, themother "was generally busy washing, or baking oat-cakes; and the father making the place resound withthe "latitat, latitat" of his shuttle. One did notOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 289wonder, seeing this, that the poor creatures are gladto turn out the whole troop of children to play on thehills, the elder girls lugging the babies along with them.The wildness into which some of these children inthe more solitary parts of the country grow is, Iimagine, not to be surpassed in any of the backsettlements of America. On July 5th of last year,the day of that remarkable thunder-storm, whichvisited a great part of the kingdom with such fury,being driven into a cottage at the foot of Pendle bythe coming on of this storm, and while standing atthe door watching its progress, I observed the head ofsome human creature carefully protruded from thedoorway of an adjoining shed, and as suddenly withdrawnon being observed. To ascertain what sort ofperson it belonged to, I went into the shed, but atfirst found it too dark to allow me to discover anything.Presently, however, as objects became visible,I saw a little creature, apparently a girl of ten yearsold, reared very erectly against the opposite wall.On accosting her in a kind tone, and telling her tocome forward, and not to be afraid, she advanced fromthe wall, and behold ! there stood another littlecreature about the head shorter, whom she had beenconcealing. I asked the elder child whether thisyounger one was a girl. She answered — " Ne-a."Was it a boy?" " Ne-a." " What ! neither boynor girl ! was she herself a girl?" " Ne-a." " Whatwas it a boy that I was speaking to ?" " Ne-a."What in the name of wonder were they then ?"We are chiltern." " Chiltern ! and was the womanin the house their mother?" "Ne-a." "Who wasshe then ?" " Ar Mam." " O ! your mam ! and do290 LIFE IN THE DALESyou keep cows in this shed ?" " Ne-a." " Whatthen?" " Bee-as." In short, common English wasquite unintelligible to these little creatures, and theirappearance was as wild as their speech. They weretwo fine young creatures, nevertheless, especially theelder, whose form and face were full of that symmetryand free grace that are sometimes the growth of unrestrainednature, and would have delighted thesculptor or the painter. Their only clothing was asort of little bodice with skirts, made of a reddishstuff, and rendered more picturesque by sundry patchesof scarlet cloth, no doubt from their mother's oldcloak. Their heads, bosoms, and legs to the kneeswere bare to all the influences of earth and heaven ;and on giving them each a penny, they bounded awaywith the fleetness and elasticity of young roes. Nodoubt, the hills and the heaths, the wild flowers ofsummer and the swift waters of the glens were theonly live-long day companions of these children, whocame home only to their oatmeal dinner, and a bed assimple as their garments. Imagine the violent changeof life, by the sudden capture and confinement ofthese little English savages, in the night and day noise,labour, and foul atmosphere of the cotton purgatories !In the immediate neighbourhood of towns, manyof the selling ranges of hills present a much morecultivated aspect, and delight the eye with theirsmooth, green, and flowing outlines ; and the valleysalmost everywhere, are woody, watered with clearrapid streams, and, in short, are beautiful. But alongthese rise up the tall chimneys of vast and innumerablefactories, and even while looking on the palaces of themaster manufacturers. Math their woods, and gardens,OF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 291and shrubbery lawns around them, one cannot helpthinking of all the horrors detailed before the Committeesof the House of Commons respecting theFactory System; of the parentheses and friendless littlewretches, sent by wagon loads from distant workhousesto these prisons of labour and despair ; of theyoung frames crushed to the dust by incessant labour;of the beds into which one set of children got, asanother set got out, so that they were said never tobe cold the whole year round, till contagious feversburst out and swept away by hundreds these littlevictims of Mammon's over-urging, never-ceasingwheel. Beautiful as are many of those wild glensand recesses where, before the introduction of steam,the dashing rivulet invited the cotton spinners toerect their mills ; and curious as the remains of thosesimple original factories are, with their one greatwater-wheel, which turned their spindles while therewas water, but during the drought of summer quiteas often stood still ; yet one is haunted even there,amongst the shadows of fine old trees that throw theirarms athwart streams dashing down their beds of solidrock, by the memory of little tender children whonever knew pity or kindness, but laboured on and on,through noon and through midnight, till they sleptand yet mechanically worked, and were often awakedonly by the horrid machinery rending off their littlelimbs. In places like these, Adhere now the oldfactories, and the large houses of the proprietorsstand deserted, or are inhabited by troops of poorcreatures whose poverty makes them only appear themore desolate, we are told by such men as Mr.Field of Oldham, once a factory child himself and•29*2 LIFE IN THE DALESnow a ffreat manufacturers who dares to reveal thesecrets of the prison-house, that little creatures haveeven committed suicide to escape from a life worseian ten deaths. And what a mighty system is thisnow become ! What a perpetual and vast supply ofhuman life and energy it requires, with aU the facilitiesof improved machinery with all the developedpower of steam., and with all the growing thirst ofwealth to urge it on ! We are told that the state ofthe factories, and the children employed in them isgreatly improved : and I trust they are : but if therebe anv truth in the evidence given before the parliamentarycommittees, there is need of great ameliorationyet : and it is when we recollect these things,how completely the labouring clas has, in thesedistricts, been regarded as mere machinery for the accumulationof enormous capitals, that we cease towonder at their uncouth and degraded aspect, andat the neglect in which they are suffered to swarmover these hills, — like the very weeds of humanity,cast out into disregarded place-es, and left tospread and increase in rank and deleterious luxuriance.The numbers of driven men that you meetin these districts in an evening, and the numbers oftcomen that you see sealed with their ale-pots andpipes roimd the ale-house fires, a sight hardly elsewhereto be witnessed, form a striking contrast to thestare of things in the agricultural districts, such asCraven, where you may pass through half-a-dozenviiiaores and not find one pot-house.It was necessary to take a glimpse at these Lancashirehills in reviewing the rural life of England ;let us now pass into a tract of the country whichOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 293borders immediately upon them, and yet is so totallyunlike in its aspect and population. We shall nowpenetrate into perhaps the most perfect nook of theworld that England holds. The Yorkshire dales areknown to most by name, but to comparatively few byactual visitation. The lie amongst that wild tract ofhills which stretch along the West Riding of Yorkshire,from Lancashire to Westmoreland, and formpart, in fact, of the great mountainous chain whichruns from Derbyshire through these counties andCumberland into Scotland. Some of these hills areof great bulk and considerable altitude. The oldrhymes are well known ofand,Icgleborough, Pendle, and PennegeatAre the highest hills betwixt Scotland and Trent;Pendle, Pennegent, and IngleboroughAre the highest hills all £england thorough.The Yorkshire dales stretch from the foot of Ingleboroughnorth-east and west, over a considerable spaceof country. It is a wild, and, in many parts, a drearyregion. Long ridges of hills covered with blackheath, or bare stone, — with stony wastes at their feetof the grimmest and most time-worn character.All round Ingleborough the whole country seems tohave been so tossed, shaken, and undermined by theviolence which at some period broke it up into itspresent character, that its whole subterranean spaceseems to be filled with caves and passages for windsand waters that possess a remarkable connexion onewith another, and present a multitude of singularphenomena. On the Craven side lie those celebratedspots Malian Cove and Cordage Scar, well known to294 LIFE IN THE DALEStourists; the one, a splendid range of precipice with ariver issuing from its base, the other, Cordage Scar,one of the most solemnly impressive of nature's works.It is that of a river which has torn its way from thetop of a mountain, through a rugged descent in thesolid rock, and falls into a sort of cove surrounded bylofty precipices, which make such a gloom that onlooking up, the stars are said sometimes to be seen atnoon. Amongst all the magnificent scenes which themountainous parts of these kingdoms present, I nevervisited one which impressed me with so much aweand wonder as this. You approach it by no regularroad ; you have even to ask permission to pass throughthe yard of a farm-house, to get at it ; and your wayis then up a valley, along which come two or threestreams, running on with a wild beauty and abundancethat occupy and delight your attention. Suddenly,you pass round a rock, and find yourself in this solemncove, the high grey cliffs towering above you onall sides, the water dropping from their summits in asilver rain, and before you a river descending from acleft in the mountain, and falling, as it were, over ascreen, and spreading in white foam over it in asolemn and yet riotous beauty. This screen is formedof the calcareous deposit of the water; and crossingthe stream by the stones which lie in it, you maymount from the greensward which carpets the bottomof the cove, climb up this screen, and ascend alongthe side of the falling torrent, up one of the most wildand desolate ravines, till you issue on the mountaintop, where the mountain cistus and the crimson geraniumwave their lovely flowers in the breeze.These scenes lie on the Craven side of IngleLANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 295borough, and as you wind round his feet, thoughdistantly, by Settle, to the dales, your way is stillamongst the loftiest fells, and past continual proofsof subterranean agency, and agency of past violence.You are scarcely past Settle, when by the road-sideyou see a trough overflowing with the most beautifullytransparent water. You stop to look at it, andit shrinks before your eyes six or seven inches, perhaps,below the edge of the trough, and then againcomes gushing and flowing over. As you advance,the very names of places that lie in view speak of awild region, and have something of the old British orDanish character in them. To your left shine thewaters distantly of Lancaster Sounds, and MorecombeBay, and around you are the Great Stone of FourStones, the Cross of Grete, Corda's Cave, that is, thecave of Corda, the Danish sorceress; WeathercockCave, and Hurtle-pot and Gingle-pot. Our progressover this ground, though early in July, was amidclouds, wind and rain. The black heights of Ingleboroughwere only visible at intervals through therolling rack, and all about Weathercote Cave, Hurtle-potand Gingle-pot were traces of the violence of out-burstingwaters. We found a capital inn nearlyopposite the Weathercote Cave, where one of thetallest of imaginable women presented us with alunch of country fare, — oat-cake, cheese, and porter,and laid our cloaks and great-coats to dry while wevisited the Cave and the Pots. Weathercote Cave, isnot, as the imagination would naturally suggest toany one, a cave in the side of a hill or precipice, butasavage chasm in the ground, in which you hear thethunder of falling waters. It is just such a place aso2296 LIFE IN THE DALESone dreams of in ancient Thessaly, haunted by Panand the Satyrs. When you come to the brink ofthis fearful chasm, which is overhung with trees andbushes, you perceive a torrent falling in a column ofwhite foam, and with a thundering din, into a deepabyss. Down to the bottom of this abyss there is asloping descent, amongst loose and slippery stones.When you reach the bottom, a cavern opens on yourleft, into which you may pass, so as to avoid the massof falling water, which is cas lied upon a large blackstone,and then is absorbed by some unseen channel.The huge blocks of stone which lie in this cave appearblack and shining as polished ebony. I suppose thischasm is at least a hundred feet deep, and yet a fewdays before we were there, it had been filled to overflowingwith water, which had rushed from its mouthwith such violence as to rend down large trees aroundit. What is still more remarkable, at a few hundredyards distance is another chasm of equal depth, and ofperpendicular descent, whence the torrents swallowedby the Weathercote Cave during great rains are againejected with incredible violence. This had takenplace, as we have said, a few days before our visit,and though this gulph was now dry again, the evidencesof its fury were all around us. Wagon loadsof stones lay at its mouth, which had been hurledup with the torrent of water, all churned or hurtled(whence its name of Hurtle-pot) by its violence intothe roundness of pebbles ; and trees were laid prostrate,with their branches crushed into fragments, inthe track by which the waters had escaped. Thistrack was towards the third singular abyss — Gingle-pot.This gulph had a wider and more slopingOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 297mouth than the other, so that you could descend aconsiderable depth into it, but there you found a blackand sullen water, which the people say has never beenfathomed. It is said to contain a species of blacktrout, which are caught, we were told, by approachingthe surface of the Mater with lighted torches bynight, towards which they rise. Several countryfellows were amusing themselves as we approachedwith rolling large stones into the abyss, which certainlysunk into the water with an awful sound.Such is the region which abuts upon the Yorkshiredales. The dales themselves are the interveningspaces betwixt high fells, which run in long rangesone beyond another in a numerous succession. Someof these dales possess a considerable breadth of meadowland, as Wesley-dale, but the far greater numberhave scarcely more room in the bottom than isoccupied by the stream and the public road. Thusevery dale seems a little world in itself, being shut inby its high ranges of fell. If you ascend to the ridgeof one of these, you find another dale, lying at yourfeet, with its own little community; were you to crossto the next ridge, you would find another, and so on,far and wide. It is a land of alternating ridge andhollow, ridge and hollow, or in the language of thedistrict, fell and dale, without any intervention ofchampaign country. Wordsworth's description inPeter Bell, shows that the poet had been there, aswell as the potter.And he had trudged through Yorkshire dales,Among the rocks and winding scars ;Where deep and low the hamlets lie,Beneath their little patch of sky,And little lot of stars.298 LIFE IN THE DALESFormerly, when there were no roads into thesesecluded dales, except some shingly ravine, downwhich the pedestrian, or one of their native poniescould with considerable caution, and sundry strikingof the foot against loose stones, descend, few, exceptthe inhabitants themselves could visit them, and theythen must have possessed a primitive character indeed.Now, however, good roads run through them, and agreater intercourse with the surrounding country musthave had its effect, yet 1 know no other corner ofEngland where still linger so patriarchal a characterand such peculiar habits.George Fox, in his travels far and wide through therealm to promulgate his doctrines, penetrated intothese dales. From the top of Gentle-hill in Lancashire,where there is an immense prospect, he tellsus in his journal, that he had a vision of the triumphsof his ministry, and of the thousands that would beconverted to his peculiar faith. Descending in thestrength of this revelation, he marched northward,and speedily found in these dales a primitive race,ready to adopt his opinions and practices, so congenialto a simple and earnest-hearted people. Therehe repeatedly came, and sojourned long ; and theaccounts of the extraordinary meetings held, and theeffect produced, have few parallels in the histories ofreligious reformers. There is a little chapel perched on the highest point of KendalFells, not far from Jedburgh, which is in the outskirtsof this district, called Frank Chapel, where athousand people are said to have been collected tohear him, and at which three hundred people wereconvinced of the truth, to use his own words, at oneOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 299time. That little chapel is standing yet, perhapsthe very humblest fabric in England belonging tothe Established Church, old and dilapidated, andsituated in one of the most singular and wild situations.Near the door is a rock, on which, it is said,he stood to preach. From its high site you lookaround over dreary moors, and a vast tract of outstretchedcountry, and wonder whence the peoplegathered to his ministry. But his fame was that ofan apostle all round this country. In Jedburghchurchyard stand two yew trees, under the shade ofwhich, he, on one occasion preached, drawing all thepeople out of the church to him. Within the dalesthemselves he planted several meetings, at Aysgarth,Countryside, and Legate. These meetings stillremain, and a considerable number of Friends arescattered through the dales, of a primitive and hospitablecharacter. We went, on the only Sunday whichwe passed in the dales, to his favourite meeting ofCountryside, and could almost have imagined that theremarkable times of his ministry were yet remaining.We found the meeting situated amid a cluster ofrustic cottages in pleasant Simmerdale, by Simmer-daleWater. The house in which he usually livedduring his visits to this valley adjoined the meeting;a true old-fashioned house, where the remains of hisoaken bedstead were still preserved; and a very handsomeone it must have been, and far too much adornedwith the vanity of carving for so plain a man, and sohomely a place. But the people were flocking fromall sides, down the fells, along the dales to the meeting,not only the Friends themselves, but the othertradespeople ; and we found Mr. Joseph Pease, brother300 LIFE IN THE DALESof the Map., and his lady, from Darlington, addressinga crowded audience. The old times of Fox seemedindeed returned. The preacher's discourse was oneof an earnest and affectionate eloquence, and theaudience was of a most simple and unworldly character.Almost every person, man or woman, had anosegay in hand ; nosegays in truth, for they veryliberally and repeatedly applied them to the organwhence they are named. The herbs, for they consistedrather of herbs than flowers, were as singularas the appearance of such a host of nosegays itself.Not one of them was without a piece of southernwood,in some instances almost amounting to a bush,and evidently there entitled to its ancient name,"lads-love and lasses delight." With this wasgrasped in many a hardy hand, thyme, and almost,and in many, mint ! No doubt the pungent qualitiesof these herbs are found very useful stimulants incloseand crowded places of worship, and especiallyunder a drowsy preacher, by those whose occupationsfor the other six days lie chiefly out-of-doors, in thekeen air of hills and moors. That such is the objectof them was sufficiently indicated by a poor womanwho offered us a little bunch of these herbs as weentered the meeting-house, saying with a smile,they are so reviving."Amongst the Friends, are a considerable numberof substantial people, who lead here a sort of patriarchallife, with their flocks and herds on the hillsaround them. And their houses, placed on the slopeof the hills, yet not far above the level of the valley,with their ample gardens, must be in the summermonths most agreeable abodes. Old English hoofLANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 301vitality and kindness are found here in all theirstrength. We called on several of the resident proprietors,and amongst others Mr. William Fothergill,at Carr-End. The garden of this gentleman was aperfect Paradise of roses. But the fine old intellectualman himself, retaining beyond his eightieth year,and in this secluded place, all the enthusiasm of youth,the love of books, and aspirations after the spread ofknowledge and freedom through the world, was a stillmore attractive object. He is the descendant of twowell-known men, Dr. Fothergill, and Samuel Othersan eminent minister in this society. Talent andliberality of sentiment seem a congenial growth ofthese dales, for the able and noble-minded AdamSedgwick is a native of one of them.To that valley, the beautiful dale of Dent, we mayaswell betake ourselves, for in describing these retiredregions, one portion may with great propriety be takenas a specimen of the whole. Descending thereforefrom the moors at Newly-Head, we found this southernentrance of Dent-dale steep and narrow. As weproceeded, it wound on before us for several miles,till we beheld the village of Dent lying at its northernextremity. Dents-Town, as they call it, has a verySwiss look, with its projecting roofs, and open galleriesascended by steps from the outside. But what strikesyou with most surprise in this dale is its high state ofcultivation. All the lower part of the dale is dividedinto small enclosures, rich with grass and summerflowers, and beautifully wooded; and amid the orchardsand gardens, peep out houses of various sizesand characters. The hills nearly meet at the bottom,and ascend high, in two long ranges. The upper302 LIFE IN THE DALESpart, above the enclosures appears, in some parts, blackwith heath, but more generally smooth and green, anddotted all over with flocks of sheep and geese. Onthe wilder parts of these hills graze a great numberof cattle, and a shaggy race of ponies, peculiar tothem, with coats and manes long, and bleached by thewintry winds, till they look at a distance, more likewild bisons than horses. These dun ponies, beforethe progress of enclosure, used sometimes to followthe tops of the hills right away into Scotland, and havebeen fetched back from a distance of two hundredmiles. When they have shed their wintry coats, andceased to have such a lookAs of the dwellers out of doors ;they often turn out very beautiful creatures, remarkablysure-footed, and highly prized for drawing inladies' pony-carriages. But we must descend into thevalley : and here one of the most remarkable featuresis the river. It has all the character of a mountaintorrent ; huge stones, and masses of gravel everywheredemonstrating the occasional violence of the waters.But what has the most singular effect, its bed is oneof solid stone, in some parts black or dark-grey marble,which is chafed and worn by the fury of the stream infloods, in such a manner that it looks itself like a rushing,billowy river, petrified by enchantment. A greatpart of this bed during the summer is dry, and thereforethe more remarkable in its aspect. Here andthere you may walk along it for a considerable distance; then again it descends in precipices, and amidblocks of stone of a gigantic character. One of theseplaces is known by the name of Hell's Cauldron, nodoubt in rainy seasons a most appropriate name ; forOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 303the river here, overhung with dark masses of trees,falls over some huge steps of the stony bed into adeep and black abyss, where the rending of the rocksand washing up of heaps of debris, shew with whatfury that cauldron boils. But what are still more significantof this fury, are the hollows worn into the verymass of the ledges of rocks over which it passes, oneof which, overlooking the abyss, is called the Pulpit,from its form, and in which you may stand. Thesehollows, which are scooped out with wonderful regularity,appear to be made by the churning and grindingof stones, which get in wherever the softer parts of therocks give way to the action of the floods. Yet fearfulas this Hell's Cauldron must be when the stream isswollen, we were told that a boy once slipped in, andwas carried through it, and washed up on the bankbelow, unhurt; — calling out to his astounded companions— " Here am I ! where are you ?" The publicroad runs along the side of the stream, down thevalley. This stream is crossed by two queer littlefoot-bridges, called by the odd names of Tommy andNelly, or Tommy-Brig, and Nelly Brig, having beenbuilt by two persons of these familiar names, toaccommodate the inhabitants of the opposite sides ofthe dale. And truly, as will be shortly evident, agreat accommodation they must be, not only in casesof actual business, but in those visiting which go onin the dale.Not only the people and their houses have anold-fashioned look, but you see continually out-of-doorslingering vestiges of long-past times and ancientusages. There are sledges, with which they bringstone and peat from the tops of the fells. I have often304 LIFE IN THE DALESwondered at the industry of mountain people in buildingup those stone walls, or dykes, as they call them,which you often see running up the mountain sides,to very distant and often very steep places ; but crossingthese fells, I discovered that the labour was farless than it seemed at first sight. The material hasnot to be carried up these lofty ascents : it abounds ontheir summits, and has only to be loosened, and sliddown the hill sides on sledges, as they proceed, forthey begin to build at the top, and not at the bottom.So their peat for fuel is found in abundance on thewet and spongy tops of these hills, and is dug, andreared on end to dry through the summer, and in theautumn is slid down on sledges. In the ScottishHighlands you see the women bringing the peat fromthe mountains in large creels, or baskets, on theirbacks, while their husbands are perhaps angling in theloch below; but here the men generally act a lesslordly part ; cutting and drying the peat with the helpof their boys, and sledging it home into the bargain.Besides these sledges, they have also that veryancient species of cart, the tumbrel ; or as they callit, the Tumble-Cart. This is of so primitive a constructionthat the wheels do not revolve on a fixedaxle, but the axle and wheels all revolve together.The wheels themselves are of a construction worthyof so pristine an axle ; they are, in truth, wheels ofthe original idea : not things of the complex constructionof nave, spokes, and fellies, but solid blocks ofwood, into which the axle is firmly inserted; upon thisaxle the body of the vehicle is laid, and kept in itsplace by a couple of pegs. It is such a cart as youmight imagine rumbling down these hills in the daysOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 305of their Saxon ancestors. Since good roads havebeen opened through the dales, carts of modern constructionhave followed, and these tumbrels will inawhile be no longer seen. They have, however, thisadvantage ; in descending the steep sides of the hills,their clumsy construction of axle and wheel preventsthem from running down too fast, and this is the causewhy they are still retained. And yet this difficultyof movement sometimes becomes the cause of awkwarddilemmas. These tumbrels are apt to stick in thebogs as they come down the fells, and are not easilydrawn out. We were assured that there was onethen sticking in a bog on the hills, past all chance ofrecovery ; and some wag of the dale had made thisdistich on the accident, denoting the peculiar preeminenceof clumsiness in the unfortunate vehicle."Willie O'Middlebrough's tumble-car.Many were better, and none war.With a carriage so antique, one is not surprised tofind gears of corresponding character. Consequently,as in Cornwall, so here, collars of straw and a fewropes often serve to harness out the team.As might be supposed, the inhabitants of one daleform a little community or clan where every one isknown to the rest, and where a great degree ofsociality and familiarity prevails : but the whole dalesubdivides itself again into neighbourhoods, where astronger esprit du corps exists. The dales are singularlymarked by lines of ravines and streams, whichrun down the sides of the fells from the bogs andsprings on the heights. These lines are commonlyfringed on the lower slopes by alders and other water-lovingtrees. The smaller streams are called sike,306 LIFE IN THE DALESthe larger gills, and the largest, being generally thosewhich run along the dale, backs. The space fromgill to gill generally constitutes a neighbourhood, orif that space is small, it may include two or three gills.Within this boundary they feel it a duty, establishedby time and immemorial usage, to perform all officesof good neighbourhood, and especially that of associationtogether. For instance, when a birth is aboutto take place, they have what is called a Shout. Thenearest neighbour undertakes the office of herald.She runs from house to house, through the neighbourhood,though it be dead of night, summoning allthe wives with this cry — " Run, neighbour, run, forneighbour such-a-one wants thy help — and take thywarming-pan with thee!" The consequence is, thatthe house is speedily filled with women and warming-pans;a scene ludicrous, and, one would imagine, inconvenientenough too ; but which the women of thedale all protest is a great comfort. When the childis born, there is a great ceremony of washing its headwith brandy, which is performed by the father andhis male friends, who are assembled for the occasion ;and who then fall to, and make merry over theirglasses.The assembled women regale themselves with afeast of their own kind, being a particular species ofbread made for the occasion, and sweet-butter ; thatis, butter mixed with rum and sugar, and having intruth no despicable flavour. Then comes the Wife-day,generally the second Sunday after the birth,when all the women of the neighbourhood who haveattended at the Shout, go dressed in their best, to taketea, and hold a regular gossip, each carrying with herOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 307a shilling and the news of the neighbourhood. Thehighest possible offence that can be given, is to passovera person within the understood limits of theneighbourhood — it is the dead-cut. Sometimes thereoccurs a false Shout, either through the wantonnessor malice of some ne'er-do-weel. In the night, themischievous wag runs from house to house, and callsall the good wives to the dwelling whence they arehourly expecting such a summons. When theyget there, they find it a hoax, and come under thename of May-goslings, — the term applied to thisspecies of dupe. The joke, however, is no venialone, for it is perhaps played off on a severe and tempestuousnight, and the good dames, muffled up intheir cloaks, and lantern and warming-pan in hand,have to steer their way down the sides of hills, andacross backs hidden by the drifts of snow. Similarassemblages take place at deaths, called Passings ;and at Christmas, when they eat yule bread and yulecheese, made after a particular formula.But perhaps the most characteristic custom of theDales, is what is called their Sitting, or going-sitting.Knitting is a great practice in the dales.Men, women, and children all knit. Formerly youmight have met the wagoners knitting as they wentalong with their teams ; but this is now rare ; for thegreater influx of visitors, and their wonder expressedat this and other practices, has made them ratherashamed of some of them, and shy of strangers observingthem. But the men still knit a great deal inthe houses ; and the women knit incessantly. Theyhave knitting schools, where the children are taught;and where they sing in chorus knitting songs, some308 LIFE IN THE DALESof which appear as childish as the nursery stories ofthe last generation. Yet all of them bear somereference to their employment and mode of life ; andthe chorus, which maintains regularity of action andkeeps up the attention, is of more importance than thewords. Here is a specimen.Bell-wether o' Barking,* cries baa, baa,How many sheep have we lost to-day ?Nineteen have we lost, one have we fun.Run Rockie,f run Rockie, run, run, run.This is sung while they knit one round of the stocking; when the second round commences they beginagain —Bell-wether o' Barking, cries baa, baa,How many sheep have we lost to-day?Eighteen have we lost, two have we fun.Run, Rockie, run Rockie, run, run, run ;and SO on till they have knit twenty rounds, decreasingthe numbers on the one hand, and increasingthem on the other. These songs are sung not onlyby the children in the schools, but also by the peopleat their sittings, M'hich are social assemblies of theneighbourhood, not for eating and drinking, but 'merely for society. As soon as it becomes dark, andthe usual business of the day is over, and the youngchildren are put to bed, they rake or put out the fire ;take their cloaks and lanterns, and set out with theirknitting to the house of the neighbour where thesitting falls in rotation, for it is a regularly circulatingassembly from house to house through the particularneighbourhood. The whole troop of neighboursbeing collected, they sit and knit, sing knitting-songs,A mountain over-looking Dent Dale. t The shepherd's dog.OF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 309and tell knitting-stories. Here all the old stories andtraditions of the dale come up, and they often get soexcited that they say, " Neighbours, we '11 not partto-night," that is, till after twelve o'clock. All thistime their knitting goes on with unremitting speed.They sit rocking to and fro like so many weirdwizards. They burn no candle, but knit by the lightof the peat fire. And this rocking motion is connectedwith a mode of knitting peculiar to the place,called swaying ; which is difficult to describe. Ordinaryknitting is performed by a variety of littlemotions, but this is a single uniform tossing motionof both the hands at once, and the body often accompanyingit with a sort of sympathetic action. Theknitting produced is just the same as by the ordinarymethod. They knit with crooked pins called pricks ;and use a knitting-sheath consisting commonly of ahollow piece of wood, as large as the sheath of adagger, curved to the side, and fixed in a belt calledthe rowland. The women of the north, in fact, oftensport very curious knitting sheaths. We have seena wisp of straw tied up pretty tightly, into which theystick their needles ; and sometimes a bunch of quillsof at least half-hundred in number. These sheathsand lowlands are often presents from their lovers tothe young women. Upon the band there is a hook,upon which the long end of the knitting is suspendedthat it may not dangle. In this manner they knit forthe Kendal market, stockings, jackets, nightcaps, anda kind of caps worn by the negroes, called bump-caps.These are made of very coarse worsted, and knit ayard in length, one half of which is turned into theother, before it has the appearance of a cap.310 LIFE IN THE DALESThe smallness of their earnings may be inferredfrom the price for the knitting of one of these capsbeing three pence. But all knit, and knitting is not somuch their sole labour as an auxiliary gain. Thewoman knits when her household work is done ; theman when his out-of-door work is done ; as they walkabout their garden, or go from one village to another,the process is going on. We saw a stout rosy girldriving: some cows to the field. She had all the characterof a farmer's servant ; without anything on herhead, in her short bedgown, and wooden clogs, shewent on after them with a great stick in her hand.A lot of calves which were in the field, as she openedthe gate, seemed determined to rush out, but thedamsel laid lustily about them with her cudgel, andmade them decamp. As we observed her proceedingsfrom a house opposite, and, amused at the contestbetween her and the calves, said, " well done ! dairymaid!" " O," said the woman of the house, "that isno dairy maid : she is the farmer's only daughter, andwill have quite a fortune. She is the best knitter inthe dale, and makes four bump-caps a day ;" that is,the young lady of fortune earned a shilling a-day.The neighbouring dale, Scarsdale, which is a narrowerand more secluded one than Dent, is a greatknitting dale. The old men sit there in companiesround the fire, and so intent are they on their occupationand stories, that they pin cloths on their shins toprevent their being burnt ; and sometimes they maybeseen on a bench at the house, and where they havecome out to cool themselves, sitting in a row knittingwith their shin-cloths on, making the oddest appearanceimaginable.OF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 311It may be supposed that eccentricity of character isthe growth of such a price. A spirit of avarice is oneof the most besetting evils. Many of the people areproprietors of their little homesteads; but there is nomanufacturing beyond that of knitting, and moneytherefore is scarce. As it is not to be got very easily,the disposition to hold and save it becomes proportionablystrong. They are extremely averse to suffer anymoney to go out of the dale ; and will buy nothing, ifthey can avoid it, of people who travel the countrywith articles to sell ; that would be sending moneyout of the dale ; but they will go to a shop in thedale, and buy the same thing, not reflecting that theshopkeeper must first purchase it out of the dale, andtherefore send money out of the dale to pay for it ;and that what goes out of the dale for such articlescomes back again by the sale of their horses, cattle,and sheep. A person who had been collector of thetaxes in one of these dales, described to us the excessivedifficulty he had to collect the money, even fromthose whom he knew always had it. They would putoff payments as long as possible, and when he wentand told them it was positively the last time he couldcall, they would sit doggedly, and declare that Sampsonwas strong, and Solomon was wise, but neithercould pay money when they had not it. When theysaw he would not depart, they would, at length, getup,go up stairs, where they always kept their cash.There he could hear them slowly open their chest, letdown the lid again ; open it again in awhile ; thenshut it again, and M'alk about the room as if unable topart with it. Then they would come to the top ofthe stairs, and shout down, saying they would not pay312 LIFE IN THE DALESit. Finding him still immoveable, they would comeslowly down, but still persist — " I'll nae gie it thee ! "Then perhaps soon after, as if relenting, they wouldcome towards him, open their hand with the money init, extending it towards him ; but when he offered totake it, snatch it away, saying — "Nay; truest neverhae it!" Finally they would throw it to him, andwith it abundance of angry words. We met a man ofa most gaunt and miserable appearance. A young mannot more than thirty years of age. He had all theaspect of a penurious fellow. Dirty, unshaven, withsoiled clothes and unwashed linen. He was comingalong the lane with a rude tumbril. This man was athorough miser as ever existed. He lived totallyalone. He suffered no woman to come about hishouse. If his clothes ever were washed they Meredone by himself, but he never bought an ounce ofsoap. He had bought a small property; a house andsome adjoining crofts, where he lived. From thisplace he was called Tony of Todcrofts. This manwas never known to part with money, except to thetax-gatherer. If he wanted a board put on his cart,or a nail to keep it together, he bargained with thewheelwright or the blacksmith to pay them in peat.He baked his own oatcake, and paid the miller inpeat for grinding his oats. He drank milk from hisown cow, and made his own clogs, cut from his ownalder. He contrived to purchase little, and what hedid purchase, he still paid for in peat. On the fellshe cut peat all summer, making days of uncommonlength ; and in the autumn he drew it down with asledge, and on one occasion having no horse, he carriedthe sledge, every time he reascended the hills,upon his back.OF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 313In such a place a man's appearance is no indicationof his actual condition as respects property. Menwho have good estates will be seen in a dress notworth three farthings altogether, except it were as acuriosity. They tell a story with great glee of anold Friend, John Wilkinson, dio sate in a patchedcoat on a large stone by the road-side, knitting, whena gentleman riding by, stopped and fixed his eyes onhim as in compassion, and then threw him half-a-crown.He picked it up, told him he was muchobliged to him, but added—" May be I's richer natou," and returned him the money, desiring him togive it to some one who had greater need of it. Infact, the old Friend was wealthy; and in this case hispride overcame his acquisitive propensity; but thatpropensity is unquestionably very powerful here, andanother instance may be mentioned which occasioneda good deal of laughter in the dale. An old man ofsome property having a colt which he wanted breaking,instead of putting it into the hands of the horse-breaker,thought he would break it himself, and savethe cost. Having brought it to carry him pretty well,he was desirous of making it proof against starting atsudden alarms. He therefore concerted with his wifethat she should stand concealed behind the yard gate,and as he entered on the back of his colt, should popout, and cry — Boh ! Accordingly, in he rode, outpopped the good-wife, and cried Boh ! so effectually,that the horse made a desperate leap, and flungthe old man with a terrible shock upon the pavement.Recovering himself, however, without any brokenbones, though sorely bruised and shaken, he said, ashelimped into the house — "Ah, Sally! Sally! thatVOL. I. p314 LIFE IN THE DALESwas too big a boh! for an old man, and a youngcolt!"This propensity extends too, amongst the women aswell as the men : one woman declared she would asleave part with the skin off her back, as with her money.And yet, there are things which they will not do formoney, as thousands of the poor in other districts do, —they won't work in a factory. The experiment wastried in this dale; but the people, like the French,would only work just when they pleased, and soonwould not work at all. One would have thought thatthe strong love of gain amongst them, and their industrioushabits would have insured success to such anexperiment, but they had too much love for their ownfiresides, and the enjoyment of the fresh mountain air ;the parents had too much love for their children to subjectthem to the daily incarceration amid heat, and dust,and flue from the cotton. The scheme failed; the factorystands a ruinous monument of the attempt, and thesebeautiful dales are yet free from the factory system.And yet, peaceful, and far removed as they are fromthe acts and oppressions by which the strong buildtheir houses, and add field to field, out of the toils ofthe weak, they are not unacquainted with occasionalinstances of the evils done with impunity in the nooksof the world. I do not mean to represent such spotsas Arcadia of purity and perfection. In the formerchapter, and in this, I have indicated the vices whichflourish, and the depravity which spreads in the shadeof secluded life. The worst feature of these dales isthe penurious spirit which little opportunity of profitproduces; but I do not know that this spirit is a moresordid one than pervades the lower streets and alleysOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 315of larsre towns. There is along with it a strong senseof meum and tuum ; a strong and uncorrupted moralprinciple ; and no man is in danger of either beingfilched of his purse, or if he chanced to lose it by accident,of not regaining it. As the pressure of povertynot so tremendous, so the extinction of the moralsense is by no means so great as in large towns ; and,on the other hand, how much more delightful a viewof the social life of these people we have, than of thoseof similar rank in our large manufacturing towns, andespecially amongst the lower classes of the metropolis,where they tread on each other from their multitudes,and yet, from the same cause, pass through lifestrangers to each other. Here the social sympathiesare strongly called forth ; a sort of kinship seems topervade the whole neighbourhood ; and they pass theirlives, if in a good deal of poverty, yet in mutual confidence,and very pleasant habits of association. Everyman and every spot has a name and share of distinction.Every gill and beck have their appellation, asHacker-gill; Arte-gill; How-gill; Cow-gill; Spice-gill;Thomas O' Harbour-gill; Blackstone-gill; Kale-beck;Monkey-beck. Every house has its name; — asTinkler's Budget ; Clint ; Henthwaite-Hall ; Coat-fall;The Birchen Tree; Life-Town; Revealing; BroadMere; Collins; Eben-ha; Scale-gill-foot ; Linter-bank;Hollow-Mill, — all names in Dent. Theirnames for one another are the most familiar possible ;and they use the christian names, and attach thechristian names of their fathers and mothers in sucha manner, that it is difficult to get at many peoples'surnames. They themselves know very well Johno' Davits Fletcher, Kit o' Willie, or Willie o' Kit316 LIFE IN THE DALESwillie; when if the real name of these people wereJohn Davis, Catherine Broadest, or William Thistle-thwart,they would have to consider a while who wasmeant, if asked for by these names.The dales' people have, therefore, evidently goodelements ; a strong social feeling ; great simplicity oflife and character; great honesty ; — and the extensionof the facility of voting in elections by dividing thecounties, and appointing local polling places, hasdemonstrated that they have a strong love of liberalprinciples. All that appears wanting is exactly whatis wanting in all these nooks, the introduction of moreknowledge by the diffusion of sound and cheap publications,which would at once raise the moral tone,and inspire a more adventurous disposition, as is thecase with the Scotch ; so that those who do not findprofitable employment in these pastoral dales, shouldset out in quest of more promising fields of action.As to crimes of magnitude, if you hear of them here,they are perpetrated by those in a higher class. Therewas a story ringing through one of the dales when wewere there, which if half of it were true, was badenough; and that we might arrive at as much truthas possible, we visited and conversed with those whowere apparently likeliest to know it. It was said,and this too by those who had been in daily intercoursewith the parties — that a very wealthy widowlady, who seemed to have been of weak intellect, orat least so unaccustomed to the world, and matters ofbusiness, as to become an easy prey to any cleverand designing fellow, had entrusted the managementof her affairs to a lawyer of a neighbouring town.That this lawyer twenty years ago made her will, inOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 317which he had appointed himself one of the executors,and a gentleman of high character, living at a greatdistance, the other. That he had left in the will tenper cent, on the accumulations of her income to theexecutors, besides five hundred pounds each for thetrouble of their office. That a man brought up inthe house of the lady, was left 5000Z. That from theoriginal making of the will, it appeared never to havebeen read over again at any time to the lady ; butthat she had frequently dictated or written in pencilher instructions for its alteration in many particulars,which instructions or alterations at the final reading ofthe will after her decease nowhere appeared. Thatfrom the time the will was made till that of her death,twenty years, her lawyer-executor had continuallytormented her with the fear of poverty. He hadtold her that her income did not meet her expenses ;and through these representations had induced herto curtail her charities, and to lay down her carriage.This, however, did not suffice, and his representationsmade the poor lady miserable with the constant fearof coming poverty. In an agony of feeling on thissubject, she one day sent her confidential servant tothe lawyer to order him to sell her West Indianproperty. The lawyer said, " tell your mistress fromme, that her West Indian property is not worth onefarthing." This the servant, whom we took the troubleof seeing, confirmed to us. The poor woman, hauntedwith the fear of poverty, at length took to her bed,and a few days before her death, when, indeed, herrecovery was hopeless, her lawyer appeared at herbedside and astounded her with the news, that so farfrom poverty, her West Indian property was very318 LIFE IN THE DALESlarge, and her income had actually accumulated in thefunds to the sum of 80,000Z. ! and the hypocriticalmonster, with a refinement of cruelty perhaps neverparalleled, humbly asked her, " how she would wishit disposed of?" The previous progress of the poorlady's illness, and this overwhelming intelligence,rendered any present disposal impossible. She wasthrown into the most fearful distress of mind, — andcontinually exclaiming, " O ! please God that I mightrecover, how different things should be !" died on thethird day.When the will was read, the man who had 5000Z.left him twenty years ago, found it left him still ; andyet this man had for years lost the good opinion ofthe lady, by his misconduct, and had not been permittedto come into her presence for two years. Thiswas a striking proof that her will had not of late yearsbeen adapted to her altered mind. This man, whofirst came into the lady's house as a shoe-black, orsome such thing, and had on one occasion for his misconduct,the alternative offered him either to quit herservice, or be carried up to the top of the neighbouringfell, on the back of one man and down again,Awhile he was flogged by another, and was of so basea nature that he had chosen the flagellation, and continuancein a family where he was regarded with contempt— this man had now actually purchased thelady's house of the executors, and lived in it! Wewalked past it, and naturally regarding it with a gooddeal of curiosity, a ludicrous scene occurred. I suppose,being strangers, and 1 having a moreen bag inmy hand, it was inferred from our particular observationof the place, that I was a lawyer, come down onOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE. 319the behalf of some dissatisfied expectant, to inquireinto the case. However that might be, we presentlysaw the man's wife, a very common-looking person,and appearing wonderfully out of place as the mistressof such a house, peeping at us from the windows, firston one side of the house, and then on the other, andat the same time attempting to screen herself fromview by partly unclosing the shutters, and placingherself behind them. Soon after, her daughter toocame with stealthy steps, out of the back-door, creptcautiously round the house, and posted herself behinda bush to watch us ; nor had we advanced far from theplace, when the man himself came hurrying along, andwent past us with very black and inquisitive looks.We were told that on the will being read, the otherexecutor being now present, was not more amazed atthe fact of his becoming, unknown to himself, sogreatly benefited by it, than he was at the generaldetails of it. He inquired of the lawyer if the willhad been read to the lady from time to time, in orderto see whether it might require some alteration, andbeing told by him that it had not, he seemed filledwith the utmost astonishment and indignation, andabruptly said to him — " Why, there is nothing butdamnation for you !" and with that proceeded in suchpiercing terms to shew to the lawyer the cruelty andwickedness of his conduct, that the man trembledthrough every joint. It was added that the lawyernever looked up afterwards," but M'as in the greatestdistress of mind, and daily Feasted away. That whenthe tenants of the property, some time afterwards wentto pay their rents, they found him propped up in bedwith bolsters and pillows, a most pitiable object; his3*20 LIFE IN THE DALESinkhorn stitched into the bed-quilt by him, and yethis trembling hand scarcely able to direct his pen intoit. That such was the effect of fear, and the visitingof conscience on his superstitious mind, that he drankthe water which dropped from the church-roof inrainy weather, in the hope it would do him good !This is a most extraordinary story, but we foundone of these quiet dales ringing with it from end toend, and this was the account given by most trustworthypeople, who knew the parties well, and one ofwhom was the lady's confidential servant. Amongstthe stories which we heard relating to the past state ofthese dales, was one of the murder of a Highlanddrover, in its particulars bearing a striking resemblanceto the story of Scott's, told under that title. In SwaleDale is said to be a race of gipsies, a very fine set ofpeople ; and a remarkable account was given us of oneof them, a singularly fine woman in her time, calledDance of Swaledale.They have some singular customs in these dales notyet mentioned. One is, when a sow litters, theyallow her to champ oats out of a bee-hive to make thebees lucky; and salt is thrown into the fire, with thesame object, when the bees swarm. Another of theircustoms arises out of their spirit of good neighbourhood,and mutual accommodation. In sheep-shearingtime, instead of each man shearing his flock solitarily,they combine together in troops, and go from farm tofarm, till they have completed the whole, and celebratethe end of their labours at each house, over a goodsupper given by the master.Here then I close this second chapter of the nooksof the world, bearing grateful testimony that amongstOF LANCASHIRE AND YORKSHIRE.the virtues of the dales-people, hospitality and attachmentto their pleasant hills and valleys are pre-eminent.Wherever we went we found them only too happy toshew us all the beauties of their country, the windingbacks, the scars and waterfalls, and prospects from theloftiest fells. When they had trudged with us for manya weary mile, through moss and moor, they would hangthe girdle upon the peat-fire, and in a wonderfullyshort time have those delicious little kettle-cakes, madeof pastry, and thickly dotted with currants, smoking onthe tea-table. And when you came in at a late hour,would bring you out those rural dainties, equally delicious,gooseberry tarts, with curds and cream. Longmay the simple virtues of the Dales remain, whileknowledge in its growth, roots out the more earthlytraits of character, and implants a bolder spirit ofenterprise, with the present moral integrity of mind.CHAPTER IV.OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.Our country houses, and especially the older ones,are in themselves an inestimable national treasure.A thousand endearing associations gather about them.I cannot conceive a more deeply interesting workthan a history of them which entered fully into thespirit of the times in which they were raised, andthrough which they have stood. Which should giveus a view of the national changes which have passedover them; mighty revolutions, whether abrupt andviolent, or slow and silent, in fortune, in manners,and in mind ; and still more, which should, aided byfamily paintings, family documents and traditions,unfold their domestic annals. What an openingup of the human heart would be there ! There isnothing more splendid, or surprising, or fearful, orpathetic, or happy and fanciful in romance, thanwould be there discovered. There is no success, noglory of life and action, no image of princely orbaronial power, no strange freaks of fortune, none ofthe startling, or the moving incidents of humanity buthave there enrolled themselves. What noble hearts ;OLD ENGLISH HOUSES. 323what great and pathetic spirits have dwelt at one timeor other in those old places ; and then, what beautifuland bewitching creatures have cast through them thesunshine of their presence ; have made them glad withtheir wit, and their gay fancies, and their strongaffections ; or have hallowed them with their sufferingsand their tears. O for the revelation of the fairforms ; of the scenes of successful or sorrowful love ;of the bridal and the burials; of the poetic dreamsand pious aspirations, that have warmed or saddenedthese old halls through the flight of ages ! Much ofthis is gone for ever; swept into the black andfathomless gulf of oblivion ; but enough might be recoveredto make us Mender at what has passed uponour ancestral soil, and to make us love it with a stilldeeper love. There is no portion of our nationalhistory, or point of our national character, but wouldbe brought into the sweep of such narratives, andreceive illustration from them. Our warriors, statesmen,philosophers, divines, poets, beauties, and heroinesmore admirable than beauty could make them,would all figure there.* In the galleries of many ofthese houses hang portraits to which traditions areattached that would freeze the blood, or make it dancewith ardour and delight; that would chain up thelistening spirit in breathless attention, in awe andcuriosity. In the very Writings by which the estatesare secured, in old charters, wills and other deeds,facts are traced and changes developed of the mostsingular character; and in the oral annals of the*■ Til is was written three years ago. Since then the author hasm;ide considerable progress in such a world.324 OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.families exist correlative testimonies, which have beenimprinted there by the intense interest of the circumstancesthemselves.How delightful it is to go through those hereditary-abodesof ancient and distinguished families, and tosee, in the very construction of them, images of thepast times, and their modes of existence. Here youpass through ample courts, amid rambling and extensiveoffices that once were necessary to the jollyestablishment of the age, for hounds, horses, hawks,and all their attendants and dependencies. Here youcome into vast kitchens, with fire-places at whichthree or four oxen might be roasted at once, withmantel-pieces wide as the arch of a bridge, andchimneys as large as the steeple of a country church.Then you advance into great halls, where scores ofrude revellers have feasted in returning from battle,or the chase, in the days of feudal running andriding, of foraging and pilgrimages; of hard knocksand hard lying : ere tea and coffee had supplantedbeef and ale at breakfast; ere books had charmedaway spears and targets, tennis-courts and tourneys,and political squabbles and parliamentary campaigning,the scouring of marches, and firing of neighbours'castles. Then again, you advance into tapestriedchambers, on whose walls mythological or scripturalhistories, wrought by the fingers of high-born dames,at once impress you with a sense of very still andleisurely and woodland times, when Rochford's andAlack's were not ; nor the active spirit of civilizationhad raised up weavers, and spinners, and artificers ofall kinds by thousands on thousands, by towns-fulland cities-full. And now you come to the veryOLD ENGLISH HOUSES. 325closets and bowers of the ladies themselves — scenes ofworn and faded splendour, but shewing enough oftheir original state to mark their wide difference fromthe silken boudoirs and luxurious dormitories of thefair dames of this age of swarming and busy artizans;of ample rents and city life ; instead of hunting andfighting, of wars in the heart of France, or civil warsat home, to call out the heads of houses, or perhaps,drive their families forth with fire and sword in theirabsence. Then there is the antique chapel, and thelibrary; the one having, in most cases, been desertedby its ancient faith, the other still bearing testimonyto the range of reading of our old squires and nobles,since reading became a part of their education, in afew grim folios, — a Bible, a William's Heraldry, oneor two of our Chroniclers, and a few Latin Classicsor Fathers, for the enjoyment of the chaplain.But the armoury and the great gallery — these arethe places in which a flood of historic light pours inupon you, and the spirit of the past is made so palpable,that you forget your real existence in this utilitariancentury; you forget reform in all its shapesballot, household suffrage, triennial parliaments ;you forget the cry of the church and king; and thecounter-cry from a million of eager voices, for libertyof hearth and faith; you forget that, all around you,from the very walls that surround you to the distantsea, is nothing but fields cultivated like gardens,secured by gates and fences, and tenfold more costlyand powerful parchment, to their particular owners;you forget that towns stand by hundreds, and villagesby thousands, filled with a busy, an inquisitive, areading, thinking, aspiring and irresistible population ;323 OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.and that all the institutions, the opinions, the lovesand doings of the times when these things before youwere matters of familiar life, are gone, or are going,for ever : that.Another race lias been, and other palms are won.Yes, mighty and impressive as these things are ;deeply as they visit your daily thought and nightlydreams ; woven as they are with the thread of yourexistence, and your hopes and belief of the futureages, — yes, potent as they are, they vanish for a time.Here are swords, helmets, coats of mail, and plate-armourstanding up in its own massiveness ; shellsfrom which the active bodies which moved them, havelong ago disappeared. Here are buff-coats, ponderousboots, and huge spurs ; broad hats, with sweepingfeathers, and chains of gold, crosses and amulets,which make the past for ever in time, the past for everin spirit, come back again with a vivid and intoxicatingeffect. You gaze upon arms and relics which figuredin all the battles and pilgrimages, the desperate strifeand extravagant pageants of our ancestors; you beholdthings which link your fancies to all the romantic agesof European history. You forget the present; andexist amid forests, the stern strength of castles, andthe venerable quiet of convents. You are ready tolisten to the distant bell of the abbey ; for news of thecrusaders ; you expect as you ride through the woods,to stumble upon the abode of the hermit. Thesearms and fragments before you, were in the battles ofCressy and Poictiers ; in the wars of the Roses ; inthe Tourney of the Field of the Cloth-of-Gold ; thatmail, on the back of some stout knijj:ht, climbed overOLD ENGLISH HOUSES. 327the ramparts of Salon, or of Jerusalem itself; andthose, bringing you down the stream of strange events,are the equipments of Cavaliers and of Puritan leaders,when the spirit of feudalism and that of progressioncame so rudely into strife as to shake the kingdom likean earthquake. You step into the gallery, and thereare the very men whose iron habiliments you havebeen contemplating; there are the rude portraitureof the warriors of an earlier day ; and there are theSidney, the Towards, the Essexeses and Leicester, theWarwick and Wilton, of an after one ; the men thatset up and pulled down kings, that waded through theblood of others, or that poured out their own, forhonour and liberty. You have read of some handsomeand gallant knight who wrought some chivalricmiracle, who perhaps died in its performance — he isthere ! You have glowed over the accounts of arrogantor fascinating beauties, who turned the heads of kingsand nobles — they are there ! worthy of all their fame,their very shadows filling you with sighs and dreams ofloveliness which will haunt you in the open sunshine,and amid ail the cheerful sounds of present life.But it is not merely these great historic characters.There are family ones that constitute a history amongstthemselves, most interesting and touching. Thereare the founders of those families. There is the greatminister, who once rose to the favour of his sovereign,and swayed the destinies of the kingdom ; there is thegreat churchman that climbed up from plebeian obscurityto the primacy; there is the judge who, from ayounger brother of an ancient line, became the fortunatefounder of a new one ; there are admirals,generals, and nobles, who have figured in the OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.pains of every reign. There are stern forms that weredespots in their own sphere, or calm and smiling facesthat have such blots and dark passages attached tothem as confound all your physiognomical acuteness ;and there are beautiful and gentle-looking creatures,that are most strangely tainted with blood ; noblematrons, who knew sorrows for which neither theirrank and affluence, no, nor the possessions of tenkingdoms could make recompense ; and lastly, thereare young boys and girls, that look on you with mostinnocent archness or open good-nature, which perishedlike blossoms ere fully opened, or lived to make youshudder over their remembrance.Such are many of our older houses, to say nothingof later and more splendid ones ; nothing of all themodern attractions that have been added to their ancientones ; nothing of those sumptuous places whichour nobility have raised on their estates, and filledwith all the luxurious adornments of modern life, andwith the wealth of art. And then those houses standscattered over all the kingdom, in fine old parks, ingardens of quaint alleys and topiary work ; or in thefreer beauty of modern lawns and shrubberies ; objectsof pleasure and pride to thousands beside their ownpossessors.Horace Walpole wished that they were all collectedin London, and then should we have had such a capitalas the world could not boast. Heaven forgive himfor the wish ! A splendid capital no doubt we shoiddhave had, but we should not have had such a country,such a people, such a national strength and characteras we have. It is by living scattered through therealm, amid their own people, their own lands andOLD ENGLISH HOUSES. 329woods, that our gentry have retained such high independenceof principle, and such healthy tastes as theyhave done. It is by this means that agriculture, andhorticulture, and rural architecture have been promotedto the extent they have reached ; that the whole kingdomhas become a paradise, and that the people havebeen linked to the interests of their superiors. We haveonly too many temptations already to a crowding intoour capital. A city life to a wealthy aristocracy mustbecome a life of luxury and splendour, a life of dissipationand rivalry. The enjoyments of society, ofmusic, and of public spectacles, at intervals, mightrefine the taste ; but when this species of life becomesalmost perpetual, its certain consequence must be todeteriorate and effeminate character : to weaken thedomestic attachments : to divert from, or disincline forthat sober thought and those studies which lead togreatness, or leave behind solid satisfaction. We havealready too much of this, and its effect will daily becomemore and more conspicuous, as it is of more andmore vital importance. Now, while the people arestruggling to acquire possession of rights that theylong knew not their claim to : now that they are growinginformed, and therefore quick to see and to feel —those on whom they look as their natural and powerfulrivals, are living at a distance from them : taking nomeans to conciliate their good-will, or to retain theiresteem. Their humble neighbours feel no effect fromtheir estates except the withdrawal of their rents ; andthey ask themselves what claim these people, who areliving in our great Babylon,Minions of splendour, shrinking from distress, —330 OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.have upon their veneration or regard. Is it not inthese noble ancestral houses, amid their ancestralwoods and lands, that the spirit of our gentry is mostlikely to acquire a right tone? Here, where they aresurrounded by objects and memories of worth, ofgreatness and renown, that the fire of a generous andglorious emulation is most likely to be kindled ; andthat all the best feelings of their nature are likely tobe touched, and their best affections quickened ?Even Horace Walpole himself furnishes an instancein proof. Little as he had of the pensive and poeticalin him, his visit to the family place at Houghtoncalled up such thoughts and emotions as, if encouragedinstead of avoided, might have made him awareof higher qualities in himself than he was habituallyaccustomed to display. " Here am I," says he in oneof his letters, " at Houghton ! and alone ; in this spotwhere, except two hours last month, 1 have not beenin sixteen years ! Think what a crowd of reflections!No ! — Gray, and forty church-yards could not furnishso many ; nay, I know one must feel them with greaterindifference than I possess, to have patience to putthem into verse. Here I am, probably for the lasttime in my life, though not for the last time; everyclock that strikes, tells me that I am one hour nearerto yonder church, — that church into which I have notyet had courage to enter ; where lies the mother onwhom I doated, and who doated on me ! There arethe two rival mistresses of Houghton, neither of whomeverwished to enjoy it. There too lies he, whofounded its greatness; to contribute to whose fall,Europe was embroiled. There he sleeps in quiet anddignity, while his friend and his foe, rather his falseOLD ENGLISH HOUSES. 331ally and real enemy, Newcastle and Bath, are exhausting;the dregs of their pitiful lives in squabblesand pamphlets.The surprise the pictures gave me is again renewed.Accustomed for many years to see wretcheddaubs and varnished copies at auctions, I look at theseas enchantment. A party arrived just as I did, tosee the house : a man and three women, in ridingdresses, and they rode fast through the apartments.I could not hurry before them fast enough; they werenot so long in seeing for the first time, as I could havebeen in one room, to examine what I knew by heart.I remember formerly being often diverted by this kindof seers; they come, ask what such a room is called,in which Sir Robert lay : admire a lobster, or a cottagein a market piece ; dispute whether the last roomwas green or purple ; and then hurry to the inn, forfear the fish should be overdressed. How different mysituation ! Not a picture here but recalls a history ;not one but I remember in Downing-street, or Chelsea,where queens and crowds admired them, thoughseeing them as little as these travellers.When I had drank tea I strolled into the garden.They told me it was now called the j^ieasure-ground.What a dissonant idea of pleasure ! Those groves,those alleys where I have passed so many charmingmoments, are now stripped up, or overgrown ; manyfond paths I could not unravel, though with a veryexact clue in my memory. I met two gamekeepers,and a thousand hares ! In the days when all my soulwas tuned to pleasure and vivacity, I hated Houghtonand its solitude ; yet I loved this garden ; as now,with many regrets, I love Houghton ; — Houghton, I332 OLD ENGLISH HOUSES.know not what to call it: a monument of grandeur orruin ! How I wished this evening for Lord Bute !How I could preach to him ! — The servants wanted tolay me in the great apartment — what ! to make mepass the night as I had done my evening ! It werelike proposing to Margaret Roper to be a duchess inthe court which cut off her father's head, and imaginingit could please her. I have chosen to sit in myfather's little dressing-room, and am now in his escritoire,where, in the height of his fortune, he used toreceive the accounts of his farmers, and deceive himself,or us, with the thoughts of his economy. Howwise a man, at once, and how weak ! For what hashe built Houghton ? For his grandson to annihilate,or his son to mourn over."Horace Walpole's Letters, vol. ii. pp. 227-8.Having made these preliminary observations, Iwill now give a specimen or two from my ownneighbourhood,* because necessarily more familiarwith them; let every reader throughout England lookround him in his, and he will find others as interestingthere.This and other parts of the work were written at Nottingham.CHAPTER V.Warwick HALL.Mrs. Jameson has lately given a very vivid andcharming account of this fine old place, I am notgoing to tread in her steps, but to describe the impressionit made upon myself at different times, inmy own way, and with reference to my own object.My first visit to it was when I was a youth ofabout seventeen. I had heard nothing at all of it,and had no idea that it was an object of any particularinterest. I was at Mansfield, and casually heard thatthe present Duke of Devonshire, its proprietor, wascome of age, and that there, as at his other houses,his birth-day was to be kept by his tenants and theneighbouring peasantry in the old English style.The house lies about five miles to the north of Mansfield,not far from the Chesterfield road. I set off,and learning that there was a footway, I passedthrough one or two quiet, old-fashioned villages,through solitary fields and deep woody valleys, aroad that for its beauty and out-of-the-world air delightedme exceedingly. I at length found myself atthe entrance of a large old park. The tall towers334 Warwick HALL.of the hall had been my landmarks all the way, andnow that unique building:, standing on the broad,level plain, surrounded at a distance by the old oaksof the park, burst upon me with an unexpected effect.It was unlike any thing I had seen ; but there weresolemn halls in the regions of poetry and romance,that my imagination immediately classed it amongst.I advanced toward it with indescribable feelings ofwonder and delight. I could have wished that it hadbeen standing in its ordinary solitude, for that seemedto my mind its true and natural state ; but it was notso : around it swarmed crowds of rustic revellers, andI determined to take things as I found them ; to considerthis very scene as a feature of the olden time ;and to see how it went, about the baronial dwellingsin the feudal ages, on occasions like that.It was not long before I came upon a man lying onhis face under the trees ; — he was dead drunk. Soon Ipassed another, and another, and another : a little farther,and they lay about like the slain on the outskirts ofa battle. When I came into the open plain before thehall, the sound of a band of music which had probablybeen sometime silent through the musicians themselvesdining, reached me ; I heard drunken songs and wildoutcries miuCTlino; with it. All about the lawn werescattered clustered throngs. I saw barrels standing ;spigots running; men catching their hats full, andrunning here and there, while others were snatchingat their prize, and often spilling the ale on theground. Sometimes there were two or three tryingto drink out of a hat at once ; others were stoopingdown to drink at the spigots ; there were fighting,scuffling, clamour, and confusion. All round theWarwick HALL. 335hull people swarmed like bees. At the doors andgates dense masses were trying to force their way in ;while stout fellows were thumping away at theirsculls with huge staves, with an energy that onewould have thought enough to kill them by dozens,but which seemed to make little impression.While this was going on, being a slim youth, Islipped beneath the uplifted arm of a stout yeoman,and made a safe ingress. I stood astonished at theplace into which I had entered. Those ample andlofty rooms, in which stood huge pieces of roast-beefon huge pewter dishes, and great leathern jacks,tankards, and modern jugs of ale, at which scores ofpeople were eating and drinking as voraciously as ifthey had been fasting all the one-and-twenty years tododue honour to this great birth-day ; while theservants were running to and fro, filling up foamingmeasures, which were emptied again with wonderfulrapidity. Those vast kitchens too, with their mightyfire-places, and tongs, and pokers, and spits fit for thekitchen of Polyphemus ; with broiling cooks, andhurrying menials, called on by twenty voices at once,I made my way to the front court, where, undercanvass awnings, long tables were set out for thetenantry and yeomanry of the neighbourhood, admittedby ticket. O what a company of jolly, rosy, fullgrown,well-fed fellows was there, making no shamonset on the plum-pudding and roast-beef of OldEngland ! The band kept up a triumphant din ; butwhen it ceased for a moment, what a rattle of knivesand forks, and a clatter of ale-cups, what a clamour oftongues and hearty laughter became perceptible !And all round the court, the walls were covered with336 Warwick HALL.swarms of men, that climbed up no trivial height toget a view of the jovial banquet, and many a cry wasraised to throw up thither some of those good things.And sure enough here went a piece of beef, and herea lump of pudding; and a score of hands caught atthem ; and a hundred voices joined in the roar oflaughter as they were caught, or fell back again intothe court, or flew over the wall amongst the scramblingcrowd.But suddenly there was in the midst of all thisnoise and jollity, a cry of horror ; and it was soonseen that one of the pointed stones that stand atintervals on the top of the high wall all round thecourt, had disappeared. It had given way with aman who clung to it, had fallen upon him, and killedhim on the spot. There was a momentary pausein the festivity ; a great running together to thespot of the catastrophe ; but the body was soon conveyedaway to an outbuilding, and the tide of riotrolled on. It was doomed, however, to receive asecond check ; for another man, in the wild excitementof the time, and of the strong ale, sprang at onebound over a wall that stood on the edge of a precipice,and fell a shattered corpse into the hollow below.These were awful events, and cast over some of therevellers a gloom that would not disperse ; but far thegreater part were now too highly charged with birthdayale to be capable of reflection. All around wasBacchanalian chaos. Singing, shouting, attempts atdancing, reeling and tumbling. Bodies lay thicklystrewn through court and hall, and far around on thelawn. Some gay sparks were, with mock respect,carried with much struggling and laughter, and laidWarwick HALL. 337in sheds and stables and under trees, and one specialdandy was deposited in a heap of soot. For myself,perhaps the only sober person there, I hastened away,resolving to revisit that fairy mansion in the time ofits restored quiet.And in what a far different aspect did it presentitself when I next saw it; and with what a fardifferent company did I witness it ! It was on oneof the most glorious days of a splendid summer thatwe passed under the shadow of its oaks, as happy andattached a company as ever met on earth. Ah ! theyare all dispersed now ! Out of a dozen glad hearts,not more than three are livings nom But let meforget that. We were a joyful band of tried friendsthen. All, except myself and a young Yorkshiredamsel, light as a sylph, and lovely and frolic as afairy, were in carriages ; we were on horseback ; andscarcely had we entered the park, when, as if the sightof its fine wide level had filled her with an irresistibledesire to scour across it, the madcap gave her horsethe rein, and darted away. Under the boughs of theoaks she stooped, and flew along with arrowy swiftness.Every moment I expected to see her caught by oneof them, and dashed to the ground ; but she was toopractised a horsewoman for that: she cleared the trees;the deer bounded away as she came galloping towardsthem, and turned and gazed at her from a distance ;the rooks, and days, and lapwings feeding on the turf,soared up and raised wild cries; but she sped on, andthere was nothing for me to do but to follow. Ispurred forwards, but it was only to see her rush, atthe same reckless speed, down a deep descent, whereone trip of her horse — and nothing was more likely —VOL. I. g«338 Warwick HALL.and she would have flown far over his head to certaindeath. Yet down she went, and down I followed;but ere I reached the bottom, she was uro-ino- herhorse up as steep an ascent, on whose summit, as Iapproached it, I found her seated on her panting steed,laughing at her exploit and my face of wonder.When we reached the Hall, there were all ourfriends in the court, and the kind-hearted old gentleman,the head of the party, standing at the great halldoor, laughing heartily at the attempts of each of theyoungsters in succession to walk blindfold up a singlerow of the flags that lead from the court-gates to thehouse. Every one began full of confidence ; but thelaughter and cries of the rest, soon proclaimed thefailure of the enterprise. When it came to the turnof our merry madcap, up she walked with a bold step,and course as strait as if guided by a clue, from gateto door. All at once exclaimed that she could see,and busy hands were soon at work to fasten the handkerchiefso artfully round her head, that she could notpossibly get a glimpse of daylight. Again she M'asled to the gate, and again she marched up to the dooras quickly and directly as before. The wonder wasgreat; but still it was asserted that she must see : — itwas that fine Grecian nose of hers that permitted aglance down beside it, enough for the guidance of thespirited damsel ; so handkerchief was bound on handkerchief,aslant and athwart, to exclude every possibilityof seeing; and again she was set at the gate ; andagain went gaily and confidently to the door withoutone erring footstep. There was a general murmur ofapplause and Mender. I see that light and buoyantfigure still advancing up the line of flags; I see thoseWarwick HALL. 339golden locks dancing in the sunshine as she went | Isee that lovely countenance, those blue and laughingeyes, full of a merry triumph, as her friends unboundher beautiful head. I see the same glad creature, allvivacity and happiness, now sitting on the warm turf,now bounding up long flights of stairs ; now standing,to the terror of her companions, on the jutting edge ofa ruinous tower ; — and can it be true, that that fairycreature has long been dead ! the light of thoselovely eyes extinguished ! those lovely locks soiledwith the damp churchyard earth ! Alas ! we knowtoo well how readily such things come to pass. Butno black presage came before us there. All aroundwas summer sunshine ; we explored every nook ofthat old ivied ruin, the older house of Hardvvick, inwhich the Queen of Scots was confined ; paced thecelebrated banqueting room, adorned with the figuresof Gog and Magog, with an angel flying betweenthem with a drawn sword. We rambled over theleaden roof, and in the happy folly of youth, markedeach other's foot upon it, with duly inscribed namesand date. We went all through the present house ;through its tapestried rooms, along its gallery, into itsancient chapel, and up to its armoury, a tower on theroof; and finally adjourned to the neat little inn atGlapwell, to a merry tea, and thence home.My next visit to Hardwick was last autumn. Mycompanions now were, my true associate for the lastseventeen years, and one little boy and girl, who, as weadvanced up the park, rambled on before us in eagerdelight. Twenty years had passed since that youthfulparty I have just mentioned was there; — twentyyears to me of many sober experiences ; of naturally340 Warwick HALL.extended knowledge : of observation of our old Englishhouses in various parts of the kingdom : but as I oncemore approached Hardwick, I felt that it had lostnone of its effect, — nay, that that effect was actually-increased: it was more unworldly, more unlike anythingelse, or anything belonging to common life ;more poetical, more crowned and overshadowed withbeautiful and solemn associations, than it was when Ifirst beheld it in mv youth. The distance you have toadvance, from the moment you emerge from amongstthe trees of the park into a full view of the Hall,until you reach it, tends greatly to heighten its effect.There it stands, bold and alone, on a wide unobstructedplain.No trees crowd upon it, or break, for a moment, theview; it lifts itself up in all its solemn and uniquegrandeur to the blue heavens, like a fairy palace, inthe days of old Romance. It is a thing expressly ofbv-ffone times — darkened indeed bv age, but not injured.Unlike modern mansions, you see no bustleof human life about it; no gardens and shrubberies;but wings of grey, and not very high walls, extendingto a considerable distance over the plain, from eachend of the house, inclosing what gardens there are,and paddocks. You see no offices appended, — itseems a place freed from all mortal necessities, — inhabitedby beings above them. All offices, in fact,that are not included within the regular walls of thehouse are removed to a considerable distance with thefarm-yard. As you draw near, its grave aspect strikesyou more strongly: you become more sensible of itsloftiness, of the vast size of its windows, and of thatsingular parapet which surmounts it. It is an oblongHeartsick HALL. 341building, with three square towers at each end, bothprojecting from, and rising much higher than, thebody of the building. The parapet surmounting thesetowers is a singular piece of open-work of sweepingh'nes of stone, displaying the initials of the builder,E, S. — Elizabeth Shrewsbury, — surmounted with thecoronet of an earl. On all sides of the house theseletters and crown strike your eye, and the whole parapetappears so unlike what is usually wrought instone, that you cannot help thinking that its singularbuilder, old Bess of Hardwick, must have cut out thepattern in paper with her scissors. It is difficult tosav, whether this remarkable woman had a greatergenius for architecture or matrimony. She M'as thedaughter of John Hardwick of Hardwick, and soleheiress of this estate. She married four times, alwayscontriving to get the power over her husband's estates,by direct demise, or by intermarrying the children oftheir former marriages with those of former husbands,so that she brought into the family immense estates,and laid the foundation of four dukedoms. Her geniusfor architecture is sufficiently conspicuous in thisunique pile, and by the engraving of Worksop Manorin Thornton's Nottinghamshire, as erected by her,though since destroyed by fire, a building full of thesame peculiar character. It is said that it havingbeen foretold her by some astrologer, that the momentshe ceased to build would be the moment of her death,she was perpetually engaged in building. At lengthas she was raising a set of alms-houses at Derby, asevere frost set in. All measures were resorted tonecessary to enable the men to continue their work:their mortar was dissolved with hot water, and when342 Warwick HALL.that failed, with hot ale; but the frost triumphed — thework ceased, and Bess of Hardwick expired ! Thisnoble building I trust will long continue to perpetuateher memory, lifting aloft on its parapet her conspicuousE. S.All the lower walls surrounding the courts andpaddocks, are finished with similar openwork of bandsof curved and knotted stone. A colonnade runs alongeach side of the house between the projecting towers,and the entrance-front is enclosed by that court ofwhich I have already spoken ; having its wallsmounted, at intervals, with quaint pyramidal stones.On this side of the house a fine valley opens itself,filled with noble woods, a large water, and displayingbeyond a hilly and pleasant country.At about a hundred yards from the Hall stands theremains of the old one. The progress of dilapidationupon this building, since my last visit, was striking.Then you could ascend to the leaden roof; but nowmeans were adopted to prevent that, on account of itsunsafe state ; in fact, the stairs themselves have partlyfallen in ; many of the floors of the rooms have fallenthrough; the ceiling of the celebrated banqueting-roomitself has given way by places, and in othersis propped up by stout pieces of timber. The gloryof Gog and Magog will soon be annihilated, or theywill be left on the walls, exposed to the astonishedgaze of the passer-by, as are some stucco alto-relievesof stags under forest trees on the chamber walls, withivy drooping over them from the top of the wallsabove, and tall trees that have sprung on the hearthsof destroyed rooms below, waving before them. Thisis the outward aspect of those old halls Here MaryWarwick HALL. 343Stuart, and the almost equally unfortunate ArabellaStuart, once dwelt. Within, the present hall is asperfect a specimen of an Elizabethan house, as canbe wished. " The state apartments are lofty andspacious, with numerous transom windows admittinga profusion of light. The hall is hung with verycurious tapestry, which appears to be as ancient as thefifteenth century. On one part of it, is a representationof boar-hunting, and on another of otter-hunting.In the chapel, which is on the first-floor, is a very richand curious altar-cloth, thirty feet long, hung roundthe rails of the altar, with figures of saints undercanopies wrought in needle-work. The great diningroomis on the same floor, over the chimney-piece ofwhich are the arms of the Countess of Shrewsbury,with the date of 1597. The most remarkable apartmentsin this interesting edifice are the state room, orroom of audience, as it is called, and the gallery. Theformer is sixty-four feet nine inches, by thirty-threefeet, and twenty-six feet four inches high. At oneend of it, is a canopy of state, and in another part abed, the hangings of which are very ancient. Thisroom is hung with tapestry, in which is representedthe story of Ulysses; over this are figures, rudelyexecuted in plaster, in bas-relief, amongst which isa representation of Diana and her nymphs. Thegallery is about 170 feet long and 26 wide, extendingthe whole length of the eastern side of the house ;and hung with tapestry, on a part of which is the dateof 1478."* The house has not only been kept inrepair, but exactly in the state in which its builderLj'son's Magna Britannia.344 Warwick HALL.left it, as to furniture and fitting up, with a very fewexceptions, and these in the most accordant taste.For instance, the Duke of Devonshire has broughthither his family pictures from Chatsworth, so as tomake this fine gallery, the family picture gallery.Not another painting has been suffered to enter. Hehas also now added a most appropriate feature to theentrance hall, a statue of the Queen of Scots, of thesize of life, by Westmacott. It stands on a pedestal ofthe same stone, bearing an armorial escutcheon.Mrs. Jameson expresses strongly the effect of thehuge escutcheons, the carved arms thrust out from thewall, intended to hold lights, and the great antlers, asshe first entered this hall by night ; but what wouldhave been the effect of seeing Mary Stuart herselfstanding full opposite, as if to receive her to this placeof her former captivity.* To her, and to every imaginativeperson, the effect must have been powerful, andsolemnly impressive. Gray the poet, instead of thinkingthat the Queen of Scots had but just walked downinto the park for half an hour, would have seen hervisibly here. I have seen the portraits of Queen Mary,both here and in Holyrood, but none of them giveme a thousandth part of the idea of what she musthave been, compared with this statue.With these two exceptions, both of which tend tostrengthen the legitimate influence of the place, allbesides is exactly as it was. You ascend the broad,easy oak stairs ; you see the chapel by their side, withallits brocaded seats and cushions; you advance alongvast passages, where stand huge chests filled withI do not mean literally that this house was the place of her captivity,it was the old one.Warwick HALL. 345coals, and having ample crypts in the walls for chipsand fire-wood. Here are none of the modern contrivancesto conceal these things : but they standthere before you, with an air of rude abundance, accordingwell with the ancient mixture of baronial stateand simplicity. You go on and on, through rooms allhung with rich old tapestry, glowing with pictorialscenes from scriptural or mythological history; allfurnished with antique cabinets, massy tables, highchairs covered with crimson velvet, or ornamentalsatin. You behold the very furniture used by QueenMary ; the very bed she worked with her own fingers.But perhaps that spacious gallery, extending alongthe whole front of the house, gives the imagination amore feudal feeling than all. Its length, nearly twohundred feet; its great height; its stupendous windows,composing nearly the whole front, rattling andwailing as the wind sweeps along them. What amao-munificent sough and even thunder of sound mustfill that wild old place in stormy weather. Thereyou see arranged high and low, portraits of most of thecharacters belonging to the family or history of theplace, of all degrees of execution. It is not my intentionto give any details, either of those or of the furniture; that having been done by Mrs. Jameson with theaccuracy and feeling that particularly distinguish her.1 aim only at imparting the general effect. It isenough therefore to say that there are "many beautifulwomen and brave men:" portraits of bluff HarryVIII ; those of the rival queens, Mary and Elizabeth;her keeper, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and his masculinewife, Elizabeth of Hard wick; and the philosophers,Boyle and Hobbs One interesting particular346 Warwick HALL.of Mrs. Jameson's statement, however, we could notverify : — the tradition of the nocturnal meeting of therival queens in the gallery. We never heard of itbefore ; nor could we now find, by the most particularinquiries, even among the domestics, any knowledgeof such a tradition. It was as new to them as to us ;and we therefore set it down as a pleasant poeticaltradition of the fair author's own planting.The Duke was come hither from Chatsworth, tospend a week, and he seemed to have come in thespirit befitting the place ; for there was scarcely morethan its usual establishment; scarcely less than itsusual quietness perceptible. The Duke himself wehad met on the road, and in his absence were shownthrough the apartments which he uses on these occasions;and it had a curious effect amid all this staid andsombre antiquity, to find, on a plain oak table in thelibrary, the newspapers of the day ; the Athenaeum,Court Journal, the Spectator, and Edinburgh Review;the works of Dr. Channing; and Hood's TylneyHall, just then published. What an antithesis ! whata mighty contrast between the spirit of the past andthe present ! — the life and stir of the politics and thepassing literature of the day, in a place belonging inhistory, character, and all its appointments to an ageso different, and so long gone by, with all its peopleand concerns.Nothing, perhaps, could mark more vividly the vastchanges in the manners and circumstances of differentages in England ; the wonderful advance in luxuryand refinement of the modern ones, than by passingfrom Hardwick to the old Hall of Haddon, built in1427, when the feudal system was in its strength ;Warwick HALL. 347when the manor-house was but one remove from thecastle; to visit this with its rude halls, its massivetables, its floors made from the planks of one mightyoak, its ancient arras and quaint stucco-work ; andthen pass over to Chatsworth, only a few miles distant,where to the past all the splendour of the presenthas been added ; modern architecture, and all itscontrivances for domestic convenience, comfort, andelegance ; pictures, statuary, books, magnificent furniture,glowing carpets ; everything that the art,wealth, and ingenuity of this great nation can bringtogether into one princely mansion. But as my limitsMill not admit of this, I shall content myself with asurvey of a more domestic kind, yet connected withthe poetical history of our own day — Annesley andNeu'stead.adsCHAPTER VI.ANNESLEY HALL AND HUCKNALL.Early in the spring of 1 834, we walked over fromNottingham to see Annesley Hall, the birth-placeand patrimony of Mary Chaworth ; a place made ofimmortal interest by the early attachment of LordByron to this lady, and by the graphic strength anddeep passion with which he has recorded in his poemsthis most influential circumstance of his youth.Annesley lies about nine miles north of Nottingham,itself — the scene of his first and most lastingattachment — Newstead, his patrimonial abode — andHucknall, his burial-place; forming the three pointsof a triangle, each of whose sides may be about twomiles in length. Yet although Newstead and Huck-all have been visited by shoals of admirers, thisplace, perhaps altogether the most interesting of thethree, has been wholly neglected. Few, or none ofthem, have thought it worth while to go so little outof their way to see it ; perhaps not one in a hundredhas known that it was so near ; probably to those whoinquired about it, it might be replied, " you see thatwooded ridge — there lies Annesley. You see all thatANNESLEY AND HUCKNALL. 349is worth seeing ; it is a poor tumble-down place :"and so they have been satisfied, and have returned intheir wisdom to their own place, at a hundred, or athousand miles distance. But what is still more remarkable,while Mr. Murray has sent down an artistinto this neighbourhood to make drawings of Huck-all church and Newstead for his Life and Poems ofLord Byron ; and while others have encompassed seaand land to give us thrice reiterated landscapes illustrativeof his biography and writings, and have evenpresented us with fictitious portraits of the mostinteresting: characters connected with his fortunes, —they have totally passed over Annesley as altogetherunworthy of their notice, though it is a spot, at once,full of a melancholy charm ; of a sad, yet old Englishbeauty; a spot, where every sod, and stone, and tree,and hearth is rife with the most strange and touchingmemories in human existence ; and where the genuinelikeness of Mary Chaworth, in the most lovely andhappy moments of her life, is to be found.Need I pause a moment to account for this ? Doesnot the discerning public always tread in one track?As sheep follow one leader, and traverse the heath inalong-extended line, so does the public follow thefirst trumpeter of the praises of one place. It hasbeen fashionable to visit Newstead, and it has beenvisited ; — but as Annesley was not at first thought of,it has not been visited at all. Well ! we have visitedit; and if there be any power in the most melancholyof mortal fortunes — in the retracing the day-dreamsof an illustrious spirit — in the gathering of all Englishfeelings round the strongest combination of the gloriesof nature, with the aspect of decay in the fortunes350 ANNESLEY HALLand habitation of an ancient race, we shall visit itagain and again.*TJiat wooded ridge was our land-mark from the firststep of our journey, and we soon reached HucknaU.The approach to HucknaU is pleasant ; the place itselfis a long and unpicturesque village. Count Gamba issaid to have been struck with its resemblance toMissolonghi. Thirteen years have now passed sincethe funeral of Lord Byron took place here, and yet itseems to me but as yesterday. His admirers, in afterages, will naturally picture to themselves the church,on that occasion, overflowing with the intelligent andpoetical part of the population of the neighbourhood.A poet who had spent a good deal of his boyhood andyouth in it — whose patrimonial estate lay here — whohad gone hence, and won so splendid a renown —whose life had been a series of circumstances andevents as striking and romantic as his poetry — whohad finally been cut down in his prime, in so brilliantan attempt to restore the freedom and ancient gloryof Greece — would naturally be supposed to comeback to the tomb of his ancestors, amidst the confluenceof a thousand strongly-excited hearts. But itwas not so. There was a considerable number ofpersons present, but the church was by no meanscrowded, and the spectators were, with very few exceptions,of that class which is collected by idle curiosityon the approach of any not very wonderful procession ;who would have collected to gaze as much at thefuneral of his lordship's grandfather, or his own, thoughSince this was published in the Athenaeum in the autumn of1834, Washington living has published his interesting visit to New-steadand Annexed.AND HUCKNALL. 351he had not written a line of poetry, or lifted the swordof freedom ; — probably, with threefold eagerness atthat of a wealthy eit, because there would have beenmore of bustle and assuming blazonry about it. Withthe exception of the undertaker's hired company ; ofSir John Cam Hothouse, and his lordship's attorney,Mr. Hanson ; his Greek servant Vita, and his old followerFletcher, the rest of the attendants were thevillagers, and a certain number of people from Nottingham,of a similar class, and led by similar motives.There was not a score of those who are called "therespectable " from Nottingham ; scarcely one of thegentry of the county. This strange fact can only beaccounted for by the circumstance that Nottinghamand its vicinity are famous for the manufacture of laceand stockings, but, like many other manufacturing-districts,possess no such decided attachment toliterature. Many readers there are, undoubtedly, inboth town and country, but readers chiefly for pastime— for the filling up of a certain space between andafter business — and a laudable way too of so filling it;but not readers from any unconquerable passion for,or attachment to, literature for its own sake. A fewliterary persons have lived in or about the neighbourhood,but these are the exception ; the character ofthe district is manufacturing and political, but by nomeans literary, nor ever was ; therefore, the strongestfeeling with which Lord Byron was regarded there,was a political one. Though an aristocrat in birthand bearing, he was a very thorough radical in principle.Hence, he had only the sympathy of theradicals with him, those consisting chiefly of theworking classes. The whigs of the town and the352 ANNESLEY HALL.gentry of the county, chiefly tories, regarded him onlyin a political light, and paid him not the respect oftheir presence.The religious world had a high prejudice againsthim for his manifold sins of speech, opinion, and life ;they of course were not there. No party had so muchmore admiration of genius — conception of the lofty,intellectual achievements of the noble poet, discernmentof the abundant qualifying, and, in fact, overbalancinggrace and beauty, and even religious sentiment,which breathed through many of his writingsfor no man had more ennobling and truly religiousfeelings rooted in his soul by the contemplation of themagnificence of God's handiwork in creation ; or feltoccasionally, more deeply the spiritualizing influencethat pervades nature ; — no party had so much moreof this tone of mind, than of their political or sectarianbias, as to forget all those minor things in hiswonderful talent — his early death — his redeemingqualities, and last deeds — and the honour he had conferred,as an everlasting heritage, on this country.In the evening, after the people who had attendedthe funeral were dispersed, I went down to the churchand entered the vault. There was a reporter fromone of the London newspapers, copying the inscriptionson the coffins, by the light of a lamp ; and agreat hobble-de-hoy of a farmer's lad was kneeling onthe case that contained the poet's heart, and lollingon the coffin with his elbows, as he watched the reporter,in a manner that indicated the most perfectabsence of all thought of the place where he was, orthe person on whose remains he was perched.In the church-yard, a group of the villagers wereAND HUCKNALL. 353eagerly discussing the particulars of the funeral, andthe character of the deceased. One man attempted toaccount for the apparently indifferent manner in whichthe clergyman performed the burial service, by hishaving understood that he felt himself disgraced byhaving to bury an atheist, "An atheist !" exclaimedan old woman, "tell me that he was an atheist ! D'yethink an atheist would be beloved by his servants asthis man was? Why, they fret themselves almost todeath about him. And d'ye think they would havemade so much of him in foreign parts? Why, theyalmost worshipped him as a god in Grecian !" givingthe final a a sound almost as long as one's finger.This was conclusive — the wondering auditors hadnothing to reply — they quietly withdrew their severalways, and I mine.The church was broken into soon after the funeral,and the black cloth with which the pulpit was hung onthis occasion, carried away : and this is not the onlyforcible entry that has been made through LordByron's being buried there ; for the clerk told me,that when Moore came to see it, with Colonel Wild-man,being impatient of the clerk's arrival, who livesat some distance, the poet had contrived to climb uptoa window, open it, and get in, where the worthybearer of the keys found him, to his great astonishment.The indifference shewn by the people of Nottinghamtowards the great poet, would not seem to have abated,if we are to judge by the entries in an album kept bythe clerk, and which was presented for that purposeabout twelve years ago by Dr. Boring. The signaturesof visitors in 1834 amounted to upwards of eight354 ANNESLEY HALLhundred, amongst which appear the names of peoplefrom North and South America, Russia, the Indiesand various other distant places and countries, but fewfrom Nottingham or its shire, who might be supposedto be amongst the best read and best informed portionof its population. This, however, must be allowed,that the names entered in the clerk's book afford nojust criterion of the number or quality of the visitorsto the poet's tomb, as many of the most poetical andrefined minds might naturally feel reluctant to placetheir signatures in such a medley of mawkish sentimentas is always found in such albums. A few clergymen,we, however, M^ere pleased to see, had thereplaced their names; and some dissenting ministershad ventured so far as to do likewise, and to preachsome pretty little sermons over him in the book, whichopens thus :TO THEImmortal and Illustrious FameOFLORD BYRON,THE FIRST POET OF THE AGE IN WHICH HE LIVED,THESE TRIBUTES,WEAK, AND UNWORTHY OF HIH,BUT IN THEMSELVES SINCERE,Are Inscribed,WITH THE DEEPEST REVERENCE.July, 1825.At this period no monument — not even so simple aslab as records the death of the humblest villae-er inthe neighbourhood, — had been erected to mark thespot in which all that is mortal of the greatest man ofour day reposes ; and he has been buried more thantwelve months. — July 1825.AND HUCKNALL. 355So should it be : let o'er this graveNo monumental banners wave ;Let no word speak — no trophy tellAught that may break the charming spell,By which, as on this sacred groundHe kneels, the pilgrim's heart is bound.A still, resistless influence,Unseen, but felt, binds up the sense ;While every whisper seems to breatheOf the mighty dead who sleeps beneath.And though the master-hand is cold,And though the lyre it once controlledRests mute in death ; yet, from the gloomWhich dwells about this holy tomb.Silence breathes out more eloquent.Than epitaph or monument.One laurel wreath — the poet's crown —Is here by hand unworthy thrown ;One tear that so much worth should die.Fills, as I kneel, my sorrowing eye ;This the simple offering.Poor, but earnest, which I bring.The tear has dried ; the wreath shall fade,The hand that twined it soon be laidIn cold obstruction — but the fameOf him who tears and wreath shall claimFrom most remote posterity.While Britain lives, can never die! — J. B.The following list contains almost all the namesthat are known to the public, or are distinguished byrank or peculiarity of circumstance ; —The Count Pietro Gamba, Jan. 31st, 1825.The Duke of Sussex visited Lord Byron's tomb, October 1824.Lieut-colonel Wildman.Lieut Colonel Charles Lallemand.The Count de Blankets, Chamberlain to the King of Prussia,Sept. 7th, 1825.1825, Sept. 2-3. William Fletcher visited his ever-to-be-lamentedlord and master's tomb.356 ANNESLEY HALL.1825, 10th itiontli. Jeremiah WifFen, Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire.1826, July 30. C. R. Pemberton, a wanderer.1828. Jan. 21. Thomas Moore.Sept. 12. Sir Francis S. Darwin, and party,Nov. 21. Lieut-Colonel D'Aguilar.Eliza D'Aguilar.Dec. 1. Lieut-Colonel James Hughes, of Llysdulles.1829, Sept. 3. Lord Byron's Sister, the Honourable Augusta MaryLeigh, visited this church,1831, May 17. Rev. Joseph Gilbert, Nottingham.Ann Gilbert, (formerly Ann Taylor of Ongar).Aug. 22. Lieut-gen. and Mrs. Need, Fountain Dale,1832, Jan. 8. M. Van Buren, Minister Plenipotentiary from theUnited States.Washington Irving.John Van Buren, New York, U. S. America.Dec. 27. Lady Famine, Glendale.1834, Feb. 15. Domingo Maria Ruin de la Vega, Ex Deputy of theSpanish Cortes, from Granada.Feb. 2.3. J. Cellars, Esq., visited Newstead Abbey, and LordByron's tomb, such as it is — one of his greatestadmirers of the day !W. Arundel, of London, accompanied the said J. B. !March 8. J. Murray, Jun., Albemarle Street, London,Although we did not, at this time, enter even thechurchyard, thoughts and feelings which had presentedthemselves in this very spot, on the day ofLord Byron's funeral, again returned.His birth, his death, dark fortunes, and brief life,Wondrous and wild as his impetuous lay.Passed through ray mind ; his wanderings, loves, and strife ;I saw him marching on from day to day :The kilted boy, roaming mid mountains grey ;The noble youth, whose life-blood was a flame,In the bright land of demi-gods astray ;The monarch of the lyre, whose haughty nameSpread on from shore to shore, the watchword of all fame ;ANNESLEY HALL. 357And then, a lifeless form ! The spell was broke ;The wizard's wild enchantment was destroyed ;He who at will did dreadful forms invoke,And called up beautiful spirits from the void,Back to the scenes in which he early toyed,He came, but knew it not. In vain earth's bloom —In vain the sky's clear beauty, which oft buoyedHis spirit to delight ; an early doomBrought him in glory's arms to the awaiting tomb.He lies — how quietly that heart which yetNever could slumber, slumbers now for aye !He lies — where first, love, fame, his young soul setWith passionate power on flame ; where gleam the greyTurrets of Newstead, through the solemn swayOf verdurous woods ; and where that hoary crownOf lofty trees, " in circular array,"Shrouds Mary's Hall, who thither may look down,And think how he loved her, ay, more than his renown.ANNESLEY HALL.From Hucknall we ascended chiefly through open,wild lands: — to our right the wooded valley of New-stead,every moment spreading itself cut more broadly;and before us the forest heights of Annesley, growingmore bold and attractive. A wild gusty breeze, anddark flying clouds, added sensibly to the deep solitudeand picturesque character of the scene. We soonpassed a cottage, having beside it an old brick pillarsurmounted with a stone ball, and before it an avenueof lime trees, which appeared some time to haveformed the boundary or place of entrance to the park;then a new lodge, and found ourselves at the foot ofthe steep hill, styled in Byron's DreamA gentle hill,Green, and of mild declivity.358 ANNESLEY HALL.The greenness and mildness of declivity, however,we afterwards found were on the side by which Byronand Mary Chaworth had ascended it from her house ;on this side it is a remarkably barren and extremelysteep hill. However, up we went, and on the summitdiscovered the strict accuracy of his delineation of it.I saw two beings in the hues of youth,Standing upon a hill, a gentle hill,Green, and of mild declivity ; the last,As 't were the cape of a long ridge of such.Save that there was no sea to kve its base.But a most living landscape, and the waveOf woods and cornfields, and the abodes of menScattered at intervals, and wreathing smokeArising from such rustic roofs : — the hillWas crowned with a peculiar diademOf trees in circular array, so fixed.Not by the sport of Nature, but of man.A most living landscape it is indeed, including allthe objects so vividly here given ; amongst them, themost conspicuous, the house of his living ancestors,and the house where he has joined them in death;and extending from the woody skirts of SherwoodForest to the mill-crowned heights of Nottingham.By the way, a strange mistake of Moore's here presenteditself. Immediately after the passage justquoted, Byron proceeds to speak further of this young-pair,and says : —Even now she loved another,And on the summit of that hill she stood.Looking afar, if yet her lover's steedKept pace with her expectancy, and flew.Moore, commenting on this, tells us that the imageof the lover's steed was suggested by the Nottinghamrace-ground, — a race-ground actually nine miles oiF,ANNESLEY HALL. 359and moreover lying in a hollow, and totally hiddenfrom view ; had the lady's eyes, indeed, been so marvellouslygood as to discern a horse nine miles off?Mary Chaworth, in fact, was looking for her lover'ssteed along the road as it winds up the common fromHucknall.But a stranger discovery soon made us forget thisIrish hull. We had no sooner reached the summit ofthe hill, than to our inexpressible astonishment wefound the very trees so strikingly pointed out in thismost interesting poem, " the trees in circular array" —cut down ! These trees, and none else, cut down !There were the trees crowning the whole length ofthe " long ridge" standing in their grayness ; andthere were the stumps of " the trees in circular array"in the earth at our feet ! An immediate and irresistableconviction forced itself on our minds; but wewrite it not; we merely state the fact, that thatmemorable landmark of love, made interesting to everyage by the poetry of passion, had been removed.Our indignation may be imagined when we foundthat not only had the trees been cut down, but therewas an actual attempt to cut down the hill itself, bymaking a gravel-pit there ; — of all places in the world,to think of making a gravel-pit on the top of thatsteep hill, when it might be got from the bottom ofany hill in the neighbourhood. We have since beentold that it was the intention of its present possessor,the husband of Mary Chaworth, to have cut down allthe trees upon that hill ; but that his design wasprevented by the interference of his eldest son, towhom the estate descends by entail ; and that he wascompelled by the spirited conduct of the son, to plant360 ANNESLEY HALL.the hill afresh ; but he has complied with the letter,overlooking the spirit of the agreement, in the mostperfect style, having planted the sides of the hill alloverwith fir-trees, so that it will in a short timeshroud the place, and smother it completely from theview.*The indignation we felt on this occasion, perhaps,made us more sensibly alive to the character of theplace. Byron, in some juvenile verses, exclaims —Hills of Annesley, bleak and barren.Where my thoughtless childhood strayed,How the northern tempests warring,Howl above thy tufted shade.So Strongly did the wind drive over this ridge, thatwe could scarcely make head against it ; and rememberingto have heard of a temple which formerlycrowned this hill, but had been blown down either bytempest or war, we looked amongst the broken ground,and perceived considerable remains of masonry, probablythe foundations of the temple : nor can a finersituation for such an erection be imagined.The trees which crowned " the ridge," and which,at a distance, appeared large, we soon saw, were ofstunted growth, with tops curled, and sturdy, as ifaccustomed to wrestle with the tempests. An avenueof them stretched away into distant woods. Largedecayed branches lay here and there beneath, indicatinga solitude and neglect of the place pleasing toMentioning the felling of these trees to a mechanic soon afterwards,— " Trees," I added, " that might be seen so far." " Seen,sir!" he exclaimed, "those trees were seen all over the world!" Hemeant through the medium of Byron's poetry. It was an expression,and accompanied by energy of feeling, that would have done honourto any man.ANNESLEY HALL. 361the imagination. Before us, across a descendingslope — the hill of mild and green declivity — extended,right and left, noble woods ; and in the midst of them,in the midst of a smaller crescent of wood, we descriedthe tall grey chimneys and ivy-covered walls andgables of the old Hall, and the top of the church-tower.We hastened down, observing on our left, inan old forest-slope, a large herd of deer, which had agood effect, — and struck into a footpath that leddirectly up towards the house. As we drew nearer,the old building, hung with luxuriant Ivy and shroudedamong tall trees, far over-topping its tall chimneys;amid shrubberies of wondrous growth of evergreens,among which are conspicuous, three remarkableilexes, with black-green foliage crowning their shortthick black trunks, and with grassy openings slopingdown to the warm south — struck us forcibly with itspicturesque and silent beauty. We found ourselvesnow, apparently at the back of a high garden-wall, bythe side of which ran a row of lime trees, whichseemed at one time to have been pollarded andtrained espalier-wise, but had now sent up heads of aluxuriant and fantastic growth. On our other hand,lay a wood, from which the thickets being clearedaway, left us ample view of its ivy-mantled trees, andthe ground beneath them one green expanse of dog's-mercuryand fresh leaves of the blue-bell. Tufts ofprimroses were scattered all about, and the wood-anemonestrembled in the wind. But over all, sucha mantle of deep silence seemed cast, that it re-funded us of some enchanted place in the fairy andforest-stories of Tieck.VOL. 1. u3G2 ANNESLEY HALL.At the top of this road, turning suddenly to theleft, we found ourselves beforeThe massy gate of that old hall,from which Byron declares that,Mounting his steed he went his way,And ne'er repassed that hoary threshold more.But all was silent and lifeless. No person was to bediscerned in the court to which it opened ; there wereno signs of life except in the cooing of some pigeonsand the cawing of certain jackdaws. We wentround the outbuildings into the churchyard, which islevel with the top of the court-wall, and looks directlyinto it. We leaned over a massy parapet, and lookeddown into this court; the spell of an invincible silenceseemed to cover the whole place. In the gravelwalks which ran round the court, there were traces ofcarriage wheels; but you felt as if no carriage withthe bustle and vivacity of active life could ever moreenter there. In the centre of the grass-plot, a basin,surrounded by a hedge of honeysuckle, and whichhad doubtless once possessed the life and beauty of afountain, now shewed only water, black, stagnant, andcovered with masses of yellow moss. We were closeto the house ; its curtained windows gave it an airof habitation ; but no sound nor visible indication ofthe presence of man was about it. We walked alongthe green and picturesque churchyard : the back ofthe buildings on this side of the court bounded part ofit ; they videre in the last state of decay ; wide gaps inthe roof gave us a view into dark and dreary stables.We came to the farm-yard, also joining the churchyard: it had the same aspect of desertion. ThereANNESLEY HALL. '3QSaras neither cattle nor ricks in it, but the brandreth,or frame on which a rick once stood, littered withdecaying straw, and its air of desolation made morestriking by a piece of old wooden balustrade cast uponit. There were barn-doors standing wide open ;and the litter of the yard even appeared dusty andgrey with age. You felt sure no human foot couldhave disturbed it for years. We descended from thechurchyard, and went round the farm-buildings oncemore towards the old "massy gate." At the back ofthese buildings were nailed the trophies of the gamekeeperby hundreds, we might, we think, say thousands;wild cats, dried to blackness, stretched theirdownward heads and legs from the wall ; hawks,magpies, and jays, hung in tattered remnants; butall grey and even green with age ; and the heads ofbirds in plenteous rows, nailed beak upward, weredried and shriveled by the sun, and winds, and frostsof many summers and winters, till their distinctivecharacters were lost. They all seemed to speak thesame silent language : — to say, Ay, this was once theabode of a prosperous old family ; here were abundanceof friends, and dependents going to and fro ;horses and hounds going forth in vociferous joy ;abroad was the chase and the sound of the gun, —within were spits turning, and good fellowship ; butall this is long since over — a blight and a sorrow havefallen here.We now approached the " massy gateway" by awide entrance, which a pair of great doors had onceclosed — one of these had fallen from its hinges, andthe other swung in the wind, banging against its postwith a hollow sound, whose echoes told of vacancy.364 ANNESLEY HALL.Above the gateway, the vane on the cupola turned toand fro in the gusty air, with a dreary queen-quake,queen-quake : all besides was still. We stood andlooked at each other with an expression that said —Did you ever see anything like this? At this momentan old grey dog came softly out of the court —the first living thing we had seen, except the jackdawsand the pigeons; quietly he came, as if he too feltthe nature of his abode. It was with no vivacity ofaction, or noisy bark : he stood and silently waggedhis tail ; and as we drew near him, as silently retreatedinto the court. We entered this silent place,and looked around. The house formed its westernend; stables and coach-houses formed its north andeastern sides; the south was open to the shrubbery.The ivy hung in huge masses from all the walls. Inthe eastern end was the " massy gateway" mentionedby Byron, arched over, and surmounted by a clockand cupola. So profoundly lifeless and desertedseemed the place, that though the clock-finger pointedto the true time of the day — exactly half-pasttwelve o'clock — our imaginations refused for sometimeto believe that the clock could actually be going:we felt positive astonishment when it proved to usthat it really did.M'^e now resolved to ascertain at the house itself, ifit had any living inhabitants; and on approaching thehall-door, we heard a sound in a stable ; we went in,and descried, in a dismal room adjoining it, a mansitting by a fire in a corner, and a dog lying on thehearth. The man and the place were alike forlorn.They were dirty, squalid, desolate. We had said,who could have supposed so abandoned a spot so nearANNESLEY HALL. 3G5Nottingham ? but who could have imagined so wildand banditti-like a being, as that man within so shorta distance of a large town? His dress and personhad every character of reckless neglect ; his blackhair hung about his pale face; he had no handkerchiefabout his neck ; he sate and devoured his dinner,which he appeared to have cooked with his own hands,looking up at us with a ruffian stupidity, as he answeredour questions with a surly bluntness, withoutceasing to help himself, with a large pocket-knife,and no fork, to his meal. He told us we could notsee the house — master never let it be seen. Whenasked, why? he could not tell — but it was so; butwe might ask the old woman in the house. Away wewent, and a jewel of an old woman we found.She was the very beau ideal of an old servant; allsimplicity, fidelity, full of the history of the family ;wrapped up in its fortunes and its honours — a part andparcel of the race and place, for she had been in thefamily above sixty year's,— being taken, as she said,when she was ten years old, by Mary Chaworth'sgrandfather, and put to school, and taught to read andwrite, to mark and to flower ; for she would, he said,be a nice sharp girl to wait on him. " Oh ! he was apretty man — a very pretty, well-behaved gentleman,"said she with a sigh. Old Nanny Maryland, for suchvas her name, seemed a pure and unsophisticatedcreature; the regular influx of visitors had not spoiledher ; the curious and the pert, and the idle, the insolentand the foolish, had not troubled the clear sincerecurrent of her thoughts ; had not made her heart andspirit turn inward, in self-defence, and converted herinto the subtle and parrot shew-woraan.366 ANNESLEY HALL.She never dreamt of anything being blameable thathad been done by any of the family. She delightedto talk of the Hall and its people ; and feeling hersolitude, — for she was the sole regular occupant, —some one to talk to was a luxury. Could we havehoped for a creature more to our hearts' desire ?Under her guidance we progressed through this mostinteresting old place ; thoughts and feelings, never tobe forgotten, springing up at every step.The house is not large ; and desertion had stampedwithin, the same characters as on all without. Damphad disfigured the walls; a fire of cheerful pine-logsblazed in the hall and in the kitchen ; but everywhereelse was the chill and gloom of the old neglectedmansion. All the more modern furniture, and mostof the paintings, had been removed, and thereby thekeeping of the abode was but the better preserved.We know not how to describe the feelings with whichwe traversed these rooms. It was as if the hall ofone of our old English families had been hidden beneatha magic cloud for ages, and suddenly revealed toour eyes, now, at a time when everything belonging tothis country is so much changed ; — houses, men, mannersand opinions. When we entered the old-fashionedfamily hall, standing as it stood ages ago, furnished asit was ages ago, with its antique stove, its antique sofas,if so they can be called, made of wood carved, andcuriously painted, and cushioned with scarlet, standingon each side of the fire; the antique French time-pieceon its bracket ; its various old cabinets and tables standingby walls ; and its floor of large and small squares ofalternating black marble and white stone — the domesticsanctuary of a race whom we regard as our HALL. 367senators, but widely different to ourselves, seemedsuddenly revealed to us, and we could almost haveexpected to see the rough, boisterous squire, or thestately baron, issue from one of the side-doors ; or tohear the rustling of the silken robe of some long-waiteddame, who could occasionally leap a five-barredgate as readily as she could dance at theChristmas festival ; or one of high and solemn beauty,in whom devotion deep, inquiring and undoubting,was the great principle and passion of life ; to whomthe domestic chapel was a holy place ; the chaplainher daily counsellor ; and the distribution of alms herdaily occupation. We saw before us the hearthstoneof a race that lived in the full enjoyment of aristocraticascendancy, when rank was old and undisputed ;when neither mercantile wealth had pressed on theirnobility on the one hand, nor popular knowledge andrio-its on the other; dien the gentry lived only to bereverenced and obeyed, every one in the midst of hisown forests and domains as a king, and led forth histenants and serfs to the wars of his country, or to thechase of his own wide wilds ; when field sports andjovial feasting, and love-making, were the life-employmentof men and women, who took rank andpower as an unquestioned heritage, and never troubledtheir brain with gathering knowledge : and allbelow them were supposed to be happy, because theyvere ignorant and submissive.This hall which occupies the centre of the building,is nearly sixty feet long by thirty wide, supported bytwo elliptic arches and Ionic pillars. The middle ofthe room is now occupied by a billiard table, whichformerly stood in an upper room, called the terracesANNESLEY HALL.room, of which we shall speak presently. At thelower end of this hall an easy flight of steps leads tothe upper apartments. Near the fire, at the upperend, a few steps lead into a beautiful little breakfast-room,which looks out into the garden, and forms oneof the projections of the building, the staircase at thelower end forming the other : the three large, old-fashionedwindows which light the hall, lying on thisside, and looking out into a little parterre, fenced offwith a trellis-fence, even with the two projections wehave spoken of — such a parterre as one often meetswith, belonging to old houses — a little favouredsanctuary of garden-ground, where choice flowerswere trained, and which was the especial care of pageand gardener, before ladies took to gardening themselves.This, which is now a perfect wilderness,almost overrun with shrubs and the tall tree-likelaurels which encumber wall and window, and almostexclude daylight from the hall, to the great annoyanceof our good old woman, was once, as was fitting, thefavourite flower-garden of Mary Chaworth.The little breakfast-room we mentioned, looks outnot only by a side window into the parterre, butalso by two large, low windows into the garden ; afine old garden, with a fine stately old terrace, one ofthe noblest it was ever our good fortune to see, andsuch a one as Darby or Turner would be proud toenrich their fine pictures with. In this room were afew family portraits. One a small full-length figure,which the old woman very significantly told us wasByron's Chaworth; that is, the Chaworth killed bythe poet's grandfather in a duel. Another portraitshe informed us was the last Lord Chaworth ; for thisANNESLEY HALL. 369estate, which had been in the family of the Annesleysfrom the time of the Conquest, came into that of LordViscount Chaworth of Armagh, in Ireland, by themarriage of one of his ancestors with the sole heiress,Alice de Annesley, in the reign of Henry VI. " Andthis," she said, pointing to a female portrait, " was hislawful wife." " What then," we said, " there was anunlawful wife, was there?" " Yes," she added, "sheis here." We glanced at the picture placed in theshady corner by the window, next, however, to LordChaworth, and exclaimed, " and a good judge was hisLordship too !" A creature of most perfect and wondrousbeauty it was that we beheld. What a fine,rich, oval countenance, and noble forehead slightlyshaded by auburn locks ! what large dark eyes of inexpressibleexpression ! what a soft, delicate, yetbeautiful and sunny complexion ! what a beautifulrounding of the cheek, chin, and throat ! what exquisitefeatures ! Mdiat a perfect mixture of nobility ofmind, with elegance and simplicity of taste. Neverdid we behold a more enchanting vision of youthand beauty ; and all this hidden for generations in adark nook of this old hall, unmentioned, and unknown.It were worth a journey from London butto gaze upon. Beautiful as this portrait is, it representsa mole upon either cheek ; but this, instead ofdetracting from the loveliness of the face, as might beimagined, only appears to give it character and individuality,and vouches for the fidelity of the likeness.The painting, too, is extremely well done ; far superiorto anything else in the house, except it be thesatin petticoat of a Miss Burnett in the terrace-room.And who," we inquired, *' was this charming cream370 ANNESLEY HALL.ture ?" " She was a girl of the village, sir," was thereply. " What ! could the village produce a creaturelike her?" "Yes: his Lordship took her into thehouse as a servant; but she did not like him, andwent away : however, he got her afterwards, andbuilt a house for her on the estate, and she had onechild. But she died, poor thing ! all was not rightsomehow ; and all her money she put in a cupboardfor her son, — they would shew you the cupboard in thehouse to this day; and on the very night she died,her own relations came and took away the money ; —things weren't as they should have been, poor thing !and she came again." " What, was this the lady thatwe have heard an old man say, came up out of a wellandsat in a tree by moonlight, combing her hair ?"No, Lord bless you ! that was another ; but theparson laid liei\ and the well is covered in ; but forall that she walks yet !" We smiled at the goodwoman's very orthodox belief in ghosts ; but we knownot Mither we should not be apt to catch the contagionof superstitious feeling, if we Averse to dwell allalone in this old house as she does, and hear the windshowling and sighing about it at night ; the long ivyrustling about the windows, and dashing against thepanes ; and the owls hooting about in many a wild,piercing, and melancholy tone; and feel oneself in theparticipated solitude of those ancient rooms, withalltheir strange and sad memories.Besides this portrait of the beautiful and unhappyMrs. Miller, we bestowed a look of great interest onone of much attraction, the daughter of ViscountChaworth — not beautiful, but full of the fascination ofcultivated mind, and of a heart so living and loving,ANNESLEY HALL. 371that it caused the eyelids to droop over their beamy-orbs,with an expression that made you tremble forthe peace of its possessor. One other picture attractedour attention from its singularity. It represents alandscape, apparently, " the hill of green and milddeclivity," the line of trees, and the trees in circulararray, from among which rises the temple we spokeof before, and which our cicerone assured us had beenconsidered " the finest in all England, but had beenblown down in Oliver Cromwell's days." In theforeground stands, as if painted in enamel, a gentlemanin a strange sort of dress-jerkin, of white satin,with a short petticoat of purple velvet bordered withgold lace. On his right hand his amazonian lady,half the head taller than himself, clad in a riding-dressof green, bordered likewise with gold-lace ; and oneither side of them a son, in the full-dress of Williamand Mary's reign ; with powdered wigs, long-lappedscarlet coats, waistcoats, and breeches, with white silkstockings on their neat little legs, and lace raises attheir hands, each with his little head turned on oneside ; — the one caressing a fawn, the other a greyhound; and the family group completed by the groomstanding a little behind, holding the lady's paltryready saddled for her use. These, and a portrait of theson of Lord Chavvorth, are all the family pictureswhich the house contains.Leaving then this room, we re-crossed the hall, andascending the staircase at the lower end, entered thedrawing-room, which is over the hall — a handsomeroom, and the best furnished in the house. The mostinteresting piece of furniture it contains, or perhaps,which the house itself contains, is a screen coveredANNESLEY HALL.over with a great number of cuttings in black paper,done by a Mrs. Goodcliild, and representing a greatvariety of family incidents and character — those littlepassing incidents in life, Mdiich, though rarely chronicled,are most influential on its fortunes — on whichoften its very destiny hangs. The receipt of a letter— the first meeting — the last parting — how muchdo these things involve ! Here we were introducedto Mary Chaworth, the lovely and graceful maiden,full of hope, and life, and gaiety; with her friends anddependents about her; at the very time when LordByron became attached to her. Of the accuracy ofthis likeness we have no doubt, from the wonderfulfidelity of some of the others, with whose persons weareacquainted.In one place she is represented as sitting in a room,her attitude one of terror. A man is before herpresenting a pistol, and a little terrified page isconcealing himself under a table. In another shesits with her mother and a gentleman at tea ; afootman behind waiting upon them. Again, she is inANNESLEY HALL. 37-)the gardens or grounds, walking with leer cousin,Miss Bradford ; her rustic hat thrown back upon hershoulders ; her beautiful head turned aside ; and herhand put forth to receive a letter from a page, kneelingon one knee, — a letter from her lover and subsequenthusband.Again, she is playing with a little child ; and in all,her figure is full of exquisite grace and vivacity, andthe profile of the face remarkably fine. It is impossibleto say with what intense interest we examinedthese memorials of private life ; these passages so fullof vitality and character, incidental, but important —the very essence of an autobiography.From the drawing-room we passed to the one calledthe terrace-room, from its opening by a glass doorupon the terrace, which runs along the top of thegarden at rio^ht angles with the house, and level withthis second story, descending to the garden by adouble flight of broad stone steps, in the middle of itslength, which is about eighty yards. This roomformerly contained the billiard table, and in it MaryChavvorth and her noble lover passed much time. Hewas fond of the terrace, and used to pace backwardsand forwards upon it, and amuse himself with shootingwith a pistol at a door. It was here that she last sawhim, with the exception of a dinner-visit, after hisreturn from his travels. It was here that he took hislast leave of Mary Chaworth, whenHe went his way,And ne'er repassed that hoary threshold more.It was here, then, those ill-fated ones stood, andlingered, and conversed, for at least two hours. Mary374 ANNESLEY HALL.Chaworth was here all life and spirit, full of youth,and beauty, and hope. What a change fell upon herafter-life ! She now stood here, the last scion of atime-honoured race, with large possessions, with thefond belief of sharing them in joy with the chosen ofher life. Never did human life present a saddercontrast! There are many reasons why we shoulddraw a veil over this mournful history, much of whichwill never be known; suffice it to say, that it wasnot without most real, deep, and agonizing causes,that years after,In her home, her native home,She dwelt begirt with growing infancy,Daughters and sons of beauty, — but behold !Upon her face there was the tint of grief,The settled shadow of an inward strife.And an unquiet drooping of the eye,As if its lid was charged with unshed tears.It was not without a fearful outraging of trustingaffections, the desolation of a spirit trodden andcrushed by that which should have shielded it, thatShe was changedAs by the sickness of the soul : her mindHad wandered from its dwelling, and her eyesThey had not their own lustre, but the lookWhich is not of the earth ; she was becomeThe queen of a fantastic realm; her thoughtsWere combinations of disjointed things;And forms impalpable and unperceivedOf others' sight, familiar were to hers.There must have come a day, a soul-prostratingday, when she must have felt the grand mistake shehad made, in casting away a heart that never ceasedto love her and sorrow for her, and a mind that wrapther, even severed as it was from her, in an imperishablehalo of glory.ANNESLEY HALL. 375There is nothing in all the histories of brokenaffections and mortal sorrows, more striking and melancholythan the idea of this lady, so bright and joyous-heartedin her youth, sitting in her latter years, fordays and weeks, alone and secluded, uninterrupted byany one, in this old house, weeping over the poemswhich commented in burning words on the individualfortunes of herself and Lord Byron —The oneTo end in madness — both in misery.With this idea vividly impressed on our spirits, adarker shade seemed to settle down on those antiquatedrooms; — we passed out into the garden, at the doorat which Byron passed ; we trod that stately terrace,and gazed at the old vase placed in the centre of itsmassy balustrade, bearing the original escutcheon ofthe Lord Chaworth, and stands a brave object asseen from the garden, into which we descended, andwandered among its high-grown evergreens. Buteverything was tinged with the spirit and fate of thatunhappy lady. The walks were overgrown with grass ;and tufts of snowdrop leaves, now grown wild andshaggy, as they do after the flower is over, grew inthem ; and tufts of a beautiful and peculiar kind offumitory, with its pink bloom, and the daffodils andprimroses of early spring looked out from amongstthe large forest trees that surround the garden.Everything, even the smallest, seemed in unison withthat great spirit of silence and desolation which hoveredover the place ; and the gusty winds that swept thelong wood-walk by which we came away, gave us amost fitting adieu.CHAPTER VII.Bedstead.We left Annesley, as we have said, by that which leads to the Mansfield road; andadvancing on that road about a mile, then turned tothe right through a deep defile down into the fields.Here we found ourselves in an extensive naturalamphitheatre, surrounded by bold declivities — in someplaces bleak and barren, in others, richly embossedwith furze and broom. Before us, at the distance ofanother mile, lay Newstead amid its woods, across amoore flat. The wind whistled and sighed amongstthe dry, white, wiry grass of last year's growth, aswe walked along ; and a solitary heron, with slowstrokes of its ample wings, flew athwart — not ourpath, for path we had none, having been tempted intothe fields by the beauty of the scene. We followedthe course of a little stream, clear as crystal, andswift as human life, and soon found ourselves at thetail of the lake so often referred to by Lord Byron.Before the mansion lay a lucid lake,Broad as transparent, deep and freshly fedBy a river, which its softened way did takeIn currents through the calmer water spreadBedstead. 377Around; the wild fowl nestled in the brakeAnd sedges, brooding in their liquid bed :The woods sloped downward to its brink, and stoodWith their green faces fixed upon the flood.It was a scene that would have delighted Bewickfor its picturesque sedgyness. The streams that fedit came don-n a woody valley shaggy with sedge — thelake thereabout being bordered with tall masses of it.There was a little island all Overgrown with it, andwater-loving trees; and wild fowl in abundance werehastening to hide themselves in its covert, or aroseand flew around with a varied clangour. Anothermoment, and we passed a green knoll, and were infront of the Abbey. John Evelyn, who once visitedit, was much struck with the resemblance between itssituation and that of Fontainebleau.Pere all was neat and habitable — had an air ofhuman life and human attention about it, that formeda strong contrast to the scene of melancholy desolationwe had left ; and also to this same scene when Ivisited it years ago, at the time when it was sold, Ibelieve, to a Mr. Houghton, who afterwards, forsome cause or other, threw up the bargain. To givean idea of the impression this place made upon me,I shall merely refer to an account furnished by memany years ago to a periodical of the time, whichaccount was partly quoted by Gait in his Life of LordByron, and made liberal use of by Moore, thoughwithout acknowledgment. I was a boy, ramblingthrough the woods nutting, when suddenly, I camein front of the Abbey, which I had never seen before,and learned from a peasant who happened to be near,that I might get to see it for the value of an ounce of378 Bedstead.tobacco given to old Murray, a grey-headed old manwho had been in the family from a boy, and whonow, at his own request, lies buried in Hucknallchurchyard, as close to the family vault as it waspossible to lay him. He and a maid-servant werethen the only inmates of the place, being left tosuperintend the removal of the goods. I marched uptothe dismal-looking porch in front, to which youascended by a flight of steps, and gave a thunderingknock, which almost startled me by the hollow soundit seemed to send through the ancient building.After a good waiting, some one approached, andbegan to withdraw bars and bolts, and to let fallchains; and presently, the old grey-headed manopened the massy door cautiously, to a width justsufficient to enable him to see who was there. Findingnothing more formidable than a boy, he openedwide, and I inquired if I could see the place. Theold man first looked at me, and then around, andsaid, " How many are there of you ?" As he wasevidently calculating the probable amount of profit, Igave him such evidence of sufficient reward that hisdoors instantly flew open, and he desired me to wanderwhere I pleased, till he could return to me, havingleft some important aflkir in medias res. Here thenwas a wilderness of an old house thrown open to me,and the effect it had on my youthful imagination isindescribable.The embellishments which the abbey had receivedfrom his lordship, had more of the brilliant conceptionof the poet in them than of the sober calculations ofcommon life. I passed through many rooms whichhe had superbly finished, but over which he had per-Bedstead. 379mitted so wretched a roof to remain, that, in abouthalf a dozen years, the rain had visited his proudestchambers ; the paper had rotted on the walls, and fellin comfortless sheets upon glowing carpets and canopies; upon beds of crimson and gold; clogging theglittering wings of eagles, and dishonouring coronets.From many rooms the furniture was gone. In theentrance hall alone remained the paintings of his oldfriends — the dog and bear.The mansion's self was vast and venerable.With more of the romantic than had beenElsewhere preserved ; the cloisters still were stable,The cells too and refectory I ween ;An exquisite small chapel had been ableStill unimpaired to decorate the scene ;The rest had been reformed, replaced, or sunk,And spoke more of the baron than the monk.Huge halls, long galleries, spacious chambers, joinedBy no quite lawful marriage of the arts,Might shock a connoisseur ; but, when combined,Formed a whole, which, irregular in parts.Yet left a grand impression on the mind.At least, of those whose eyes are in their hearts.The long and gloomy gallery, which, whoeverviews will be strongly reminded of Laura, as indeeda survey of this place will awake more than one scenein that poem, — had not yet relinquished the sombrepictures of its ancient race —That frownedIn rude, but antique portraiture around.In the study, which is a small chamber overlookingthe garden, the books were packed up; but thereremained a sofa, over which hung a sword in a giltsheath ; and at the end of the room opposite thewindow, stood a pair of light fancy stands, each Bedstead.porting a couple of the most perfect and finely-polishedskulls I ever saw ; most probably selected,along with the far-famed one converted into a drinking-cup,and inscribed with some well-known verses, froma vast number taken from the abbey cemetery, andpiled up in the form of a mausoleum, but since recommittedto the ground. Between them hung a giltcrucifix.To those skulls he evidently alludes in Laura, wherehe makes his servants ask one another —Why gazed he so upon the ghastly head,Which hands profane had gathered from the dead,That still beside his open volume lay,As if to startle all save him away ?And they most probably suggested that fine passagein Child Harold —Remove yon skull from out those shattered heaps :Is that a temple where a God may dwell ?Why, even the worm at last disdains her shattered cell !Look on its broken arch, its ruined wall,Its chambers desolate, and portals foul ;Yes, this was once ambition's airy hall.The dome of thought, the palace of the soul ;Behold through each lack-lustre, eyeless hole,The gay recess of wisdom and of wit,And passion's host, that never brooked control :Can all, saint, sage, or sophist ever writ.People this lonely tower, this tenement refit?In the servants' hall, lay a stone coffin, in whichwere fencing gloves and foils ; and on the wall of theample but cheerless kitchen, was painted in largeletters, " Waste not, want not."During a great part of his Lordship's minority, theabbey was in the occupation of Lord Grey de luther,Bedstead. 3,^1his hounds, and divers colonies of jackdaws, swallows,and starling's. The internal traces of this Goth M^ereswept away; but without, all appeared as rude andunreclaimed as he could have left it. I must confess,that if I was astonished at the heterogeneous mixtureof splendour and ruin within, I was more so at theperfect uniformity of wildness without. I never hadbeen able to conceive poetic genius in its domesticbower, without figuring it, diffusing the polish of itsdelicate taste on everything about it. But here thespirit of beauty seemed to have dwelt, but not to havebeen caressed ; — it was the spirit of the wilderness.The gardens were exactly as their late owner describedthem in his earliest poems: —Through tliy battlements, Newstead, the hollow winds whistle;Thou the hall of my fathers, art gone to decay ;In thy once-smiling gardens the hemlock and thistle,Now choke up the rose, that late bloomed in the way.With the exception of the dog's tomb — a conspicuousand elegant object, placed on an ascent ofseveral steps, crowned with a lambent flame, andpanelled with white marble tablets, of which that containingthe celebrated epitaph was removed, I do notrecollect the slightest trace of culture, or improvement.The late lord, a stern and desperate character,who is never mentioned by the neighbouring peasantswithout a significant shake of the head, might havereturned and recognized everything about him, except,perchance, an additional crop of weeds. Therestill gloomily slept the old pond, into which he issaid to have hurled his lady in one of his fits of fury,whence she was rescued by the gardener: a courageousblade, who was the lord's master, and chastised382 Bedstead.him for his barbarity. There still, at the end of thegarden, in a grove of oak, two towering satyrs — hewith his club, and Mrs. Satyr, with her chubby,cloven-footed brat, placed on pedestals at the intersectionsof the narrow and gloomy pathways, struckfor a moment, with their grim visages, and silent,shaggy forms, the fear into your bosoms, which isfelt by the neighbouring peasantry at " the old lo7^d'sdevils."In the lake below the abbey, the artificial rock,which he piled at a vast expense, still reared its loftyhead; but the frigate which fulfilled old Mother Ship-ton'sprophecy, by sailing on dry land to this placefrom a distant port, had long vanished ; and the onlyrelics of his naval whim were this rock, and his ship-boy,the venerable old Murray, who accompanied meround the premises. The dark, haughty, impetuous,and mad deeds of this nobleman, the poet's grandfather,no doubt, by making a vivid impression on his youthfulfancy, furnished some of the principal materialsfor the formation of his lordship's favourite and ever-recurringpoetical hero. His manners and acts .arethe theme of many a winter's evening in that neighbourhood.In one of his paroxysms of wrath, heshot his coachman, for giving, in his opinion, animproper precedence, threw the corpse into the carriage,to his lady, mounted, and drove himself. In aquarrel, which originally arose out of a dispute betweentheir gamekeepers, he killed his neighbour, Mr.Chaworth, the lord of the adjoining manor. Thisrencontre took place at the Star and Garter, Pall-Mail,after a convivial meeting — a club of Nottinghamshiregentlemen. His lordship was committed to the Tower,Bedstead. 383and on April 16th, 1765, placed at the bar of theHouse of Lords, and without one dissentient voice,convicted of manslaughter, and discharged on payinghis fees, having pleaded certain privileges under astatute of Queen Anne. The particulars may beseen in Vol. X. of State Trials, published by order ofthe House of Peers.The old lord, from some cause of irritation againsthis son, said to be on account of his marriage, whodied before coming to the title, did all he could toinjure the estate. He is said to have pulled down aconsiderable part of the house, and sold the materials;he cut down very extensive plantations, and sold theyoung trees to the bakers of Nottingham to heat theirovens with, or to the nurserymen ; two of which,Lombardy poplars, bought at that time, now stand atthe head of a fish-pond of my father's, grown to animmense size.Mr. Moore has justly remarked, that Lord Byronderived the great peculiarities of his character from hisancestors. After I came away from the abbey, Iasked many people in the neighbourhood what sort ofa man the noble poet had been. The impression ofhis energetic but eccentric character was obvious intheir reply. '« He is the deuce of a fellow for strangefancies ; he flogs the old lorxl to nothing : but he is ahearty good fellow for all that."One of these fancies, as related by the miller at thehead of the lake, was, to get into a boat, with his twonoble Newfoundland dogs, row into the middle of thelake, then dropping the oars, tumble into the water.The faithful animals would immediately follow, seizehim by the collar, one on each side, and bear him to384 Bedstead.land. This miller told me that every month he cameto be weighed, and if he found himself lighter, heappeared highly delighted ; but if heavier, he wentaway in obvious ill humour, and without saying aword. At this time even, L e. before he came of age,he had the greatest horror of corpulency, to whichhe deemed himself hereditarily prone, and used to liea certain time every day in a hot-bed, made on purpose,to reduce himself. The master-builder, whohad been engaged in the restoration of the abbey,said much about a certain Haled, who then was withhim, — probably the same that accompanied him toBrighton, as his younger brother, — and of the wildlife kept up, and mad pranks played off, by him andhis companions. He described the mornings passingin the most profound quiet, for his Lordship and hisguests did not rise till about one o'clock; in the afternoon,the place was all alive with them; — they wereseen careering in all directions ; at midnight, the oldabbe)'^ was all lit up, and resounded with their jollity.On one occasion, they were called up to extricate anunfortunate wight from the old stone coffin, where, insome of their mad pranks, he had secreted himself,and fitted it so well, that it was with difficulty he wasdrawn out, amid the merriment of his comrades. Noperson, indeed, could form any correct notion of Byronfrom his poetry, till the publication of his Don Juan,which exhibits more of the style of his youthful conversationalmanner than any other of his writings,except his journal. I have heard a lady M'ho used tosee him at Mrs. Byron's, at Nottingham, say that hewas then, in his teens, a most rackety fellow; wasvery fond of going into the kitchen, and baking oat-bedstead.385meal cakes on the fire shovel ; on which occasions, thecook would sometimes pin a napkin to his coat, whichbeing discovered on his return to the parlour, he wouldrush out and pursue the maids in all directions, and,to use the lady's phrase, turn the house upside down.When they went away, he always took care to ask theservants if his mother had given them anything ; andon their replying in the negative, he would say, " No,no ! I knew that well enough;" when he would makethem a handsome present.Such anecdotes of his youth abound ; but one is toocharacteristic to be omitted. An old man of the nameof Kemp, of Mansfield, was one day in Southwest,when a dog in the minster-yard fell upon his little dog.He was beating it off, when a genteel boy came up,and in a very decided tone said, " Let them fight itout — they find their own clothes, don't they?" Theold man said, clothes or no clothes, his dog should notbe worried. A stander-by asked him if he knew towhom he spoke. The old man said he neither knewnor cared. " It is Lord Byron," said the person ; butthe old man said he did not care whether he was a lordor a duke, they should not worry his dog ; and havinggot his little dog under his arm, he marched off innone of the best humour. Some tine afterwards, however,seeing " Hours of Idleness and other Poems, byLord Byron," advertised, he recollected the spirit ofthe lad with so much admiration, that he took his stickand set off to Newark to purchase the book, and alwaysafterwards remained a great admirer of his works.Such was my acquaintance with the place then ; itis now a good, substantial, and very comfortable familymansion. With its external appearance the public isVOL. I. s386 Bedstead.well acquainted through various prints ; and the onlyobjects in the interior, which can much intereststrangers as connected with the history of Lord Byronare equally familiar. The picture of his wolf-dog, andhis Newfoundland-dog — the living Newfoundland-dogwhich he had with him in Greece ; the skull-cup keptin a cabinet in the drawing-room, and the little chapeland cloisters mentioned by him. There are also in alumber-room the identical stone coffin and the foils Isaw there twenty years ago, and a portrait of old Murraysmoking his pipe. There is also the well-knownportrait by Phillips. A full-length likeness of him asabout to embark on his first travels, which was in thedrawing-room at that time, is now gone, but has beenengraved for Mr. Murray's edition of his Life andWorks.It is fortunate for the public that the place has falleninto the hands of a gentleman who affords the utmostfacility for the inspection of it by strangers. Nothingcan exceed the easy courtesy with which it is thrownopen to them ; and, as an old schoolfellow of LordByron's, we believe Colonel Wildman is as desirousas any man can be not to obliterate any traces of hisLordship's former life here. There are some particulars,however, in which I think this care might havebeen carried more thoroughly into act. In the firstplace, I think a style of architecture in restoring theabbey might have been adopted more abbey-like — morein keeping with the old part of it — and more consonantto the particular state of feeling with which admirersof the noble poet's genius would be likely toapproach it. To my taste it is too square and massyin its tout ensemble. I do not see why the architect,Bedstead. 387whoever he was, should have gone back in the date ofhis style beyond that of the ancient remains. Theold western front is a specimen of what Hickman callsthe early English order of Anglo-Gothic architecture ;so light, so airy, so pure and beautiful, that the juxtapositionof a heavy Norman style, and especially ofthe ponderous, square, and stunted tower at the southwestcorner, is strange, and anything but pleasing.A greater variety of outline — the projection of porchesand buttresses — the aspiring altitude of pointed gablesclustered chimneys, and slender, sky-seeking turretswould certainly have given greater effect. Instead ofa square mass of stone, as it appears at a distance, itwould have proclaimed its own beauty to the eyefrom everj^ far-off point at which it may be discovered.Any one who has seen Fonthill, Abbotsford from theGalashiel's road, or Ham from the entrance of Dove-dale,may imagine how much more that effect wouldbe in accordance, not only with a low situation, butwith the mental impressions of a poetic visitor.1 cannot help, too, regretting that the poet's studyshould now be converted into a common bed-room ;and most of all, that the antique fountain which stoodin front of the abbey, and makes so strong a featurein the very graphic picture of the place drawn in DonJuan, should be removed. It now adorns the innerquadrangle, or cloister court, and is certainly a verybeautiful object there, as may be seen by the print inMurray's edition of Byron's Works. I do not wonderat Colonel Wildman desiring to grace this court witha fountain, but I wonder extremely at his gracing itwith this fountain. I must for ever deplore its388 Bedstead.removal, as the breaking up of that most vivid pictureof the front, given by the poet to all posterity : —A glorious remnant of the Gothic pile,While yet the church was Rome's, stood half apart.In a grand arch, which once screened many an aisle.These last had disappeared — a loss to art ;The first yet frowned superbly o'er the soil,And kindled feelings in the roughest heart,Which mourned the power of time's or tempest's march.In gazing on that venerable arch.Within a niche nigh to its pinnacle,Twelve saints had once stood sanctified in stone :And these had fallen, not when the friars fell.But in the war which struck Charles from his throne.» * » « • # «But in a higher niche, alone, but crowned,The Virgin Mother of the God-born child.With her son in her blessed arms, looked round.Spared by some chance, when all beside was spoiled ;She made the earth below seem holy ground.This may be superstition weak, or wild ;But even the painted relics of a shrineOf any worship, wake some thoughts divine.A mighty window, hollow in the centre ;Shorn of its glass of thousand colourings.Through which the deepened glories once could enter.Streaming from ofi" the sun like seraph's wings,Now yawns all desolate : now loud, now fainter,The gale sweeps through its fretwork; and oft singsThe owl his anthem, where the silenced quireLie with their hallelujahs quenched like fire.Amid the court a Gothic fountain played.Symmetrical, but decked with carvings quaint —Strange fiices, like to men in masquerade.And here, perhaps, a monster, there a saint :The spring gushed through grim mouths, of granite made.And sparkled into basins, where it spentIts little torrent in a thousand bubbles.Like man's vain glory, and his gainer troubles.Bedstead. 389It was seeing how exactly all this was a copy of theoriginal — how there stood the mighty window, showingthrough it the garden and dog's tomb — how theVirgin there still stood aloft with her child, distinct,bold, and beautiful — but the fountain was gone, thatwe could not help loudly expressing our regret.When the valet who attended us came to the inner-court," there," he said, " you see is the fountain — itis all there, quite perfect." "Yes, yes," we couldnot help replying, "that is the very thing we are sorryfor — its being all there. A man might cut off hisnose, and put it in his pocket, and when any one wonderedat his mutilated face, cry, ' O, it is all here ;I have it in my pocket.' The mischief would be, itwould be in the wrong place, and his face would bespoiled for ever. To every visiter of taste, the abbeyfront must be thus injured whilst it and the poet'sdescription of it, last together.These are things to regret; for the rest, the placeis a very pleasant place. The new stone-work isvery substantially and well done; there is a greatdeal of modern elegance about the house ; a fortunemust have been spent upon it. The grounds beforethe new front are extremely improved ; and the oldgardens, with very correct feeling, have been sufferedto retain their ancient character. An oak planted byLord Byron is shewn ; and why should he not have atree as well as Shakspeare, Milton, and Johnson?The initials of himself and his sister upon a tree inthe satyr-grove at the end of the garden, are said tohave been pointed out by his sister herself, the HonourableMrs. Leigh, on her visit there some time390 Bedstead.ago. The tree has two boles issuing from one root,a very appropriate emblem of their consanguinity.The scenery around presents many features thatrecall incidents in his life, or passages in his poems.There are the houses where Fletcher and Ashtonlived — the two followers of his, who are addressed inthe ballad in the first canto of Child Harold, beginningat the third stanza —Come hither, hither, my little page !But in the progress of improvement, the mill, wherehe used to be weighed, is just now destroyed.Down the valley, in front of the Abbey, is a richprospect over Moods, and around are distant slopesscattered with young plantations, that in time willadd eminently to the beauty of this secluded spot;and supply the place, in some degree, of those oldand magnificent woods in which the Abbey was formerlyembosomed.Here ended our ramble, having gone over groundand through places that the genius of one man in abrief life has sanctified to all times ; for like us —Hither romantic pilgrims shall betakeThemselves from distant lands. When we are stillIn centuries of sleep, his fame will wake.And his great memory with deep feelings fillThese scenes that he has trod, and hallow every hill.Bedstead.Here too we leave the Old Houses of England, inthe words of John Evelyn : — " Other there are, sweetand delectable country-seats and villas of the noblesse,and rich and opulent gentry, built and environed withparks, paddocks, plantations, etc. : adapted to countryand rural seats, dispersed through the whole nation,conspicuous, not only for the structure of their houses,built upon the best rules of architecture, but for situation,gardens, canals, walks, avenues, parks, forests,ponds, prospects, and vistas; groves, woods, and largeplantations; and other the most charming and delightfulrecesses, natural and artificial ;" but to enumerateand describe what were extraordinary in theseand the rest would furnish volumes, for who has noteither seen, admired, or heard of —Audley-end, Thorpe, Auckland, Aqualate-Hall, Alnwick, arlington,Ampthill, Swell, Aldermaston, Aston, Alveston, Alton-abbey.Bolster, Administer, Freckles, Burghly-on-the Hill, and theother Surlily, Breton, Bucklers, Auckland, Bulvoii-, Lexington,Blenheim, Smithfield, Westwood, Broomhall, Beaudesert.Castle Rising, Castle Ashy, Castle-bennington, Castle-Howard,Chatsworth, Charley, Carbury, Casiobury, Cobham, Cowley, Ca-versa,Cranbourn-Park, Slumber, Charlton, Copt Hall, Cheveron,famous for Sir William Bassett's vineyard, producing forty hogsheadsof wine yearly ; nor must I forget that of Deepen, planted by theHonourable Charles Howard, of Norfolk, my worthy neighbour inSurrey.Drayton, Bennington-Park, Dean.Eastwell, Euston, Eccleswould, Edscombe, Eaton, Epping.Fasten, Frankfort, Fonthill, Fountains-Abbey.Greystock, Goodrich, Grooby, Grafton, Bathurst, Golden-Grove.Hardwick, Hidden, Hornby, Hatfield, Hand, Hatfield, Linton,Holme-Pierrepont, Horslmounceaux, Houghton.Lichfield, Ham, Ingestre.Kirby, Knowles, Middleton.Longest, Nathan, Lensal, Latimer, Line-Hall, Gainsborough.392 Bedstead.Moiepark, Margrave, Marlborough, Margin, Mount Edgcombe.Norraanby, North-Hall, Marlborough, Needham, Newstead.St. Ostlo, Oxnead.Wentworth, I'enshurst, Pastor-Hall.Quorndon, Quicksand.Raglan, Retort, Ragley, Riot, Rockingham, Ray.Cherbourg, Shirley, Swallowfield, Stanton - Harold, Stafford,Shaftsbury, Scarborough, Wanton, Stowe, Started, Scots-Hall, Sandsof the Vine.Theobaldss, Thornkill, Thornhill, Bentham.Up-Park.Wilton, Wrest, Woburn, Wollaston, Worksop-Manor, Woodstock,which, as Camden tells us, was the first park in England, Wimburn,Brittle-Park, Warwick Castle, Wentworth. 'CHAPTER VIII.CHARACTERISTICS OF PARK SCENERY.How delicious is our old park scenery. How wisethat such places as Richmond, Greenwich, and suchold parks in the neighbourhood of the metropolis, arekept up and kept open, that our citizens may occasionallyget out of the smoke and noise of the greatBabel, and breathe all their freshness, and feel alltheir influence ! Who does not often, in the midstof brick-and-mortar regions, summon up before hisimagination this old park or forest scenery ? Theferny or heathy slopes, under old, stately, gnarledoaks, or thorns as old, with ivy having stems nearly asthick as their own, climbing up them, and clinging tothem, and sometimes incorporating itself so completelywith their heads, as to make them look entirelyivy-trees. The foot-paths, with turf short and soft asvelvet, running through the bracken. The sunnysilence that lies on the open glades and brown uplands; the cool breezy feeling under the shade ; thegrashopper chattering amongst the bents; the hawkhovering and whimpering over-head; the keeper,lounging along in velveteen jacket, and with his gun,394 PARK SCENERY.at a distance, or firing at some destructive bird. Theherds of deer, fallow or red, congregated beneath theshadow of the trees, or lying in the sun if not toowarm, their quick ears and tails keeping up a perpetualtwinkle; the telling of scattered deer, asthey go bounding and mincing daintily across theopenings, here and there, — the old ones, hoarse anddeep, the young shrill and plaintive. Cattle withwhisking tails, grazing sedately ; the wood-pecker'slaughter from afar ; the little tree-creeper running upthe ancient boles, always beginning at the bottom,and going upwards with a quick, gliding progress —the quaint cries of other birds and wild creatures, thedays and the rooks feeding together, and minglingtheir different voices of pert and grave accent. Thesquirrel running with extended tail along the ground,or flourishing it over his head, as he sits on the tree ;or fixing himself, when suddenly come upon, in theattitude of an old, brown, decayed branch by the treeside, as motionless as the deadest branch in the forest.The hum of insects all around you, the low still murmurof sunny music,Nature's ceaseless hum,Voice of the desert, never dumb.The pheasant's crow ; the pheasant with all her broodspringing around you, one by one, from the turf whereyou are standing amid the bracken — here one ! thereone ! close under your feet, with a sudden, startlingwhirr, — to compare nature with art, country sceneswith city ones, like so many squibs and crackers firedoff about you in smart succession, where you don'tlook for them. That most ancient and most originalPARK SCENERY. 395of all ladders, a bough with some pegs driven throughit, reared against a tree for the keeper to reach thenests of hawks or magpies, or to fetch down a broodof young jackdaws for a pie, quite as savoury a dishas one made with young rooks or pigeons; or for himto sit aloft amongst the foliage, and watch for theapproach of deer, or fawn M^hen he is commissioned toshoot one. The profound and basking silence allaround you, as you sit on some dry ferny mound, andlook far and wide through the glimmering heat, or thecool shadow. The far-off sounds — rooks, telling ofsome old Hall that stands slumberously amid the woods;or dogs, sending from their hidden kennel amongstthe trees, their sonorous yelling. Forest smells, thatrise up deliciously as you cross dim thickets, or treadthe spongy turf all fragrant with thyme, and sprinkledwith the light hare-belL Huge limbs of oak riven offby tempests, or the old oak itself, a vast, knotty, anddecayed mass, lying on the ground, and perhaps thewoodmen gravely labouring upon it, lopping itsboughs, riving its huge, misshapen stem, piling it instacks of cord-wood, or binding them into billets. Thekeeper's house near, in its own paled enclosure ; andall about, old thorns hung with the dried and haggardremains of wild-cats, pole-cats, weasels, hawks, owls,jays, and other vermin, as he deems them ; or thesame most picturesquely displayed on the sturdy bolesof the vast oaks ; and lastly, the mere, the lake, inthe depth of the woodlands, shrouded in screeningmasses of flags and reeds, the beautiful flowering-rush,the magnificent great water-dock, with leaves as hugeand green as if they grew by some Indian river — thetall club-mace, the thousands of wild-ducks, teals, or396 PARK SCENERY.pigeons that start up at your approach with clatteringwings, and cries of quick alarm.Who that has wandered through our old parks andforests, is not familiar with all these sights and sounds?does not long to witness them again, ever and anon,when he has been " long in city pent," till he is fainto mount his horse and ride off into some such ancient,quiet, and dreamy region, as Crabbe suddenly mountedhis, and rode forty miles to see again the sea?END OF VOLUME I.LONDON :Printed by Manning and Smithson, Ivy-lane, Paternoster-roar