VOYAGESANDDISCOVERIESOFTHE COMPANIONS OF COLUMBUS.BYWASHINGTON IRVING,To declare my opinion herein, whatsoever hath heretofore been discovered by the famous tramSaturn and Hercules, with such other v horn the Antiquities for their heroicalacts honoured as gods, seemeth but little and obscure, if it be compared to the victoriouslabours of the Spaniards. P. Martyr, Dccad. III. c. 4. Lock s translation.CAREY AND LEA CHESNUT STREET.1831.Southern District of New York, ss,BE IT REMEMBERED, That. on the 31st day of December,L. S. t A. D. 1830, in the fifty-fifth year of the Independence of the Unitedtttttttt* g States of America, WASHINGTON IRVING, ofthe said district, hathdeposited in this office the title of a book, the right whereof he claims as author,in the words following, to wit:VOYAGES AND DISCOVERIES OF THE COMPANIONS OF COLUMBUS. By WashingtonIrving. To declare my opinion herein, whatsoever hath heretofore been discovered bythe famous travayles of Stumps and Hercules, with such other whom the Antiquities fortheir heroical acts honoured as gods, seemeth but little and obscure, if it be compared to thevictorious labours of the Spaniards. P. Martyr, Dead. III. c. 4. Lock s translation. 1 "In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States intitled,An act for the Encouragement of Learning, by securing the copies of maps,charts, and books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during thetime therein mentioned." And also to an act, entitled, "An act supplementaryto an act, entitled, * An act for the encouragement of learning, bysecuring the copies of maps, charts, and books, to the authors and proprietorsof such copies during the times therein mentioned, and extending thebenefits thereof to the arts of designing, engraving, and etching historicaland other prints." .FRED. J. BETTS,Clerk of the Southern District of New York.I. Ashamed & Co. Printers.INTRODUCTIONTHE first discovery of the western hemisphere hasalready been related by the author in his History of Columbus.It is proposed by him, in the present work, tonarrate the enterprises of certain of the companions anddisciples of the admiral, who, enkindled by his zeal, andinstructed by his example, sallied forth separately in thevast region of adventure to which he had led the way.Many of them sought merely to skirt the continent whichhe had partially visited, and to secure the first fruits ofthe pearl fisheries of Paria and Cubaga, or to explore thecoast of Veragua, which he had represented as the AureaChersonesus of the Ancients. Others aspired to accomplisha grand discovery which he had meditated towardthe close of his career. In the course of his expeditionsalong the coast of Terra Firma, Columbus had repeatedlyreceived information of the existence of a vast sea to thesouth. He supposed it to be the great Indian Ocean,the region of the Oriental spice islands, and that it mustcommunicate by a strait with the Caribbean Sea. Hislast and most disastrous voyage was made for the expresspurpose of discovering that imaginary strait, and making4 INTRODUCTION.his way into this Southern Ocean. The illustrious navigator,however, was doomed to die, as it were, upon thethreshold of his discoveries. It was reserved for one ofhis followers, Vasco Nunez de Balboa, to obtain the firstview of the promised ocean, from the lofty mountains ofDarien, some years after the eyes of the venerable admiralhad been closed in death.The expeditions herein narrated, therefore, may beconsidered as springing immediately out of the voyagesof Columbus, and fulfilling some of his grand designs.They may be compared to the attempts of adventurousknights errant to achieve the enterprise left unfinishedby some illustrious predecessor. Neither is this comparisonentirely fanciful. On the contrary, it is a curiousfact, well worthy of notice, that the spirit of chivalryentered largely into the early expeditions of the Spanishdiscoverers, giving them a character wholly distinct fromsimilar enterprises undertaken by other nations. It willnot, perhaps, be considered far sought, if we trace thecause of this peculiarity to the domestic history of theSpaniards during the middle ages.Eight centuries of incessant warfare with the Moorishusurpers of the peninsula produced a deep and lastingeffect upon the Spanish character and manners. Thewar being ever close at home, mingled itself with thedomestic habits and concerns of the Spaniard. He wasborn a soldier. The wild and predatory nature of thewar, also, made him a kind of chivalrous marauder. Hishorse and weapon were always ready for the field. Hisdelight was in roving incursions and extravagant exploits,and no gain was so glorious in his eyes as the cavalcade ofspoils and captives, driven home in triumph from a plunderedprovince. Religion, which has ever held greatINTRODUCTION. 5empire in the Spanish mind, lent its aid to sanctify theseroving and ravaging propensities, and the Castilian cavalier,as he sacked the towns and laid waste the fields ofhis Moslem neighbour, piously believed he was doingGod service.The conquest of Granada put an end to the peninsularwars between Christian and infidel ; the spirit of Spanishchivalry was thus suddenly deprived of its wonted sphereof action ; but it had been too long fostered arid excitedto be as suddenly appeased. The youth of the nation,bred up to daring adventure and heroic achievement,could not brook the tranquil and regular pursuits of commonlife, but panted for some new field of romantic enterprise.It was at this juncture that the grand project of Columbuswas carried into effect. His treaty with thesovereigns was, in a manner, signed with the same penthat had subscribed the capitulation of the Moorish capital,and his first expedition may almost be said to havedeparted from beneath the walls of Granada. Many ofthe youthful cavaliers who had fleshed their swords inthat memorable war, crouded the ships of the discoverers,thinking a new career of arms was to be opened to thema kind of crusade into splendid and unknown regions ofinfidels. The very weapons and armour that had beenused against the Moors, were drawn from the arsenals toequip the discoverers, and some of the most noted of theearly commanders in the new world will be found to havemade their first essay in arms under the banner of Ferdinandand Isabella, in their romantic campaigns amongthe mountains of Andalusia.To these circumstances may, in a great measure, beascribed that swelling chivalrous spirit which will beINTRODUCTION.found continually mingling, or rather warring, with thetechnical habits of the seaman, and the sordid schemes ofthe mercenary adventurer ; in these early Spanish discoveries,chivalry had left the land and launched upon thedeep. The Spanish cavalier had embarked in the Caravelof the discoverer; he carried among the tracklesswildernesses of the new world, the same contempt of dangerand fortitude under suffering, the same restless roamingspirit, the same passion for inroad and ravage, andvain-glorious exploit, and the same fervent, and oftenbigoted, zeal for the propagation of his faith that had distinguishedhim during his warfare with the Moors. Instancesin point will be found in the extravagant careerof the daring Ojeda, particularly in his adventures alongthe coast of Terra Firma and the wild shores of Cuba.In the sad story of the " unfortunate Nicuesa ;" gracedas it is with occasional touches of high-bred courtesy ;. inthe singular cruise of that brave, but credulous, old cavalier,Juan Ponce de Leon, who fell upon the flowery coastof Florida, in his search after an imaginary fountain ofyouth ; and above all in the chequered fortunes of VascoNunez de Balboa, whose discovery of the Pacific ocean,forms one of the most beautiful and striking incidents inthe history of the new world, an d whose fate might furnisha theme of wonderful interest for a poem or a drama.The extraordinary actions and adventures of these men,while they rival the exploits recorded in chivalric tale,have the additional interest of verity. They leave us inadmiration of the bold and heroic qualities inherent in theSpanish character, which led that nation to so high apitch of power and glory, and which are still discerniblein the great mass of that gallant people, by those whohave an opportunity of judging of them rightly.INTRODUCTION. 7#** *-* vBefore concluding these prefatory remarks, the authorwould acknowledge how much he has been indebted tothe third volume of the invaluable Historical collection ofDon Martin Fernandez de Navarretete, wherein he has exhibitedhis usual industry, accuracy and critical acumen.He has likewise profited greatly by the second volume ofOviedo s general history, which only exists in Manuscript,and a copy of which he found in the Columbian library ofthe Cathedral of Seville. r ^ /He has had some assistance also from the documents ofthe law case between Don Diego Columbus and the Crown,which exists in the archives of the Indies; and for aninspection of which he is much indebted to the permissionof the Spanish Government and the kind attentionsof Don Josef de La Higher Laura, the keeper of thearchives. These, with the historical works of Las Casas,Herrera Genera, and Peter Martyr, have been his authoritiesfor the facts contained in the following work ;though he has not thought proper to refer to them continuallyat the bottom of his page.While his work was going through the press he receiveda volume of Spanish Biography, written with greatelegance and accuracy, by Don Manuel Josef Quintana,and containing a life of Vasco Nufiez de Balboa. Hewas gratified to find that his arrangement of facts weregenerally corroborated by this work ; though he was enabledto correct his dates in several instances, and tomake a few other emendations from the volume of SenorQuintana, whose position in Spain gave him the means ofattaining superior exactness on these points.ALONZO DE OJEDA.HIS FIRST VOYAGE,IN WHICH HE WAS ACCOMPANIED BYAMERIGO VESPUCCLfCHAPTER I.Some Account of Ojeda of Juan de la Cosa of Amerigo VespucciPreparations for the Voyage. (1499.)THOSE who have read the History of Columbus will,doubtless, remember the character and exploits of Alonzode Ojeda; as some of the readers of the following pages,however, may not have perused that work, and as it isproposed at present to trace the subsequent fortunes ofthis youthful adventurer, a brief sketch of him may notbe deemed superfluous.Alonzo de Ojeda was a native of Cuenca, in New Castile,and of a respectable family. He was brought up asapage or esquire, in the service of Don Luis de Corda,Duke of Medina Celi, one of the most powerful nobles ofSpain ; the same who for some time patronised Columbusduring his application to the Spanish court. JIn those warlike days, when the peninsula was distractedby contests between the Christian kingdoms, byOjeda is pronounced in Spanish Oheda, with a strong aspirationof the h.t Vespucci, Vespuchy. /Baronet Lustres, por F. Pizarro y Orellana, p. 41. Las Casas,Hist. Ind 1. i. c. 82.10 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.feuds between the nobles and the crown, and by the incessantand marauding warfare with the Moors, the householdof a Spanish nobleman was a complete school ofarms, where the youth of the country were sent to betrained up in all kinds of hardy exercises, and to be ledto battle under an illustrious banner. Such was especiallythe case with the service of the Duke of MedinaCeli, who possessed princely domains, whose householdwas a petty court, who led legions of armed retainers tothe field, and who appeared in splendid state and withan immense retinue, more as an ally of Ferdinand andIsabella, than as a subject. He engaged in many of theroughest expeditions of the memorable war of Granada,always insisting on leading his own troops in person,when the service was of peculiar difficulty and danger.Alonzo de Ojeda was formed to signalize himself in sucha school. Though small of stature, he was well made,and of wonderful force and activity, with a towering spiritand a daring eye that seemed to make up for deficiencyof height. He was a bold and graceful horseman,an excellent foot soldier, dexterous with every weapon,and noted for his extraordinary skill and adroitness in allfeats of strength and agility.He must have been quite young when he followed theduke of Medina Celi, as page, to the Moorish wars ; forhe was but about twenty-one years of age when he accompaniedColumbus in his second voyage ; he hadalready, however, distinguished himself by his enterprizingspirit and headlong valour; and his exploitsduring that voyage contributed to enhance his reputation.He returned to Spain with Columbus, but did notaccompany him in his third voyage, in the spring of 1498.He was probably impatient of subordination, and ambi-1499.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 11pious of a separate employment or command, which theinfluence of his connexions gave him a great chance ofobtaining , He had a cousin german of his own name,the reverend Padre Alonzo de Ojeda, a Dominican friar,who was one of the first inquisitors of Spain, and a greatfavourite with the Catholic sovereigns.* This fatherinquisitor was, moreover, an intimate friend of the bishopDon Juan Rodriguez Fonseca, who had the chief managementof the affairs of the Indies, under which generalname were comprehended all the countries discovered inthe new world. Through the good offices of his cousininquisitor, therefore, Ojeda had been introduced to thenotice of the bishop, who took him into his especialfavour and patronage. Mention has already been made,in the History of Columbus, of a present made by thebishop to Ojeda of a small Flemish painting of the HolyVirgin. This the young adventurer carried about withhim as a protecting relic, invoking it at all times of peril,whether by sea or land ; and to the special care of theVirgin he attributed the remarkable circumstance that hehad never been wounded in any of the innumerable brawlsand battles into which he was continually betrayed by hisrash and fiery temperament.While Ojeda was lingering about the court, letterswere received from Columbus, giving an account of theevents of his third voyage, especially of his discovery ofthe coast of Paria, which he described as abounding withdrugs and spices, with gold and silver, and preciousstones, and, above all, with oriental pearls, and which hesupposed to be the borders of that vast and unknownregion of the East, wherein, according to certain learnedPizarro. Baronet Lustres.12 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.theorists, was situated the terrestrial paradise. Specimensof the pearls, procured in considerable quantitiesfrom the natives, accompanied his epistle, together withcharts descriptive of his route. These tidings caused agreat sensation among the maritime adventurers of Spain;but no one was more excited by them than Alonzo deOjeda, who, from his intimacy with the bishop, had fullaccess to the charts and correspondence of Columbus.He immediately conceived the project of making a voyagein the route thus marked out by the admiral, and ofseizing upon the first fruits of discovery which he hadleft ungathered. His scheme met with ready encouragementfrom Fonseca, who, as has heretofore beenshown, was an implacable enemy to Columbus, and willingto promote any measure that might injure or molest him.The bishop accordingly granted a commission to Ojeda,authorizing him to fit out an armament and proceed on avoyage of discovery, with the proviso merely that heshould not visit any territories appertaining to Portugal,or any of the lands discovered in the name of Spain previousto the year 1495. The latter part of this provisionappears to have been craftily worded by the bishop,so as to leave the coast of Paria and its pearl fisheriesopen to Ojeda, they having been recently discovered byColumbus in 1498.The commission was signed by Fonseca alone, in virtueof general powers vested in him for such purposes, butthe signature of the sovereigns did not appear on the instrument,and it is doubtful whether their sanction wassought on the occasion. He knew that Columbus had recentlyremonstrated against a royal mandate issued in1495, permitting voyages of discovery, by private adventurers,and that the sovereigns had in consequence re-1499.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 13yoked their mandate wherever it might be deemed prejudicialto the stipulated privileges of the admiral.* Itis probable, therefore, that the bishop avoided raising anyquestion that might impede the enterprize 5 being confidentof the ultimate approbation of Ferdinand, whowould be well pleased to have his dominions in the newworld extended by the discoveries of private adventurers,undertaken at their own expense. It was stipulated inthis, as well as in subsequent licenses for private expeditions,that a certain proportion of the profits, generallya fourth or fifth, should be reserved for the crown.Having thus obtained permission to make the voyage,the next consideration with Ojeda was to find the means.He was a young adventurer, a mere soldier of fortune,and destitute of wealth ; but he had a high reputation forcourage and enterprise, and with these, it was thought,would soon make his w r ay to the richest parts of the newlydiscovered lands, and have the wealth of the Indies at hisdisposal. He had no difficulty, therefore, in findingmonied associates among the rich merchants of Seville,who, in that age of discovery, were ever ready to staketheir property upon the schemes of roving navigators.With such assistance he soon equipped a squadron of fourvessels at Port St. Mary, opposite Cadizz. Among theseamen who engaged with him were several who had justreturned from accompanying Columbus in his voyage tothis very coast of Paria. The principal associate ofOjeda, and one on whom he placed great reliance, wasJuan de la Cosa; who accompanied him as first mate, or,as it was termed, chief pilot. This was a bold Biscay,who may be regarded as a disciple of Columbus, withNavarretete, t. ii. Document, xiii.aE Lief?OF THEUNIVERSITYLO*. - or ^\Vi14 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.whom he had sailed in his second voyage, when he coastedCuba and Jamaica, and he had since accompaniedRodrigo de Bastides, in an expedition along the coast ofTerra Firma. The hardy veteran was looked up to byhis contemporaries as an oracle of the seas, and was pronouncedone of the most able mariners of the day ; hemay be excused, therefore, if in his harmless vanity, heconsidered himself on a par even with Columbus.*Another conspicuous associate of Ojeda, in this voyage,was Amerigo Vespucci, a Florentine merchant, inducedby broken fortunes and a rambling disposition to seekadventures in the new world. Whether he had any pecuniaryinterest in the expedition, and in what capacityhe sailed, does not appear. His importance has entirelyarisen from subsequent circumstances ; from his havingwritten and published a narrative of his voyages, and fromhis name having eventually been given to the new world.Navarretete. Collect. Via. t. iii. p. 4.1499.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 15CHAPTER II.Departure from Spain Arrival on the Coast of P aria Customs ofthe Nations.OJEDA sailed from Port St. Mary .on the 20th of May,1499, and, having touched for supplies at the Canaries,took a departure from Gomara, pursuing the route of Columbus,in his third voyage, being guided by the charthe had sent home, as well as by the mariners who had accompaniedhim on that occasion. At the end of twenty-fourdays he reached the continent of the new world,about two hundred leagues farther south than the partdiscovered by Columbus, being, as it is supposed, thecoast of Surinam.*From hence he ran along the coast of the Gulf of Paria,passing the mouths of many rivers, but especially those ofthe Esquire and the Orinoco. These, to the astonishmentof the Spaniards, unaccustomed as yet to the mightyrivers of the new world, poured forth. such a prodigiousvolume of water, as to freshen the sea for a great extent.They beheld none of the natives until they arrived at theIsland of Trinidad, on which island they met with tracesof the recent visit of Columbus.Vespucci, in his letters, gives a long description of thepeople of this island and of the coast of Paria, who wereof the Carib race, tall, well made and vigorous, and expertwith the bow, the lance an the buckler. His de-navarre.t. iii. p. 5.16 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.scription, in general, resembles those which have frequentlybeen given of the Aboriginal of the new world ;there are two or three particulars, however, worthy ofcitation.They appeared, he said, to believe in no religiouscreed, to have no place of worship, and to make no prayersor sacrifices; but, he adds,, from the voluptuousnessof their lives, they might be considered Epicurean.*Their habitations were built in the shape of bells ; of thetrunks of trees, thatched with palm leaves, and were proofagainst wind and weather. They appeared to be in common,and some of them were of such magnitude as to containsix hundred persons: in one place there were eightprincipal houses capable of sheltering nearly ten thousandinhabitants. Every seven or eight years the natives wereobliged to change their residence, from the maladies engenderedby the heat of the climate in their crowded habitations.Their riches consisted in beads and ornaments madefrom the bones of fishes ; in small white and green stonesstrung like rosaries, with which they adorned their persons,and in the beautiful plumes of various colours forwhich the tropical birds are noted.The Spaniards smiled at their simplicity in attachingan extraordinary value to such worthless trifles ; whilethe savages, in all probability, were equally surprised atbeholding the strangers so eager after, gold, and pearlsand precious stones, which to themselves were objects ofindifference.Their manner of treating the dead was similar to thatobserved among the gives of some of the islands.Visages che Vespucci. Navarretete. t. in. p. 211.1499.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 17Having deposited the corpse in a cavern or sepulchre,they placed a jar of water and a few eatables at its head,and then abandoned it without moan or lamentation. I nsome parts of the coast, when a person was considerednear his end, his nearest relatives bore him to the woodsand laid him in a hammock suspended to the trees. Theythen danced round him until evening, when, having leftwithin his reach sufficient meat and drink to sustain himfor four days, they repaired to their habitations. If herecovered and returned home, he was received with muchceremony and rejoicing; if he died of his malady or offamine, nothing more was thought of him.Their mode of treating a fever is also worthy of mention.In the height of the malady they plunged thepatient in a bath of the coldest water, after which theyobliged him to make many evolutions round a great fire,until he was in a violent heat, when they put him to bed,that he might sleep : a treatment, adds Amerigo Vespucci,by which we saw many cured.18 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.CHAPTER III.Coasting of Terra Firma Military Expedition of Ojeda.AFTER touching at various parts of Trinidad and theGulf of Paria, Ojeda passed through the strait of the Bocadel Drago, or Drago s Mouth, which Columbus hadfound so formidable, and then steered his course alongthe coast of Terra Firma, landing occasionally until hearrived at Curran, or the Gulf of Pearls. From hencehe stood to the opposite island of Margarita, previouslydiscovered by Columbus, and since renowned for its pearlfishery. This, as well as several adjacent islands, hevisited and explored; after which he returned to themain land, and touched at Cumana and Maracapana,where he found the rivers infested with alligators resemblingthe crocodiles of the Nile.Finding a convenient harbour at Maracapana he unloadedand careened his vessels there, and built a smallbrigantine. The natives came to him in great numbers,bringing abundance of venison, wish, and cassava bread,and aiding the seamen in their labours. Their hospitalitywas not certainly disinterested, for they sought to gainthe protection of the Spaniards, whom they reverencedas superhuman beings. When they thought they hadsufficiently secured their favour, they represented toOjeda that their coast was subject to invasion from a distantisland, the inhabitants of which were cannibals, andcarried their people into captivity, to be devoured at1499.] ALONZO DE OJEUA FIRST VOYAGE. 19their unnatural banquets. They besought Ojeda, therefore,to avenge them upon these ferocious enemies.The request was gratifying to the lighting propensitiesof Alonzo de Ojeda, and to his love of adventure, andwas readily granted. Taking seven of the natives onboardof his vessels, therefore, as guides, he set sail inquestof the cannibals. After sailing for seven days hecame to a chain of islands, some of which were peopled,others uninhabited, and which are supposed to have beenthe Carried islands. One of these was pointed out byhis guides as the habitation of their foes. On runningnear the shore he beheld it thronged with savage warriors,decorated with coronets of gaudy plumes, theirbodies painted with a variety of-colours. They werearmed with bows and arrows, with darts, lances, andbucklers, and seemed prepared to defend their islandfrom invasion.This show of war was calculated to rouse the martialspirit of Ojeda. He brought his ships to anchor, orderedout his boats, and provided each with a caterer orsmall cannon. Beside the oarsmen, each boat containeda number of soldiers, who were told to crouch out ofsight in the bottom. The boats then pulled in steadilyfor the shore. As they approached the Indians let fly acloud of arrows, but without much effect. Seeing theboats continue to advance, the savages threw themselvesinto the sea, and brandished their lances to prevent theirlanding. Upon this, the soldiers sprang up in the boatsand discharged the parterres. At the sound and smokeof these unknown, weapons the savages abandoned thewater in affright, while Ojeda and his men leaped onshore and pursued them. The Carib warriors rallied onthe banks, and fought for a long time with that courage20 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.peculiar to their race, but were at length driven to thewoods, at the edge of the sword, leaving many killed andwounded on the field of battle.On the following day the savages were seen on theshore in still greater numbers, armed and painted, anddecorated with war plumes, and sounding defiance withtheir conchs and drums. Ojeda again landed with fifty-sevenmen, whom he separated into four companies, andordered them to charge the enemy from different directions.The Caribs fought for a time hand to hand, displayinggreat dexterity in covering themselves with theirbucklers, but were at length entirely routed and driven,with great slaughter, to the forests. The Spaniards hadbut one man killed and twenty-one wounded in thesecombats, such superior advantage did their armour givethem over the naked savages. Having plundered andset fire to the houses they returned triumphantly to theirships, with a number of Carib captives; and made sailfor the main land. Ojeda bestowed a part of the spoil uponthe seven Indians who had accompanied him as guides,and sent them exulting to their homes, to relate to theircountrymen the signal vengeance that had been wreakedupon their foes. He then anchored in a bay where heremained for twenty days, until his men had recoveredfrom their wounds.*There is some discrepancy in the early accounts of this battle,as to the time and place of its occurrence. The author has collatedthe narratives of Vespucci, Las Casas, Herrera,and Peter Martyr,and the evidence given in the law-suit of Diego Columbus, andhas endeavoured as much as possible to reconcile them.1499.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 21CHAPTER IV.Discovery of the Gulf of Venezuela Transactions there Ojeda,explores the Gulf Penetrates to Maracaibo.His crew being refreshed and the wounded sufficientlyrecovered, Ojeda made sail, and touched at the island ofDurazzo, which, according to the accounts of Vespucci,was inhabited by a race of giants, " every woman appearinga Penthesilea, and every man an Antaeus"* AsVespucci was a scholar, and as he supposed himself exploringthe regions of the extreme East, the ancient realmof fable, it is probable, his imagination deceived him, andconstrued the formidable accounts given by the Indiansof their cannibal neighbours of the islands, into somethingaccording with his recollections of classic fable. Certainit is, that the reports of subsequent voyagers proved theinhabitants of the island to be of the ordinary size.Proceeding along the coast, he arrived at a vast deepgulf, resembling a tranquil lake ; entering which, he beheldon the eastern side a village, the construction ofwhich struck him with surprise. It consisted of twentylarge houses, shaped like bells, and built on piles driveninto the bottom of the lake, which, in this part was limpidand of but little depth. Each house was providedwith a drawbridge, and with canoes by which the communicationwas carried *on. From these resemblances to theItalian city, Ojeda gave to the bay the name of the GulfVespucci. Letter to Lorenzo de Pier Francisco de Medicis.22 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.of Venice : and it is called at the present day Venezuela,or little Venice : the Indian name was Coquibacoa.When the inhabitants beheld the ships standing intothe bay, looking like wonderful and unknown apparitionsfrom the deep, they fled with terror to their houses, andraised the drawbridges. The Spaniards remained for atime gazing with admiration at this amphibious village,when a squadron of canoes entered the harbour from thesea. On beholding the ships they paused in mute amazement,and on the Spaniards attempting to approach them,paddled swiftly to shore, and plunged into the forest.They soon returned with sixteen young girls, whom theyconveyed in their canoes to the ships, distributing four onboardof each, either as peace-offerings or as tokens ofamity and confidence. The best of understanding nowseemed to be established ; and the inhabitants of the villagecame swarming about the ships in their canoes, andothers swimming in great numbers from the shores.The friendship of the savages, however, was all delusive.On a sudden several old women at the doors of thehouses uttered loud shrieks, tearing their hair in fury.It appeared to be a signal for hostility. The sixteennymphs plunged into the sea and made for shore ; the Indiansin the canoes caught up their bows and dischargeda flight of arrows, and even those who were swimmingbrandished darts and lances, which they had hitherto concealedbeneath the water.Ojeda was for a moment surprised at seeing war. thusstarting up on every side, and the very sea bristling withweapons. Manning his boats, he immediately chargedamongst the thickest of the enemy, shattered and sunk several- of their canoes, killed twenty Indians and wounded1499.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 23many more, and spread such a panic among them, thatmost of the survivors flung themselves into the sea andswam to shore. Three of them were taken prisoners, andtwo of the fugitive girls, and were conveyed on hoard of theships, where the men were put in irons. One of them,however, and the two girls, succeeded in dexterously escapingthe same night.Ojeda had but five men wounded in the affray; all ofwhom recovered. He visited the houses, hut found themabandoned and destitute of booty; notwithstanding theunprovoked hostility of the inhabitants, he spared thebuildings, that he might not cause useless irritation alongthe coast.Continuing to explore this gulf, Ojeda penetrated to aport or harbour, to which he gave the name of St. Bartholomew,but which is supposed to be the same at presentknown by the original Indian name of Maracaibo. Hereincompliance with the entreaties of the natives, he senta detachment of twenty-seven Spaniards on a. visit to theinterior. For nine days they were conducted from townto town, and feasted and almost idolized by the Indians,who regarded them as angelic beings, performing theirnational dances and games, and chaunting their traditionalballads for their entertainment.The natives of this part were distinguished for thesymmetry of their forms ; the females in particular appearedto the Spaniards to surpass all others that theyhad yet beheld in the new world for grace and beauty ;neither did the men evince, in the least degree, thatjealousy which prevailed in other parts of the coast; but,on the contrary, permitted the most frank and intimateintercourse with their wives and daughters.By the time the Spaniards set out on their return to24 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.the ship,, the whole country was aroused, pouring forthits population, male and female, to do them honour. Somebore them in litters or hammocks, that they might not befatigued with the journey, and happy was the Indian whohad the honour of bearing a Spaniard on his shouldersacross a river. Others loaded themselves with the presentsthat had been bestowed on their guests, consisting ofrich plumes, weapons of various kinds, and tropical birdsand animals. In this way they returned in triumphantprocession to the ships, the woods and shores resoundingwith their songs and shouts.Many of the Indians crowded into the boats that tookthe detachment to the ships ; others put off in canoes, orswam from shore, so that in a little while the vessels werethronged with upwards of a thousand wondering natives.While gazing and marvelling at the strange objects aroundthem, Ojeda ordered the cannon to be discharged, at thesound of which, says Vespucci, the Indians " plunged tinto the water like so many frogs from a bank." Perceiving,however, that it was done in harmless mirth, theyreturned on board, and passed the rest of the day in greatfestivity. The Spaniards brought away with them severalof the beautiful and hospitable females from this place,one of whom, named by them Isabel, was much prized byOjeda, and accompanied him in a subsequent voyage.*Navarretete, t. iii. p. 8. Idem, pp. 107, 108.It is worthy of particular mention that Ojeda, in his report ofhis voyage to the Sovereigns, informed them of his having metwith English voyagers in the vicinity of Cocjuibacoa, and thatthe Spanish government attached such importance to his informationas to take measures to prevent any intrusion into those partsby the English. It is singular that no record should exist of thisearly and extensive expedition of English navigators. If it wasundertaken in the service of the Crown, some document might befound concerning it among the archives of the reign of Henry1499.]ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE.VII. The English had already discovered the continent of NorthAmerica. This had been done in 1497, by John Cabot, a Venetian,accompanied by his son Sebastian, who was born in Bristol.They sailed under a license of Henry VII., who was to have a fifthof the profits of the voyage. On the 24th June they discoveredNewfoundland, and afterwards coasted the continent quite to Florida,bringing back to England a valuable cargo and several of thenatives. This was the first discovery of the mainland of America. Thesuccess of this expedition may have prompted the one which Ojedaencountered in the neighborhood of Coquibacoa,26* SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499,CHAPTER V.Protection of the Voyage-return to Spain.LEAVING the friendly, port of Coquibacoa, Ojeda continuedalong the western shares of the gulf of Venezuela,,and standing out to sea, and doubling Cape.Maracaibo, hepursued his coasting voyage from port to port, and promontoryto promontory, of this unknown continent, untilhe reached that long stretching headland called Cape dela Vela. There the state of his vessels, and .perhaps thedisappointment of his hopes at not meeting with abundantsources of immediate wealth, induced him sto abandon allfurther voyaging along the coast, and changing his course,he stood across the Caribbean Sea for Hispaniola. Thetenor of his commission forbade his visiting that island ;but Ojeda was not a man to stand upon trifles when hisinterest or inclination prompted the contrary. He trustedto excuse the infraction of his orders by the allegednecessity of touching at the island to caulk and refit hisvessels, and to procure provisions. His true object, however,is supposed to have been to cut dye-wood, whichabounds in the western part of Hispaniola.He accordingly anchored at Yaquimo in September,and landed with a large party of his men. Columbus atthat time held command of. the island, and, hearing ofthis unlicensed intrusion, despatched Francesco Soldan,the quondam rebel, to call Ojeda to account. The contestof stratagem and management that took place between1499. J ALONZO DE OJEpA FIRST VOYAGE. 27these two adroit and daring adventurers, has been alreadydetailed in the History of Columbus. Roldan was eventuallysuccessful , and Ojeda, being obliged to leave Hispaniola,resumed his rambling voyage, visiting variousislands, from whence he carried off numbers of the natives.He at length arrived at Cadizz in June 1500, withhis ships crowded with captives, whom he sold as slaves.So meagre, however, was the result of this expedition,that we are told, when all the expenses were deducted,but five hundred ducats remained to be divided betweenfifty-five adventurers. What made this result the moremortifying was, that a petty armament which had sailedsometime after that of Ojeda, had returned two monthsbefore him, rich with the spoils of the New World. Abrief account of this latter expedition is necessary to connectthis series of minor discoveries.28 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. .[1499.PEDRO ALONZOANDChristian GUERRA. (1499.)THE permission granted by Bishop Fonseca to Alonzode Ojeda, to undertake a private expedition to the NewWorld, roused the emulation of others of the followers ofColumbus. Among these was Pedro Alonzo Nino, a hardyseaman, native of Moguer in the vicinity of Palos,who had sailed with Columbus, as a pilot, in his Burst voyage,and also in his cruising along the coasts of Cuba andParian He soon obtained from the bishop a similar licenseto that given to Ojeda, and like the latter, soughtfor some monied confederate among the rich merchantsof Seville. One of these, named Luis Guerra, offeredto lit out a caravel for the expedition ; but on conditionthat his brother, Christoval Guerra, should have thecommand. The poverty of Nino compelled him to assentto the stipulations of the man of wealth, and he sailedas subaltern in his own enterprise ; but his nautical skilland knowledge soon gained him the ascendancy, he be-pronouncedNinyo. The N in Spanish is always pronouncedas if followed by the letter ?/.t Testimony of Bastides in the law suit of Diego Columbus.1499.] PEDRO A. Nine AND CHRIST. GUERRA. 29came virtually the captain, and ultimately enjoyed thewhole credit of the voyage.The bark of these two adventurers was but of fifty tonsburthen, and the .crew thirty three souls all told. Withthis slender armament they undertook to traverse unknownand dangerous seas, and to explore the barbarous shoresof that vast continent recently discovered by Columbus ;~such was the daring spirit of the Spanish voyagers ofthose days.It was about the beginning of June, 1499, and but afew days after the departure of Ojeda, that they put tosea. They sailed from the little port of Palos, the originalcradle of American discovery, whose brave and skilfulmariners long continued foremost in all enterprises tothe New World. Being guided by the chart of Columbus,they followed his route, and reached the southerncontinent, a little beyond Paria, about fifteen days afterthe same cflast had been visited by Ojeda.They then proceeded to the gulf of Paria, where theylanded to cut dye-wood, and were amicably entertainedby the natives. Shortly after, sallying from the gulf bythe Boca del Drago, they encountered eighteen canoes ofCaribs, the pirate rovers of these seas, and the terror ofthe bordering lands. This savage armada, instead of beingdaunted, as usual, by the sight of a European ship,with swelling sails, resembling some winged monster ofthe deep, considered it only as an object of plunder orhostility, and assailed it with showers of arrows. Thesudden burst of artillery, however, from the sides of thecaravel, and the havoc made among the Caribs by thisseeming thunder, struck them with dismay, and they fledin all directions. The Spaniards succeeded in capturingone of the canoes, with one of the warriors who had manned30 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.it. In the bottom of the canoe lay an Indian prisoner,bound hand and foot. On being liberated he informedthe Spaniards by signs that these Caribs had been on amarauding expedition along the neighbouring coasts, shuttingthemselves up at night in a stockade which they carriedwith them and issuing forth by day to plunder thevillages and to make captives. He had been one of sevenprisoners ; his companions had been devoured before hiseyes at the cannibal banquets of these savages, and he hadbeen awaiting the same miserable fate. Honest Nino andhis confederates were so indignant at this recital, that,receiving it as established fact, they performed what theyconsidered an act of equitable justice, by abandoning theCarib to the discretion of his late captive. The latterfell upon the defenceless warrior with fist and foot andcudgel ; nor did his rage subside even after the breathhad been hauled out of his victim, hilt, tearing the grimhead from the body, he placed it on a pole, as a trophy ofhis vengeance.Nino and his fellow-adventurers now steered for theisland of Margarita, where they obtained a considerablequantity of pearls by barter. They afterwards skirtedthe opposite coast of Cumana, trading cautiously andshrewdly, from port to port; sometimes remaining onboardof their little bark, and obliging the savages to comeoff to them, when the latter appeared too numerous, atother times . venturing on shore, and even into the interior.They were invariably treated with amity by thenatives, who were perfectly naked, excepting that theywere adorned with necklaces and bracelets of pearls.These they sometimes gave freely to the Spaniards, atother times they exchanged them for glass beads and1499.] PEDRO A. Nine AND CHRIST. GUERRA. 31other trinkets, and smiled at the folly of the strangers inmaking such silly bargains.*The Spaniards were struck with the grandeur and densityof the forests along this coast, for in these regions ofheat and moisture, vegetation appears in its utmost magnificence.They heard also the cries and roaring of wildand unknown animals in the woodlands, which, however,appeared not to be .very dangerous, as the Indians wentabout the forest armed solely with bows and arrows.From meeting with deer and rabbits, they were convincedthat that was a part of Terra Firma, not having foundany animals of the kind on the islands. fNino and Guerra were so well pleased with the hospitalityof the natives of Cumana, and with the profitabletraffic for pearls, by which they obtained many ofgreat size and beauty, that they remained upwards ofthree months on the coast.They then proceeded westward to a country calledCauchieto, trading, as usual, for pearls, and for the inferiorkind of gold called guanin. At length they arrivedat a place where there was a kind of fortress protectinga number of houses and gardens situated on a river, thewhole forming, to the eyes of the Spaniards, one of themost delicious abodes imaginable. They were about tolandand enjoy the pleasures of this fancied paradise,when they beheld upwards of a thousand Indians, armedwith bows and arrows,, and war clubs, preparing to givethem a warm reception; having been probably incensedby the recent visit of Ojeda. As Nino and Guerra hadnot the fighting propensities of Ojeda, and were in questof profit rather than renown, having moreover, in aH*Lascars. Hist. Ind. lib. i. c. 171. .>"t Navarretete, t. iii. p. 1 4,32 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.probability, the fear of the rich merchant of Seville beforetheir eyes, they prudently abstained from landing,and, abandoning this hostile coast, returned forthwith toCumana, to resume their trade for pearls. They soonamassed a great number, many of which were equalin size and beauty, to the most celebrated of the east,though they had been injured in boring from a want ofproper implements.Satisfied with their success, they now set sail for Spain,and piloted their little bark safely to Bayonne in Gallican,where they anchored about the middle of April, 1500,nearly two months before the arrival of Ojeda and his associates,La Cosa and Vespucci.*The most successful voyagers to the New World weredoomed to trouble from their very success. The ampleamount of pearls paid to the treasury, as the royal portionof the profits of this expedition, drew suspicion insteadof favour upon the two adventurers. They were accused.of having concealed a great part of the pearls collectedby them, thus defrauding their companions andthe crown. Pedro Alonzo Nino was actually thrown intoprison on this accusation, but, nothing being proved againsthim, was eventually set free, and enjoyed the enviablereputation of having performed the richest voyage thathad yet been made to the New World, fPeter Martyr. Other historians give a different date for theirarrival. Herrera says Feb. 6.t Navarretete. Collect, t. iii. p. 1 1. Herrera, d. i. I. iv. c. v.1499.] VICENTE YANEZ PINZON. 33VICENTE YANEZ PINZON. (1499.)AMONG the maritime adventurers of renown who wereroused to action by the licenses granted for private expeditionsof discovery, we find conspicuous the name ofVicente Yanez Pinson of Palos, one of the three bravebrothers who aided Columbus in his first voyage, andrisked life and fortune with him in his doubtful and perilousenterprise.Of Martin Alonzo Pinson, the eldest and most importantof these three brothers, particular mention has beenmade in the History of Columbus, and of the unfortunateerror in conduct which severed him from the admiral,brought on him the displeasure of the sovereigns, andprobably contributed to his premature and melancholydeath.Whatever cloud of disgrace may have overshadowedhis family, it was but temporary. The death of MartinAlonzo, as usual, atoned for his faults, and his good deedslived after him. The merits and services of himself andhis brothers were acknowledged, and the survivers of thefamily were restored to royal confidence. A feeling ofjealous hostility prevented them from taking a part in thesubsequent voyages of Columbus; but the moment thedoor was thrown open for individual enterprise, theypressed forward for permission to engage in it. at theirown risk and expense and it was readily granted. In34 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.fact, their supposed hostility to Columbus was one of thesurest recommendations they could have to the favour ofthe Bishop Fonseca, by whom the license was issued fortheir expedition.Vicente Yailez Pinson was the leader of this new enterprise,and he was accompanied by two nephews, namedArias Perez and Diego Fernandez, sons of his latebrother, Martin Alonzo Pinson. Several of his sailorshad sailed with Columbus in his recent voyage to Paria,as had also his three principal pilots, Juan Quintero, Juande Umbria, and Juan de Jerez. Thus these minor voyagesseemed all to emanate from the great expeditions ofColumbus, and to aim at realizing the ideas and speculationscontained in the papers transmitted by him to Spain.The armament consisted of four caravels, and was fittedout at the port of Palos. The funds of Vicente Yanezwere completely exhausted before he had fitted out hislittle squadron; he was obliged therefore to purchase oncredit the sea stores and articles of traffic necessary forthe enterprise. The merchants of Palos seem to haveknown how to profit by the careless nature of sailors andthe sanguine spirit of discoverers. In their bargains theycharged honest Pinson eighty and a hundred per cent,above the market value of their merchandise, and in thehurry and urgency of the moment he was obliged to submitto the imposition.*The squadron put to sea in the beginning of December,1499, and after passing the Canary and Cape deVerde Islands, stood to the south-west. Having sailedabout seven hundred leagues, they crossed the equator*Navarretete, vol. iii. See Doc. No. 7: where Vicente Yanez Pinson petitions for redress.1499.] VICENTE YANEZ PINZON. 35and lost sight of the north star. They had scarcely passedthe equinoctial line when they encountered a terribletempest, which had well nigh swallowed up their slenderbarks. The storm passed away, and the firmament wasagain serene ; but the mariners remained tossing about inconfusion, dismayed by the turbulence of the waves andthe strange aspect of the heavens. They looked in vainto the south for some polar star by which to shape theircourse, and fancied that some swelling prominence of theglobe concealed it from their view. They knew nothingas yet of the firmament of that hemisphere, nor of thatbeautiful constellation the southern cross, but expectedto find a guiding star at the opposite pole, similar to thecynosure of the north.Pinson, however, who was of an intrepid spirit, pursuedhis course resolutely .to the west, and after sailing abouttwo hundred and forty leagues, and being in the eighthdegree of southern latitude, he beheld land afar off on the28th of January, to which he gave the name of SantaMaria de la Consolation, from the sight of it having consoledhim in the midst of doubts and perplexities. It isnow called Cape St. Augustine, and forms the most prominentpart of the immense empire of Brazil.The sea was turbid and discoloured as in rivers, andon sounding they had sixteen fathoms water. Pinsonlanded, accompanied by a notary and witnesses, and tookformal possession of the territory for the Castilian crown ;no one appeared to dispute his pretensions, but he observedthe print of footsteps on the beach which seemed ofgigantic size.At night there were fires lighted upon a neighbouringpart of the coast, which induced Pinson on the followingmorning to send forty men well armed to the spot. A36 SPANISH VOYAGES-pF DISCOVERY. [1499.band of Indians, of about equal number, sallied forth toencounter them, armed with bows and arrows, and seeminglyof extraordinary stature. A still greater numberwere seen in the distance hastening to the support of theircompanions. The Indians arrayed themselves for combat,and the two parties remained for a short time eyeingeach other with mutual curiosity and distrust. TheSpaniards now displayed looking glasses, beads, and othertrinkets, and jingled strings of hawks bells, in general socaptivating to an Indian ear; but the haughty savagestreated all their overtures with contempt, regarding theseofferings carelessly for a short time, and then stalking offwith stoic gravity. They were ferocious of feature, andapparently warlike in disposition, and are supposed tohave been a wandering race of unusual size, who roamedabout in the night, and were of the most fierce untractablenature. By nightfall there was not an Indian to be seen,in the neighbourhood.Discouraged by the inhospitable character of the coast,Pinson made sail and stood to the north-west, until hecame to the mouth of a river too shallow to receive hisships. Here he sent his boats inshore with a number ofmen well armed. They landed on the river banks, andbeheld a multitude of naked Indians on a neighbouringhill. A single Spaniard armed simply with sword andbuckler, was sent to invite them to friendly intercourse.He approached them with signs of amity, and threw tothem a hawks bell. They replied to him with similarsigns, and threw to him a small gilded wand. The soldierstoop ed to pick it up, when suddenly a troop ofsavages rushed down to seize him ; he threw himself immediatelyupon the defensive, with sword and target, andthough but a small man, and far from robust, he handled1499.] VICENTE YANEZ PINZON. 37his weapons with such dexterity and fierceness, that hekept the savages at bay, making a clear circle round him,and wounding several who attempted to break it. Hisunlooked-for prowess surprised and confounded his assailants,and gave time for his comrades to come to hisassistance. The Indians then made a general assault,with such a galling discharge of darts and arrows that almostimmediately eight or ten Spaniards were slain, andmany more wounded. . The latter were compelled toretreat to their boats disputing every inch of ground.The Indians pursued them even into the water, surroundingthe boats and seizing hold of the oars. The Spaniardsmade a desperate defence, thrusting many throughwith their lances, and cutting down and ripping up otherswith their swords, but such was the ferocity of the survives,that they persisted in their attack until they overpoweredthe crew of one of the boats, and bore it off intriumph. With this they retired from the combat, andthe Spaniards returned defeated and disheartened to theirships, having met wish the roughest .reception that theEuropeans had yet experienced in the New World.Pinson now stood forty leagues to the north-west, untilhe arrived in the neighbourhood of the equinoctial line.Here he found the water of the sea so fresh that he wasenabled to replenish his casks with it. Astonished at sosingular a phenomenon he stood in for the land, and arrivedamong a number of fresh and verdant islands inhabitedby a gentle and hospitable race of people, gailypainted, who came off to the ships with the most frankand fearless confidence. Pinson soon found that theseislands lay in the mouth of an immense river, more thanthirty leagues in breadth, the water of which enteredupwards of forty leagues into the sea before losing its38 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1499.sweetness. It was in fact, the renowned Marion, sinceknown as the Orellana and the Amazon. While lyingin the mouth of this river there was a sudden swellingof the stream, which, . being opposed by the currentof the sea, and straitened by the narrow channels of theislands, rose more than five fathoms, with mountain waves,and a tremendous noise, threatening the destruction ofthe ships. Pinson extricated his little squadron withgreat difficulty from this perilous situation, and findingthere was but little gold, or any thing else of value to befound among the simple natives, he requited their hospitality,in the mode too common among the early discoverers,by carrying off thirty-six of them captive.Having regained the sight of the polar star, Pinsonpursued his course along the coast, passing the mouths ofthe Orinoco, and entering the Gulf of Paria, where helanded and cut Brazil wood. Sallying forth by the Bocadel Drago, he reached the island of Hispaniola about the23d of June, from whence he sailed for the Bahamas.Here, in the month of July, while &t anchor,, there camesuch a tremendous hurricane that two of the caravelswere swallowed up with all their crews in the sight oftheir terrified companions: a third parted her cablesand was driven out to sea, while the fourth was so furiouslybeaten by the tempest that the crew threw themselvesinto the boats and made for shore. Here theyfound a few naked Indians, who offered them no molestation; but, fearing that they might spread the tidings ofa handful of shipwrecked Spaniards being upon the coast,and thus bring the savages of the neighbouring islandsupon them, a council of war was held whether it wouldnot be a wise precaution to put these Indians to death.Fortunately for the latter, the vessel which had been1499.] VICENTE YANEZ PINZON. 39driven from her anchors returned and put an end to thealarm, and to the council of war. The other caravel alsorode out the storm uninjured, and the sea subsiding, theSpaniards returned on board, and made the best of theirway to the Island of Hispaniola. Having repaired thedamages sustained in the gale, they again made sail forSpain, and came to anchor in the river before Palos,about the end of September. -f *Thus ended one of the most chequered and disastrousvoyages that had yet been made to the New World.Yanez Pinson had lost two of his ships, and many of hismen ; what made the loss of the latter more grievous Wasthat they had been enlisted from among his neighbours,his friends, and relatives. In fact, the expeditions tothe New World must have realized .the terrors and apprehensionsof the people of Palos by filling that littlecommunity with widows and orphans. When the richmerchants, who had sold goods to Pinson, at a hundredper cent, advance, beheld him return in this sorry condition,with two shattered barks and a handful of poor,tattered, weatherbeaten seamen, they began to tremblefor their money. No sooner, therefore, had he and hisnephews departed to Granada, to give an account of theirdiscoveries to the sovereigns, than the merchants seizedupon their caravels and cargoes, and began to sell them,to repay themselves.* Honest Pinson immediately addresseda petition to the government, stating the impositionthat had been practised upon him, and the danger hewas in of imprisonment and utter ruin, should his creditorsbe allowed to sacrifice his goods at a public sale. Hepetitioned that they might be compelled to return theproperty thus seized, and that he might be enabled tosell three hundred and fifty quintals of Brazil wood, which40 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1500.he had brought back with him, and which would be sufficientto satisfy the demands of his creditors. The sovereignsgranted his prayer. They issued an order tothe civil authorities of Palos to interfere in the matter,with all possible promptness and brevity, allowing novexatious delay, and administering justice so impartiallythat neither of the parties should have cause to complain.Pinson escaped front the fangs of his creditors, but, ofcourse, must have suffered in purse from the expenses ofthe law; which, in Spain is apt to bury even a successfulclient, under an overwhelming mountain of documentsand writings. We infer this in respect to Pinson from aroyal order issued in the following year, allowing him toexport a quantity of grain, in consideration of the heavylosses he had sustained in his voyage of discovery. Hedid but share the usual lot of the Spanish discoverers,whose golden anticipations too frequently ended in penury; but he is distinguished from among the crowd of themby being the first European who crossed the Equinoctialline, on the western ocean, and by discovering the greatkingdom of Brazil.*On4:he 5th of September, 1501, a royal permission was givento Vicente Yafiez Pinson to colonize and govern the lands hehad discovered, beginning a little north of the river Amazon, andextending to Cape St. Augustine. The object of the governmentin this permission was to establish an outpost and a resolute commanderon this southern frontier, that should check any intrusionsthe Portuguese might make in consequence of the accidental discoveryof a part of the coast of Brazil by Pedro Alvarez Cabral,in 1500. The subsequent arrangement of a partition line betweenthe two countries prevented the necessity of this precaution, and itdoes, not appear that Vicente Yafiez Pinson made any second voyageto those parts.In 1506 he undertook an expedition in company with Juan Diade Solis, a native of Lebrija, the object of which was to endeavour tofind the strait or passage supposed by Columbus to lead from theAtlantic to a southern ocean. It was necessarily without success,1500.] VICENTE YANEZ PINZON. 41as was also another voyage made by them, for the same purpose, in1508. As no such passage exists, no blame could attach to thoseable navigators for being foiled in the object of their search.In consequence of the distinguished merits and services of thePinson family they were raised, by the emperor Charles V., to thedignity of aHidalguia, or nobility, without any express title, and acoat of arms was granted them, on which were emblazoned threecaravels, with a hand at the stern pointing to an island covered withsavages. This coat of arms is still maintained by the family, whohave added to it the motto granted to Columbus, merely substitutingthe name of Pinson for that of the Admiral,A Castile y a Leon,Nuevo Mundo dio Pinson.42 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1500.DIEGO DE LeeANDRODRIGO DE BASTIDES. (1500.NOTWITHSTANDING the hardships and disasters thathad beset the voyagers to the New-world, and the penuryin which their golden anticipations had too frequentlyterminated, adventurers continued to press forward, excitedby fresh reports of newly discovered regions, eachof which, in its turn, was represented as the real land ofpromise. Scarcely had Vicente Yafiez Pinson departedon the voyage recently narrated, when his townsmanDiego de Lee likewise set sail with two vessels from thebusy little port of Palos, on a like expedition. No particularsof importance are known of this voyage, exceptingthat Lee doubled Cape St. Augustine, and beheldthe southern continent stretching far to the southwest. Onreturning to Spain he drew a chart of the coast for thebishop Fonseca, and enjoyed the reputation, for upwardsof ten years afterwards, of having extended his discoveriesfurther south than any other voyager.Another contemporary adventurer to the New Worldwas Rodrigo de Bastides, a wealthy notary of Triana, thesuburb of Seville inhabited by the maritime part of itspopulation. Being sanctioned by the sovereigns, to whomhe engaged to yield a fourth of his profits, he fitted out1500.] DIEGO DE Lee AND Rodrigo DE BASTIDES. 43two caravels in October, 1500, to go in quest of gold andpearls.Prudently distrusting his own judgment in nauticalmatters, this adventurous notary associated with him theveteran pilot Juan de la Cosa, the same hardy Biscaywho had sailed with Columbus and Ojeda. A generaloutline of their voyage has already been given in the lifeof Columbus; it extended the discoveries of the coast ofTerra Firma from Cape de la Vela, where Ojeda had leftoff, quite to the port of Nombre de Dies.Bastides distinguished himself from the mass of discoverersby his kind treatment of the natives, and Juan dela Cosa by his sound discretion and his able seamanship.Their voyage had been extremely successful, and theyhad collected, by barter, a great amount of gold and pearls,when their prosperous career was checked by an unlooked-for evil. Their vessels to their surprise became leakyin every part, and they discovered to their dismay, thatthe bottoms were pierced in innumerable places by thebrome, or worm, which abounds in the waters of the torridzone, but of which they, as yet, had scarcely anyknowledge. It was with great difficulty they could keepafloat until they reached a small islet on the coast of Hi (spaniel. Here they repaired their ships as well as theywere able, and again put to sea to return to Cadizz. Asuccession of gales drove them back to port ; the ravagesof the worms continued, the leaks broke out afresh ; theylanded the most portable and precious part of their wealthycargoes, and the vessels foundered with the remainder.Bastides lost, moreover, the arms and ammunitionsaved from the wreck, being obliged to destroy them lestthey should fall into the hands of the Indians.Distributing his men into three bands, s^fvo of them44 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1500.headed by La Cosa and himself, they set off for San Domingoby three several routes, as the country was notableto furnish provisions for so large a body. Each bandwas provided with a coffer stored with trinkets and otherarticles of Indian traffic, with which to buy provisions onthe road.Francisco de Bobadilla, the wrong-headed oppressorand supersede of Columbus, was at that time governor ofSan Domingo. The report reached him that a crew ofadventurers had landed on the island, and were marchingthrough the country in three bands, each provided with acoffer of gold, and carrying on illicit trade with thenatives. The moment Bastides made his appearance,therefore, he was seized and thrown into prison, and aninvestigation commenced. In his defence he maintainedthat his only traffic with the natives was for the purposeof procuring provisions for his followers, or guides forhis journey. It was determined, however, to send himto Spain for trial, with the written testimony and theother documents of his examination.He was accordingly conveyed in the same fleet inwhich Bobadilla embarked for Spain, and which experiencedsuch an awful shipwreck in the sight of Columbus.The ship Rodrigo Bastides was one of the few that outlivedthe tempest: it arrived safe at Cadizz in September,1502. Bastides was ultimately acquitted of the chargesadvanced against him. So lucrative had been his voyage,that, notwithstanding the losses sustained by the founderingof his vessels, he was enabled to pay a large sum tothe crown as a fourth of his profits, and to retain a greatamount for himself. In reward of his services and discoveriesthe sovereigns granted him an annual revenuefor life, to arise from the proceeds of the province of1500.] DIEGO DE Lee AND RODRIGO DE BAST1DES. 45Uraba, which he had discovered. An equal pension waslikewise assigned to the hardy Juan de la Cosa, to resultfrom the same territory, of which he was appointedAlguazil Mayor.* Such was the economical generosityof king Ferdinand, who rewarded the past toils of his adventurousdiscoverers out of the expected produce oftheir future labours.Navarretete. Collect. t. iii.46 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1502.SECOND VOYAGE OF ALONZO DE OJEDA.1502.THE first voyage of Alonzo de Ojeda to the coast ofParia, and its meagre termination in June, 1500, has beenrelated. He gained nothing in wealth by that expedition,but he added to his celebrity as a bold and skilfuladventurer. His youthful fire, his sanguine and swellingspirit, and the wonderful stories that were told of his activityand prowess, made him extremely popular, so thathis patron, the bishop Fonseca, found it an easy matter tosecure for him the royal favour. In consideration of hispast services and. of others expected from him, a grantwas made to-him of six leagues of land on the southernpart of Hispaniola, and the government of the province ofCoquibacoa which he had discovered. He was, furthermore,Authorized to fit out any number of ships, not exceedingten, at his own expense, and to prosecute the discoveryof the coast of Terra Firma. He was not to touchor traffic on the pearl coast of Paria; extending as far asabay in the vicinity of the island of Margarita. Beyondthis he had a right to trade in all kinds of merchandise,whether of pearls, jewels, metals, or precious stones;paying one fifth of the profits to the crown, and abstainingfrom making slaves of the Indians without a speciallicense from the sovereigns. He was to colonize Loquibacon, and, as a recompense, was to enjoy one half of theproceeds of his territory, provided the half did not .]ALONZO DE OJEDA SECOND VOYAGE. 47need 300,000 tragedies: all beyond that amount was togo to the crown.A principal reason, however, for granting this governmentand those privileges to Ojeda, was that, in his previousvoyage, he had met with English adventurers on avoyage of discovery in the neighbourhood of Coquibacoa,at which the jealousy of the sovereigns had taken thealarm. They were anxious, therefore, to establish a resoluteand fighting commander like Ojeda upon this outpost,and they instructed him to set up the arms of Castile andLeon in every place he visited, as a signal of discoveryand possession, and to put a stop to the intrusions of theEnglish.*With this commission in his pocket, and the governmentof an Indian territory in the perspective, Ojedasoon found associates to aid him in fitting out an armament.These were Juan de Vergara, a servant of a richcanon of the cathedral of Seville, and Garcia de Campos,commonly called Ocampo, They made a contract ofpartnership to last for two years, according to which theexpenses and profits of the expedition, and of the governmentof Coquibacoa were to be shared equally betweenthem. The purses of the confederates were not ampleenough to afford ten ships, but they fitted out four. 1st,The Santa Maria de la Antigua, commanded by Garciadel Campo ; 2d, The Santa Maria de la Granada, commandedby Juan de Vergara $ 3d, The Caravel Magdalena,commanded by Pedro de Ojeda, nephew to Alonzo;and 4th, The Caravel Santa Ana, commanded byHernando de Guevara. The whole was under the commandof Alonzo de Ojeda. The expedition set sail jn1502, touched at the Canaries, according to custom, toNavarretete, t. iii. document x.48 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1502.take in provisions, and then proceeded westward for theshores of the New World.After traversing the Gulf of Paria, and before reachingthe Island of Margarita, the caravel Santa Ana, commandedby Hernando de Guevara, was separated fromthem, and for several days the ships were mutually seekingeach other, in these silent and trackless seas. Afterthey were all reunited they found their provisions growingscanty, they landed therefore at a part of the coastcalled Cumana by the natives, but to which, from itsbeauty and fertility, Ojeda gave the name of Valfermoso.While foraging here for their immediate supplies, theidea occurred to Ojeda that he should want furniture andutensils of all kinds for his proposed colony, and that itwould be better to pillage them from a country where hewas a mere transient visitor, than to wrest them from hisneighbours in the territory where he was to set up hisgovernment. His companions were struck with the policy,if not the justice, of this idea, and they all set towork to carry it into execution. Dispersing themselves,therefore, in ambush in various directions, they at a concertedsignal rushed forth from their concealment, andset upon the natives. Ojeda had issued orders to do aslittle injury and damage as possible, and on no account todestroy the habitations of the Indians. His followers,however, in their great zeal, transcended his orders.Seven or eight Indians were killed and many woundedin the skirmish which took place, and a number of theircabins were wrapped in flames. A great quantity ofhammocks, of cotton, and of utensils of various kinds,fell into the hands of the conquerors; they also capturedseveral female Indians, some of whom were ransomedwith the kind of gold called guanin ; some were1502.] .ALONZO DE OJEDA SECOND VOYAGE. 49retained by Vergara for himself and his friend Ocampo,others were distributed among the crews, the rest, probablythe old and ugly, were set at liberty. As to Ojeda,he reserved nothing for himself of the spoil excepting asingle hammock.The ransom paid by the poor Indians for some of theireffects and some of their women, yielded the Spaniards atrifling quantity of gold, but they found the place destituteof provisions, and Ojeda was obliged to despatchVergara in a caravel to the island of Jamaica to forage forsupplies, with instructions to rejoin him at Maracaibo orCape de la Vela.Ojeda at length arrived at Coquibacoa, at the portressd for his seat of government. He found the country,however, so poor and sterile, that he proceeded along thecoast to a bay which he named Santa Cruz, but which issupposed to be the same at present called Bahia Honda,where he found a Spaniard who had been left in the provinceof Citarma by Bastides in his late voyage about thirteenmonths before, and hall remained ever since amongthe Indians, so that he had acquired their language.Ojeda determined to form his settlement at this place;but the natives seemed disposed to defend their territory,for, the moment a party landed to procure water, theywere assailed by a galling shower of arrows, and drivenback to the ships. Upon this Ojeda landed with all hisforce, and struck such terror into the Indians, that theycame forward with signs of amity, and brought a considerablequantity of gold "as a peace-offering, which wasgraciously accepted.Ojeda, with the concurrence of his associates, now setto work to establish a settlement, cutting down trees, andcommencing a fortress. They had scarce begun, when50 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1502.they were attacked by a neighbouring cacique,, but Ojedasallied forth upon him with such intrepidity and effect asnot merely to defeat, but to drive him from the neighbourhood.He then proceeded quietly to finish his fortress,which was defended by lombards and contained the magazineof provisions and the treasure amassed in the expedition.The provisions were dealt out twice a day, underthe inspection of proper officers ; the treasure gained bybarter, by ransom, or by plunder, was deposited in a strongbox secured by two locks, one key being kept by the royalsupervisor, the other by Ocampo.In the mean time provisions became scarce. The Indiansnever appeared in the neighbourhood of the fortress,except to harass it with repeated though ineffectual assaults.Vergara did not appear with the expected supplies fromJamaica, and a caravel was despatched in search of him.The people, worn out with labour and privations of va ,pious kinds, and disgusted with the situation of a settlement,which was in a poor and unhealthy country, grewdiscontented and factious. They began to fear that theyshould lose the means of departing, as their vessels werein danger of being destroyed by the brome or worms.Ojeda led them forth repeatedly upon foraging partiesabout the adjacent country, and collected some provisionsand booty in the Indian villages. The provision he depositedin the magazine, part of the spoils Tie dividedamong his followers, and the gold he locked up in thestrong box, the keys of which he took possession of, tothe great displeasure of the supervisor and his associateOcampo. The murmurs of the people grew loud as theirsufferings increased. They insinuated that Ojeda hadno authority over this part of the coast, having passed theboundaries of his government, and formed his settlement1502.] ALONZO DE OJEDA-T-SECOND VOYAGE. 51in the country discovered by Bastides. By the timeVergara arrived from Jamaica, the factions of this pettycolony had risen to an alarming height. Ocampo had apersonal enmity to the governor, arising probably fromsome feud about the strong box ; being a parties Jir friendof Vergara, he held a private conference with him, andlaid a plan to entrap the doughty Ojeda. In pursuanceof this the latter was invited on board of the caravel ofVergara, to see the provisions he had brought from Jamaica,but no sooner was he on board than they chargedhim with having transgressed the limits of his government,with having provoked the hostility of the Indians,and needlessly sacrificed the lives of his followers, andabove all with having taken possession of the strong box,in contempt of the authority of the royal supervisor, andwith the intention of appropriating* to himself all thegains of the enterprise; they informed him therefore oftheir intention to convey him a prisoner to Hispaniola, toanswer to the Governor for his offences. Ojeda findinghimself thus entrapped, proposed to Vergara and Campo that they should return to Spain with such of thecrews as chose to accompany them, leaving him with theremainder to prosecute his enterprise. The two recreantpartners at first consented for they were disgusted withthe enterprise which offered little profit and severe hardships.They agreed to leave Ojeda the smallest of thecaravels, with a third of the provisions and of their gains,and to build a row boat for him. They actually began tolabour upon the boat. Before ten days had elapsed,however, they repented of the arrangement, the ship-carpenterswere ill, there were no caulkers, and moreoverthey recollected that as Ojeda, according to theirrepresentations, was a defaulter to the crown, they would52 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1502,be liable as his sure ties, should they return to* Spain withouthim. They concluded, therefore, that the wisestplan was to give him nothing, but to carry him off prisoner.Wheij Ojeda learned the determination of his warypartners, he attempted to make his escape and get offto St. Domingo, but he was seized, thrown in irons,and conveyed on board of the caravel. The two partnersthen set sail from Santa Cruz, bearing off the wholecommunity, its captive governor, and the litigated strongbox.They put to sea about the beginning of September, andarrived at the western part of the island of Hispaniola.While at anchor within a stone s throw of the land, Ojeda,confident in his strength and skill as a swimmer, let himselfquietly slide down the side of the ship into the water duringthe night, and attempted to swim for the shore. His armswere free, but his feet were shackled, and the weight ofhis irons threatened to sink him. He was obliged to shoutfor help ; a boat was sent from the vessel to his relief, andthe unfortunate governor was brought back half drownedto his unrelenting partners.*The latter now landed and delivered their prisoner intothe hands of Galleys the commander of the place, tobe put at the disposal of the governor of the island. Inthe mean time the strong box, which appears to have beenat the bottom of all these feuds, remained in the possessionof Vergara and Ocampo, who, Ojeda says, took fromit whatever they thought proper, without regard to theroyal dues, or the consent of the royal supervisor. Theywere all together, prisoner and accusers, in the city of%Hist. Gen. de Visages. Herrera, Hist. Ind.1502.] ALONZO DE OJEDA SECOND VOYAGE. 53San Domingo, about the end of September, 1502, whenthe chief judge of the island, after hearing both partiesgave a verdict against Ojeda that stripped him of all hiseffects, and brought him into debt to the crown for theroyal proportion of the profits of the voyage. Ojeda appealedto the sovereign, and, after some time was honourablyacquitted, by the royal council, from all tj^e charges,and a mandate was issued in 1503, ordering a restitutionof his property. It appears, however, that thecosts of justice, or rather of the law, consumed his shareof the treasure of the strong box, and that a royal orderwas necessary to liberate him from the hands of the governor;so that like too many other litigants, he finallyemerged from the labyrinths of the law a triumphant client,but a ruined man.54 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.THIRD VOYAGEOFALONZO DE OJEDA,Ojeda applies for a Command Has a rival Candidate in Diegode Nicuesa His success.FOR several years after his ruinous, though successfullawsuit, we lose all traces of Alonzo de Ojeda, exceptingthat we are told he made another voyage to the vicinityof Coquibacoa, in 1505. No record remains of this expedition,which seems to have been equally unprofitablewith the preceding, for we find him in 1508, in theisland of Hispaniola, as poor in purse, though as proud inspirit,as ever. In fact, however fortune might havefavoured him, he had a heedless squandering dispositionthat would always have kept him poor.About this time the cupidity of King Ferdinand wasgreatly excited by the accounts which had been given byColumbus, of the gold mines of Veragua, in which the admiralfancied he had discovered the Aurea Chersonesusof the ancients, from whence King Solomon procured thegold, used in building the temple of Jerusalem. Subsequentvoyagers had corroborated the opinion of Columbusas to the general riches of the coast of Terra Firma;King Ferdinand resolved, therefore, to found regular1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 55colonies along that coast and to place the whole undersome capable commander. A project of the kind hadbeen conceived by Columbus, when he discovered thatregion in the course of his last voyage, and the readermay remember the disasters experienced by his brotherDon Bartholomew and himself* in endeavouring to establisha colony on the hostile shores of Veragua. The admiralbeing dead, the person who should naturally havepresented himself to the mind of the sovereign for thisparticular service was Don Bartholomew, but the waryand selfish monarch knew the Adelantado to be as lofty inhis terms as his late brother, and preferred to accomplishhis purposes by cheaper agents. . He was unwilling, also,to increase the consequence of a family, whose vast, butjust, claims were already a cause of repining to his sordidand jealous spirit. He looked round, therefore,among the crowd of adventurers, who had sprung up inthe school of Columbus, for some individual who mightbe ready to serve him on more accommodating terms.Among those, considered by their friends as most fittedfor this purpose, was Alonzo de Ojeda, for his roving voyagesand daring exploits had made him famous among thevoyagers ; and it was thought that an application on hispart would be attended with success, for he was knownto possess a staunch friend at court in the Bishop Fonseca.Unfortunately he was too far distant to urge his suit to thebishop, and what was worse, he was destitute of money.At this juncture there happened to be at Hispaniola theveteran navigator and pilot Juan de la Cosa, who was akind of Nestor in all nautical affairs.* The hardy Bis-Peter Martyr gives the following weighty testimony to theknowledge and skill of this excellent seamen : " Of the Spaniards,56 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.cavan had sailed with Ojeda, and had conceived a greatopinion of the courage and talents of the youthful adventurer.He had contrived, also, to fill his purse in thecourse of his cruising and now, in the generous spirit ofa sailor, offered to aid Ojeda with it in the prosecution ofhis wishes.His offer was gladly accepted ; it was agreed that Juande la Cosa should depart for Spain, to promote the appointmentof Ojeda to the command of Terra Firma, and,in case of success, should fit out, with his own funds, thenecessary armament.La Cosa departed on his embassy; he called on theBishop Fonseca, who, as had been expected, enteredwarmly into the views of. his favourite Ojeda, and recommendedhim to the ambitious and .bigot king, as a manwell fitted to promote his empire in the wilderness, andto dispense the blessings of Christianity among the savages..The recommendation of the bishop was usually effectualin the affairs of the New World, and the opinion ofthe veteran de la Cosa had great weight even with thesovereign; but a rival candidate to Ojeda had presentedhimself, and one who had the advantage of higher connexionsand greater pecuniary means. This was Diegode Nicuesa, an accomplished courtier of noble birth, whohad filled the, post of grand carver to Don Antique Enri-as many as thought themselves to have any knowledge of whatpertained to measure the land and sea, drew cardes (charts) onparchment as concerning these navigations. Of all others theymost esteem them which Juan de la Cosa, the companion of Ojeda,and another pilot, called Andres Morales, had set forth, and this,as well for the great experience which both had, (to whom thesetracks were as well known as the chambers of their own houses) as alsothat they were thought to be cunning in that part of cosmographywhich teacheth the description and measuring of the sea."P. Martyr, Dead. ii. c. 10.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA. THIRD VOYAGE. 57ques, uncle of the king. Nature, education, and habitseemed to have combined to form Nicuesa as a completerival of Ojeda. Like him he was small of stature, butremarkable for symmetry and compactness of form andfor bodily strength and activity ; like him he was masterat all kinds of weapons, and skilled, not merely in feats ofagility, but in those graceful and chivalrous exercises,which the Spanish cavaliers of those days had inheritedfrom the Moors ; being noted for his vigour and addressin the jousts or tilting matches after the Moresco fashion.Ojeda himself could not surpass him in feats of horsemanship,and particular mention is made of a favourite mare,which he could make caper and carrion in strict cadenceto the sound of a viol ; beside all this, he was versed inthe legendary ballads or romances of his country, and wasrenowned as a capital performer on the guitar! Suchwere the qualifications of this candidate for a command inthe wilderness, as enumerated by the reverend BishopLas Casas. It is probable, however, that he had givenevidence of qualities more adapted to the desired post;having already been out to Hispaniola in the militarytrain of the late Governor Ovando.Where merits were so singularly balanced as those ofOjeda and Nicuesa, it might have been difficult todecide ; King Ferdinand avoided the dilemma by favouringboth of the candidates ; not indeed by furnishing themwith ships and money, but by granting patents and dignitieswhich cost nothing, and might bring rich returns.He divided that part of the continent which lies alongthe Isthmus of Darien into two provinces, the boundaryline running through the Gulf of Uraba. The easternpart, extending to Cape de la Vela was called New Andalusia,and the government of it given to Ojeda. The58 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.other to the west, including Veragua, and reaching toCape Gracias a Dios, was assigned to Nicuesa. The islandof Jamaica was given to the two governors in common, asaplace from whence to draw supplies of provisions.Each of the governors was to erect two fortresses in hisdistrict, and to enjoy for ten years the profits of all themines he should discover, paying to the crown one tenthpart the first year, one ninth the second, one eighth thethird, one seventh the fourth, and one fifth part in eachof the remaining years.Juan de la Cosa, who had been indefatigable in promotingthe suit of Ojeda, was appointed his lieutenant inthe government, with the post of Alguazil Mayor of theprovince. He immediately freighted a ship and twobrigantines, in which he embarked with about two hundredmen. It was a slender armament, but the purse ofthe honest voyager was not very deep, and that of Ojedawas empty. Nicuesa, having ampler means, armed fourlarge vessels and two brigantines, furnished them withabundant munitions and supplies, both for the voyage andthe projected colony, enlisted a much greater force, andset sail in gay and vaunting style, for the golden shores ofVeragua, the Aurea Chersonesus of his imagination.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 59CHAPTER II.Feud between the Rival Governors Ojeda and Nicuesa A Challenge.(1509.)THE two rival armaments arrived at San Domingoabout the same time. Nicuesa had experienced what wasdoubtless considered a pleasant little turn of fortune bythe way. Touching at Santa Cruz, one of the Carriedislands, he had succeeded in capturing a hundred of thenatives, whom he had borne off in his ships to be sold asslaves at Hispaniola. This was deemed justifiable in thosedays, even by the most scrupulous divines, from the beliefthat the Caribs were all anthropophagi, or man-eaters;fortunately the opinion of mankind, in this more enlightenedage, makes but little difference in atrocity betweenthe cannibal and the kidnapper.Alonzo de Ojeda welcomed with joy the arrival of hisnautical friend and future lieutenant in the government,the worthy Juan de la Cosa: still he could not but feelsome mortification at the inferiority of his armament tothat of his rival Nicuesa. whose stately ships rode proudlyat anchor in the harbor of San Domingo. He felt, too,that his means were inadequate to the establishment of hisintended colony. Ojeda, however, was not long at a lossfor pecuniary assistance. Like many free spirited men,who are careless and squandering of their own purses, hehad a facility at commanding the purses of his neighbours.Among the motley population of San Domingo60 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.there was a lawyer of some abilities, the Bachelor MartinFernandez de Enciso, who had made two thousand castiliansby his pleading;* for it would appear that thespirit of litigation was one of the first fruits of civilizedlife transplanted to the New World, and flourished surprisinglyamong the Spanish colonists.Alonzo de Ojeda became acquainted with the Bachelor,and finding him to be of a restless and speculativecharacter, soon succeeded in inspiring him with a contemptfor the dull but secure and profitable routine of hisoffice in San Domingo, and imbuing him with his ownpassion for adventure. Above all he dazzled him withthe offer to make him Alcalde Mayor, or chief judge ofthe provincial government lie was about to establish inthe wilderness.In an evil hour the aspiring Bachelor yielded to thetemptation, and agreed to invest all his money in the enterprise.It was agreed that Ojeda should depart withthe armament which had arrived from Spain, while theBachelor should remain at Hispaniola to beat up for recruitsand provide supplies; with these he was to embarkin a ship purchased by himself, and proceed to join hishigh-mettled friend at the seat of his intended colony.Two rival governors, so well matched as Ojeda and Nicest,and both possessed of swelling spirits, pent up insmall but active bodies, could not remain long in a littleplace like San Domingo without some collision. Theisland of Jamaica which had been assigned to them incommon, furnished the first ground of contention; theprovince of Darien furnished another, each pretending toinclude vt within the limits of his jurisdiction. TheirEquivalent to 10,650 dollars of the present day.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA. THIRD VOYAGE. 61disputes on these points ran so high that the whole placeresounded with them, In talking, however, Nicuesahad the advantage ; having been brought up in the courthe was more polished and ceremonious, had greater self-command,and probably perplexed his rival governor inargument. Ojeda was no great casuist, but he was anexcellant swordsman, and always ready to fight his waythrough any question of right or dignity which he couldnot clearly argue with the tongue ; so he proposed to settlethe dispute by single combat. Nicuesa, thoughequally brave was more a man of the world, and saw thefolly of such arbitrament. Secretly smiling at the heatof his antagonist, he proposed as a preliminary to theduel, and to furnish something worth fighting for, thateach should deposit five thousand castilians, to be theprize of the victor. This, as he foresaw, was a temporarycheck upon the fiery valour of his rival, who didnot possess a pistole in his treasury ; but probably wastoo proud to confess it.It is not likely, however, that the impetuous spirit ofOjeda would long have remained in check, had not thediscreet Juan de la Cosa interposed to calm it. It is interestingto notice the great ascendency possessed by thisveteran navigator over his fiery associate. Juan de laCosa was a man whose strong natural good sense had beenquickened by long and hard experience ; whose couragewas above all question, but tempered by time and trial.He seems to have been personally attached to Ojeda, asveterans who have outlived the rash impulse of youthfulvalour, are apt to love the fiery quality in their youngerassociates. So long as he accompanied Ojeda in his enterpriseshe stood by him as a Mentor in council, and adevoted partisan in danger.62 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.In the present instance the interference of this veteranof the seas had the most salutary effect : he prevented theimpending duel of the rival governors, and persuadedthem to agree that the river Darien should be the boundaryline between their respective jurisdictions.The dispute relative to Jamaica was settled by theAdmiral, Don Diego Columbus himself. He had alreadyfelt aggrieved by the distribution of these governmentsby the king without his consent or even knowledge, beingcontrary to the privileges which he inherited from hisfather, the discoverer. It was in vain to contend, however,when the matter was beyond his reach and involvedin technical disputes. But as to the island of Jamaica, itin a manner lay at his own door, and he could not brookits being made a matter of gift to these brawling governors.Without waiting the slow and uncertain course ofmaking remonstrances to the king, he took the affair, as amatter of plain right, into his own hands, and ordered abrave officer, Juan de Esquibel, the same who had subjugatedthe province of Higuey, to take possession of thatisland, with seventy men, and to hold it subject to hiscommand.Ojeda did not hear of this arrangement until he was onthe point of embarking to make sail. In the heat of themoment he loudly defied the power of the admiral, andswore that if he ever found Juan de Esquibel on the islandof Jamaica he would strike off his head. The populacepresent heard this menace, and had too thorough an ideaof the fiery and daring character of Ojeda to doubt thathe would carry it into effect. Notwithstanding his bravado,however, Juan de Esquibel proceeded according tohis orders to take possession of the island of Jamaica.The squadron of Nicuesa lingered for some time after1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA. THIRD VOYAGE. 63the sailing of his rival. His courteous and engagingmanners, aided by the rumour of great riches in the provinceof Veragua, where he intended to found his colony,,had drawn numerous volunteers to his standard, insomuchthat he had to purchase another ship to convey them.Nicuesa was more of the courtier and the cavalier,than the man of business, and had no skill in managinghis pecuniary affairs. He had expended his funds with afree and lavish hand, and involved himself in debts whichhe had not the immediate means of paying. Many of hiscreditors knew that his expedition was regarded with anevil eye by the Admiral, Don Diego Columbus ; to gainfavour with the latter, therefore, they threw all kinds ofimpediments in the way of Nicuesa. Never was an unfortunategentleman more harassed and distracted by dunsand demands, one plucking at his skirts as soon as theother was satisfied. He succeeded, however, in gettingall his forces embarked. He had seven hundred men,well chosen and well armed, together with six horses.He chose Lope de Olano to be his captain general, aseemingly impolitic appointment, as this Olano had beenconcerned with the notorious Roldan in his rebellionagainst Columbus.The squadron sailed out of the harbour and put to sea,excepting one ship, which, with anchor a-trip and sailsunfurled, waited to receive Nicuesa, who was detained onshore until the last moment by the perplexities whichhad been artfully multiplied around him.Just as he was on the point of stepping into his boat hewas arrested by the harpies of the law, and carried beforethe Alcalde Mayor to answer a demand for five hundredducats, which he was ordered to pay on the spot, orprepare to go to prison.64 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.This was a thunderstroke to the unfortunate cavalier. Invain he represented his utter incapacity to furnish such asum at the moment ; in vain he represented the ruin thatwould accrue to himself and the vast injury to the publicservice, should he be prevented from joining his expedition.The Alcalde Mayor was inflexible, and Nicuesawas reduced to despair. At this critical moment reliefcame from a most unexpected quarter. The heart of apublic notary was melted by his distress ! He steppedforward in court and declared that rather than see so gallanta gentleman reduced to extremity he himself wouldpay down the money. Nicuesa gazed at him with astonishment,and could scarce believe his senses, but whenhe saw him actually pay off the debt and found himselfsuddenly released from this dreadful embarrassment, heembraced his deliverer with tears of gratitude, and hastenedwith all speed to embark, lest some other legal spellshould be laid upon his person.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 65CHAPTER III.Exploits and Disasters of Ojeda on the Coast of Carthagena-~Fateof the veteran Juan de la Cosa. (1509.)IT was on the 10th of November, 1509, that Alonzode Ojeda set sail from San Domingo with two ships, twobrigantines, and three hundred men. He took with himalso twelve brood mares. Among the remarkable adventurerswho embarked with him was Francisco Pizarro,who was afterwards renowned as the conqueror of Peru.*Hernando Cortez had likewise intended to sail in theexpedition, but was prevented by an inflammation in oneof his knees.The voyage was speedy and prosperous, and they arrivedlate in the autumn in the harbour of Cartagena.The veteran Juan de la Cosa was well acquainted withFrancisco Pizarro was a native of Truxillo in Estremadura. Hewas the illegitimate fruit of an amour between Gonsalvo Pizarro, aveteran captain of infantry, and a damsel in low life. His childhoodwas passed in grovelling occupations incident to the humblecondition of his mother, and he is said to have been a swineherd.When he had sufficiently increased in years and stature he enlistedas a soldier. His first campaigns may have been against the Moorsin the war of Granada. He certainly served in Italy under thebanner of the Great Captain, Gonsalvo of Cordova. His rovingspirit then induced him to join the bands of adventurers to the NewWorld. He was of ferocious courage, and, when engaged in anyenterprise, possessed an obstinate perseverance that was neither tobe deterred by danger, weakened by fatigue and hardship, or checkedby repeated disappointment. After having conquered the greatkingdom of Peru, he was assassinated, at an advanced age in 1541,defending himself bravely to the last.66 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.this place, having sailed as pilot with Rodrigo de Bastides,at the time he discovered it in 1501. He warnedAlonzo de Ojeda to be upon his guard, as the nativeswere a brave and warlike race of Carib origin, far differentfrom the soft and gentle inhabitants of the islands.They wielded great swords of palm wood, defended themselveswith osier targets, and dipped their arrows in asubtle poison. The women, as well as the men, mingledin battle, being expert in drawing the bow and throwinga species of lance called the azagay. The warning waswell timed, for the Indians of these parts had been irritatedby the misconduct of previous adventurers, and flewto arms on the first appearance of the ships.Juan de la Cosa now feared for the safety of the enterprisein which he had person, fortune, and official dignityat stake. He earnestly advised Ojeda to abandon thisdangerous neighbourhood, and to commence a settlementin the gulf of Uraba, where the people were less ferocious,and did not use poisoned weapons. Ojeda was too proudof spirit to alter his plans through fear of a naked foe.It is thought, too, that he had no objection to a skirmish,being desirous of a pretext to make slaves to be sent toHispaniola in discharge of the debts he had left unpaid.*He landed, therefore, with a considerable part of hisforce, and a number of friars, who had been sent out toconvert the Indians. His faithful lieutenant, being unableto keep him out of danger, stood by to second him.Ojeda advanced towards the savages, and ordered thefriars to read aloud a certain formula which had recentlybeen digested by profound jurists and divines in Spain.It began in stately form. "I, Alonzo de Ojeda, servantLas Casas. Hist. Ind. 1. ii. c. 57. MS.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 67of the most high and mighty sovereigns of Castile andLeon, conquerors of barbarous nations, their messengerand captain, do notify unto you, and make you know, inthe best way I can, that God our Lord, one and eternal,created the heaven and the earth, and one man and onewoman, from whom you and we, and all the people of theearth proceeded, and are descendants, as well as all thosewho shall come hereafter The formula then went on todeclare the fundamental principles of the Catholic Faith ;the supreme power given to St. Peter over the world andall the human race, and exercised by his representativethe pope ; the donation made by a late pope of all thispart of the world and all its inhabitants, to the Catholicsovereigns of Castile; and the ready obedience whichhad already been paid by many of its lands and islandsand people to the agents and representatives of thosesovereigns. It called upon those savages present, therefore,to do the same, to acknowledge the truth of theChristian doctrines, the supremacy of the pope, and thesovereignty of the Catholic King, but, in case of refusal,it denounced upon them all the horrors of war, the desolationof their dwelling, the seizure of their property,and the slavery of their wives and children. Such wasthe extraordinary document, which, from this time forward,was read by the Spanish discoverers to the wonderingsavages of any newly found country, as a preludeto sanctify the violence about to be inflicted on them.*When the friars had read this pious manifesto, Ojedamade signs of amity to the natives, and held up glitteringpresents; they had already suffered, however, from theThe reader will find the complete form of this curious manifestoin the appendix.68 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.cruelties of the white men, and were not to be won bykindness. On the contrary they brandished their weapons,sounded their conchs, and prepared to make battle.Juan de la Cosa saw the rising choler of Ojeda, andknew his fiery impatience. He again intreated him toabandon these hostile shores, and reminded him of thevenomous weapons of the enemy. It was all in vain:Ojeda confided blindly in the protection of the Virgin.Putting up, as usual, a short prayer to his patroness, hedrew his weapon, braced his buckler, and charged furiouslyupon the savages. Juan de la Cosa followed asheartily as if the battle had been of his own seeking.The Indians were soon routed, a number killed, and severaltaken prisoners ; on their persons were found platesof gold, but of an inferior quality. Flushed by this triumph,Ojeda took several of the prisoners as guides, andpursued the flying enemy four leagues into the interior.He was followed, as usual, by his faithful lieutenant, theveteran La Cosa, continually remonstrating against hisuseless temerity, but hardily seconding him in the mosthare-brained perils. Having penetrated far into the forest,they came to a strong hold of the enemy, where dnumerous force was ready to receive them, armed withclubs, lances, arrows and bucklers. Ojeda led his mento the charge with the old Castilian war cry, " Santiago !"The savages soon took to flight. Eight of their bravestwarriors threw themselves into a cabin, and plied theirbows and arrows so vigorously, that the Spaniards werekept at bay. Ojeda cried shame upon his followers to bedaunted by eight naked men. Stung by this reproach,an old Castilian soldier rushed through a shower of arrows,and forced the door of the cabin, but received ashaft through the heart, and fell dead on the threshold.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA FIRST VOYAGE. 69Ojeda, furious at the sight, ordered fire to be set to thecombustible edifice; in a moment it was in a blaze, andthe eight warriors perished in the flames.Seventy Indians were made captive and sent to theships, and Ojeda, regardless of the remonstrances of Juande la Cosa, continued his rash pursuit of the fugitivesthrough the forest. In the dusk of the evening they arrivedat a village called Yurbaco; the inhabitants ofwhich had fled to the mountains with their wives andchildren and principal effects. The Spaniards, imaginingthat the Indians were completely terrified and dispersed,now roved in quest of booty among the desertedhouses, which stood distant from each other, buried amongthe trees. While they were thus scattered, troops ofsavages rushed forth, with furious yells, from all parts ofthe forest. The Spaniards endeavoured to gather togetherand support each other, but every little party wassurrounded by a host of foes. They fought with desperatebravery, but for once their valour and their iron armourwere of no avail ; they were overwhelmed by numbers,and sank beneath war clubs and poisoned arrows.Ojeda on the first alarm collected a few soldiers andensconced himself within a small enclosure, surroundedby palisades. Here he was closely besieged and galledby flights of arrows. He threw himself on his knees,covered himself with his buckler, and, being small andactive, managed to protect himself from the deadlyshower, but all his companions were slain by his side, someof them perishing in frightful agonies. At this fearfulmoment the veteran La Cosa, having heard of the perilof his commander, arrived, with a few followers, to hisassistance. Stationing himself at the gate of the palingSPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.sides, the brave Biscay kept the savages at bay untilmost of his men were slain and he himself was severelywounded. Just then Ojeda sprang forth like a tiger intothe midst of the enemy, dealing his blows on every side.La Cosa would have seconded him, but was crippled byhis wounds. He took refuge with the remnant of hismen in an Indian cabin ; the straw roof of which, heaided them to throw off, lest the enemy should set it onfire. Here he defended himself until all his comrades,but one, were destroyed. The subtle poison of hiswounds at length overpowered him, and he sank to theground. Feeling death at hand, he called to his onlysurviving companion. " Brother," said he, " since Godhath protected thee from harm, sally forth and fly, and ifever thou shouldst see Alonzo de Ojeda, tell him of myfate!"Thus fell the hardy Juan de la Cosa, faithful and devotedto the very last ; nor can we refrain from pausing to paya passing tribute to his memory. He was acknowledgedby his contemporaries to be one of the ablest of those gallantSpanish navigators who first explored the way to theNew World. But it is by the honest and kindly qualitiesof his heart that his memory is most endeared tous; it is, above all, by that loyalty in friendship displayedin this his last and fatal expedition. Warmed by hisattachment for a more youthful and a hot-headed adventurer,we see this wary veteran of the seas forgetting hisusual prudence and the lessons of his experience, andembarking heart and hand, purse and person, in the wildenterprises of his favourite. We behold him watchingover him as a parent, remonstrating with him as a counsellor,but fighting by him as a partisan; following him,1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 71without hesitation, into known and needless danger, tocertain death itself, and showing no other solicitude inhis dying moments, but to be remembered by his friend.The history of these Spanish discoveries abound innoble and generous traits of character, but few havecharmed us more than this instance of loyalty to the lastgasp, in the death of the staunch Juan de la Cosa. TheSpaniard who escaped to tell the story of his end was theonly surviver of seventy that had followed Ojeda in thisrash and headlong inroad.72 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509,CHAPTER IV.Arrival of Nicuesa Vengeance taken on the Indians.WHILE these disastrous occurrences happened onshore ; great alarm began to be felt on board of the ships.Days had elapsed since the party had adventured sorashly into the wilderness ; yet nothing had been seen orheard of them, and the forest spread a mystery over theirfate. Some of the Spaniards ventured a little distanceinto the woods, but were deterred by the distant shoutsand yells of the savages, and the noise of their conchsand drums. Armed detachments then coasted the shorein boats, landing occasionally, climbing the* rocks andpromontories, firing signal guns, and sounding trumpets.It was all in vain ; they heard nothing but the echoes oftheir own noises, or perhaps the wild whoop of an Indianfrom the bosom of the forest. At length, when theywere about to give up the search in despair, they cameto a great thicket of mangrove trees on the margin of thesea. These trees grow within the water, but their rootsrise, and are intertwined, above the surface. In this entangledand almost impervious grove, they caught aglimpse of a man in Spanish attire. They entered, and,to their astonishment, found it to be Alonzo de Ojeda.He was lying on the matted roots of the mangroves, hisbuckler on his shoulder, and his sword in his hand ; butso wasted with hunger and fatigue that he could notspeak. They bor*him to the firm land; made a fire on1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 73the shore to warm him, for he was chilled with the dampand cold of his hiding place, and when he was a littlerevived they gave him food and wine. In this way hegradually recovered strength to tell his doleful story.*He had succeeded in cutting his way through thehost of savages, and attaining the woody skirts of themountains ; but when he found himself alone, and that allhis brave men had been cut off, he was ready to yield upin despair. Bitterly did he reproach himself for havingdisregarded the advice of the veteran La Cosa, anddeeply did he deplore the loss of that loyal follower, whohad fallen a victim to his devotion. He scarce knewwhich way to bend his course, but continued on, in thedarkness of the night and of the forest, until out of hearingof the yells of triumph uttered by the savages overthe bodies of his men. When the day broke, he soughtthe rudest parts of the mountains, and hid himself untilthe night; then struggling forward among rocks, andprecipices and matted forests, he made his way to the seaside,but was too much exhausted to reach the ships.Indeed it was wonderful that one, so small of frame,should have been able to endure such great hardships ;but he was of admirable strength and hardihood. Hisfollowers considered his escape, from death as little lessThe picture here given is so much like romance, that the authorquotes his authority at length. " Llegaron atone havia,junto al ague che la mar, nos Mangles, que son*arboles, quesempre nacen, i crecen i permanence centre del ague de la mar,con grandes raiccs, asidas, i enmaranadas anas con otras, i aliimexico, i escondido hallaron a Alfonso de Ojeda, con su espadaen la mano, i la rodela en las espaldas, i en ella sobre trecientasdefiles de flechazos. Estabo descaido de sambre, que no podiahechar de si la habla; i si no funera tan robust, aunque chico decuerpo, funera puerto."Las Casas. 1. ii. c. 58. MS. Ferrara, Hist. Ind. D. 1. 1. vii.c. xv.74 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.than miraculous, and he himself regarded it as anotherproof of the special protection of the Virgin ; for, thoughhe had, as usual, received no wound, yet it is said hisbuckler lore the dints of upwards of three hundredarrows.*While the Spaniards were yet on the shore, administeringto the recovery of their commander, they behelda squadron of ships standing towards the harbour of Cartagena,and soon perceived them to be the ships ofNicuesa. Ojeda was troubled in mind at the sight, recollectinghis late intemperate defiance of that cavalier ;and, reflecting that, should he seek him in enmity, hewas in no situation to maintain his challenge or defendhimself. He ordered his men, therefore, to return onboardthe ships and leave him alone on the shore, and notto reveal the place of his retreat while Nicuesa shouldremain in the harbour.As the squadron entered the harbour, the boats salliedforth to meet it. The first inquiry of Nicuesa was concerningOjeda. The followers of the latter replied,mournfully, that their commander had gone on a warlikeexpedition into the country, but days had elapsed withouthis return, so that they feared some misfortune had befallenhim. They entreated Nicuesa, therefore, to givehis word, as a cavalier, that should Ojeda really be indistress, he would not take advantage of his misfortunes torevenge himself for their late disputes.Nicuesa, who was a gentleman of noble and generousspirit, blushed with indignation at such a request. (( Seekyour commander instantly," said he; " bring him to metLas Casas. ubi. sup.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 75if he be alive ; and I pledge myself not merely to forgetthe past, but to aid him as if he were a brother. "*When they met, Nicitesa received his late foe withopen arms. "It is not." said he, "for Hidalgos, likemen of vulgar souls, to remember past differences whenthey behold one another in distress. Henceforth, let allthat has occurred between us be forgotten. Commandme as a brother. Myself and my men are at your orders,to follow you wherever you please, until the deaths ofJuan de la Cosa and his comrades are revenged."The spirits of Ojeda w T ere once more lifted up by thisgallant and generous offer. The two governors, nolonger rivals, landed four hundred of their men andseveral horses, and set off with all speed for the fatal village.They approached it in the night, and, dividingtheir forces into two parties, gave orders that not an Indianshould be taken alive.The village was buried in deep sleep, but the woodswere filled with large parrots, which, being awakened,made a prodigious clamour. The Indians, however,thinking the Spaniards all destroyed, paid no attentionto these noises. It was not until their houses were assailed,and wrapped in flames, that they took the alarm.They rushed forth, some with arms, some weaponless,but were received at their doors by the exasperated Spaniards,and either slain on the spot, or driven back intothe fire. Women fled wildly forth with children in theirarms, but at sight of the Spaniards glittering in steel, andof the horses, which they supposed ravenous monsters,they ran back, shrieking with horror, into their burninghabitations. Great was the carnage, for no quarter wasLas Casas, ubi sup.76 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509,shown to age or sex. Many perished by the fire, andmany by the sword.When they had fully glutted their vengeance, theSpaniards ranged about for booty. While thus employed,they found the body of the unfortunate Juan de laCosa. It was tied to a tree, but swoln and discolouredin a hideous manner by the poison of the arrows withwhich he had been slain. This dismal spectacle had suchan effect upon the common men, that not one would remainin that place during the night. Having sacked thevillage, therefore, they left it a smoking ruin, and returnedin triumph to their ships. The spoil in gold andother articles of value must have been great, for the shareof Nicuesa and his men amounted to the value of seventhousand castilians.* The two governors, now faithfulconfederates, parted with many expressions of friendship,and with mutual admiration of each others prowess, andNicuesa continued his voyage for the coast of Veragua.Equivalent to 37,28 1 dollars of the present day.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 77CHAPTER V,Ojeda founds the Colony of San Sebastian Beleaguered brj theIndians.OJEDA now adopted, though tardily, the advice of hisunfortunate lieutenant, Juan de la Cosa, and, giving up allthoughts of colonising this disastrous part of the coast,steered his course for the Gulf of Uraba. He sought forsome time the river Darien, famed among the Indians asabounding in gold, but not finding it, landed in variousplaces, seeking a favourable site for his intended colony,His people were disheartened by the disasters they hadalready undergone, and the appearance of surroundingobjects was not calculated to reassure them. The country,though fertile and covered with rich and beautifulvegetation, was in their eyes a land of cannibals andmonsters. They began to dread the strength as well asfierceness of the savages, who could transfix a man withtheir arrows even when covered with armour, and whoseshafts were tipped with deadly poison. They heard thebowling of tigers, panthers, and, as they thought, lions inthe forests, and encountered large and venomous serpentsamong the rocks and thickets. As they were passingalong the banks of a river one of their horses was seizedby the leg by an enormous alligator, and dragged beneaththe waves.*Herrera, Hist. Ind. D. 1. 1. vii. c. xvi.78 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.At length Ojeda fixed upon a place for his town on aheight at the east side of the Gulf. Here, landing allthat could be spared from the ships, he began, with alldiligence, to erect houses, giving this embryo capital ofhis province the name of San Sebastian, in honour of thatsainted martyr, who was slain by arrows; hoping hemight protect the inhabitants from the imprisoned shaftsof the savages. As a further protection he erected alarge wooden fortress, and surrounded the place with astockade. Feeling, however, the inadequacy of his handfulof men to contend with the hostile tribes around him,he despatched a ship to Hispaniola, with a letter to theBachelor, Martin Fernandez de Enciso, his AlcaldeMayor, informing him of his having established his seatof government, and urging him to lose no time in joininghim with all the recruits, arms and provisions he couldcommand. By the same ship he transmitted to San Domingoall the captives and gold he had collected.His capital being placed in a posture of defence, Ojedanow thought of making a progress through his wild territory, and set out, accordingly, with an armed band, topay a friendly visit to a neighbouring cacique, reputed aspossessing great treasures of gold. The natives, however,had by this time learnt the nature of these friendly visitsand were prepared to resist them. Scarcely had theSpaniards entered into the defiles of the surroundingforest when they were assailed by flights of arrows fromthe close coverts of the thickets. Some were shot deadon the spot, others, less fortunate, expired raving withthe torments of the poison; the survivers, filled withhorror at the sight, and, losing all presence of mind, retreatedin confusion to the fortress.It was some time before Ojeda could again persuade1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 79his men to take the field, so great was their dread of thepoisoned weapons of the Indians. At length their provisionsbegan to fail, and they were compelled to forageamong the villages in search, not of gold, but of food.In one of their expeditions they were surprised by anambuscade of savages, in a gorge of the mountains, andattacked with such fury and effect, that they were completelyrouted, and pursued with yells and howling tothe very gates of St. Sebastian. Many died in excruciatingagony of their wounds, and others recovered withextreme difficulty. Those who were well, no longerdared to venture forth in search of food ; for the wholeforest teemed with lurking foes. They devoured suchherbs and roots as they could find, without regard totheir quality. The humours of their bodies became corrupted,and various diseases, combined with the ravagesof famine, daily thinned their numbers. The sentinelwho feebly mounted guard at night, was often found deadat his post in the morning. Some stretched themselveson the ground and expired of mere famine and debility;nor was death any longer regarded as an evil, but ratheras a welcome relief from a life of horror and despair.80 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER VI.Alonzo de Ojeda supposed by the Savages to have a charmed lifeTheir experiment to try the fact.IN the mean time the Indians continued to harass thegarrison, lying in wait to surprise the foraging parties,cutting off all stragglers, and sometimes approaching thewalls in open defiance. On such occasions Ojeda salliedforth at the head of his men, and from his great agilitywas the first to overtake the retreating foe. He slewmore of their warriors with his single arm than all hisfollowers together. Though often exposed to showers ofarrows none had ever wounded him, and the Indiansbegan to think he had a charmed life. Perhaps theyhad heard from fugitive prisoners, the idea entertainedby himself and his followers of his being under supernaturalprotection. Determined to ascertain the fact,they placed four of their most dextrous archers in ambush ,with orders to single him out. A number of them advancedtowards the fort sounding their conchs and drums,and uttering yells of defiance. As they expected, theimpetuous Ojeda sallied forth immediately at the head ofhis men. The Indians fled towards the ambuscade, drawinghim in furious pursuit. The archers waited until hewas full in front and then launched their deadly shafts.Three struck his buckler and glanced harmlessly off, butthe fourth pierced his thigh. Satisfied that he was1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 81wounded beyond the possibility of cure, the savages retreatedwith shouts of triumph.Ojeda was borne back to the fortress in great anguishof body and despondency of spirit. For the first timein his life he had lost blood in battle. The charm inwhich he had hitherto confided was broken; or rather,the Holy Virgin appeared to have withdrawn her protection.He had the horrible death of his followers beforehis eyes, who had perished of their wounds in ravingfrenzy.One of the symptoms of the poison was to shoot a thrillingchill through the wounded part; from this circumstance,perhaps, a remedy suggested itself to the imagination ofOjeda, which few but himself could have had the courageto undergo. He caused two plates of iron to be madered hot, and ordered a surgeon to apply them to eachorifice of the wound. The surgeon shuddered and refused,saying, he would not be the murderer of his general.*Upon this Ojeda made a solemn vow that he wouldhang him unless he obeyed. To avoid the gallows, thesurgeon applied the glowing plates. Ojeda refused tobe tied down, or that any one should hold him during thisfrightful operation. He endured it without shrinking oruttering a murmur, although it so inflamed his whole system,that they had to wrap him in sheets steeped invinegar, to allay the burning heat which raged throughouthis body ; and we are assured that a barrel of vinegarwas exhausted for the purpose. The desperateremedy succeeded: the cold poison, says Bishop LasCasas, was consumed by the vivid fire, f How far the*Charlevoix, ut sup. p. 293.t Las Casas, Hist. Ind. lib. ii. c. 59. MS.82 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.venerable historian is correct in his postulate surgeonsmay decide ; but many incredulous persons will be apt toaccount for the cure by surmising that the arrow was notenvenomed.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 83CHAPTER VII.Arrival of a strange ship at San Sebastian.ALONZO DE OJEDA, though pronounced out of danger,was still disabled by his wound, and his helpless situationcompleted the despair of his companions, for while hewas in health and vigour his buoyant and mercurial spirit,his active, restless, and enterprising habits, imparted animation,if not confidence, to every one around him. Theonly hope of relief was from the sea, and that was nearlyextinct, when one day, to the unspeakable joy of theSpaniards, a sail appeared on the horizon. It made forthe port and dropped anchor at the foot of the height ofSan Sebastian, and there was no longer a doubt that itwas the promised succour from San Domingo.The ship came indeed from the island of Hispaniola,but it had not been fitted out by the Bachelor Enciso.The commanders name was Bernardino de Talavera.This man was one of the loose, heedless adventurers whoabounded in San Domingo. His carelessness and extravagancehad involved him in debt, and he was threatenedwith a prison. In the height of his difficulties the shiparrived which Ojeda had sent to San Domingo, freightedwith slaves and gold, an earnest of the riches to be foundat San Sebastian. Bernardo de Talavera immediatelyconceived the project of giving his creditors the slip, andescaping to this new settlement. He understood that84 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.Ojeda was in need of recruits, and felt assured that fromhis own reckless conduct in money matters, he wouldsympathize with any one harassed by debt. He drew intohis schemes a number of desperate debtors like himself,nor was he scrupulous about filling his ranks with recruitswhose legal embarrassments arose from more criminalcauses. Never did a more vagabond crew engage in aproject of colonization.How to provide themselves with a vessel was now thequestion. They had neither money nor credit; but thenthey had cunning and courage, and were troubled by noscruples of conscience ; thus qualified, a knave will oftensucceed better for a time than an honest man ; it is in thelong run that he fails, as will be illustrated in the case ofTalavera and his hopeful associates. While casting aboutfor means to escape to San Sebastian they heard of a vesselbelonging to certain Genoese, which was at Cape Tiburon,at the western extremity of the island, taking in acargo of bacon and cassava bread for San Domingo. Nothingcould have happened more opportunely: herewas a ship amply stored with provisions, and ready totheir hand ; they had nothing to do but seize it and embark.The gang, accordingly, seventy in number, made theirway separately and secretly to Cape Tiburon, where, assemblingat an appointed time and place, they boardedthe vessel, overpowered the crew, weighed anchor andset sail. They were heedless, hap-hazard mariners, andknew little of the management of a vessel ; the historianCharlevoix thinks, therefore, that it was a special providencethat guided them to San Sebastian. Whether ornot die good father is right in his opinion, it is certain that1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 85the arrival of the ship rescued the garrison from the verybrink of destruction.*Talavera and his gang, though they had come lightlyby their prize,, were not disposed to part with it asfrankly, but demanded to be paid down in gold for theprovisions furnished to the starving colonists. Ojedaagreed to their terms, and taking the supplies into hispossession, dealt them out sparingly to his companions.Several of his hungry followers were dissatisfied withtheir portions, and even accused Ojeda of unfairness inreserving an undue share for himself. Perhaps theremay have been some ground for this charge, arising, notfrom any selfishness in the character of Ojeda, but fromone of those superstitious fancies with which his mindwas tinged ; for we are told that, for many years, he hadbeen haunted by a presentiment that he should eventuallydie of hunger, fThis lurking horror of the mind may have made himdepart from his usual free and lavish spirit in doling outthese providential supplies, and may have induced himto set by an extra portion for himself, as a precautionagainst his anticipated fate ; certain it is that great clamoursrose among his people, some of whom threatenedto return in the pirate vessel to Hispaniola. He succeeded,however, in pacifying them for the present, byrepresenting the necessity of husbanding their supplies,and by assuring them that the Bachelor Enciso could notfail soon to arrive, when there would be provisions inabundance.Hist. S. Domingo, lib. iv.t Herrera. Dead. 1. 1. viii. c. 3.86 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER VIII.Factions in the Colony, A Convention made.DAYS and days elapsed but no relief arrived at San Sebastian.The Spaniards kept a ceaseless watch upon thesea, but the promised ship failed to appear. With allthe husbandry of Ojeda the stock of provisions wasnearly consumed ; famine again prevailed, and several ofthe garrison perished through their various sufferings andtheir lack of sufficient nourishment. The survivers nowbecame factious in their misery, and a plot was formedamong them to seize upon one of the vessels in the harbourand make sail for Hispaniola.Ojeda discovered their intentions, and was reduced togreat perplexity. He saw that to remain here withoutrelief from abroad was certain destruction, yet he clungto his desperate enterprise. It was his only chance forfortune or command ; for should this settlement be brokenup he might try in vain, with his exhausted means andbroken credit, to obtain another post or to set on footanother expedition. Ruin in fact would overwhelm him,should he return without success.He exerted himself, therefore, to the utmost to pacifyhis men; representing the folly of abandoning a placewhere they had established a foothold, and where theyonly needed a reinforcement to enable them to controlthe surrounding country, and to make themselves mastersof its riches. Finding they still demurred, he offered.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 87now that he was sufficiently recovered from his wound,to go himself to San Domingo in quest of reinforcementsand supplies.This offer had the desired effect. Such confidencehad the people in the energy, ability, and influence ofOjeda, that they felt assured of relief should he seek itin person. They made a kind of convention with him,therefore, in which it was agreed that they should remainquietly at Sebastian s for the space of fifty days. At theend of this time, in case no tidings had been received ofOjeda, they were to be at liberty to abandon the settlementand return in the brigantines to Hispaniola. In themean time Francisco Pizarro was to command the colonyas Lieutenant of Ojeda, until the arrival of his AlcaldeMayor, the Bachelor Enciso. This convention beingmade, Ojeda embarked in the ship of Bernardino deTalavera. That cut-purse of the ocean and his loose-handedcrew were effectually cured of their ambition tocolonize. Disappointed in the hope of finding abundantwealth at San Sebastian s, and dismayed at the perils andhorrors of the surrounding wilderness, they preferred returningto Hispaniola, even at the risk of chains anddungeons. Doubtless they thought that the influence ofOjeda would be sufficient to obtain their pardon, especiallyas their timely succour had been the salvation ofthe colony.88 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER IX.Disastrous Voyage of Ojeda in the Pirate Ship.OJEDA had scarce put to sea in the ship of these freebooters,when a fierce quarrel arose between him andTalavera. Accustomed to take the lead among his companions;,still feeling himself governor, and naturally of adomineering spirit, Ojeda, on coming on board, had assumedthe command as a matter of course. Talavera,who claimed dominion over the ship, by the right nodoubt of trover and conversion, or, in other words, ofdownright piracy, resisted this usurpation.Ojeda, as usual, would speedily have settled the questionby the sword, but he had the whole vagabond crewagainst him, who overpowered him with numbers andthrew him in irons. Still his swelling spirit was unsubdued.He reviled Talavera and his gang as recreant,traitors, pirates, and offered to fight the whole of themsuccessively, provided they would give him a clear deck,and come on two at a time. Notwithstanding his diminutivesize, they had too high an idea of his prowess, andhad heard too much of his exploits, to accept his challenge; so they kept him raging in his chains while theypursued their voyage.They had not proceeded far, however, when a violentstorm arose. Talavera and his crew knew little of navigation,and were totally ignorant of those seas. Theraging of the elements, the baffling winds and currents,1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 89and the danger of unknown rocks and shoals filled themwith confusion and alarm. They knew not whither theywere driving before the storm, or where to seek forshelter. In this hour of peril they called to mind thatOjeda was a sailor as well as soldier, and that he hadrepeatedly navigated these seas. Making a truce, therefore,for the common safety, they took off his irons, oncondition that he would pilot the vessel during theremainder of her voyage.Ojeda acquitted himself with his accustomed spirit andintrepidity ; but the vessel had been already swept so farto the westward that all his skill was ineffectual inendeavouring to work up to Hispaniola against storms andadverse currents. Borne away by the gulf stream, andtempest tost for many days, until the shattered vessel wasalmost in a foundering condition, he saw no alternativebut to run it on shore on the southern coast of Cuba.Here then the crew of free-shooters landed from theirprize in more desperate plight than when they first tookpossession of it. They were on a wild and unfrequentedcoast, their vessel lay a wreck upon the sands, and theironly chance was to travel on foot to the eastern extremityof the island, and seek some means of crossing to Hispaniola,where, after all their toils, they might perhapsonly arrive to be thrown into a dungeon. Such, however,is the yearning of civilized men after the haunts ofcultivated society, that they set out, at every risk, upontheir long and painful journey.90 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER X.Toilsome March of Ojeda and his Companions through the morassesof Cuba.NOTWITHSTANDING the recent services of Ojeda, thecrew of Talavera still regarded him with hostility; but, ifthey had felt the value of his skill and courage at sea,they were no less sensible of their importance on shore,and he soon acquired that ascendency over them whichbelongs to a master-spirit in time of trouble.Cuba was as yet colonized. It was a place of refugeto the unhappy natives of Hayti, who fled hither from thewhips and chains of their European task-masters. Theforests abounded with these wretched fugitives, who oftenopposed themselves to the shipwrecked party, supposingthem to be sent by their late masters to drag them back tocaptivity.Ojeda easily repulsed these attacks; but found thatthese fugitives had likewise inspired the villagers withhostility to all European strangers. Seeing that his companionswere too feeble and disheartened to fight theirway through the populous parts of the island, or to climbthe rugged mountains of the interior, he avoided alltowns and villages, and led them through the closeforests and broad green savannahs which extended betweenthe mountains and the sea.He had only made choice of evils. The forests graduallyretired from the coast. The savannahs, where1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 91the Spaniards at first had to contend merely with longrank grass and creeping vines, soon ended in salt marshes,where the oozy bottom yielded no firm foot-hold, and themud and water reached to their knees. Still they pressedforward, continually hoping in a little while to arriveat a firmer soil, and flattering themselves they beheldfresh meadow land before them; but continually deceived.The farther they proceeded, the deeper grewthe mire, until, after they had been eight days on thisdismal journey, they found themselves in the centre of avast morass where the water reached to their girdles.Though thus almost drowned, they were tormented withincessant thirst, for all the water around them was asbriny as the ocean. They suffered too the cravings ofextreme hunger, having but a scanty supply of cassavabread and cheese, and a few potatoes and other roots,which they devoured raw. When they wished to sleepthey had to climb among the twisted roots of mangrovetrees, which grew in clusters in the waters. Still thedreary marsh widened and deepened. In many placesthey had to cross rivers and inlets; where some, whocould not swim, were drowned, and others were smotheredin the mire.Their situation became wild and desperate. Theircassava bread was spoiled by the water, and their stockof roots nearly exhausted. The interminable morassstill extended before them, while, to return, after thedistance they had come, was hopeless. Ojeda alone keptup a resolute spirit, and cheered and urged them forward.He had the little Flemish painting of the Madona,which had been given him by the Bishop Fonseca,carefully stored among the provisions in his knapsack.Whenever he stopped to repose among the roots of the92 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.mangrove trees, he took out this picture, placed itamong the branches, and kneeling, prayed devoutly tothe Virgin for protection. This he did repeatedly in thecourse of the day, and prevailed upon his companions tofollow his example. Nay, more, at a moment of greatdespondency, he made a solemn vow to his patroness, thatif she conducted him alive through this peril, he woulderect a chapel in the first Indian village he should arriveat; and leave her picture there, to remain an object ofadoration to the Gentiles.*This frightful morass extended for the distance ofthirty leagues, and was so deep and difficult, so entangledby roots and creeping vines, so cut up by creeksand rivers, and so beset by quagmires, that they werethirty days in traversing it. Out of the number of seventymen that set out from the ship but thirty-five remained." Certain it is," observes the venerable Las Casas,the sufferings of the Spaniards in the New World, insearch of wealth, have been more cruel and severe thanever nation in the world endured; but those experiencedby Ojeda and his men have surpassed all others."They were at length so overcome by hunger andfatigue, that some lay down and yielded up the ghost, andothers seating themselves among the mangrove trees,waited in despair for death to put an end to their miseries.Ojeda, with a few of the lightest and most vigorous,continued to struggle forward, and to their unutterablejoy, at length arrived to where the land was firm anddry. They soon descried a foot-path, and, following it,arrived at an Indian village, commanded by a caciqueLas Casas, Hist. Ind. 1. ii. c. 60. MS.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE, 93called Cueybas. No sooner did they reach the villagethan they sank to the earth exhausted.The Indians gathered round and gazed at them withwonder; but when they learnt their story, they exhibiteda humanity that would have done honour to the most professingChristians. They bore them to their dwellings,set meat and drink before them, and vied with each otherin discharging the offices of the kindest humanity. Findingthat a number of their companions were still in themorass, the cacique sent a large party of Indians withprovisions for their relief, with orders to bring on theirshoulders such as were too feeble to walk. " The Indians,"says the Bishop Las Casas, " did more than theywere ordered ; for so they always do, when they are notexasperated by ill treatment. The Spaniards werebrought to the village, succoured, cherished, consoled,and almost worshipped as if they had been angels."94 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER XLOjeda performs his Vow to the Virgin.BEING recovered from his sufferings, Alonzo de Ojedaprepared to perform his vow concerning the picture ofthe Virgin, though sorely must it have grieved him topart with a relique to which he attributed his deliverancefrom so many perils. He built a little hermitage ororatory in the village, and furnished it with an altar,above which he placed the picture. He then summonedthe benevolent cacique, and explained to him, as well ashis limited knowledge of the language, or the aid of interpreterswould permit, the main points of the Catholicfaith, and especially the history of the Virgin, whom herepresented as the mother of the Deity that reigned in theskies, and the great advocate for mortal man.The worthy cacique listened to him with mute attention,and though he might not clearly comprehend thedoctrine, yet he conceived a profound veneration for thepicture. The sentiment was shared by his subjects.They kept the little oratory always swept clean, and decoratedit with cotton hangings, laboured by their ownhands, and with various votive offerings. They composedcouplets or areytos in honour of the Virgin, whichthey sang to the accompaniment of rude musical instruments,dancing to the sound under the groves which surroundedthe hermitage.A further anecdote concerning this relique may not be1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA SECOND VOYAGE. 95unacceptable. The venerable Las Casas, who recordsthese facts, informs us that he arrived at the village ofCuebas sometime after the departure of Ojeda. He foundthe oratory preserved with the most religious care, as asacred place, and the picture of the Virgin regarded withfond adoration. The poor Indians crowded to attendmass, which he performed at the altar ; they listened attentivelyto his paternal instructions, and at his requestbrought their children to be baptized. The good LasCasas having heard much of this famous relique of Qjeda,was desirous of obtaining possession of it, and offered togive the cacique in exchange, an image of the Virginwhich he had brought with him. The chieftain madean evasive answer, and seemed much troubled in mind.The next morning he did not make his appearance.Las Casas went to the oratory to perform mass, butfound the altar stripped of its precious relique. On inquiring,he learnt that in the night the cacique had fledto the woods, bearing off with him his beloved pictureof the Virgin. It was in vain that Las Casas sent messengersafter him, assuring him that he should not be deprivedof the relique, but, on the contrary, that the imageshould likewise be presented to him. The caciquerefused to venture from the fastnesses of the forest, nordid he return to his village and replace the picturein the oratory until after the departure of the Spaniards.**Las Casas, Hist. Ind. c. 61, MS-hearers, Hist. Inch. d. i. 1.ix., c. xv.96 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER XII.Arrival of Ojeda at Jamaica His reception by Juan de Esquibel.WHEN the Spaniards were completely restored tohealth and strength, they resumed their journey. Thecacique sent a large body of his subjects to carry theirprovisions and knapsacks, and to guide them across adesert tract of country to the province of Macaca, whereChristopher Columbus had been hospitably entertained onhis voyage along this coast. They experienced equalkindness from its cacique and his people, for such seemsto have been almost invariably the case with the nativesof these islands, before they had held much intercoursewith the Europeans.The province of Macaca was situated at Cape de laCruz, the nearest point to the island of Jamaica. HereOjeda learnt that there were Spaniards settled on thatisland, being in fact the party commanded by the veryJuan de Esquibel, whose head he had threatened to strikeoff, when departing in swelling style from San Domingo.It seemed to be the fortune of Ojeda to have his bravadoesvisited on his head in times of trouble and humiliation.He found himself compelled to apply for succourto the very man he had so vain-gloriously menaced.This was no time, however, to stand on points of pride ;he procured a canoe and Indians from the cacique ofMacaca, and one Pedro de Ordas undertook the perilous1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 97voyage of twenty leagues in the frail bark, and arrivedsafe at Jamaica.No sooner did Esquibel receive the message of Ojeda,than, forgetting past menaces, he instantly despatched acaravel to bring to him the unfortunate discoverer and hiscompanions. He received him with the utmost kindness,lodged him in his own house, and treated him in allthings with the most delicate attention. He was a gentlemanwho had seen prosperous days, but had fallen intoadversity and been buffeted about the world, and hadlearnt how to respect the feelings of a proud spirit in distress.Ojeda had the warm, touchy heart to feel suchconduct; he remained several days with Esquibel infrank communion, and when he sailed for San Domingothey parted the best of friends.And here we cannot but remark, the singular differencein character and conduct of these Spanish adventurerswhen dealing with each other, or with the unhappynatives. Nothing could be more chivalrous, urbane, andcharitable; nothing more pregnant with noble sacrificesof passion and interest, with magnanimous instances offorgiveness of injuries and noble contests of generosity,than the transactions of the discoverers with each other ;but the moment they turned to treat with the Indians,even with brave and high-minded caciques, they werevindictive, blood-thirsty, and implacable. The veryJuan de Esquibel, who could requite the recent hostilityof Ojeda with such humanity and friendship, was thesame, who, under the government of Ovando, laid desolatethe province of Higuey in Hispaniola, and inflictedatrocious cruelties upon its inhabitants.When Alonzo de Ojeda set sail for San Domingo, Bernardinode Talavera and his rabble adherents remained at98 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.Jamaica. They feared to be brought to account for theirpiratical exploit in stealing the Genoese vessel, and thatin consequence of their recent violence to Ojeda, theywould find in him an accuser rather than an advocate.The latter, however, in the opinion of Las Casas, whoknew him well, was not a man to make accusations. Withallhis faults he did not harbour malice. He was quickand fiery, it is true, and his sword was too apt to leapfrom its scabbard on the least provocation; but after thefirst flash all was over, and, if he cooled upon an injury ?he never sought for vengeance.1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 99CHAPTER XIII.Arrival of Alonzo de Ojeda at San Domingo Conclusion of hisStory.ON arriving at San Domingo the first inquiry of Alonede Ojeda was after the Bachelor Enciso. He was toldthat he had departed long before, with abundant suppliesfor the colony, and that nothing had been heard of himsince his departure. Ojeda waited for a time, in hopesof hearing, by some return ship, of the safe arrival of theBachelor at San Sebastian. No tidings, however, arrived,and he began to fear that he had been lost in thosestorms which had beset himself on his return voyage.Anxious for the relief of his settlement, and fearingthat, by delay, his whole scheme of colonization wouldbe defeated, he now endeavoured to set on foot anotherarmament, and to enlist a new set of adventurers. Hisefforts, however, were all ineffectual. The disasters ofhis colony were known, and his own circumstances wereconsidered desperate. He was doomed to experience thefate that too often attends sanguine and brilliant projectors.The world is dazzled by them for a time, and hailsthem as heroes while successful ; but misfortune dissipatesthe charm, and they become stigmatized with theappellation of adventurers. When Ojeda figured in SanDomingo as the conqueror of Coanabo, as the commanderof a squadron, as the governor of a province, his prowessand exploits were the theme of every tongue. When100 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.he set sail, in vaunting style, for his seat of government,setting the vice-roy at defiance, and threatening the lifeof Esquibel, every one thought that fortune was at hisheck, and he was about to accomplish wonders. A fewmonths had elapsed, and he walked the streets of SanDomingo a needy man, shipwrecked in hope and fortune.His former friends, dreading some new demand upontheir purses, looked coldly on him ; his schemes, once soextolled, were now pronounced wild and chimerical, andhe was subjected to all kinds of slights and humiliationsin the very place which had been the scene of his greatestvain glory.While Ojeda was thus lingering at San Domingo, theAdmiral, Don Diego Columbus, sent a party of soldiersto Jamaica to arrest Talavera and his pirate crew. Theywere brought in chains to San Domingo, thrown intodungeons, and tried for the robbery of the Genoese vessel.Their crime was too notorious to admit of doubt,and being convicted, Talavera .and several of his principalaccomplices were hanged. Such was the end oftheir frightful journey by sea and land. Never hadvagabonds travelled farther or toiled harder to arrive ata gallows !In the course of the trial Ojeda had naturally been summonedas a witness, and his testimony must have tendedgreatly to the conviction of the culprits. This drewupon him the vengeance of the surviving comrades ofTalavera, who still lurked about San Domingo. As hewas returning home one night at a late, hour he was waylaidand set upon by a number of these miscreants. Hedisplayed his usual spirit. Setting his back against awall, and drawing his sword, he defended himself admirablyagainst the whole gang ; nor was he content with1509.] ALONZO DE OJEDA THIRD VOYAGE. 101beating them off, but pursued them for some distancethrough the streets ; and having thus put them to utterroute, returned tranquil and unharmed to his lodgings.This is the last achievement recorded of the gallantbut reckless Ojeda ; for here his bustling career terminated,and he sank into the obscurity that gathers round aruined man. His health was broken by the various hardshipshe had sustained, and by the lurking effects of thewound received at San Sebastian, which had been butimperfectly cured. Poverty and neglect, and the corrodingsickness of the heart, contributed, no less than themaladies of the body, to quench that sanguine and fierytemper, which had hitherto been the secret of his success,and to render him the mere wreck of his formerself; for there is no ruin so hopeless and complete, asthat of a towering spirit humiliated and broken down.He appears to have lingered some time at San Domingo.Gomara, in his history of the Indies, affirms that he turnedmonk, and entered in the convent at San Francisco, wherehe died. Such a change would not have been surprising inaman, who, in his wildest career, mingled the bigot withthe soldier ; nor was it unusual with military adventurersin those days, after passing their youth in the bustle andlicentiousness of the camp, to end their days in the quietand mortification of the cloister. Las Casas, however, whowas at San Domingo at the time, makes no mention of thefact, as he certainly would have done, had it taken place.He confirms, however, all that has been said of the strikingreverse in his character and circumstances; and headds an affecting picture of his last moments, which mayserve as a wholesome comment on his life. He died sopoor, that he did not leave money enough to provide forhis interment; and so broken in spirit, that, with his last102 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.breath, he entreated his body might be buried in themonastery of San Francisco, just at the portal, in humbleexpiation of his past pride, " that every one ivho enteredmight tread upon his grave"*Such was the fate of Alonzo de Ojeda, and who doesnot forget his errors and his faults at the threshold of hishumble and untimely grave ! He was one of the most fearlessand aspiring of that band of " Ocean chivalry," thatfollowed the footsteps of Columbus. His story presentsa lively picture of the daring enterprises, the extravagantexploits, the thousand accidents, by flood and field,that chequered the life of a Spanish cavalier in thatroving and romantic age.Never," says Charlevoix, " was man more suited foracoup de main, or to achieve and suffer great things underthe direction of another: none had a heart morelofty, or ambition more aspiring ; none ever took less heedof fortune, or showed greater firmness of soul, or foundmore resources in his own courage ; but none was lesscalculated to be commander in chief of a great enterprize.Good management and good fortune for ever failedhim."tLas Casas, ubi suptCharlevoix, Hist. S. Coming.1509.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 103THE VOYAGEOFDIEGO DE Nicest,Nicuesa sails to the Westward His Shipwreck and subsequent disasters.WE have now to recount the fortunes experienced bythe gallant and generous Diego de Nicuesa, after hisparting from Alonzo de Ojeda at Cartagena. On resuminghis voyage he embarked in a caravel, that hemight be able to coast the land and reconnoitre; heordered that the two brigantines, one of which was commandedby his lieutenant Lope de Olano, should keepnear to him, while the large vessels, which drew morewater, should stand further out to sea. The squadronarrived upon the coast ofVeragua, in stormy weather,and, as Nicuesa could not find any safe harbour, and wasapprehensive of rocks and shoals, he stood out to sea atthe approach of night, supposing that Lope de Olanowould follow him with the brigantines according to hisorders. The night was boisterous, the caravel was muchtossed and driven about, and when the morning dawned,not one of the squadron was in sight.104 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.Nicuesa feared some accident had befallen the brigantines; he stood for the land and coasted along it in searchof them until he came to a large river, into which he enteredand came to anchor. He had not been here longwhen the stream suddenly subsided, having merely beenswoln by the rains. Before he had time to extricate himselfthe caravel grounded, and at length fell over on oneside. The current rushing like a torrent strained thefeeble bark to such a degree, that her seams yawned andshe appeared ready to go to pieces. In this moment ofperil a hardy seaman threw himself into the water tocarry the end of a rope on shore as a means of saving thecrew. He was swept away by the furious current andperished in sight of his companions. Undismayed byhis fate, another brave seaman plunged into the wavesand succeeded in reaching the shore. He then fastenedone end of a rope firmly to a tree, and the other beingsecured on board of the caravel, Nicuesa and his crewpassed one by one along it, and reached the shore insafety.Scarcely had they landed when the caravel went topieces, and with it perished their provisions, clothingand all other necessaries. Nothing remained to thembut the boat of the caravel, which was accidentally caston shore. Here then they were, in helpless plight, ona remote and savage coast, without food, without arms,and almost naked. What had become of the rest of thesquadron they knew not. Some feared that the brigantineshad been wrecked ; others called to mind that Lopede Olano had been one of the loose lawless men confederatedwith Francisco Roldan in his rebellion against Columbus,and, judging him from the school in which hehad served, hinted their apprehensions that he had .]DIEGO DE Nicest. 105served with the brigantines. Nicuesa partook of theirsuspicions, and was anxious and sad at-heart. He concealedhis uneasiness, however, and endeavoured to cheerup his companions, proposing that they should proceedwestward on foot in search of Veragua, the seat of his intendedgovernment, observing, that if the ships had survivedthe tempest, they would probably repair to thatplace. They accordingly set off along the sea shore, forthe thickness of the forest prevented their traversing theinterior. Four of the hardiest sailors put to sea in theboat and kept abreast of them, to help them across thebays and rivers.Their sufferings were extreme. Most of them weredestitute of shoes, and many almost naked. They had toclamber over sharp and rugged rocks, and to strugglethrough dense forests beset with thorns and brambles.Often they had to wade across rank fens and morassesand drowned lands, or to traverse deep and rapidstreams.Their food consisted of herbs and roots and shell fishgathered along the shore. Had they even met with Indiansthey would have dreaded, in their unarmed state,to apply to them for provisions, lest they should take revengefor the outrages committed along this coast byother Europeans.To render their sufferings more intolerable, they werein doubt whether, in the storms which preceded theirshipwreck, they had not been driven past Veragua, inwhich case each step would take them so much the fartherfrom their desired haven.Still they laboured feebly forward, encouraged by thewords and the example of Nicuesa, who cheerfully partookof the toils and hardships of the meanest of his men.106 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.They had slept one night at the foot of impendingrocks and were about to resume their weary march in themorning, when they were espied by some Indians from aneighbouring height. Among the followers of Nicuesawas a favourite page, whose tattered finery and white hatcaught the quick eyes of the savages. One of them immediatelysingled him out, and taking a deadly aim, let flyan arrow that laid him expiring at the feet of his master.While the generous cavalier mourned over his slaughteredpage, consternation prevailed among his companions,each fearing for his own life. The Indians, however, didnot follow up this casual act of hostility, but suffered theSpaniards to pursue their painful journey unmolested.Arriving one day at the point of a great bay that ranfar inland, they were conveyed, a few at a time, in theboat, to what appeared to be the opposite point. Beingall landed, and resuming their march, they found to theirsurprise that they were on an island, separated from themain land by a great arm of the sea. The sailors whomanaged the boat were too weary to take them to the oppositeshore, they remained therefore all night upon theisland.In the morning they prepared to depart, but, to theirconsternation, the boat with the four mariners had disappeared.They ran anxiously from point to point, utteringshouts and cries, in hopes the boat might be insome inlet; they clambered the rocks and strained theireyes over the sea. It was all in vain. No boat was tobe seen: no voice responded to their call; it was tpo evidentthe four mariners had either perished or had desertedthem.1509.] DIEGO DE Nicest.CHAPTER II.Nicuesa and his men on a Desolate Island.THE situation of Nicuesa and his men was dreary anddesperate in the extreme. They were on a desolateisland, bordering upon a swampy coast, in a remote andlonely sea, where commerce never spread a sail. Theircompanions in the other ships, if still alive and true tothem, had doubtless given them up for lost; and manyyears might elapse before the casual bark of a discoverermight venture along these shores. Long before that timetheir fate would be sealed, and their bones, bleaching onthe sands, would alone tell their story.In this hopeless state many abandoned themselves tofrantic grief, wandering about the island, wringing theirhands and uttering groans and lamentations ; others calledupon God for succour, and many sat down in silent andsullen despair.The cravings of hunger and thirst at length rousedthem to exertion. They found no food but a few shellfishscattered along the shore, and coarse herbs and roots,some of them of an unwholesome quality. The islandhad neither springs nor streams of fresh water, and theywere fain to slake their thirst at the brackish pools of themarshes.Nicuesa endeavoured to animate his men with newhopes. He employed them in constructing a raft of driftwoodand branches of trees, for the purpose of crossing108 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.the arm of the sea that separated them from the mainland.It was a difficult task, for they were destitute oftools, and when the raft was finished they had no oars withwhich to manage it. Some of the most expert swimmersundertook to propel it, but they were too much enfeebledby their sufferings. On their first essay, the currentswhich sweep that coast bore the raft out to sea, and theyswam back with difficulty to the island. Having no otherchance of escape, and no other means of exercising andkeeping up the spirits of his followers, Nicuesa repeatedlyordered new rafts to be constructed, but the resultwas always the same, and the men at length either grewtoo feeble to work or renounced the attempt in despair.Thus day after day, and week after week elapsed, withoutany mitigation of suffering or any prospect of relief.Every day some one or other sank under his miseries, avictim, not so much to hunger and thirst, as to grief anddespondency. His death was envied by his wretchedsurvivors, many of whom were reduced to such debility,that they had to crawl on hands and knees in search of theherbs and shell fish which formed their scanty food.1509.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 109CHAPTER III.Arrival of a boat Conduct of Lope de Olano.WHEN the unfortunate Spaniards, without hope of succour,began to consider death as a desirable end to theirmiseries, they were roused to new life one day by beholdinga sail gleaming on the horizon. Their exultationwas checked,, however, by the reflection how manychances there were against its approaching this wild anddesolate island. Watching it with anxious eyes they putup prayers to God to conduct it to their relief, and atlength, to their great joy, they perceived that it wassteering directly for the island. On a nearer approachit proved to be one of the brigantines that had been commandedby Lope de Olano. It came to anchor: a boatput off, and among the crew were the four sailors who haddisappeared so mysteriously from the island.These men accounted in a satisfactory manner for theirdesertion. They had been persuaded that the ships werein some harbour to the eastward, and that they were dailyleaving them farther behind. Disheartened at the constant,and, in their opinion, fruitless toil which fell totheir share in the struggle westward, they resolved totake their own counsel, without risking the opposition ofNicuesa. In the dead of the night, therefore, whentheir companions on the island were asleep, they had silentlycast off their boat, and retraced their course along110 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.the coast. After several days toil they found the brigantinesunder the command of Lope de Olano, in the riverof Belen, the scene of the disasters of Columbus in hisfourth voyage.The conduct of Lope de Olano was regarded with suspicionby his contemporaries, and is still subject to doubt.He is supposed to have deserted Nicuesa designedly, intendingto usurp the command of the expedition. Men,however, were prone to judge harshly of him from hishaving been concerned in the treason and rebellion ofFrancisco Roldan. On the stormy night when Nicuesastood out to sea to avoid the dangers of the shore, Olanotook shelter under, the lee of an island. Seeing nothingof the caravel of his commander in the morning, he madeno effort to seek for it, but proceeded with the brigantinesto the river Chagres, where he found the ships at anchor.They had landed all their cargo, being almost in a sinkingcondition from the ravages of the worms. Olanopersuaded the crews that Nicuesa had perished in thelate storm, and, being his lieutenant, he assumed the command.Whether he had been perfidious or not in his motives,his command was but a succession of disasters. Hesailed from Chagres for the river of Belen, where theships were found so damaged that they had to be brokento pieces. Most of the people constructed wretchedcabins on the shore, where, during a sudden storm, theywere almost washed away by the swelling of the river, orswallowed up in the shifting sands. Several of his menwere drowned in an expedition in quest of gold, and hehimself merely escaped by superior swimming. Theirprovisions were exhausted, they suffered from hunger andfrom various maladies, and many perished in extrememisery. All were clamorous to abandon the coast, and1509.] DIEGO DE Nicest. IllOlano set about constructing a caravel, out of the wreckof the ships, for the purpose, as he said, of returning toHispaniola, though many suspected it was still his intentionto persist in the enterprise. Such was the statein which the four seamen had found Olano and his party ;most of them living in miserable cabins and destitute ofthe necessaries of life.The tidings that Nicuesa was still alive put an end tothe sway of Olano. Whether he had acted with truthor perfidy, he now manifested a zeal to relieve his commander,and immediately despatched a brigantine in questof him, which, guided by the four seamen, arrived at theisland in the way that has been mentioned.112 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509,CHAPTER IV.Nicuesa rejoins his Crews.WHEN the crew of the brigantine and the companionsof Nicuesa met, they embraced each other with tears, forthe hearts, even of the rough mariners, were subdued bythe sorrows they had undergone ; and men are renderedkind to each other by a community of suffering. Thebrigantine had brought a quantity of palm nuts, and ofsuch other articles of food as they had been able to procurealong the coast. These the famished Spaniards devouredwith such voracity that Nicuesa was obliged tointerfere, lest they should injure themselves. Nor wasthe supply of fresh water less grateful to their parchedand fevered palates.When sufficiently revived, they all abandoned the desolateisland, and set sail for the river Belen, exulting asjoyfully as if their troubles were at an end, and they werebound to a haven of delight, instead of merely changingthe scene of suffering and encountering a new variety ofhorrors.In the meantime Lope de Olano had been diligentlypreparing for the approaching interview with his commander,by persuading his fellow officers to intercede inhis behalf, and to place his late conduct in the most favourablelight. He had need of their intercessions.Nicuesa arrived, burning with indignation. He orderedhim to be instantly seized and punished as a traitor; .]DIEGO DE Nicest. 113attributing to his desertion the ruin of the enterprise andthe sufferings and death of so many of his brave followers.The fellow cap pains of Olano spoke in his favour;but Nicuesa turned indignantly upon them : " You dowell cried he, " to supplicate mercy for him ; you,who, yourselves, have need of pardon! You have participatedin his crime ; why, else, have you suffered solong a time to elapse without compelling him to send oneof the vessels in search of me ?"The captains now vindicated themselves by assurancesof their belief in his having foundered at sea. They reiteratedtheir supplications for mercy to Olano ; drawingthe most affecting pictures of their past and present sufferings,and urging the impolicy of increasing the horrorsof their situation by acts of severity. Nicuesa atlength was prevailed upon to spare his victim ; resolvingto send him, by the first opportunity, a prisoner to Spain.It appeared, in truth, no time to add to the daily blows offate that were thinning the number of his followers. Ofthe gallant armament of seven hundred resolute and effectivemen that had sailed with him from San Domingo, fourhundred had already perished by various miseries ; and,of the survives, many could scarcely be said to live.114 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. 1509.]CHAPTER V.Sufferings of Nicuesa and his men on the Coast of the Isthmus.THE first care of Nicuesa, on resuming the generalcommand, was to take measures for the relief of his people,who were perishing with famine and disease. Allthose who were in health, or who had strength sufficientto bear the least fatigue, were sent on foraging parties,among the fields and villages of the natives. It was aservice of extreme peril ; for the Indians of this part ofthe coast were fierce and warlike, and were the samewho had proved so formidable to Columbus and his brother,when they attempted to found a settlement in thisneighbourhood.Many of the Spaniards were slain in these expeditions.Even if they succeeded in collecting provisions, the toilof bringing them to the harbour was worse to men intheir enfeebled condition, than the task of fighting forthem ; for they were obliged to transport them on theirbacks, and, thus heavily laden, to scramble over ruggedrocks, through almost impervious forests and across dismalswamps.Harassed by these perils and fatigues, they broke forthinto murmurs against their commander, accusing him, notmerely of indifference to their sufferings, but of wantonlyimposing severe and unnecessary tasks upon them out ofrevenge for their having neglected him.1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 115The genial temper of Nicuesa, had in fact; been souredby disappointment; and a series of harassing cares andevils had rendered him irritable and impatient; but hewas a cavalier of a generous and honourable nature,and does not appear to have enforced any services thatwere not indispensable to the common safety. In fact,the famine had increased to such a degree, that, we aretold, thirty Spaniards, having on one occasion found thedead body of an Indian in a state of decay, they weredriven by hunger to make a meal of it, and were so infectedby the horrible repast, that not one of them survived.*Disheartened by these miseries, Nicuesa determined toabandon a place which seemed destined to be the graveof Spaniards. Embarking the greater part of his men inthe two brigantines, and the caravel which had beenbuilt by Olano, he set sail eastward in search of somemore favourable situation for his settlement. A numberof the men remained behind, to await the ripening ofsome maize and vegetables which they had sown. Thesehe left under the command of Alonzo Nufiez, whom henominated his Alcalde Mayor.When Nicuesa had coasted about four leagues to theeast, a Genoese sailor, who had been with Columbus inhis last voyage, informed him that there was a fine harboursomewhere in that neighbourhood, which had pleasedthe old admiral so highly, that he had given it thename of Puerto Bello. He added, that they might knowthe harbour by an anchor, half buried in the sand, whichColumbus had left there ; near to which was a fountain ofremarkably cool and sweet water, springing up at the footHen-era, Hist. Ind. D. i. and viii. c. 2.116 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.of a large tree. Nicuesa ordered search to be made alongthe coast, and at length they found the anchor, the fountain,and the tree. It was the same harbour which bearsthe name of Portobello at the present day. A number ofthe crew were sent on shore in search of provisions, butwere assailed by the Indians; and, being too weak towield their weapons with their usual prowess, weredriven back to the vessels with the loss of several slainor wounded.Dejected at these continual misfortunes, Nicuesa continuedhis voyage seven leagues further, until he came tothe harbour to which Columbus had given the name ofPuerto de Bastimientos, or, Port of Provisions. It presentedan advantageous situation for a fortress, and wassurrounded by a fruitful country. Nicuesa resolved tomake it his abiding place. " Here," said he, " let usstop, en el nombre de Diosf" (in the name of God.) Hisfollowers, with the superstitious feeling with which meninadversity are prone to interpret every thing intoomens, persuaded themselves that there was favourableaugury in his words, and called the harbour u Nombrede Dios," which name it afterwards retained.Nicuesa now landed, and drawing his sword, took solemnpossession in the name of the Catholic sovereigns.He immediately began to erect a fortress to protect hispeople against the attacks of the savages. As this was acase of exigency, he exacted the labour of every onecapable of exertion. The Spaniards, thus equally distressedby famine and toil, forgot their favourable omen,cursed the place as fated to be their grave, and calleddown imprecations on the head of their commander, whocompelled them to labour when ready to sink with hungerand debility. Those murmured no less who were1510.] DIEGO DE NTCUESA. 117sent in quest of food, which was only to be gained byfatigue and bloodshed ; for whatever they collected theyhad to transport from great distances, and they were frequentlywaylaid and assaulted by the Indians.When he could spare men for the purpose, Nicuesadespatched the caravel for those whom he had left at theriver Belen. Many of them had perished, and the survivershad been reduced to such famine at times, as toeat all kinds of reptiles, until a part of an alligator was abanquet to them. On mustering all his forces when thusunited, Nicuesa found that but one hundred emaciatedand dejected wretches remained.He despatched the caravel to Hispaniola, to bring aquantity of bacon which he had ordered to have preparedthere, but it never returned. He ordered Gonzalo deBadajoz, at the head of twenty men, to scour the countryfor provisions ; but the Indians had ceased to cultivate :they could do with little food, and could subsist on theroots and wild fruits of the forest. The Spaniards, therefore,found deserted villages and barren fields, but lurkingenemies at every defile. So deplorably were theyreduced by their sufferings, that at length there were notleft a sufficient number in health and strength to mountguard at night; and the fortress remained without sentinels.Such was the desperate situation of this once gayand gallant cavalier, and of his brilliant armament, whichbut a few months before had sallied from San Domingo,flushed with the consciousness of power, and the assurancethat they had the means of compelling the favours offortune.It is necessary to leave them for a while, and turn ourattention to other events which will ultimately be foundto bear upon their destinies.118 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.CHAPTER VI.Expedition of the Bachelor Enciso in search of the Seat of GovernmentofQjeda. (1510 r )IN calling to mind the narrative of the last expeditionof Alonzo de Ojeda, the reader will doubtless rememberthe Bachelor Martin Fernandez de Enciso, who was inspiredby that adventurous cavalier with an ill-starredpassion for colonizing, and freighted a vessel at San Domingowith reinforcements and supplies for the settlementat San Sebastian.When the Bachelor was on the eve of sailing, a numberof the loose hangers-on of the colony, and men encumberedwith debt, concerted to join his ship from thecoast and the outports. Their creditors, however, gettingnotice of their intention, kept a close watch uponevery one that went on board while in the harbour, andobtained an armed vessel from the Admiral Don DiegoColumbus, to escort the enterprising Bachelor clear ofthe island. One man, however, contrived to elude theseprecautions, and, as he afterwards rose to great importance,it is proper to notice him particularly. His namewas Vasco Nunez de Balboa. He was a native of Xeresde los Caballeros, and of a noble though impoverishedfamily. He had been brought up in the service of DonPedro Puerto Career, Lord of Moguer-and he afterwardsenlisted among the adventurers who accompaniedRodrigo de Bastides in his voyage of discovery. Peter1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 119Martyr, in his Latin decades, speaks of him by the appellationof u egregious gladiator," which has been interpretedby some as a skilful swordsman, by others, as anadroit fencing master. He intimates, also, that he was amere soldier of fortune, of loose prodigal habits, and thecircumstances under which he is first introduced to usjustify this character. He had fixed himself for a timein Hispaniola, and undertaken to cultivate a farm at thetown of Salvatierra, on the sea coast, but in a little timehad completely involved himself in debt. The expeditionof Enciso presented him with an opportunity of escapingfrom his embarrassments, and of indulging his adventuroushabits. To elude the vigilance of his creditorsand of the armed escort, he concealed himself in acask, which was conveyed from his farm on the sea coaston board of the vessel, as if containing provisions for thevoyage. When the vessel was fairly out at sea, andabandoned by the escort, Vasco Nunez emerged like anapparition from his cask, to the great surprise of Enciso,who had been totally ignorant of the stratagem. TheBachelor was indignant at being thus outwitted, eventhough he gained a recruit by the deception ; and, in thefirst ebullition of his wrath, gave the fugitive debtor avery rough reception, threatening to put him on shore onthe first uninhabited island they should encounter. VascoNunez, however, succeeded in pacifying him, "for God,"says the venerable Las Casas {f reserved him for greaterthings." It is probable the Bachelor beheld in him aman well fitted for his expedition, for Vasco Nunez wasin the prime and vigour of his days, tall and muscular,seasoned to hardships, and of intrepid spirit.Arriving at the main land, they touched at the fatal120 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.harbour of Cartagena, the scene of the sanguinary conflictsof Ojeda and Nicuesa with the natives, and of thedeath of the brave Juan de la Cosa. Enciso was ignorantof those events, having had no tidings from thoseadventurers since their departure from San Domingo;without any hesitation, therefore, he landed a number ofhis men to repair his boat, which was damaged, and toprocure water. While the men were working upon theboat, a multitude of Indians gathered at a distance, wellarmed, and with menacing aspect, sounding their shells andbrandishing their weapons. The experience they had hadof the tremendous powers of the strangers, however, renderedthem cautious of attacking, and for three days theyhovered in this manner about the Spaniards, the latter beingobliged to keep continually on the alert. At length twoof the Spaniards ventured one day from the main body tofill a water cask from the adjacent river. Scarcely hadthey reached the margin of the stream, when eleven savagessprang from the thickets and surrounded them, bendingtheir bows and pointing their arrows. In this way theystood for a moment or two in fearful suspense, the Indiansrefraining from discharging their shafts, but keeping themconstantly pointed at their breasts. One of the Spaniardsattempted to escape to his comrades who were repairingthe boat, but the other called him back, and,understanding something of the Indian tongue, addresseda few amicable words to the savages. The latter, astonishedat being spoken to in their own language, now relaxeda little from their fierceness, and demanded of thestrangers who they were, who were their leaders, andwhat they sought upon their shores. The Spaniard repliedthat they mere harmless people, who came from1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 121other lands and merely touched there through necessity,and he wondered that they should meet them with suchhostility ; he at the same time warned them to beware, asthere would come many of his countrymen well armed,and would wreak terrible vengeance upon them for anymischief they might do. While they were thus parleying,the Bachelor Enciso, hearing that two of his menwere surrounded by the savages, sallied instantly fromhis ship, and hastened with an armed force to theirrescue. As he approached, however, the Spaniardwho had held the parley, made him a signal that thenatives were pacific. In fact the latter had supposedthat this was a new invasion of Ojeda and Nicuesa, andhad thus arrayed themselves, if not to take vengeance forpast outrages, at least to defend their houses from a seconddesolation. When they were convinced, however, thatthese were a totally different band of strangers and withouthostile intentions, their animosity was at an end, theythrew by their weapons, and came forward with the mostconfiding frankness. During the whole time that theSpaniards remained there, they treated them with thegreatest friendship, supplying them with bread madefrom maize, with salted fish , and with the fermentedand spiritous beverages common along that coast. Suchwas the magnanimous conduct of men who were consideredamong the most ferocious and warlike of these savagenations; and who, but recently, had beheld theirshores invaded, their villages ravaged and burnt, andtheir friends and relations butchered, without regard toage or sex by the countrymen of these very strangers.When we recall the bloody and indiscriminate vengeancewreaked upon this people by Ojeda and his followers for122 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.their justifiable resistance of invasion, and compare it withtheir placable and considerate spirit when an opportunityfor revenge presented itself, we confess we feel a momentarydoubt whether the arbitrary appellation of savageis always applied to the right party.1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 123CHAPTER VII.IThe Bachelor hears unwelcome tidings of his destined Jurisdiction.NOT long after the arrival of Enciso at this eventfulharbour he was surprised by the circumstance of a brigantineentering and coming to anchorite encounter anEuropean sail in these almost unknown seas, was alwaysa singular and striking occurrence, but the astonishmentof the Bachelor was mingled with alarm when, on boardingthe brigantine, he found that it was manned by anumber of the men who had embarked with Ojeda. Hisfirst idea was, that they had mutinied against their commander,and deserted with the vessel. The feelings ofthe magistrate were aroused within him by the suspicion,and he determined to take his first step as Alcalde Mayor,by seizing them and inflicting on them the severity of thelaw. He altered his tone, however, on conversing withtheir resolute commander. This was no other than FranciscoPizarro, whom Ojeda had left as his locum tenensat San Sebastian, and who showed the Bachelor his letterpatent, signed by that unfortunate governor. Infact, the little brigantine contained the sad remnant of theonce vaunted colony. After the departure of Ojeda inthe pirate ship, his followers, whom he had left behindunder the command of Pizarro, continued in the fortress124 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.until the stipulated term of fifty days had expired. Receivingno succour, and hearing no tidings of Ojeda, theythen determined to embark and sail for Hispaniola ; buthere an unthought-of difficulty presented itself, theywere seventy in number, and the two brigantines whichhad been left with them were incapable of taking somany. They came to the forlorn agreement, therefore,to remain until famine, sickness, and the poisoned arrowsof the Indians should reduce their number to the capacityof the brigantines. A brief space of time was sufficientfor the purpose. They then prepared for the voyage.Four mares, which had keen kept alive as terrorsto the Indians, were killed and salted for sea-stores.Then taking whatever other articles of provision remained,they embarked and made sail. One brigantinewas commanded by Pizarro, the other by one Venezuela.They had not proceeded far when, in a storm, a seastruck the crazy vessel of Valenzuela with such violenceas to cause it to founder with all its crew. Theother brigantine was so near that the mariners witnessedthe struggles of their drowning companions andheard their cries. Some of the sailors, with the commondisposition to the marvellous, declared that theyhad beheld a great whale, or some other monster ofthe deep, strike the vessel with its tail, and eitherstave in its sides or shatter the rudder, so as to cause theshipwreck.* The surviving brigantine then made thebest of its way to the harbour of Cartagena, to seekprovisions.Herrera, Hist. Ind. d. 1. 1. vii. c. 10.1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest.Such was the disastrous account rendered to theBachelor by Pizarro, of his destined jurisdiction. En-cis,however, was of a confident mind and sanguine temperament,and trusted to restore all things to order andprosperity on his arrival.SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.CHAPTER VIII.Crusade of the Bachelor Enciso against the Sepulchres of Menu.THE Bachelor Enciso, as has been shown, was a man ofthe sword as well as of the robe ; having doubtless imbibeda passion for military exploit from his intimacywith the discoverers. Accordingly, while at Cartagena,he was visited by an impulse of the kind, and undertookan enterprise that would have been worthy of his friendOjeda. He had been told by the Indians that about twenty-liveleagues to the west lay a province called Menu,the mountains of which abounded with the finest gold,This was washed down by torrents during the rainyseason, in such quantities that the natives stretched netsacross the rivers to catch the largest particles ; some ofwhich were said to be as large as eggs.The idea of taking gold in nets captivated the imaginationof the Bachelor, and his cupidity was still moreexcited by further accounts of this wealthy province.He was told that Zenu was the general place of sepultureof the Indian tribes throughout the country, whitherthey brought their dead, and buried them, according totheir custom, decorated with their most precious ornaments.It appeared to him a matter of course, therefore, thatthere must be an immense accumulation of riches in the1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 127Indian tombs, from the golden ornaments that had beenburied with the dead through a long series of generations.Fired with the thought, he determined to make a forayinto this province, and to sack the sepulchres ! Neitherdid he feel any compunction at the idea of plunderingthe dead, considering the deceased as pagans and infidels,who had forfeited even the sanctuary of the grave, byhaving been buried according to the rites and ceremoniesof their idolatrous religion.Enciso, accordingly, made sail from Cartagena andlanded with his forces on the coast of Zenu. Here hewas promptly opposed by two caciques, at the head of alarge band of warriors. The Bachelor, though he hadthus put on the soldier, retained sufficient of the spirit ofhis former calling not to enter into quarrel without takingcare to have the law on his side ; he proceeded regularly,therefore, according to the legal form recently enjoinedby the crown. He caused to be read and interpreted tothe caciques, the same formula used by Ojeda, expoundingthe nature of the Deity, the supremacy of the pope,and the right of the Catholic sovereigns to all these lands,by virtue of a grant from his holiness. The caciques listenedto the whole very attentively and without interruption,according to the laws of Indian courtesy. They thenreplied that, as to the assertion that there was but one God,the sovereign of heaven and earth, it seemed to them good,and that such must be the case ; but as to the doctrinethat the pope was regent of the world in place of God,and that he had made a grant of their country to theSpanish king, they observed that the pope must havebeen drunk to give away what was not his, and the kingmust have been somewhat mad to ask at his hands what128 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.belonged to others. They added, that they were lordsof those lands and needed no other sovereign, and if thisking should come to take possession, they would cut offhis head and put it on a pole ; that being their mode ofdealing with their enemies. As an illustration of thiscustom they pointed out to Enciso the very uncomfortablespectacle of a row of grisly heads impaled in theneighbourhood.Nothing daunted either by the reply or the illustration,the Bachelor menaced them with war and slaveryas the consequences of their refusal to believe and submit.They replied by threatening to put his head upona pole as a representative of his sovereign. The Bachelorhaving furnished them with the law now proceeded tothe commentary. , He attacked the Indians, routedthem, and took one of the caciques prisoner, but inthe skirmish two of his men were slightly woundedwith poisoned arrows, and died raving with torment.*It does not appear, however, that his crusade againstthe sepulchres was attended with any lucrative advantage.Perhaps the experience he had received of thehostility of the natives, and of the fatal effects of theirpoisoned arrows, prevented his penetrating into the land,The above anecdote is related by the Bachelor Enciso himself,in a geographical work entitled .Sum de Geographic, whichhe published in Seville, in 1519. As the reply of the poor savagescontains something of natural logic we give a part of it as reportedby the Bachelor. " Respondieron me : que en lo que cleziaque no asia sino un dies y que este governaba el ciel y la tierra yque era senor de todo que les marcia y que ash delia ser : pero queenlo que delia que el papa era senior de todo el universe en sugarole dies y que el asia echo mercer de quelle tierra al rey de Castilla;dixon que el papa clebiera star boracic quando lo hizo,pues data lo que no era suo, y que el rey que media y tomava italmercer delia ser algun loco pues media lo que era de otros," &c.1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 129with his scanty force. Certain it is, the reputed wealthof Zenu, and the tale of its fishery for gold with nets, remainedunascertained and uncontradicted, and were thecause of subsequent and disastrous enterprises. TheBachelor contented himself with his victory, and returningto his ships, prepared to continue his voyage for theseat of government established by Ojeda in the Gulf ofUraba.130 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.CHAPTER IX.The Bachelor wives at San Sebastian His disasters there, andsubsequent Exploits at Darien.IT was not without extreme difficulty, and the peremptoryexercise of his authority as Alcalde Mayor, thatEnciso prevailed upon the crew of Pizarro to return withhim to the fated shores of San Sebastian. He at lengtharrived in sight of the long wished-for seat of his anticipatedpower and authority ; but here he was doomed likehis principal, Ojeda, to meet with nothing but misfortune.On entering the harbour his vessel struck on arock on the eastern point. The rapid currents andtumultuous waves rent it to pieces; the crew escapedwith great difficulty to the brigantine of Pizarro ; a littleflour, cheese and biscuit, and a small part of the armswere saved, but the horses, mares, swine and all othercolonial supplies were swept away, and the unfortunateBachelor beheld the proceeds of several years of prosperouslitigation swallowed up in an instant.His dream of place and dignity seemed equally on thepoint of vanishing, for, on landing, he found the fortressand its adjacent houses mere heaps of ruins, having beendestroyed with fire by the Indians.For a few days the Spaniards maintained themselveswith palm nuts, and with the flesh of a kind of wild swine,of which they met with several herds. These suppliesfailing, the Bachelor sallied forth with a hundred men to1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 131forage the country. They were waylaid by three Indians,who discharged all the arrows in their quivers withincredible rapidity, wounded several Spaniards, and thenfled with a swiftness that defied pursuit. The Spaniardsreturned to the harbour in dismay. All their dread ofthe lurking savages and their poisoned weapons revived,and they insisted upon abandoning a place marked outfor disaster.The Bachelor Enciso was himself disheartened atthe situation of this boasted capital of San Sebastian ;but whither could he go where the same misfortunesmight not attend him? In this moment of doubt and despondency,Vasco Nunez, the same absconding debtorwho had been smuggled on board in the cask, steppedforward to give counsel. He informed the Bachelor thatseveral years previously he had sailed along that coastwith Rodrigo de-Bastides. They had explored the wholegulf of Uraba ; and he well remembered an Indian villagesituated on the western side, on the banks of a riverwhich the natives called Darien. The country aroundwas fertile and abundant, and was said to "possess minesof gold ; and the natives, though a warlike race, nevermade use of poisoned Weapons. He offered to guide theBachelor to this place, where they might get a supply ofprovisions, and even found their colony*The Spaniards hailed the words of Vasco Nunez as ifrevealing a land of promise. The Bachelor adopted hisadvice, and, guided by him, set sail for the village, determinedto eject the inhabitants and take possession ofit as the seat of government. Arrived at the river, helanded, put his men in martial array, and marched alongthe banks. The place was governed by a brave caciquenamed Zemaco. When he heard of the approach of the132 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.Spaniards, he sent off the women and children to a placeof safety, and posting himself with five hundred of hiswarriors on a height, prepared to give the intruders awarm reception. The Bachelor was a discoverer at allpoints, pious, daring, and rapacious. On beholding thismartial array he recommended himself and his followersto God, making a vow in their name to " Our Lady ofAntigua," whose image is adored with great devotion inSeville, that the first church and town which they builtshould be dedicated to her, and that they would make apilgrimage to Seville to offer the spoils of the heathen ather shrine. Having thus endeavoured to propitiate thefavour of heaven, and to retain the Holy Virgin in hiscause, he next proceeded to secure the fidelity of his followers.Doubting that they might have some lurkingdread of poisoned arrows, he exacted from them all anoath that they would not turn their backs upon the foe,whatever might happen. Never did warrior enter intobattle with more preliminary forms and covenants thanthe Bachelor Enciso. All these points being arranged,he assumed the soldier, and attacked the enemy with suchvalour, that though they made at first a show of fierce resistance,they were soon put to* flight, and many of themslain. The Bachelor entered the village in triumph, tookpossession of it by unquestionable right of conquest, andplundered all the hamlets and houses of the surroundingcountry ; collecting great quantities of food and cotton,with bracelets, anklets, plates and other ornaments ofgold, to the value often thousand castellanos.* His heartwas wonderfully elated by his victory and his booty ; hisfollowers, also, after so many hardships and disasters, gaveEquivalent to a present sum of 53,259 dollars.1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 133themselves up to joy at this turn of good fortune, and itwas unanimously agreed that the seat of governmentshould be established in this village ; to which, in fulfilmentof his vow, Enciso gave the name of Santa Mariade la Antigua del Darien.u v *134 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510,CHAPTER X.The Bachelor Enciso, undertakes the command His Downfall.THE Bachelor Enciso now entered upon the exerciseof his civil functions as Alcalde Mayor, and Lieutenantof the absent governor, Ojeda. His first edict was sternand peremptory; he forbade all trafficking with the nativesfor gold, on private account, under pain of death.This was in conformity to royal command; but it waslittle palatable to men who had engaged in the enterprisein the hopes of enjoying free trade, lawless liberty, andgolden gains. They murmured among themselves, andinsinuated that Enciso intended to reserve all the profitto himself.Yasco Nunez was the first to take? advantage of thegeneral discontent. He had risen to consequence amonghis fellow-adventurers, from having guided them to thisplace, and from his own intrinsic qualities, being hardy,bold, and intelligent, and possessing the random spiritand open-handed generosity common to a soldier of fortune,and calculated to dazzle and delight the multitude.He bore no good will to the Bachelor, recollecting histhreat of landing him on an uninhabited island, when heescaped in a cask from San Domingo. He sought, therefore,to make a party against him, and to unseat him fromhis command. He attacked him in his own way, withlegal weapons, questioning the legitimacy of his pretensions.The boundary line, he observed, which separated1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 135the jurisdictions of Ojeda and Nicuesa, ran through thecentre of the gulf of Uraba. The village of Darien lay onthe western side, which had been allotted to Nicuesa.Enciso, therefore, as Alcalde Mayor and Lieutenant ofOjeda, could have no jurisdiction here, and his assumedauthority was a sheer usurpation.The Spaniards, already incensed at the fiscal regulationsof Enciso, were easily convinced ; so with one accordthey refused allegiance to him ; and the unfortunateBachelor found the chair of authority to which he had sofondly and anxiously aspired, suddenly wrested fromunder him, before he had well time to take his seat.136 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510,CHAPTER XLPerplexities at the Colony Arrival of Commences.To depose the Bachelor had been an easy matter, formost men are ready to assist in pulling down; but tochoose a successor was a task of far more difficulty. Thepeople at first agreed to elect mere civil magistrates, andaccordingly appointed Vasco Nunez and one Zemudio asalcaldes, together with a cavalier of some merit of thename of Valdivia, as region. They soon, however, becamedissatisfied with this arrangement, and it was generallyconsidered advisable to vest the authority in oneperson. Who this person should be, was now the question.Some proposed Nicuesa, as they were within hisprovince ; others were strenuous for Vasco Nunez. Aviolent dispute ensued, which was carried on with suchheat and obstinacy, that ninny, anxious for a quiet life,declared it would be better to reinstate Enciso until thepleasure of the king should be known.In the height of these factious altercations the Spaniardswere aroused one day by the thundering of cannonfrom the opposite side of the gulf, and beheld columns ofsmoke rising from the hills. Astonished at these signalsof civilized man on these wild shores, they replied in thesame manner, and in a short time two ships were seenstanding across the gulf. They proved to be an armamentcommanded by one Rodrigo de Colmenares, andwere in search of Nicuesa with supplies. They had met1510.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 137with the usual luck of adventurers on this disastrous coast,storms at sea and savage foes on shore, and many of theirnumber had fallen by poisoned arrows. Colmenares hadtouched at San Sebastian to learn tidings of Nicuesa;but, finding the fortress in ruins, had made signals, inhopes of being heard by the Spaniards, should they beyet lingering in the neighbourhood.The arrival of Colmenares caused a temporary suspensionof the feuds of the colonists. He distributed provisionsamong them and gained their hearts. Then,representing the legitimate right of Nicuesa to the commandof all that part of the coast as a governor appointedby the king, he persuaded the greater part of the peopleto acknowledge his authority. It was generally agreed,therefore, that he should cruise along the coast in searchof Nicuesa, and. that Diego de Arbiter, and an activemember of the law, called the Bachelor Corral, shouldaccompany him as ambassadors, to invite that cavalier tocome and assume the government of Darien.138 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.CHAPTER XII.Colmenares goes in quest of Nicuesa.Rodrigo de Colmenares proceeded along the coast tothe westward, looking into every bay and harbour, butfor a long time without success. At length one day hediscovered a brigantine at a small island in the sea. Onmaking up to it, he found that it was part of the armamentof Nicuesa, and had been sent out by him to foragefor provisions. By this vessel he was piloted to the portof Nombre de Dios, the nominal capital of the unfortunategovernor, but which was so surrounded and over-shadowed by forests, that he might have passed by withoutnoticing it.The arrival of Colmenares was welcomed with transportsand tears of joy. It was scarcely possible for himto recognise the once buoyant and brilliant Nicuesa in thesqualid and dejected man before him. He was living inthe most abject misery. Of all his once gallant and powerfulband of followers, but sixty men remained, and thoseso feeble, yellow, emaciated, and woe-begone, that it waspiteous to behold them.*The harbour of Nombre de Dios continued for a long time topresent traces of the sufferings of the Spaniards. We are told byHerrera, that several years after the time here mentioned, a bandof eighty Spanish soldiers, commanded by Gonzalo de Badajoz,arrived at the harbour with an intention of penetrating into the interior.They found there the ruined fort of Nicuesa, together withsculls and bones, and crosses erected on heaps of stones, dismalmementos of his followers who had perished of hunger; the sight1510.] . DIEGO DE Nicest. 139Colmenares distributed food among them, and told themthat he had come to convey them to a plenteous country,and one rich in gold. When Nicuesa heard of the settlementat Darien, and that the inhabitants had sent forhim to come and govern them, he was as a man suddenlyrevived from death. All the spirit and munificence ofthe cavalier again awakened in him. He gave a kind ofbanquet that very day to Colmenares and the ambassadors,from the provisions brought in the ship. He presided athis table with his former hilarity, and displayed a feat ofhis ancient office as royal carver, by holding up a fowl inthe air and dissecting it with wonderful adroitness.Well would it have been for Nicuesa had the suddenbuoyancy of his feelings carried him no further, but adversityhad not taught him prudence. In conversingwith the envoys about the colony of Darien, he alreadyassumed the tone of governor, and began to disclose thekind of policy with which he intended to rule. Whenhe heard that great quantities of gold had been collectedand retained by private individuals, his ire was kindled.He vowed to make them refund it, and even talked ofpunishing them for trespassing upon the privileges andmonopolies of the crown. This was the very error thathad unseated the Bachelor Enciso from his government,and it was a strong measure for one to threaten who as yetwas governor but in expectation. The menace vas notlost upon the watchful ambassadors Diego de All tes andthe Bachelor Corral. They were put still mere on thealert by a conversation which they held that very which struck such horror and dismay into the hearts of the soldiersthat they would have abandoned their enterprise, had nottheir intrepid captain immediately sent away the ships, and thusdeprived them of the means of retreating. Herrera, d. 11. 1. i.140 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. .[1510.ing with Lope de Olano, who was still detained a prisonerfor his desertion, but who found means to communewith the envoy s, and to prejudice them against his unsuspectingcommander. (( Take warning said he, " bymy treatment. I sent relief to Nicuesa and rescued himfrom death when starving on a desert island. Behold myrecompense. He repays me with imprisonment andchains. Such is the gratitude the people of Darien maylook for at his hands!"The subtle Bachelor Corral and his fellow envoy laidthese matters to heart, and took their measures accordingly.They hurried their departure before Nicuesa,and setting all sail on their caravel, hastened back toDarien. The moment they arrived they summoned ameeting of the principal inhabitants. " A blessed changewe have made," said they, " in summoning this Diego deNicuesa to the command ! We have called in the storkto take the rule, who will not rest satisfied until he hasdevoured us." They then related, with the usual exaggeration,the unguarded threats that had fallen fromNicuesa, and instanced his treatment of Olano as a proofof a tyrannous and ungrateful disposition.The words of the subtle Bachelor Corral and his associateproduced a violent agitation among the people, especiallyamong those who had amassed treasures whichwould have to be refunded. Nicuesa, too, by a transactionwhich almost destroys sympathy in his favour, gave timefor their passions to ferment. On his way to Darien hestopped for several, days among a group of small islands,for the purpose of capturing Indians to be sold as slaves.While committing these outrages against humanity, liesent forward Juan de Cayzedo in a boat to announce hiscoming. His messenger had a private pique against him,1510.] DIEGO" DE Nicest. 141and played him false. He assured the people of Darienthat all they had been told by their envoys concerning thetyranny and ingratitude of Nicuesa was true. That hetreated his followers with wanton severity ; that he tookfrom them all they won in battle, saying, that the spoilswere his rightful property ; and that it was his intentionto treat the people of Darien in the same manner.What folly is it in you added he, " being your ownmasters, and in such free condition, to send for a tyrantto rule-over you!"The people of Darien were convinced by this concurringtestimony, and confounded by the overwhelmingevil they had thus invoked upon their heads. They haddeposed Enciso for his severity, and they had thrownthemselves into the power of one who threatened to beten times more severe! Vasco Nunez de Balboa observedtheir perplexity and consternation. He drew them oneby one apart, and conversed with them in private. " Youare cast down in heart," said he, a and so you might wellbe, were the evil beyond all cure. But do not despair;there is an effectual relief, and you hold it in your hands.If you have committed an error in inviting Nicuesa toDarien, it is easily remedied by not receiving him whenhe comes!" The obviousness and simplicity of the remedystruck every mind, and it was unanimously adopted.142 SPANISH VOYAGES OV DISCOVERY. [1510.CHAPTER XIII.Catastrophe of the unfortunate Nicuesa.WHILE this hostile plot was maturing at Darien, theunsuspecting Nicuesa pursued his voyage leisurely andserenely, and arrived in safety at the mouth of the river.On approaching the shore he beheld a multitude, headedby Vasco Nufiez, waiting, as he supposed, to receivehim with all due honour. He was about to land when thepublic procurator, or attorney, called to him with a loudvoice, warning him not to disembark, but advising himto return with all speed to his government at Nombre deDios.Nicuesa remained for a moment as if thunderstruck byso unlooked-for a salutation. When he recovered hisself-possession he reminded them that he had come attheir own request ; he entreated, therefore, that he mightbe allowed to land and have an explanation, after whichhe would be ready to act as they thought proper. Hisentreaties were vain; they only provoked insolent replies,and threats of violence should he venture to put footon shore. Night coming on, therefore, he was obligedto stand out to sea, but returned the next morning, hopingto find this capricious people in a different mood.There did, indeed appear to be a favourable change,for he was now invited to land. It was a mere stratagemto get him in their power, for no sooner did he set footon shore than the multitude rushed forward to seize him.1511.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 143Among his many bodily endowments, Nicuesa was notedfor swiftness of foot. He now trusted to it for safety, and,throwing off the dignity of governor, fled for his lifealong the shore, pursued by the rabble. He soon distancedhis pursuers and took refuge in the woods.Vasco Nufiez de Balboa, who was himself a man ofbirth, seeing this high-bred cavalier reduced to such extremity,and at the mercy of a violent rabble, repented ofwhat he had done. He had not anticipated such popularfury, and endeavoured, though too late, to allay the tempesthe had raised. He succeeded in preventing thepeople from pursuing Nicuesa into the forest, and thenendeavoured to mollify the vindictive rage of his fellowAlcalde, Zamudio, whose hostility was quickened by thedread of losing his office, should the new governor bereceived ; and who was supported in his boisterous conductby the natural love of the multitude for what arecalled " strong measures." Nicuesa now held a parleywith the populace, through the mediation of VascoNunez. He begged that, if they would not acknowledgehim as governor, they would at least admit him as acompanion. This they refused, saying, that if they admittedhim in one capacity, he would end by attaining tothe other. He then implored, that if he could be admittedon no other terms, they would treat him as a prisoner,and put him in irons, for he would rather die among themthan return to Nombre de Dios, to perish of famine, or bythe arrows of the Indians.It was in vain that Vasco Nuuez exerted his eloquenceto obtain some grace for this unhappy cavalier. Hisvoice was drowned by the vociferations of the multitude.Among these was a noisy swaggering fellow named FranciscoBenitez, a great talker and jester, who took a vultSPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.gar triumph in the distresses of a cavalier, and answeredevery plea in his behalf with scoffs and jeers. He was anadherent of the Alcalde Zamudio, and under his patronagefelt emboldened to bluster. His voice was even uppermostin the general clamour, until, to the expostulationsof Vasco Nunez, he replied by merely bawling withgreat vociferation, " " No, no, no! we will receive nosuch a fellow among us as Nicuesa!" The patience ofVasco Nunez was exhausted: he availed himself of hisauthority as Alcalde, and suddenly, before his fellow magistratecould interfere, ordered the brawling ruffian tobe rewarded with a hundred lashes, which were taleout roundly to him upon the shoulders.*Seeing that the fury of the populace was not to be pacified,he sent word to Nicuesa to retire to his brigantine,and not to venture on shore until advised by him to doso. The counsel was fruitless. Nicuesa, above deceithimself, suspected it not in others. He retired to hisbrigantine, it is true, but suffered himself to be inveigledon shore by a. deputation professing to come on the partof the public, with offers to reinstate him as governor.He had scarcely landed when he was set upon by anarmed band, headed by the base minded Zamudio, whoseized him and compelled him, by menaces of death, toswear that he would immediately depart, and make no delayin any place until he had presented himself beforethe king and council in Castile.It was in vain that Nicuesa reminded them that hewas governor of that territory and representative of theking, and that they were guilty of treason in thus opposinghim; it was in vain that he appealed to their humani-lasCasas, Hist. Ind. I. ii. c. 63.1511.] DIEGO DE Nicest. 145ty, or protested before God against their cruelty andpersecution. The people were in that state of tumultwhen they are apt to add cruelty to injustice. Not contentwith expelling the discarded governor from theirshores, they allotted him the worst vessel in the harbour;an old crazy brigantine totally unfit to encounter theperils and labours of the sea.Seventeen followers embarked with him ; some beingof his household and attached to his person; the restwere volunteers who accompanied him out of respect andsympathy. The frail bark set sail on the first of March,1511, and steered across the Caribbean sea for the islandof Hispaniola, but was never seen or heard of more !Various attempts have been made to penetrate the mysterythat covers the fate of the brigantine and its crew.A rumour prevailed some years afterwards that severalSpaniards, wandering along the shore of Cuba, found thefollowing inscription carved on a tree ;Qui feneciu el clcsdicado Nicuesa.(Here perished the unfortunate Nicuesa.)Hence it was inferred that he and his followers hadlanded there, and been massacred by the Indians. LasCasas, however, discredits this story. He accompaniedthe first Spaniards who took possession of Cuba, and heardnothing of the fact, as he most probably would have donehad it really occurred. He imagines, rather, that thecrazy bark was swallowed up by the storms and currentsof the Caribbean sea, or that the crew perished with hungerand thirst, having been hut scantily supplied withprovisions. The good old bishop adds, with the superstitiousfeeling prevalent in that age, that a short time146 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.before Nicuesa sailed from Spain on his expedition, anastrologer warned him not to depart on the day he hadappointed, or under a certain sign; the cavalier replied,however, that he had less confidence in the stars than inGod who made them. " I recollect, moreover," addsLas Casas, (( that about this time a comet was seen overthis island of Hispaniola, which, if I do not forget, wasin the shape of a sword ; and it was said that a monkwarned several of those about to embark with Nicuesa, toavoid that captain, for the heavens foretold he was destinedto be lost. The same, however," he concludes,might be said of Alonzo de Ojeda, who sailed at thesame time, yet returned to San Domingo and died in hisLas Casas, ut sup. c. 68.1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 147VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA,DISCOVERER OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN.CHAPTER I.Factions at Darien Vasco Nunez elected to (he Command.WE have traced the disastrous fortunes of Alonzo deOjeda and Diego de Nicuesa, we have now to recordthe story of Vasco Nunez de Balboa an adventurerequally daring, far more renowned, and notless unfortunate, who, in a manner, rose upon theirruins.When the bark disappeared from view which bore theill-starred Nicuesa from the shores of Darien, the communityrelapsed into factions, as to who should have therule. The Bachelor Enciso insisted upon his claims asparamount, but he met with a powerful opponent in VascoNunez, who had become a great favourite with thepeople, from his frank and fearless character, and hiswinning affability. In fact, he was peculiarly calculatedto manage the fiery and factious, yet generous and susceptible,nature of his countrymen ; for the Spaniards,though proud and resentful, and impatient of indignityor restraint, are easily dazzled by valour, and won by148 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.courtesy and kindness. Vasco Nunez had the externalrequisites also to captivate the multitude. He was nowabout thirty-five years of age ; tall, well formed, and vigorous,with reddish hair, and an open prepossessing countenance.His office of Alcalde, while it clothed him withinfluence and importance, tempered those irregular anddissolute habits he might have indulged while a mere soldierof fortune ; and his superior talent soon gave him acomplete ascendancy over his official colleague Zamudio.He was thus enabled to set on foot a vigorous oppositionto Enciso. Still he proceeded according to the forms oflaw, and summoned the Bachelor to trial, on the chargeof usurping the powers of Alcalde Mayor, on the mereappointment of Alonzo de Ojeda, whose jurisdiction didnot extend to this province.Enciso was an able lawyer, and pleaded his causeskilfully; but his claims were, in fact, fallacious, and,had they not been so, he had to deal with men who caredlittle for law, who had been irritated by his legal exactions,and who were disposed to be governed by a man ofthe sword rather than of the robe. He was readilyfound guilty therefore, and thrown into prison, and allhis property was confiscated. This was a violent verdict,and rashly executed; but justice seemed to growfierce and wild when transplanted to the wildernessof the new world. Still there is no place wherewrong can be committed with impunity; the oppressionof the Bachelor Enciso, though exercised underthe forms of law, and in a region remote fromthe pale of civilized life, redounded to the eventualinjury of Vasco Nunez, and contributed to blast thefruits of that ambition it was intended to promote.1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 149The fortunes of the enterprising Bachelor had indeedrun strangely counter to the prospects with whichhe had embarked at San Domingo; he had becomea culprit at the bar instead of a judge upon the bench;and now was left to ruminate in a prison on the failureof his late attempt at general command. Hisfriends, however, interceded warmly in his behalf,and at length obtained his release from confinement,and permission for him to return to Spain. Vasco Nunez foresaw that the lawyer would be apt to plead hiscause more effectually at the court of Castile than he haddone before the partial and prejudiced tribunal ofDarien. He prevailed upon his fellow Alcalde Za-medio, therefore, who was implicated with him inthe late transactions, to return to Spain in the samevessel with the Bachelor, so as to be on the spot toanswer his charges, and to give a favourable reportof the case. He was also instructed to set forththe services of Vasco Nunez, both in guiding thecolonists to this place, and in managing the affairs ofthe settlement; and to dwell with emphasis on thesymptoms of great riches in tj^e surrounding country.The Bachelor and the Alcalde embarked in a smallcaravel; and, as it was to touch at Hispaniola, VascoNunez sent his confidential friend, the Region Valdivia,to that island to obtain provisions and recruits.He secretly put into his hands a round sum of gold as apresent to Miguel de Passionate, the royal treasurer ofHispaniola, whom he knew to have great credit with theking, and to be invested with extensive powers, cravingat the same-time his protection in the new world and hisinfluence at court.150 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [loll.Having taken these shrewd precautions, Vasco Nunezsaw the caravel depart without dismay, though bearingto Spain his most dangerous enemy ; he consoled himself,moreover, with the reflection that it likewise bore off hisfellow Alcalde Zamudio, and thus left him in sole commandof the colony.1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 151^ CHAPTER II.Expedition to Coyba Vasco Nunez receives the daughter of aCacique as hostage.VASCO NUNEZ now exerted himself to prove his capacityfor the government to which he had aspired ; andas he knew that no proof was more convincing .to KingFerdinand than ample remittances, and that gold coveredall sins in the new world, his first object was to discoverthose parts of the country which most abounded inthe precious metals. Hearing exaggerated reports ofthe riches of a province about thirty leagues distant,called Coyba, he sent Francisco Pizarro with six men toexplore it.The cacique Zemaco, the native lord of Darien, whocherished a bitter hostility against the European intruders,and hovered with his warriors about the settlement,received notice of this detachment from hisspies, and planted himself in ambush to waylay and destroyit. The Spaniards had scarcely proceeded threeleagues along the course of the river when a host of savagesburst upon them from the surrounding thickets, utteringfrightful yells, and discharging showers of stonesand arrows. Pizarro and his men, though sorely bruisedand wounded, rushed into the thickest of the foe, slewmany, wounded more, and put the rest to flight; but,fearing another assault, they made a precipitate retreat,leaving one of their companions, Francisco Herman,152 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.disabled on the field. They arrived at the settlementcrippled and bleeding; but when Vasco Nunez heardthe particulars of the action, his anger was roused againstPizarro, and he ordered him, though wounded, toreturn immediately and recover the disabled man.Let it not be said, for shame," said he ? thatSpaniards fled before savages, and left a comrade intheir hands!" Pizarro felt the rebuke, returned tothe scene of combat, and brought off Francisco Hermanin safety.Nothing having been heard of Nicuesa since his departure,Vasco Nunez despatched two brigantines forthose followers of that unfortunate adventurer who hadremained at Nombre de Dios. They were overjoyedat being rescued from their forlorn situation, and conveyedto a settlement where there was some prospectof comfortable subsistence. The brigantines, in coastingthe shores of the Isthmus, picked up two Spaniards,clad in painted skins, and looking as wild as the nativeIndians. These men, to escape some punishment, hadfled from the ship of Nicuesa about a year and a halfbefore, and had taken refuge with Careta, the caciqueof Coyba. The savage chieftain had treated them withhospitable kindness; their first return for which, nowthat they found themselves safe among their countrymen,was to advise the latter to invade the cacique inhis dwelling, where they assured them they wouldfind immense booty. Finding their suggestion listenedto, one of them proceeded to Darien, to serve asaguide to any expedition that might be set on foot;the other returned to the cacique, to assist in betrayinghim.Vasco Nunez was elated by the intelligence received1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 153through these vagabonds of the wilderness. He chosea hundred and thirty well armed and resolute men, andset off for Coyba, the dominions of Careta. The caciquereceived the Spaniards in his mansion with the accustomedhospitality of a savage, setting before them meatand drink, and whatever his house afforded ; but whenVasco Nunez asked for a large supply of provisions forthe colony, he declared that he had none to spare, hispeople having been prevented from cultivating the soilby a war which he was waging with the neighbouringcacique of Ponca. The Spanish traitor, who had remainedto betray Iris benefactor, now took Vasco Nunezaside, and assured him fiat the cacique had an abundanthoard of provisions in secret; he advised him, however,to seem to believe his words, and to make a pretended departurefor Darien with his troops, but to return in thenight and take the village by surprise. Vasco Nunezadopted the advice of the traitor. He took a cordialleave of Careta, and set off for the settlement. In thedead of the night, however, when the savages were buriedin deep sleep, Vasco Nunez led his men into themidst of the village, and, before the inhabitants couldrouse themselves to resistance, made captives of Careta,his wives, and children, and many of his people. Hediscovered also the hoard of provisions, with which heloaded two brigantines, and returned with his booty andhis captives to Darien.When the unfortunate cacique beheld his family inchains, and in the hands of strangers, his heart Was wrungwith despair; "What have I done to thee," said he toVasco Nunez, "that thou shouldst treat me thus cruelly?none of thy people ever came to my land that were notfed, and sheltered, and treated with loving kindness.154 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.When thou earnest to my dwelling, did I meet thee witha javelin in my hand? Did I not set meat and drink beforethee, and welcome thee as a brother? Set me freetherefore, with my family and people, and we will remainthy friends. We will supply thee with provisions,and reveal to thee the riches of the land. Dost thondoubt my faith? Behold my daughter, I give her tothee as a pledge of friendship. Take her for thy wife,and be assured of the fidelity of her family and herpeople!"Vasco Nunez felt the force of these words and knewthe importance of forming a strong alliance among thenatives. The captive maid, also, as she stood tremblingand dejected before him, found great favour in his eyes,for she was young and beautiful. He granted, therefore,the prayer of the cacique, and accepted his daughter,engaging moreover, to aid the father against hisenemies, on condition of his furnishing provisions to thecolony.Careta remained three days at Darien, during whichtime, he was treated with the utmost kindness. VascoNunez took him on board of his ships and showed himevery part of them. He displayed before him also thewar horses, with their armour and rich caparisons, andastonished him with the thunder of artillery. Lest heshould be too much daunted by these warlike spectacles,he caused the musicians to perform a harmonious concerton their instruments, at which the cacique was lostin admiration. Thus having impressed him with a wonderfulidea of the power and endowments of his newallies, he loaded him with presents and permitted him todepart.*P. Martyr, D. 3. c. vi.1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 155Careta returned joyfully to his territories, and hisdaughter remained with Vasco Nunez, willingly for hissake giving up her family and native home. They werenever married, but she considered herself his wife, asshe really was, according to the usages of her own country,and he treated her with fondness, allowing her graduallyto acquire great influence over him. To his affectionfor this damsel, his ultimate ruin is, in some measure,to he ascribed.156 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511CHAPTER III.fiasco Nunez hears of a Sea beyond the Mountains.VASCO NUNEZ kept his word with the father of his Indianbeauty. Taking with him eighty men, and hiscompanion in arms Rodrigo Enriquez de Colmenares, herepaired by sea to Coyba, the province of the cacique.Here landing, he invaded the territories of Ponca, thegreat adversary of Careta, and obliged him to take refugein the mountains. He then ravaged his lands, and sackedhis villages, in which he found considerable booty. Returningto Coyba, where he was joyfully entertained byCareta, he next made a friendly visit to the adjacent provinceof Comagre, which was under the sway of a cacique,of the same name,, who had 3000 fighting men athis command.This province was situated at the foot of a lofty mountainin a beautiful plain, twelve leagues in extent. Onthe approach of Vasco Nunez, the cacique came forth tomeet him, attended by seven sons, all fine young men, theoffspring of his various wives. He was followed by hisprincipal chiefs and warriors, and by a multitude of hispeople. The Spaniards were conducted with greatceremony to the village, where quarters were assignedthem, and they w r ere furnished with abundance of provisions,and men and women were appointed to attendupon them.The dwelling of the cacique surpassed any they had1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 157yet seen for magnitude, and for the skill and solidity ofthe architecture. It was one hundred and fifty paces inlength, and eighty in breadth, founded upon great logs,surrounded with a stone wall ; while the upper part wasof wood work, curiously interwoven, and wrought withsuch beauty as to fill the Spaniards with surprise and admiration.It .contained many commodious apartments.There were store rooms also ; one filled with bread, withvenison, and other provisions ; another with various spirituousbeverages, which the Indians made from maize ?from a species of the palm, and from roots of differentkinds. There was also a great hall in a retired and secretpart of the building, wherein Comagre preservedthe bodies of his ancestors and relatives. These hadbeen dried by the fire, so as to free them from corruption,and afterwards wrapped in mantles of cotton, richlywrought and interwoven with pearls and jewels of gold ?and with certain stones held precious by the natives.They were then hung about the hall with cords of cotton,and regarded with great reverence, if not a species ofreligious devotion.Among the sons of the cacique, the eldest was of a loftyand generous spirit, and distinguished above the rest byhis superior intelligence and sagacity. Perceiving, saysold Peter Martyr, that the Spaniards were a " wanderingkind of men, living only by shifts and spoil, " hesought to gain favour for himself and family by gratifyingtheir avarice. He gave Vasco Nunez and Colmenares,therefore, 4000 ounces of gold, wrought into various ornaments,together with sixty slaves, being captives thathe had taken in the wars. Vasco Nunez ordered onefifth of the gold to be weighed out and set apart for thecrown, and the rest to be shared among his followers.158 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.The division of the gold took place in the porch of thedwelling of Comagre, in the presence of the youthfulcacique who had made the gift. As the Spaniards wereweighing it out, a violent quarrel arose among them as tothe size and value of the pieces which fell to their respectiveshares. The high minded savage was disgustedat this sordid brawl among beings whom he had regardedwith such reverence. In the first impulse of his disdainhe struck the scale swith his fist, and scattered the glitteringgold about the porch. Before the Spaniardscould recover from their astonishment at this sudden act,he thus addressed them, " Why should you quarrel forsuch a trifle? If this gold is indeed so precious in youreyes, that for it alone you abandon your homes, invade thepeaceful lands of others, and expose yourselves to suchsufferings and perils, I will tell you of a region where youmay gratify your wishes to the utmost. Behold thoselofty mountains," continued he, pointing to the south.Beyond these lies a mighty sea, which may be discernedfrom their summit. It is navigated by people whohave vessels almost as large as yours, and furnished, likethem, with sails and oars. All the streams which flow-downthe southern side of those mountains into that seaabound in gold ; and the kings who reign upon its borderseat and drink out of golden vessels. Gold, in fact,is as plentiful and common among those people of thesouth as iron is among you Spaniards."Struck with this intelligence, Vasco Nuftez inquiredeagerly as to the means of penetrating to this sea and tothe opulent regions on its shores. " The task," repliedthe prince, " is difficult and dangerous. You must passthrough the territories of many powerful caciques, whowill oppose you with hosts of warriors Some parts of1511.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 159the mountains are infested by fierce and cruel cannibals,a wandering lawless race : but, above all, you will haveto encounter the great cacique Tubanama, whose territoriesare at the distance of six days journey, and morerich in gold than any other province ; this cacique willbe sure to come forth against you with a mighty force,To accomplish your enterprise, therefore, will require atleast a thousand men armed like those who follow you."The youthful cacique gave him further information onthe subject, collected from various captives whom he hadtaken in battle, and from one of his own nation, who hadbeen for a long time in captivity to Tubanama, thepowerful cacique of the golden realm. The prince,moreover, offered to prove the sincerity of his words byaccompanying Vasco Nunez in any expedition to thoseparts at the head of his father s warriors.Such was the first intimation received by VascoNunez of the Pacific Ocean and its golden realms, and ithad an immediate effect upon his whole character andconduct. This hitherto wandering and desperate manhad now an enterprise opened to his ambition, which, ifaccomplished, would elevate him to fame and fortune,and entitle him to rank among the great captains and discoverersof the earth. Henceforth the discovery of thesea beyond the mountains was the great object of histhoughts, and his whole spirit seemed roused and ennobledby the idea.He hastened his return to Darien, to make the necessarypreparations for this splendid enterprise. Beforedeparting from the province of Comagre he baptized thatcacique by the name of Don Carlos, and performed thesame ceremony upon his sons and several of his SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1511.sects; thus singularly did avarice and religion go handin hand" in the conduct of the Spanish discoverers.Scarcely had Vasco Nunez returned to Darien whenthe Region Valdivia arrived there from Hispaniola, butwith no more provisions than could be brought in hissmall caravel. These were soon consumed, and the generalscarcity continued. It was heightened also by aviolent tempest of thunder, lightning, and rain, whichbrought such torrents from the mountains that the riverswelled and overflowed its banks, laying waste all the adjacentfields that had been cultivated. In this extremityVasco Nunez despatched Valdivia a second time to Hispaniolafor provisions. Animated also by the loftierviews of his present ambition, he wrote to Don DiegoColumbus, who governed at San Domingo, informing himof the intelligence he had received of a great sea andopulent realms beyond the mountains, and entreating himto use his influence with the king that one thousand menmight be immediately furnished him for the prosecutionof so grand a discovery. He sent him also the amountof fifteen thousand crowns in gold, to be remitted to theking as the royal fifths of what had already been collectedunder his jurisdiction. Many of his followers, also,forwarded sums of gold to be remitted to their creditorsin Spain. In the mean time, Vasco Nunez prayed theadmiral to yield him prompt succour to enable him tokeep his footing in the land, representing the difficultyhe had in maintaining, with a mere handful of men, sovast a country in a state of subjection.VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 161CHAPTER IV.Expedition of Vasco Nunez in quest of the Golden Temple of .)WHILE Vasco Nunez awaited the result of this missionof Valdivia, his active disposition prompted him to undertakeforaging excursions into the surrounding country.Among various rumours of golden realms in the interiorof this unknown land, was one concerning a provincecalled Dobayba, situated about forty leagues distant, onthe banks of a great river which emptied itself, by severalmouths, into a corner of the Gulf of Uraba.This province derived its name, according to Indiantradition, from a mighty female of the olden time, themother of the god who created the sun and moon and allgood things. She had power over the elements, sendingthunder and lightning to lay waste the lands of thosewho displeased her, but showering down fertility andabundance upon the lands of her faithful worshippers.Others described her as having been an Indian princesswho once reigned amongst the mountains of Dobayba, andwas renowned throughout the land for her supernaturalpower and wisdom. After her death, divine honourswere paid her, and a great temple was erected for herworship. Hither the natives repaired from far and near,on a kind of pilgrimage, bearing offerings of their mostvaluable effects. The caciques who ruled over distantterritories, also sent golden tributes, at certain times of-162 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.the year, to be deposited in this temple, and slaves to besacrificed at its shrine. At one time, it was added, thisworship fell into disuse, the pilgrimages were discontinued,and the caciques neglected to send their tributes;whereupon the deity, as a punishment, inflicted a droughtupon the country. The springs and fountains failed, therivers were dried up; the inhabitants of the mountainsWere obliged to descend into the plains, were they diggedpits and wells,, but these likewise failing, a great part ofthe nations perished with thirst. The remainder hastenedto propitiate the deity by tributes and sacrifices, andthus succeeded in averting her displeasure. In consequenceof offerings of the kind, made for generations fromall parts of the country, the temple was said to be filledwith treasure, and its walls to be covered with goldengifts.* In addition to the tale of this temple, the Indiansgave marvellous accounts of the general wealth of thisprovince, declaring that it abounded with mines of gold,the veins of which reached from the dwelling of the caciqueto the borders of his dominions.To penetrate to this territory, and above all to securethe treasures of the golden temple, was an enterprisesuited to the adventurous spirit of the Spaniards. VascoNunez chose one hundred and seventy of his hardiest menfor the purpose. Embarking them in two brigantines anda number of canoes, he set sail from Darien, and, afterstanding about nine leagues to the east, came to the mouthof the Rio Grande de San Juan, or the Great River of St.John, also called the Atrato, which is since ascertained tobe one of the branches of the river Darien. Here he detachedRodrigo Enriquez de Colmenares with one thirdP. Martyr, dead. 3. c. vi. Idem. d. 7. c. x.1512.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 163of his forces to explore the stream, while he himself proceededwith the residue to another branch of the river,which he was told flowed from the province of Dobayba,and which he ascended, flushed with sanguine expectations.*-His old enemy Zemaco, the cacique of Darien, however,had discovered the object of his expedition, and hadtaken measures to disappoint it : repairing to the provinceof Dobayba, he had prevailed upon its cacique to retireat the approach of the Spaniards, leaving his countrydeserted.Vasco Nunez found a village situated in a marshy neighbourhood,on the banks of the river, and mistook it forthe residence of the cacique : it was silent and abandoned.There was not an Indian to be met with, from whom hecould obtain any information about the country, or whocould guide him to the golden temple. He was disappointed,also, in his hopes of obtaining a supply of provisions,but he found weapons of various kinds hanging inthe deserted houses, and gathered jewels and pieces ofgold to the value of seven thousand castellanos. Discouragedby the savage look of the surrounding wilderness,which was perplexed by deep morasses, and havingIn recording this expedition, the author has followed the oldSpanish narratives, written when the face of the country was butlittle known, and he was much perplexed to reconcile the accountsgiven of numerous streams with the rivers laid down on modernmaps. By a clear and judicious explanation, given in the recentwork of Don Manuel Josef Quintana, it appears that the differentstreams explored by Vasco Nunez and Colmenares were all branchesof one grand river, which, descending from the mountains of theinterior, winds about in crystal streams among the plains and morassesbordering the bottom of the great gulf of Darien, and dischargesitself by various mouths into the gulf. In fact, the streamwhich ran by the infant city of Santa Maria de la Antigua was butone of its branches, a fact entirely unknown to Vasco Nunez andhis companions.164 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.no guides to aid him in exploring it, he put all the bootyhe had collected into two large canoes, and made his wayback to the Gulf of Uraba. Here he was assailed by aviolent tempest which nearly wrecked his two brigantines,and obliged him to throw a great part of their cargoesoverboard. The two canoes containing the bootywere swallowed up by the raging sea, and all their crewsperished.Thus baffled and tempest tost, Vasco Nunez at lengthsucceeded in getting into what was termed the GrandRiver, which he ascended, and rejoined Colmenares andhis detachment. They now extended their excursionsup a stream which emptied into the Grand River, andwhich, from the dark hue of its waters, they called RioNegro, or the Black River. They also explored certainother tributary streams, branching from it, though notwithout occasional skirmishes with the natives.Ascending one of these minor rivers with a part of hismen, Vasco Nunez came to the territories of a caciquenamed Abibeyba, who reigned over a region of marshesand shallow lakes. The habitations of the natives werebuilt amidst the branches of immense and lofty trees.They were large enough to contain whole family connexions,and were constructed partly of wood, partly of akind of wicker work, combining strength and pliability,and yielding uninjured to the motion of the brancheswhen agitated by the wind. The inhabitants ascendedto them, with great agility, by light ladders, formed ofgreat reeds split through the middle, for the reedson this coast grow to the thickness of a man s body.These ladders they drew up after them at night, or incaseof attack. These habitations were well stockedwith provisions ; but the fermented beverages, of which1512.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 165these people had always a supply, were buried in vesselsin the earth, at the foot of the tree, lest they should berendered turbid by the rocking of the houses. Close by,also, were, the canoes with which they navigated therivers and ponds of their marshy country, and followedtheir main occupation of fishing.On the approach of the Spaniards, the Indians tookrefuge in their tree-built castles, and drew up the ladders.The former called upon them to descend and tofear nothing. Upon this the cacique replied, entreatingthat he might not be molested, seeing he had done themno injury. They threatened, unless he came down, tofell the trees, or to set fire to them and burn him arid hiswives and children. The cacique was disposed to consent,but was prevented by the entreaties of his people.Upon this the Spaniards prepared to hew down the trees,but were assailed by showers of stones. They coveredthemselves however with their bucklers, assailed thetrees vigorously with their hatchets, and soon compelledthe inhabitants to capitulate. The cacique descended withhis wife and two of his children. The first demand of the.Spaniards was for gold. He assured them he had none;for, having no need of it, he had never made it an objectof his search. Being importuned, however, he assuredthem that if he were permitted to repair to certain mountainsat a distance, he would in a few days return, andbring them what they desired. They permitted him todepart, retaining his wife and children as hostages, butthey saw no more of the cacique. After remaining herea few days, and regaling on the provisions which theyfound in abundance, they continued their foraging expeditions,often opposed by the bold and warlike natives,166 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.and suffering occasional loss, but inflicting great havocon their opposers.Having thus overrun a considerable extent of country,and no grand object presenting to lure him on. to furtherenterprise, Vasco Nunez at length returned to Darienwith the spoils and captives he had taken, leaving BartholomewHurtado with thirty men in an Indian village on theRio Negro, or Black River, to hold the country in subjection.Thus terminated the first expedition in questof the golden temple Dobayba, which, for some time,continued to be a favourite object of enterprise amongthe adventurers of Darien..1512.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 167CHAPTER V.Disaster on the Black River Indian plot against Darien.Bartholomew HURTADO, being left to his own discretionon the banks of the Black River, occupied himselfoccasionally in hunting the scattered natives who straggledabout the surrounding forests. Having.in this waypicked up twenty-four captives, he put them on boardof a large canoe, like so much live stock, to be transportedto Darien and sold as slaves. Twenty of his followers,who were infirm either from wounds or the diseasesof the climate, embarked also in the canoe, so thatonly ten men remained with Hurtado.The great canoe, thus heavily freighted, descendedthe Black River slowly, between banks overhung withforests. Zemaco, the indefatigable cacique of Darien,was on the watch, and waylaid the ark with four canoesfilled with warriors, armed with war clubs, and lanceshardened in the fire. The Spaniards being sick, couldmake but feeble resistance ; some were massacred, othersleaped into the river and were drowned. Two only escaped,by clinging to two trunks of trees that were floatingdown the river, and covering themselves with thebranches. Reaching the shore in safety, they returnedto Bartolome Hurtado with the tragical tidings of thedeath of his followers. Hurtado was so disheartened bythe news, and so dismayed at his own helpless situation,in the midst of a hostile country, that he resolved to168 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.abandon the fatal shores of the Black River and return toDarien. He was quickened in this resolution by receivingintimation of a conspiracy forming among the natives.The implacable Zemaco had drawn four other caciquesinto a secret plan to assemble their vassals and make asudden attack upon Darien. Hurtado hastened with theremnant of his followers to carry tidings to the settlementof this conspiracy. Many of the inhabitants werealarmed at his intelligence ; others treated it as a falserumour of the Indians, and no preparations were madeagainst what might be a mere imaginary danger.Fortunately for the Spaniards, among the female captivesowned by Vasco Nunez was an Indian damsel namedFulvia ; to whom, in consequence of her beauty, he hadshown great favour, and who had become strongly attachedto him. She had a brother among the warriors ofZemaco, who often visited her in secret. In one of hisvisits, he informed her that on a certain night the settlementwould be attacked and every Spaniard destroyed.He charged her, therefore, to hide herself that night inacertain place until he should come to her aid, lest sheshould be slain in the confusion of the massacre.When her brother was gone, a violent struggle tookplace in the bosom of the Indian girl between her feelingfor her family and her people, and her affection for VascoNunez. The latter at length prevailed, and she revealedall that had been told to her. Vasco Nunez prevailedupon her to send for her brother under pretence of aidingher to escape. Having him in his power, he extortedfrom him all that he knew of the designs of theenemy. His confessions showed what imminent dangerhad been lurking round Vasco Nuftez in his most unsuspectingmoments. The prisoner informed him that he1512.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 169had been one of forty Indians sent some time before bythe cacique Zemaco to Vasco Nunez, in seeming friendship,to be employed by him in cultivating the fields adjacentto the settlement. They had secret orders,however, to take an opportunity when Vasco Nunezshould come forth to inspect their work, to set upon himin an unguarded moment, and destroy him. Fortunately,Vasco Nufiez always visited the fields mounted on hiswar horse, and armed with lance and target. The Indianswere therefore so awed by his martial appearance,and by the terrible animal he bestrode, that they darednot attack him.Foiled in this and other attempts of the kind, Zemacoresorted to the conspiracy with the neighbouring caciqueswith which the settlement was menaced.Five caciques had joined in the confederacy : they hadprepared a hundred canoes; had amassed provisions foran army, and had concerted to assemble five thousandpicked warriors at a certain time and place ; with thesethey were to make an attack on the settlement by landand water, in the middle of the night, and to slaughterevery Spaniard.Having learnt where the confederate chiefs were to befound, and where they had deposited their provisions,Vasco Nunez chose seventy of his best men well armed,and made a circuit by land, while Colmenares, with sixtymen, sallied forth secretly in four canoes, guided by theIndian prisoner. In this way they surprised the generalof the Indian army and several of the principal confederates,and got possession of all their provisions, thoughthey failed to capture the formidable Zemaco. TheIndian general was shot to death with arrows, and theleaders of the conspiracy were hanged in presence of170 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.their captive followers. The defeat of this deep laidplan, and the punishment of its devisers, spread terrorthroughout the neighbouring provinces, and preventedany further attempt at hostilities. Vasco Nunez, however,caused a strong fortress of wood to be immediatelyerected, to guard against any future assaults of thesavages.1512.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 171CHAPTER VI.FurlJier Factions in the Colony. Arrogance of Alonzo Perez andthe Bachelor Corral. (1512.)A CONSIDERABLE time had now elapsed since the departureof Valdivia for Hispaniola, yet no tidings hadbeen received from him. Many began to fear that somedisaster had befallen him,- while others insinuated that itwas possible both he and Zamudio might have neglectedthe objects of their mission, and, having appropriated totheir own use the gold with which they had been entrusted,might have abandoned the colony to its fate.Vasco Nunez himself was harassed by these surmises ;and by the dread lest the Bachelor Enciso should succeedin prejudicing the mind of his sovereign against him.Impatient of this state of anxious suspense, he determinedto repair to Spain, to communicate in person allthat he had heard concerning the Southern Sea, and toask for the troops necessary for its discovery.Every one, however, both friend and foe, exclaimedagainst such a measure, representing his presence as indispensableto the safety of the colony, from his great talentsas a commander, and the fear entertained of him by theIndians..-. iAfter much debate and contention, it was at lengthagreed that Juan de Cayzedo and Rodrigo Enriquez deColmenares should go in his place, instructed to make all172 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.necessary representations to the king. Letters werewritten also, containing the most extravagant accounts ofthe riches of the country, partly dictated by the sanguinehopes of the writers, and partly by the fables of thenatives. The rumoured wealth of the province of Do-barba,and the treasures of its golden temple were notforgotten ; and an Indian was taken to Spain by the commissioners,a native of the province of Zenu, where goldwas said to be gathered in nets stretched across the mountainstreams. To give more weight to all these stories,every one contributed some portion of gold from his privatehoard, to be presented to the king in addition to theamount arising from his fifths.But little time elapsed after the departure of the commissionerswhen new dissensions broke out in the colony.It was hardly to be expected that a fortuitous assemblageof adventurers could remain long tranquil during a timeof suffering, under rulers of questionable authority.Vasco Nunez, it is true, had risen by-his courage andabilities : but he had risen from among their ranks ; hewas in a manner of their own creation; and they had notbecome sufficiently accustomed to him as a governor, toforget that he was recently but a mere soldier of fortune,and an absconding debtor.Their factious discontent, however, was directed atfirst against a favourite of Vasco Nunez, rather thanagainst himself. He had invested Bartolome Hurtado,the commander of the Black River, with considerableauthority in the colony, and the latter gave great offenceby his oppressive conduct. Hurtado had particularlyaggrieved by his arrogance one Alonzo Perez de la Rua,a touchy cavalier, jealous of his honour, who seems tohave peculiarly possessed the sensitive punctilio of a1512.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 173Spaniard. Firing at some indignity, whether real orfancied, Alonzo Perez threw himself into the ranks ofthe disaffected, and-was immediately chosen as theirleader. Thus backed by a faction, he clamoured loudlyfor the punishment of Hurtado ; and, finding his demandsunattended to, threw out threats of deposing VascoNunez. The latter no sooner heard of these menaces,than with his usual spirit and promptness, he seized uponthe testy Alonzo Perez, and threw him in prison, todigest his indignities and cool his passions at leisure.The conspirators flew to arms to liberate their leader.The friends of Vasco Nunez were equally on the alert.The two parties drew out in battle array in the publicsquare, and a sanguinary conflict was on the point oftaking place. Fortunately there were some cool headsleft in the colony. These interfered at the critical moment)representing to the angry adversaries that, if theyfought among themselves, and diminished their alreadyscanty numbers, even the conquerors must eventuallyfall a prey to the Indians.Their remonstrances had effect. A parley ensued, and,after much noisy debate, a kind of compromise was made.Alonzo Perez was liberated, and the mutineers dispersedquietly to their homes. The next day, however, theywere again in arms, and seized upon Bartolome Hurtado;but after a little while were prevailed upon to set himfree. Their factious views seemed turned to a higherobject. They broke forth into loud murmurs againstVasco Nunez, complaining that he had not made a fairdivision of the gold and slaves taken in the late expeditions,and threatening to arrest him and bring him to account.Above all, they clamoured for an immediate SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. 1512.]tribulation of ten thousand castellanos in gold, which yetremained unshared.Vase Nunez understood too well the riotous nature ofthe people under him, and his own precarious hold ontheir obedience, to attempt to cope with them in thismoment of turbulence. He shrewdly determined, therefore,to withdraw from the sight of the multitude, and toleave them to divide the spoil among themselves, trustingto their own strife for his security. That very night hesallied forth into the country, under pretence of going ona hunting expedition.The next morning the mutineers found themselves inpossession of the field. Alonzo Perez, the pragmaticalringleader, immediately assumed the command, secondedby the Bachelor Corral. Their first measure was to seizeupon the ten thousand castellanos, and to divide themamong the multitude, by way of securing their own popularity.The event proved the sagacity and forethoughtof Vasco Nunez. Scarcely had these hot-headed intermeddlersentered upon the partition of the gold, than a furiousstrife arose. Everyone was dissatisfied with hisshare, considering his merits entitled to peculiar recompense.Every attempt to appease the rabble only augmentedtheir violence, and in their rage they swore thatVasco Nunez had always shown more judgment and discriminationin his distributions to men of merit.The adherents of the latter now ventured to lift uptheir voices; " Vasco Nunez/ said they, "won the goldby his enterprise and valour, and would have shared itwith the brave and the deserving; but these men haveseized upon it by factious means, and would squander itupon their minions." The multitude, who, in fact, .]VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 175mired the soldier like qualities of Vasco Nunez, displayedone of the customary reverses of popular feeling. Thetouchy Alonzo Perez, his coadjutor the Bachelor Corral,and several other of the ringleaders were seized, thrownin irons, and confined in the fortress ; and Vasco Nunezwas recalled with loud acclamations to the settlement.How long this pseudo commander might have been ableto manage the unsteady populace it is impossible to say ?but just at this juncture two ships arrived from Hispaniola,freighted with supplies, and bringing a reinforcementof one hundred and fifty men. They brought alsoa commission to Vasco Nufiez, signed by Miguel de passionate,the royal treasurer of Hispaniola, to whom hehad sent a private present of gold, constituting him captain-general of the colony. It is doubtful whether Passionatepossessed the power to confer such a commissionthough it is affirmed that the king had clothed him withit, as a kind of check upon the authority of the admiralDon Diego Columbus, then Governor of Hispaniola, ofwhose extensive sway in the new world the monarch wassecretly jealous. At any rate, the treasurer appears tohave acted in full confidence of the ultimate approbationof his sovereign.Vasco Nunez was rejoiced at receiving a commissionwhich clothed him with at least the semblance of royalsanction. Feeling more assured in his situation, and beingnaturally of a generous and forgiving temper, he waseasily prevailed upon, in his moment of exultation, to releaseand pardon Alonzo Perez, the Bachelor Corral, andthe other ringleaders of the late commotions, and for atime the feuds and factions of this petty community werelulled to repose.176 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.CHAPTER VII.Vasco Nunez determines to seek the Sea beyond the Mountains.[1513.]THE temporary triumph of Vasco Nunez was soonovercast by tidings received from Spain. His late colleague,the Alcalde Zamudio wrote him word that theBachelor Enciso had carried his complaints to the foot ofthe throne, and succeeded in rousing the indignation ofthe king, and had obtained a sentence in his favour, condemningVasco Nunez in costs and damages. Zamudioinformed him in addition, that he would be immediatelysummoned to repair to Spain, and answer in person thecriminal charges advanced against him on account of theharsh treatment and probable death of the unfortunateNicuesa.Vasco Nunez was at first stunned by this intelligence,which seemed at one blow to annihilate all his hopes andfortunes. He was a man, however, of prompt decisionand intrepid spirit. The information received fromSpain was private and informal, no order had yet arrivedfrom the king, he was still master of his actions, and hadcontrol over the colony. One brilliant achievementmight atone for all the past, and fix him in the favour ofthe monarch. Such an achievement was within hisreach the discovery of the southern sea. It is true, athousand soldiers had been required for the expedition,but were he to wait for their arrival from Spain, his dayof grace would be past. It was a desperate thing to .]VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 177undertake the task with the handful of men at his command,but the circumstances of the case were desperate. Fame,fortune, life itself, depended upon the successful and theprompt execution of the enterprise. To linger was tobe lost.Vasco Nunez looked round upon the crew of daringand reckless adventurers that formed the colony, andchose one hundred and ninety of the most resolute andvigorous, and of those most devoted to his person. Thesehe armed with swords, targets, crossbows, and arquebusses.He did not conceal from them the peril of the enterpriseinto which he was about to lead them ; but the spirit ofthese Spanish adventurers was always roused by the ideaof perilous and extravagant exploit. To aid his slenderforces, he took with him a number of bloodhounds, whichhad been found to be terrific allies in Indian warfare.The Spanish writers make particular mention of oneof those animals, named Leoncico, which was a constantcompanion, and as it were body guard of Vasco Nunez, anddescribe him as minutely as they would a favourite warrior.He was of a middle size, but immensely strong :of a dull yellow or reddish colour, with a black muzzle,and his body was scarred all over with wounds receivedin innumerable battles with the Indians. Vasco Nunezalways took him on his expeditions, and sometimes lenthim to others, receiving for his services the same share ofbooty allotted to an armed man. In this way he gainedby him, in the course of his campaigns, upwards of athousand crowns. The Indians, it is said, had conceivedsuch terror of this animal, that the very sight of himwas sufficient to put a host of them to flight.*Oviedo, Hist. Indies, p. 2. c. 3. MS.178 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.In addition to these forces, Vasco Nunez took with hima number of the Indians of Darien, whom he had wonto him by kindness, and whose services were important,from their knowledge of the wilderness, and of the habitsand resources of savage life. Such was the motleyarmament that set forth from the little colony of Darien,under the guidance of a daring, if not desperate commander,in quest of the great Pacific Ocean.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 179CHAPTER ViiExpedition in quest of the Southern Sea.IT was on the first of September that Vasco Nunezembarked with his followers in a brigantine and nine largecanoes or pirogues, followed by the cheers and goodwishes of those who remained at the settlement. Standingto the northwestward, he arrived without accident atCoyba, the dominions of the cacique Careta, whose daughterhe had received as a pledge of amity. That Indianbeauty had acquired a great influence over Vasco Nunez,and appears to have cemented his friendship with herfather and her people. He was received by the caciquewith open arms, and furnished with guides and warriorsto aid him in his enterprise.Vasco Nunez left about half of his men at Coyba toguard the brigantine and canoes, while he should penetratethe wilderness with the residue. The importanceof his present expedition, not merely as affecting his ownfortunes, but as it were unfolding a mighty secret of nature,seems to have impressed itself upon his spirit, andto have given correspondent solemnity to his conduct.Before setting out upon his march, he caused mass to beperformed, and offered up prayers to God for the successof his perilous undertaking.It was on the sixth of September, that he struck offfor the mountains. The march was difficult and toilsomein the extreme. The Spaniards, encumbered with the180 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.weight of their armour and weapons, and oppressed bythe heat of a tropical climate, were obliged to climbrocky precipices, and to struggle through close andtangled forests. Their Indian allies aided them by carryingtheir ammunition and provisions, and by guidingthem to the most practicable paths.On the eighth of September they arrived at the villageof Ponca, the ancient enemy of Careta. The village waslifeless and abandoned ; the cacique and his people hadfled to the fastnesses of the mountains. The Spaniardsremained here several days to recruit the health of someof their number who had fallen ill. It was necessary alsoto procure guides acquainted with the mountain wildernessthey were approaching. The retreat of Ponca wasat length discovered, and he was prevailed upon, thoughreluctantly, to come to Vasco Nunez. The latter had apeculiar facility in winning the confidence and friendshipof the natives. The cacique was soon so captivated byhis kindness, that he revealed to him in secret all he knewof the natural riches of the country. He assured himof the truth of what had been told him about a greatpechry or sea beyond the mountains, and gave him severalornaments ingeniously wrought of fine gold, which hadbeen brought from the countries upon its borders. Hetold him, moreover, that when he had attained the summitof a lofty ridge, to which he pointed, and whichseemed to rise up to the skies, he would behold that seaspread out far below him.Animated by the accounts, Vasco Nunez procuredfresh guides from the cacique, and prepared to ascendthe mountains. Numbers of his men having fallen illfrom fatigue and the heat of the climate, he ordered them1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 181to return slowly to Coyba, taking with him none but suchas were in robust and vigorous health.On the 20th of September, he again set forward througha broken rocky country, covered with a matted forest andintersected by deep and turbulent streams, many of whichit was necessary to cross upon rafts.So toilsome was the journey, that in four days they didnot advance above ten leagues, and in the mean time theysuffered excessively from hunger. At the end of thistime they arrived at the province of a Warlike cacique,named Quaraqua, who was at war with Ponca.Hearing that a band of strangers were entering his territories,guided by the subjects of his inveterate foe, thecacique took the field with a large number of warriors,some armed with bows and arrows, others with longspears, or with double handed maces of palm wood, almostas heavy and hard as iron. Seeing the inconsiderablenumber of the Spaniards, they set upon them with furiousyells, thinking to overcome them in an instant.The first discharge of fire-arms, however, struck themwith dismay. They thought they were contending withdemons who vomited forth thunder and lightning, especiallywhen they saw their companions fall bleeding and deadbeside them, without receiving any apparent blow. Theytook to headlong flight, and were hotly pursued by theSpaniards and their bloodhounds. Some were transfixedwith lances, others hewn down with swords, and manywere torn to pieces by the dogs, so that Quaraqua andsix hundred of his warriors were left dead upon the field.A brother of the cacique and several chiefs were takenprisoners. They were clad in robes of white cotton.Either from their effeminate dress, or from the accusationsof their enemies, the Spaniards were induced to182 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.consider them guilty of unnatural crimes, and, in theirabhorrence and disgust, gave them to be torn to piecesby the bloodhounds.*It is also affirmed, that among the prisoners wereseveral negroes, who had been slaves to the cacique.The Spaniards, we are told, were informed by the othercaptives, that these black men came from a region at nogreat distance, where there was a people of that colourwith whom they were frequently at war. " These,"adds the Spanish writer, "were the first negroes everfound in the New World, and I believe no others havesince been discovered"!After this sanguinary triumph, the Spaniards marchedto the village of Quaraqua, where they found considerablebooty in gold and jewels. Of this Vasco Nunez reservedone-fifth for the crown, and shared the rest liberallyamong his followers. The village was at the foot of thelast mountain that remained for them to climb : several ofthe Spaniards, however, were so disabled by the woundsthey had received in battle, or so exhausted by the fatigueand hunger they had endured, that they were unableto proceed. They were obliged, therefore, reluctantlyto remain in the village, within sight of the nountain-top that commanded the long-sought prospect. VascoHerrera, Hist. Ind. d. 1, 1. x. c. 1.t Peter Martyr, in his third Decade, makes mention of thesenegroes in the following words: "About two days journey distantfrom Quaraqua is a region inhabited only by black moors, exceedingfierce and cruel. It is supposed that in time past certainblack moors sailed thither out of Ethiopia, to rob, and that by shipwreck,or some other chance, they were driven to these mountains."As Martyr lived and wrote at the time, he of course relatedthe mere rumour of the day, which all subsequent accountshave disproved. The other historians who mentioned the circumstance,have probably repeated it from him. It must haverisen from some misrepresentation, and is not entitled to credit.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 183.Nunez selected fresh guides from among his prisoners,who were natives of the province, and sent back the subjectsof Ponca. Of the band of Spaniards who had setout with him in this enterprise, sixty-seven alone remainedin sufficient health and spirits for this last effort.These he ordered to retire early to repose, that theymight be ready to set off at the cool and fresh hour ofday-break, so as to reach the summit of the mountain beforethe noon-tide heat.184 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513,CHAPTER IX.Discovery of the Pacific Ocean.THE day had scarcely dawned, when Vasco Nunezand his followers set forth from the Indian village andbegan to climb the height. It was a severe and ruggedtoil for men so wayworn, but they were filled with newardour at the idea of the triumphant scene that was sosoon to repay them for all their hardships.About ten o clock in the morning they emerged fromthe thick forests through which they had hitherto struggled,and arrived at a lofty and airy region of the mountain.The bald summit alone remained to be ascended,and their guides pointed to a moderate eminence fromwhich they said the southern sea was visible.Upon this Vasco Nunez commanded his followers tohalt, and that no man should stir from his place. Then,with a palpitating heart, he ascended alone the baremountain-top. On reaching the summit the long-desiredprospect burst upon his view. It was as if a new worldwere unfolded to him, separated from all hitherto knownby this mighty barrier of mountains. Below him extendeda vast chaos of rock and forest, and green savannahsand wandering streams, while at a distance thewaters of the promised ocean glittered in the morningsun.At this glorious prospect Vasco Nufiez sank upon hisknees, and poured out thanks to God for being the first1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 185European to whom it was given to make that great discovery.He then called his people to ascend : " Behold,my friends said he, " that glorious sight which wehave so much desired. Let us give thanks to God thathe has granted us this great honour and advantage. Letus pray to him that he will guide and aid us to conquerthe sea and land which we have discovered, and in whichChristian has never entered to preach the holy doctrineof the Evangelists. As to yourselves, be as you havehitherto been, faithful and true to me, and by the favourof Christ you will become the richest Spaniards that haveever come to the Indies; you will render the greatestservices to your king that ever vassal rendered to hislord; and you will have the eternal glory and advantageof all that is here discovered, conquered, and convertedto our holy Catholic faith."The Spaniards answered this speech by embracingVasco Nunez and promising to follow him to death.Among them was a priest, named Andres de Vara, wholifted up his voice and chanted Te Deem laudanumthe usual anthem of Spanish discoverers. The people,kneeling down, joined in the strain with pious enthusiasmand tears of joy; and never did a more sincere oblationrise to the Deity from a sanctified altar than from thatwild mountain summit. It was indeed one of the mostsublime discoveries that had yet been made in the NewWorld, and must have opened a boundless field of conjectureto the wondering Spaniards. The imaginationdelights to picture forth the splendid confusion of theirthoughts. Was this the great Indian Ocean, studdedwith precious islands, abounding in gold, in gems, andspices, and bordered by the gorgeous cities and wealthymarts of the East? Or was it some lonely sea locked up186 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.in the embraces of savage uncultivated continents, andnever traversed by a bark, excepting the light pirogueof the Indian? The latter could hardly be the case, forthe natives had told the Spaniards of golden realms, andpopulous and powerful and luxurious nations upon itsshores. Perhaps it might be bordered by various people,civilized in fact, but differing from Europe in their civilization; who might have peculiar laws and customs andarts and sciences ; who might form, as it were, a world oftheir own, inter communing by this mighty sea, and carryingon commerce between their own islands and continents; but who might exist in total ignorance and independenceof the other hemisphere.Such may naturally have been the ideas suggested bythe sight of this unknown ocean. It was the prevalentbelief of the Spaniards, however, that they were the firstChristians who had made the discovery. Vasco Nunez,therefore, called upon all present to witness that he tookpossession of that sea, its islands, and surrounding lands,in the name of the sovereigns of Castile, and the notaryof the expedition made a testimonial of the same, to whichall present, to the number of sixty-seven men, signedtheir names. He then caused a fair and tall tree to becut down and wrought into a cross, which was elevatedon the spot from whence he had at first beheld the sea.A mound of stones was likewise piled up to serve as amonument, and the names of the Castilian sovereignswere carved on the neighbouring trees. The Indiansbeheld all these ceremonials and rejoicing in silent wonder,and, while they aided to erect the cross and pile upthe mound of stones, marvelled exceedingly at the meaningof these monuments, little thinking that they markedthe subjugation of their land.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 187The memorable event here recorded took place on the26th of September, 1513 ; so that the Spaniards had beentwenty days performing the journey from the province ofCareta to the summit of the mountain, a distance which atpresent, it is said, does not require more than six daystravel. Indeed the isthmus in this neighbourhood is notmore than eighteen leagues in breadth in its widest part,and in some places merely seven; but it consists of aridge of extremely high and rugged mountains. Whenthe discoverers traversed it, they had no route but theIndian paths, and often had to force their way amidst allkinds of obstacles, both from the savage country and itssavage inhabitants. In fact, the details of this narrativesufficiently account for the slowness of their progress, andpresent an array of difficulties and perils, which, as hasbeen well observed, none but those " men of iron" couldhave subdued and overcome.*Vidas de Spangles Celebres, por Don Manuel Josef Quintana.Tom. ii. p. 40.188 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.CHAPTER X.Vasco Nunez marches to the shores of the South Sea.HAVING taken possession of the Pacific Ocean andall its realms from the summit of the mountain, VascoNunez now descended with his little band, to seek theregions of reputed wealth upon its shores. He had notproceeded far when he came to the province of a warlikecacique, named Cheapes, who, issuing forth at the headof his warriors, looked with scorn upon the scanty numberof straggling Spaniards, and forbade them to set footwithin his territories. Vasco Nunez depended for safetyupon his power of striking terror into the ignorant savages.Ordering his arquebusiers to the front, he poured avolley into the enemy, and then let loose the bloodhounds.The flash and noise of the fire arms, and the sulphureoussmoke which was carried by the wind among the Indians,overwhelmed them with dismay. Some fell down in apanic as though they had been struck by thunderbolts,the rest betook themselves to headlong flight.Vasco Nuilez commanded his men to refrain from needlessslaughter. He made many prisoners, and on arrivingat the village, sent some of them in search of their caciqueaccompanied by several of his Indian guides. Thelatter informed Cheapes of the supernatural power of theSpaniards, assuring him that they exterminated withthunder and lightning all who dared to oppose them,but loaded all such as submitted to them with benefits.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 189They advised him therefore,, to throw himself upon theirmercy and seek their friendship.The cacique listened to their advice, and came tremblingto the Spaniards, bringing with him five hundredpounds weight of wrought gold as a peace offering, forhe had already learnt the value they set upon that metal.Vasco Nunez received him with great kindness, and graciouslyaccepted his gold, for which he gave him beads,hawks bells, and looking glasses, making him, in his ownconceit, the richest potentate on that side of the mountains.Friendship being thus established between them, VascoNunez remained at the village for a few days, sendingback the guides who had accompanied him from Quartsand ordering his people whom he had left at thatplace to rejoin him. In the meantime he sent out threescouting parties of twelve men each, under FranciscoPizarro, Juan de Escary and Alonzo Martin de DonBenito, to explore the surrounding country and discoverthe best route to the sea. Alonzo Martin was the mostsuccessful. After two days journey, he came to a beach,where he found two large canoes lying high and dry,without any water being in sight. While the Spaniardswere regarding these canoes, and wondering why theyshould be so far on land, the tide, which rises to a greatheight on that coast, came rapidly in and set them afloat ;upon this, Alonzo Martin stepped into one of them, andcalled his companions to bear witness that he was the firstEuropean that embarked upon that sea; his example wasfollowed by one Bias de Etienza, who called them likewiseto testify that he was the second.*Hen-era, Mist. Into. d. i. 1. x. c. 2.190 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.We mention minute particulars of the kind, as beingcharacteristic of these extraordinary enterprises, and ofthe extraordinary people who undertook them. Thehumblest of these Spanish adventurers seemed actuatedby a swelling and ambitious spirit, that rose superior attimes to mere sordid considerations, and aspired to sharethe glory of these great discoveries. The scouting partyhaving thus explored a direct route to the sea coast, returnedto report their success to their commander.Yasco Nunez being rejoined by his men from Quaequenow left the greater part of his followers to repose and recoverfrom their sickness and fatigues in the village ofCheapes, and, taking with him twenty-six Spaniards, wellarmed, he set out on the twenty-ninth of September, forthe sea coast, accompanied by the cacique and a numberof his warriors. The thick forest which covered the mountains,,descended to the very margin of the sea, surroundingand overshadowing the wide and beautiful bays thatpenetrated far into the land. The whole coast, as far asthe eye could reach, was perfectly wild, the sea withouta sail, and both seemed never to have been under thedominion of civilized man.Vasco Nunez arrived on the borders of one of thosevast bays, to which he gave the name of Saint Michael,it being discovered on that saint s day. The tide wasout, the water was above half a league distant, and the interveningbeach was covered with mud ; he seated himself,therefore, under the shade of the forest trees untilthe tide should rise. After awhile, the water came rushingin with great impetuosity, and soon reached nearlyto the place where the Spaniards were reposing. Uponthis Vasco Nunez rose and took a banner, on which werepainted the Virgin and child, and under them the arms1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 191of Castile and Leon; then drawing his sword and throwinghis buckler on his shoulder, he marched into the seauntil the water reached above his knees, and waving hisbanner, exclaimed with a loud voice; "Long live thehigh and mighty monarchs Don Ferdinand and DonnaJoanna, sovereigns of Castile, of Leon, and of Arragon,in whose name, and for the royal crown of Castile I takereal, and corporal, and actual possession of there seas,and lands, and coasts, and ports, and islands of the South,and all thereunto annexed; and of the kingdoms andprovinces which do or may appertain to them in whatevermanner, or by whatever right or title, ancient ormodern, in times past, present, or to come, without anycontradiction ; and if other prince or captain, Christianor infidel, or of any law, sect or condition whatsoever, shallpretend any right to these lands and seas, I am ready andprepared to maintain and defend them in the name of theCastilian sovereigns, present and future, whose is the empireand dominion over these Indians, islands, and terrafirma, northern and southern, with all their seas both atthe arctic and antarctic poles, on either side of the equinoctialline, whether within or without the tropics of Cancerand Capricorn, both now and in all times, as long asthe world endures, and until the final day of judgmentof all mankindThis swelling declaration and defiance being utteredwith a loud voice, and no one appearing to dispute hispretensions, Vasco Nunez called upon his companions tobear witness of the fact of his having duly taken possession.They all declared themselves ready to defend hisclaim to the uttermost, as became true and loyal vassalsto the Castilian sovereigns ; and the notary having drawn192 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.up a document for the occasion, they all subscribed itwith their names.This done, they advanced to the margin of the sea, andstooping down tasted its waters. When they found, that,though severed by intervening mountains and continents,they were salt like the seas of the north, they felt assuredthat they had indeed discovered an ocean, and again returnedthanks to God.Having concluded all these ceremonies, Vasco Nunezdrew a dagger from his girdle and cut a cross on a treewhich grew within the water, and made two other crosseson two adjacent trees in honour of the Three Personsof the Trinity, and in token of possession. His followerslikewise cut crosses on many of the trees of the adjacentforest, and lopped off branches with their swords to bearaway as trophies.*Such was the singular medley of chivalrous and religiousceremonial, with which these Spanish adventurerstook possession of the vast Pacific Ocean, and all itslands a scene strongly characteristic of the nation andthe age.Many of the foregoing particulars are from the unpublishedvolume of Oviedo s History of the Indians.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE DALJiOA. 193CHAPTER XLAdventures of Vasco Nunez on the borders of the Pacific Ocean.WHILE he made the village of Chiapes his head quarters,Vasco Nunez foraged the adjacent country arid obtainedconsiderable quantity of gold from the natives.Encouraged by his success, he undertook to explore bysea the borders of a neighbouring gulf of great extent,which penetrated far into the land. The cacique Chiapeswarned him of the danger of venturing to sea in thestormy season, which comprises the months of October,November, and December, assuring him that he had beheldmany canoes swallowed up in the mighty waves andwhirlpools, which at such times render the gulf almostu n navigable.These remonstrances w r ere unavailing: Vasco Nunezexpressed a confident belief that God would protect him,seeing that his voyage was to redound to the propagationof the faith, and the augmentation of the power of theCastilian monarchs over the infidels; and in truth thisbigoted reliance on the immediate protection of heavenseems to have been in a great measure the cause of theextravagant daring of the Spaniards in their expeditionsin those days, whether against Moors or Indians.Seeing his representations of no effect, Chiapes volunteeredto take part in this perilous cruise, lest he shouldappear wanting in courage, or in good will to his guest.Accompanied by the cacique, therefore, Vasco Nufiez194 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.embarked on the 17th of October with sixty of his meninnine canoes, managed by Indians, leaving the residueof his followers to recruit their health and strengthin the village of Chiapes.Scarcely however had they put forth on the broadbosom of the gulf wheii the wisdom of the cacique s advicewas made apparent. The wind began to blowfreshly, raising a heavy and tumultuous sea, which brokein roaring and foaming surges on the rocks and reefs, andamong the numerous islets with which the gulf was studded.The light canoes were deeply laden with men unskilledin their management. It was frightful to those in onecanoe to behold their companions, one instant tossed on highon the breaking crest of a wave, the next plunging out ofsight, as if swallowed in a watery abyss. The Indians themselves,though almost amphibious in their habits, showedsigns of consternation ; for amidst these rocks and breakerseven the skill of the expert swimmer would be of littleavail. At length the Indians succeeded in tying thecanoes in pairs, side by side, to prevent their being overturned,and in this way they kept afloat, until towardsevening they were enabled to reach a small island. Herethey landed, and fastening the canoes to the rocks, or tosmall trees that grew upon the shore, they sought an elevateddry place, and stretched themselves to take repose.They had but escaped from one danger to encounteranother. Having been for a long time accustomed to thesea on the northern side of the isthmus, where there islittle, if any, rise or fall of the tide, they had neglectedto take any precaution against such an occurrence. Inalittle while they were awakened from their sleep by therapid rising of the water. They shifted their situationto a higher ground, but the waters continued to gain upon1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 195them, the breakers rushing and roaring and foaming uponthe beach like so many monsters of the deep seeking fortheir prey. Nothing, it is said, can be more dismal andappalling than the sullen bellowing of the sea among theislands of that gulf at the rising and falling of the tide.By degrees, rock after rock, and one sand bank afteranother disappeared, until the sea covered the whole island,and rose almost to the girdles of the Spaniards.Their situation was now agonizing. A little more andthe waters would overwhelm them : or, even as it was,the least surge might break over them and sweep themfrom their unsteady footing. Fortunately the wind hadlulled, and the sea, having risen above the rocks whichhad fretted it, was calm. The tide had reached its heightand began to subside, and after a time they heard the retiringwaves beating against the rocks below them.When the day dawned they sought their canoes ; buthere a sad spectacle met their eyes. Some were brokento pieces, others yawning open in many parts. Theclothing and food left in them had been washed away,and replaced by sand and water. The Spaniards gazedon the scene in mute despair ; they were faint and weary,and needed food and repose, but famine and labourawaited them, even if they should escape with their lives.Vasco Nunez, however, rallied their spirits, and setthem an example by his own cheerful exertions. Obeyinghis directions, they set to work to repair, in the bestmanner they were able, the damages of the canoes. Suchas were not too much shattered they bound and braced upwith their girdles, with slips of the bark of trees, or withthe tough long stalks of certain sea weeds. They thenpeeled ois the bark from the small sea plants, pounded itbetween stones, and mixed it with grass, and with this SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.devoured to caulk the seams and stop the leaks that remained.When they re- embarked, their numbers weigheddown the canoes almost to the water s edge, and asthey rose and sank with the swelling waves there wasdanger of their being swallowed up. All day they labouredwith the sea, suffering excessively from the pangsof hunger and thirst, arid at nightfall they landed in acorner of the gulf, near the abode of a cacique namedTumaco. Leaving a part of his men to guard the canoes,Vasco Nunez set out with the residue for the Indiantown. He arrived there about midnight, but the inhabitantswere on the alert to defend their habitations.The fire-arms and dogs soon put them to flight, and theSpaniards pursuing them with their swords, drove themhowling into the woods. In the village were found provisionsin abundance, beside a considerable amount ofgold and a great quantity of pearls, many of them of alarge size. In the house of the cacique were severalhuge shells of mother of pearl, and four pearl oystersquite fresh, which showed that there was a pearl fishery1b the neighbourhood. Eager to learn the sources of thiswealth, Vasco Nunez sent several of the Indians of Chapelin search of the cacique, who traced him to a wildretreat among the rocks. By their persuasions Tiimacosent his son, a fine young savage, as a mediator. Thelatter returned to his father loaded with presents, and extollingthe benignity of these superhuman beings, who hadshown themselves so terrible in battle. By these means,and by a mutual exchange of presents, a friendly intercoursewas soon established. Among other things thecacique gave Vasco Nunez jewels of gold weighing sixhundred and fourteen crowns, and two hundred pearls ofgreat size and beauty, excepting that they were .]VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 197what discoloured in consequence of the oysters havingbeen opened by fire.The cacique seeing the value which the Spaniards setupon the pearls, sent a number of his men to fish forthem at a place about ten miles distant. Certain of theIndians were trained from their youth to this purpose, soas to become expert divers, and to acquire the power ofremaining a long time beneath the water. The largestpearls are generally found in the deepest water, sometimesin three and four fathoms, and are only sought incalm weather ; the smaller sort are found at the depth oftwo and three feet, and the oysters containing them areoften driven in quantities on the beach during violentstorms.The party of pearl divers sent by the cacique consistedof thirty Indians, with whom Vasco ^"ufiez sent sixSpaniards as eye-witnesses. The sea, however, was, sofurious at that stormy season that the divers dared notventure into the deep water. Such a number of theshell-fish, however, had been driven on shore that theycollected enough to yield pearls to the value of twelvemarks of gold. They were small, but exceedingly beautiful,being newly taken and uninjured by fire. A numberof these shell-fish and their pearls were selected tobe sent to Spain as specimens.In reply to the inquiries of Vasco Nunez, the caciqueinformed him that the coast which he saw stretching to thewest continued onwards without end, and that far to thesouth there was a country abounding in gold, where theinhabitants made use of certain quadrupeds to carry burthens.He moulded a figure of clay to represent theseanimals, which some of the Spaniards supposed to be a198 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.deer, others a camel, others a tapir, for as yet they knewnothing of the lama, the native beast of burthen of SouthAmerica. This was the second intimation received byVasco Nunez of the great empire of Peru ; and, while itconfirmed all that had been told him by the son of Comagre,it filled him with glowing anticipations of theglorious triumphs that awaited him.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 199CHAPTER XII.Farther adventures and exploits of Vasco Nunez on the borders ofthe Pacific Ocean.LEST any ceremonial should be wanting to secure thisgrand discovery to the crown of Spain, Vasco Nunez determinedto sally from the gulf and take possession of themain land beyond. The cacique Tumaco furnished himwith a canoe of state, formed from the trunk of an enormoustree, and managed by a great number of Indians.The handles of the paddles were inlaid with small pearls,a circumstance which Vasco Nuiiez caused his companionsto testify before the notary, that it might be reportedtp the sovereigns as a proof of the wealth of thisnewly discovered sea.*Departing in the canoe on the 29th of October, he waspiloted cautiously by the Indians along the borders of thegulf, over drowned lands where the sea was fringed byinundated forests, and as still as a pool. Arrived at thepoint of the gulf, Vasco Nuiiez landed on a smooth sandybeach, laved by the waters of the broad ocean, and, withbuckler on arm, sword in hand, and banner displayed,again marched into the sea and took possession of it, withlike ceremonials to those observed in the Gulf of St.Michael s.Oviedo,Hist. Gen. p. 2. MS.200 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513."The Indians now pointed to a line of land rising abovethe horizon about four or five leagues distant, which theydescribed as being a great island, the principal one of anarchipelago. The whole group abounded with pearls,but those taken on the coasts of this island were representedas being of immense size, many of them as largeas a man s eye, and found in shell-fish as big as bucklers.This island and the surrounding cluster of small ones,they added, were under the dominion of a tyrannical andpuissant cacique, who often, during the calm seasons,made descents upon the main land with fleets of canoes,plundering and desolating the coasts, and carrying thepeople into captivity.Vasco Nunez gazed with an eager and wistful eyeat this land of riches, and would have immediatelyundertaken an expedition to it, had not the Indiansrepresented the danger of venturing on such a voyagein that tempestuous season in their frail canoes.His own recent experience convinced him of the wisdomof their remonstrances. He postponed his visit,therefore, to a future occasion, when, he assured his allies,he would avenge them upon this tyrant invader, and delivertheir coasts from his marauding. In the mean timehe gave to this island the name of Isla Rica, and the littlearchipelago surrounding it the general appellationof the Pearl Islands.On the third of November Vasco Nunez departedfrom the province of Tumaco, to visit other partsof the coast. He embarked with his men in thecanoes, accompanied by Chiapes and his Indians, andguided by the son of Tumaco, who had become stronglyattached to the Spaniards. The young man piloted1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 201them along an arm of the sea, wide in some places, butinothers obstructed by groves of mangrove trees, whichgrew within the water and interlaced their branches fromshore to shore, so that at times the Spaniards were obligedto cut a passage with their swords.At length they entered a great and turbulent river,which they ascended with difficulty, and, early thenext morning surprised a village on its banks, makingthe cacique Teaochan, prisoner; who purchased theirfavour and kind treatment by a quantity of gold andpearls, and an abundant supply of provisions. As itwas the intention of Vasco Nunez to abandon the shoresof the Southern Ocean at this place, and to strike acrossthe mountains for Darien, he took leave of Chiapesand of the youthful son of Tumaco, who were to returnto their houses in the canoes. He sent at thesame time, a message to his men, whom he had leftin the village of Chiapes, appointing a place in themountains where they were to rejoin him on his way backto Darien.The talent of Vasco Nunez for conciliating andwinning the good will of the savages is often mentioned,and to such a degree had he exerted it inthe present instance, that the two chieftains shed tearsat parting. Their conduct had a favourable effectupon the cacique TeaQchan ; he entertained VascoNunez with the most devoted hospitality during threedays that he remained in his village; when aboutto depart he furnished him with a stock of provisionssufficient for several days, as his route would layover rocky and sterile mountains. He sent also anumerous band of his subjects to carry the burthens of202 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.the Spaniards. These he placed under the commandof his son, whom he ordered never to separate from thestrangers, nor to permit any of his men to return withoutthe consent of Vasco Nuftez.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 203CHAPTER XIII.Vasco Nunez sets out on his return across the mountains Hiscontests with the Savages.TURNING their backs upon the Southern Sea, theSpaniards now began painfully to clamber the ruggedmountains on their return to Darien.In the early part of their route an unlooked-for sufferingawaited them : there was neither brook nor fountainnor standing pool. The burning heat, which producedintolerable thirst, had dried up all the mountain torrents,and they were tantalized by the sight of naked and dustychannels where water had once flowed in abundance.Their sufferings at length increased to such a height thatmany threw themselves fevered and panting upon theearth, and were ready to give up the ghost. The Indians,however, encouraged them to proceed, by hopesof speedy relief, and after a while, turning aside from thedirect course, led them into a deep and narrow glen, refreshedand cooled by a fountain which bubbled out of acleft of the rocks.While refreshing themselves at the fountain, and reposingin the little valley, they learnt from their guidesthat they were in the territories of a powerful chiefnamed Poncra, famous for his riches. The Spaniards hadalready heard of the golden stores of this Croesus of themountains, and being now refreshed and invigorated,pressed forward with eagerness for his village.204 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.The cacique and most of his people fled at their approach but they found an earnest of his wealth in thedeserted houses, amounting to the value of three thousandcrowns in gold. Their avarice thus whetted, they despatchedIndians in search of Poncra, who found himtrembling in his secret retreat, and partly by threats,partly by promises, prevailed upon him and three of hisprincipal subjects to come to Vasco Nunez. He was asavage, it is said, so hateful of aspect, so misshapen inbody and deformed in all his members, that he was hideousto behold. The Spaniards endeavoured by gentlemeans to draw from him information of the places fromwhence he had procured his gold. He professed utterignorance in the matter, declaring that the gold found inhis village had been gathered by his predecessors in timeslong past, and that as he himself set no value on the metal,he had never troubled himself to seek it. The Spaniardsresorted to menaces, and even, it is said, to tortures,to compel him to betray his reputed treasures, but withno better success. Disappointed in their expectations,and enraged at his supposed obstinacy, they listened tooreadily to charges advanced against him by certain caciquesof the neighbourhood, who represented him as amonster of cruelty, and as guilty of crimes repugnant tonature;* whereupon, in the heat of the moment, theygave him and his three companions, who were said to beequally guilty, to be torn in pieces by the dogs. A rashand cruel sentence, given on the evidence of avowedenemies ; and which, however it may be palliated by thealleged horror and disgust of the Spaniards at the imputedcrimes of the cacique, bears too much the stampP. Martyr, d. in. c. 2.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 205of haste and passion, and remains a foul blot on the characterof Vasco Nunez.The Spaniards remained for thirty days reposing inthe village of the unfortunate Poncra, during which timethey were rejoined by their companions, who had beenleft behind at the village of Chiapes. They were accompaniedby a cacique of the mountains, who had lodgedand fed them, and made them presents of the value of twothousand crowns in gold. This hospitable savage approachedVasco Nunez with a serene countenance, andtaking him by the hand, "Behold," said he, "most valiantand powerful chief, I bring thee thy companions safeand well, as they entered under my roof. May he whomade the thunder and lightning, and who gives us thefruits of the earth, preserve thee and thine in safety!"So saying, he raised his eyes to the sun, as if he worshippedthat as his deity and the dispenser of all temporalblessings.*Departing from this village, and being still accompaniedby the Indians of Teaochan, the Spaniards nowbent their course along the banks of the river Comagre,which descends the northern side of the Isthmus, andflows through the territories of the cacique of the samename. This wild stream, which in the course of ages hadworn a channel through the deep clefts and ravines of themountains, was bordered by precipices, or overhung byshagged forests ; they soon abandoned it, therefore, andwandered on without any path, but guided by the Indians.They had to climb terrible precipices, and todescend into deep valleys, darkened by thick forests andHcrrera, d. i. 1. x. c. 4.206 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.beset by treacherous morasses, where, but for theirguides, they might have been smothered in the mire.In the course of this rugged journey they suffered excessivelyin consequence of their own avarice. Theyhad been warned of the sterility of the country they wereabout to traverse, and of the necessity of providingamply for the journey. When they came to lade theIndians, however, who bore their burdens, their onlythought was how to convey the most treasure ; and theygrudged even a slender supply of provisions, as taking upthe place of an equal weight of gold. The consequenceswere soon felt. The Indians could carry but small burthens,and at the same time assisted to consume thescanty stock of food which formed part of their load.Scarcity and famine ensued, and relief was rarely to beprocured, for the villages on this elevated part of themountains were scattered and poor, and nearly destituteof provisions. They held no communication with eachother ; each contenting itself with the scanty produce ofits own fields and forest. Some were entirely deserted;at other places, the inhabitants, forced from their retreats,implored pardon, and declared they had hiddenthemselves through shame, not having the means of properlyentertaining such celestial visitors. They broughtpeace-offerings of gold, but no provisions. For once theSpaniards found that even their darling gold could fail tocheer their drooping spirits. Their sufferings from hungerbecame intense, and many of their Indian companionssank down and perished by the way. At length theyreached a village where they were enabled to obtain supplies,and where they remained thirty days, to recruittheir wasted strength.1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 207CHAPTER XIV,Enterprise against Tubanama, the warlike Cacique of the Mountains.Return to Darien.THE Spaniards had now to pass through the territoriesof Tubanama, the most potent and warlike cacique of themountains. This was the same chieftain of whom a formidablecharacter had been given by the young Indianprince, who first informed Vasco Nunez of the southernsea. He had erroneously represented the dominions ofTubanama as lying beyond the mountains : and when hedwelt upon the quantities of gold to be found in them,had magnified the dangers that would attend any attemptto pass their borders. The name of this redoubtablecacique was in fact a terror throughout the country; andwhen Vasco Nunez looked round upon his handful of paleand emaciated followers, he doubted whether even thesuperiority of their weapons, and their military skill,would enable them to cope with Tubanama and his armiesin open contest. He resolved, therefore, to venture upona perilous stratagem. When he made it known to hismen, every one pressed forward to engage in it. Choosingseventy of the most vigorous, he ordered the rest to maintaintheir post in the village.As soon as night had fallen he departed silently andsecretly with his chosen band, and made his way withsuch rapidity through the labyrinths of the forests and thedefiles of the mountains, that he arrived in the SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.boyhood of the residence of Tubanama by the followingevening, though at the distance of two regular daysjourney.There waiting until midnight he assailed the villagesuddenly, and with success, so as to surprise and capturethe cacique and his whole family, in which were eightyfemales. When Tubanama found himself a prisoner inthe hands of the Spaniards, he lost all presence of mind,and wept bitterly. The Indian allies of Vasco Nunezbeholding their once dreaded enemy thus fallen and captive,now urged that he should be put to death, accusinghim of various crimes and cruelties. Vasco Nunez pretendedto listen to their prayers, and gave orders that hiscaptive should be tied hand and foot, and given to thedogs. The cacique approached him trembling, and laidhis hand upon the pommel of his sword. "Who canpretend," said he, "to strive with one who bears thisweapon, which can cleave a man asunder with a blow?Ever since thy fame has reached among these mountainshave I reverenced thy valour. Spare my life, and thoushalt have all the gold I can procure."Vasco Nunez, whose anger was assumed, was readilypacified. As soon as the day dawned, the cacique gavehim armlets and other jewels of gold to the value of threethousand crowns, and sent messengers throughout his dominionsordering his subjects to aid in paying his ransom.The poor Indians, with their accustomed loyalty hastenedin crowds, bringing their golden ornaments, until inthe course of three days they had produced an amountequal to six thousand crowns. This done, Vasco Nunezset the cacique at liberty, bestowing on him severalEuropean trinkets, with which he considered himselfricher than he had been with all his gold. Nothing1513.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 209would draw from him, however, the disclosure of themines from whence this treasure was procured. He declaredthat it came from the territories of his neighbours,where gold and pearls were to be found in abundance ;but that his lands produced nothing of the kind. VascoNunez doubted his sincerity, and secretly caused thebrooks and rivers in his dominions to be searched, wheregold was found in such quantities that he determined, ata future time, to found two settlements in the neighbourhood.On parting with Tubanama, the cacique sent his sonwith the Spaniards to learn their language and religion.It is said, also, that the Spaniards carried off his eightywomen; but of this particular fact Oviedo, who writeswith the papers of Vasco Nunez before him, says nothing.He affirms, generally, however, that the Spaniards,throughout this expedition, were not scrupulous in theirdealings with the wives and daughters of the Indians;and adds, that in this their commander set them theexample.*Having returned to the village where he had left thegreater part of his men, Vasco Nunez resumed his homewardmarch. His people were feeble and exhausted,and several of them sick ; so that some had to be carriedand others, led by the arms. He himself was part of thetime afflicted by a fever, and had to be borne in a hammockon the shoulders of the Indians.Proceeding thus slowly and toilfully, they at lengtharrived on the northern sea coast, at the territories oftheir ally, Comagre. The old cacique was dead, and hadbeen succeeded by his son, the same intelligent youth whoOviedo, Hist. Gen. Part II. c. 4. MS,210 SPANISH/VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.had first given information of the southern sea and thekingdom of Peru. The young chief, who had embracedChristianity, received them with great hospitality, makingthem presents of gold. Vasco Nunez gave him trinketsin return, and a shirt and a soldier s cloak ; withwhich, says Peter Martyr, he thought himself half a godamong his naked countrymen. After having reposed forafew days, Vasco Nunez proceeded to Ponca, where heheard that a ship and caravel had arrived at Darien fromHispaniola, with reinforcements and supplies. Hastening,therefore, to Coyba, the territories of his ally, Careta, heembarked on the 18th of January, 1514, with twenty ofhis men, in the brigantine which he had left there, andarrived at Santa Maria de la Antigua, in the river ofDarien, on the following day. All the inhabitants cameforth to receive him; and when they heard the news ofthe great southern sea, and of his returning from itsshores laden with pearls and gold, there were no boundsto their joy. He immediately despatched the ship andcaravel to Coyba for the companions he had left behind,who brought with them the remaining booty, consistingof gold and pearls, mantles, hammocks, and other articlesof cotton, and a great number of captives of both sexes.A fifth of the spoil was set apart for the crown ; the restwas shared, in just proportions, among those who hadbeen in the expedition, and those who had remained atDarien. All were contented with their allotment, andelated with the prospect of still greater gain from futureenterprises.Thus ended one of the most remarkable expeditions ofthe early discoverers. The intrepidity of Vasco Dunedinpenetrating, with a handful of men, far into the interiorof a wild and mountainous country, peopled by .]VASCO NUNEZ DE BAIJ1OA. 211like tribes : his skill in managing his band of rough adventurers stimulating their valour, enforcing their obedience,arid attaching their affections, show him to havepossessed great qualities as a general. We are told thathe was always foremost in peril-and the last to quit thefield. He shared the toils and dangers of the meanest ofhis followers, treating them with frank affability ; watching,fighting, fasting, and labouring with them ; visitingand consoling such as were sick or infirm, and dividingall his gains with fairness and liberality. He was chargeableat times with acts of bloodshed and injustice, but itis probable that these were often called for as measures ofsafety and precaution ; he certainly offended less againsthumanity than most of the early discoverers; and theunbounded amity and confidence reposed in him by thenatives, when they became intimately acquainted withhis character, speak strongly in favour of his kind treatmentof them.The character of Vasco Nunez had, in fact, risen withhis circumstances, arid now assumed a nobleness andgrandeur from the discovery he had made, and the importantcharge it had devolved upon him. He no longerfelt himself a mere soldier of fortune, at the head of aband of adventurers, but a great commander conductingan immortal enterprise. " Behold," says old Peter Martyr," Vasco Nunez de Balboa, at once transformed froma rash royster to a politic and discreet captain : ? and thusit is that men are often made by their fortunes ; that is tosay, their latent qualities are brought out, and shapedand strengthened by events, and by the necessity of everyexertion to cope with the greatness of their destiny.212 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.CHAPTER XV.Transactions in Spain. Per arias Damla appointed to the commandof Darien. Tidings received in Spain of the discovery ofthe Pacific Ocean.VASCO NUNEZ de Balboa now flattered himself that hehad made a discovery calculated to silence all his enemiesat court; and to elevate him to the highest favour withhis sovereign. He wrote letters to the king, giving adetail of his expedition, and setting forth all that he hadseen or heard of this Southern Sea, and of the richcountries upon its borders. Beside the royal fifths of theprofits of the expedition, he prepared a present for thesovereign, in the name of himself and his companions,consisting of the largest and most precious pearls theyhad collected. As a trusty and intelligent envoy to bearthese tidings, he chose Pedro de Arbolancha, an old andtried friend, who had accompanied him in his toils anddangers, and w r as well acquainted with all his transactions.The fate of Vasco Nunez furnishes a striking instancehow prosperity and adversity, how even life and deathhang balanced upon a point of time, and are affected bythe improvement or neglect of moments. Unfortunately,the ship which was to convey the messenger to Spainlingered in port until the beginning of March ; a delaywhich had a fatal influence on the fortunes of VascoNunez. It is necessary here to cast an eye back upon1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 213the events which had taken place in Spain while he wasemployed in his conquests and discoveries.The Bachelor Enciso had arrived in Castile full of hiswrongs and indignities. He had friends at court; who aidedhim in gaining a ready hearing, and he lost not a momentin availing himself of it. He declaimed eloquentlyupon the alleged usurpation of Vasco Nunez, and representedhim as governing the colony by force and fraud. It wasin vain that the Alcalde Zamudio, the ancient colleagueand the, envoy of Vasco Nunez, attempted to speak in hisdefence ; he was unable to cope with the facts and argumentsof the Bachelor, who was a pleader by profession,and now pleaded his own cause. The king determinedto send a new governor to Darien, with power to inquireinto and remedy all abuses. For this office he chose DonPedro Arias Davila, commonly called Pedrarias.* Hewas a native of Segovia, who had been brought up in theroyal household, and had distinguished himself as a bravesoldier, both in the war in Granada and at the taking ofOran and Bugia in Africa, He possessed those personalaccomplishments which captivate the soldiery, and wascalled el Galen, for his gallant array and courtly demeanour,and el Justador, or the Titter, for his dexterity injousts and tournaments. These, it must be admitted, werenot the qualifications most adapted for the governmentof rude and factious colonies in a wilderness; but he hadan all-powerful friend in the Bishop Fonseca. TheBishop was as thoroughgoing in patronage as in persecution.He assured the king that Pedrarias had understandingequal to his valour ; that he was as capable ofmanaging the affairs of peace as of war, and that, havingBy the English historians he has generally been called Davila.214 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.been brought up in the royal household, his loyalty mightbe implicitly relied on.Scarcely had Don Pedrarias been appointed, whenC*iyzedo and Colmenares arrived on their mission fromDarien, to communicate the intelligence received fromthe son of the cacique Comagre, of the Southern Sea beyondthe mountains, and to ask one thousand men toenable Vasco Nunez to make the discovery.The avarice and ambition of Ferdinand were inflamedby the tidings. He rewarded the bearers of the intelligence,and, after consulting with Bishop Fonseca, resolvedto despatch immediately a powerful armada, withtwelve hundred men, under the command of Pedrarias,to accomplish the enterprise.Just about this time the famous Gonsalvo Hernandez deCordova, commonly called the Great Captain, was preparingto return to Naples, where the allies of Spain had experienceda signal defeat, and had craved the assistanceof this renowned general to retrieve their fortunes. Thechivalry of Spain thronged to enlist under the banner ofGonsalvo. The Spanish nobles, with their accustomedprodigality, sold or mortgaged their estates to buy gorgeousarmour, silks, brocades, and other articles of martialpomp and luxury, that they might figure, with becomingmagnificence, in the campaigns of Italy. Thearmament was on the point of sailing for Naples with thishost of proud and gallant spirits, when the jealous mindof Ferdinand took offence at the enthusiasm thus showntowards his general, and he abruptly countermanded theexpedition. The Spanish cavaliers were overwhelmedwith disappointment at having their dreams of glory thussuddenly dispelled ; when, as if to console them, the enterpriseof Pedrarias was set on foot, and opened a ."] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 215went career) f adventure. The very idea of an unknownsea and splendid empire, where never European ship hadsailed or foot had trodden, broke upon the imaginationwith the vague wonders of an Arabian tale. Even thecountries already known, in the vicinity of the settlementof Darien, were described in the usual terms of exaggeration.Gold was said to lie on the surface of theground, or to be gathered with nets out of the brooks andrivers ; insomuch that the region hitherto called TerraFirma, now received the pompous and delusive appellationof Castilla del Oro, or Golden Castile.Excited by these reports, many of the youthful cavaliers,who had prepared for the Italian campaign, nowoffered themselves as volunteers to Don Pedrarias. Heaccepted their services, and appointed Seville as theplace of assemblage. The streets of that ancient city soonswarmed with young and noble cavaliers splendidlyarrayed, full of spirits, and eager for the sailing of theIndian armada. Pedrarias, on his arrival at Seville,made a general review of his forces, and was embarrassedto find that the number amounted to three thousand.He had been limited in his first armament totwelve hundred ; on representing the nature of the case,however, the number was extended to fifteen hundred ;but through influence, entreaty and stratagem, upwardsof two thousand eventually embarked.* Happy did hethink himself who could in any manner, and by anymeans, get admitted on board of the squadron. Nor wasthis eagerness for the enterprise confined merely to youngand buoyant and ambitious adventurers ; we are told thatthere were many covetous old men, who offered to go atOviedo, 1. ii. c. 7. MS.216 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.their own expense, without seeking any pay from theking. Thus every eye was turned with desire to thissquadron of modern Argonauts, as it lay anchored on thebosom of the Guadalquiver.The pay and appointments of Don Pedrarias Davilawere on the most liberal scale, and no expense was sparedin fitting out the armament; for the object of the expeditionwere both colonization and conquest. Artillery andpowder were procured from Malaga. Beside the usualweapons, such as muskets, crossbows, swords, pikes, lancesand Neapolitan targets, there was armour devised ofquilted cotton, as being light and better adapted to theclimate, and sufficiently proof against the weapons of theIndians ; and wooden bucklers from the Canary islands,to ward off the poisoned arrows of the Caribs.Santa Maria de la Antigua was, by royal ordinance,elevated into the metropolitan city of Golden Castile, anda Franciscan friar, named Juan de Quevedo was appointedas bishop, with powers to decide in all cases of conscience.A number of friars were nominated to accompanyhim, and he was provided with the necessary furnitureand vessels for a chapel.Among the various regulations made for the good ofthe infant colony, it was ordained that no lawyers shouldbe admitted there, it having been found at Hispaniola andelsewhere, that they were detrimental to the welfare ofthe settlements, by fomenting disputes and litigations.The judicial affairs were to be entirely confided to theLicentiate Gaspar de Espinosa, who was to officiate asAlcalde Mayor or chief judge.Don Pedrarias had intended to leave his wife in Spain.Her name was Dona Isabella de Bobadilla; she was nieceto the Marchioness de Mora, a great favourite of the late1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 217Queen Isabella, who had been instrumental in persuadingher royal mistress to patronize Columbus.* Her niecepartook of her high and generous nature. She refusedto remain behind in selfish security, but declared that shewould accompany her husband in every peril, whetherby sea or land. This self-devotion is the more remarkablewhen it is considered that she was past the romanticperiod of youth ; and that she had a family of four sonsand four daughters, whom she left behind her in Spain.Don Pedrarias was instructed to use great indulgencetowards the people of Darien, who had been the followersof Nicuesa, and to remit the royal tithe of all the goldthey might have collected previous to his arrival . TowardsVasco Nunez de Balboa alone the royal countenance wasstern and severe. Pedrarias was to depose him from hisassumed authority, and to call him to strict account beforethe Alcalde Mayor, Gaspar de Espinosa, for his treatmentof the Bachelor Enciso.The splendid fleet, consisting of fifteen sail, weighedanchor at St. Lucar on the 12th of April, 1514, andswept proudly out of the Guadalquiver, thronged withthe chivalrous adventurers for Golden Castile. But a shorttime had elapsed after its departure, when Pedro Arborarrived with the tardy missions of Vasco Nunez.Had he arrived a few days sooner, how different mighthave been the fortunes of his friend !He was immediately admitted to the royal presence,where he announced the adventurous and successful expeditionof Vasco Nunez, and laid before the king theThis was the same Marchioness de Mora, who during the warof Granada, while the court and royal army were encamped beforeMalaga, was mistaken for the queen by a Moorish fanatic, and hadnearly fallen beneath his dagger.218 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.pearls and golden ornaments which he had brought as thefirst fruits of the discovery. King Ferdinand listenedwith charmed attention to this tale of unknown seas andwealthy realms added to his empire. It filled, in fact,the imaginations of the most sage and learned with goldendreams and anticipations of unbounded riches. OldPeter Martyr, who received letters from his friends inDarien, and communicated by word of mouth with thosewho came from thence, writes to Leo the Tenth in exultingterms of this event. "Spain says he, " willhereafter be able to satisfy with pearls the greedy appetiteof such as in wanton pleasures are like unto Cleopatraand jEsopus; so that henceforth we shall neither envynor reverence the nice fruitfulness of Trapoban or theRed Sea. The Spaniards will not need hereafter tomine and dig far into the earth, nor to cut asundermountains in quest of gold, but will find it plentifully, inamanner, on the upper crust of the earth, or in the sandsof rivers dried up by the heats of summer. Certainly thereverend antiquity obtained not so great a benefit of nature,nor even aspired to the knowledge thereof, sincenever man before, from the known world, penetrated tothese unknown regions. "#The tidings of this discovery at once made all Spain resoundwith the praises of Vasco Nunez ; and, from beingconsidered a lawless and desperate adventurer, he waslauded to the skies as a worthy successor to Columbus.The king repented of the harshness of his late measurestowards him, and ordered the Bishop Fonseca to devisesome mode of rewarding his transcendent services.P. Martyr, clecad. 3, chap. iii. Lok s translation.1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 219CHAPTER XVI.Arrival and grand Entry of Don Pedrarias Damla into Darien.WHILE honours and rewards were preparing in Europefor Vasco Nufiez, that indefatigable commander, inspiredby his fortunes with redoubled zeal and loftier ambition,was exercising the paternal forethought and discretion ofa patriotic governor over the country subjected to hisrule. His most strenuous exertions were directed to bringthe neighbourhood of Darien into such a state of cultivationas might render the settlement independent of Europefor supplies. The town was situated on the banksof a river, and contained upwards of two hundred housesand cabins. Its population amounted to five hundred andfifteen Europeans, all men, and fifteen hundred Indians,male and female. Orchards and gardens had been laidout, where European as well as native fruits and vegetableswere cultivated, and already gave promise of futureabundance. Vasco Nunez devised all kinds of means tokeep up the spirits of his people. On holidays they hadtheir favourite national sports and games, and particularlytilting matches, of which chivalrous amusement the Spaniardsin those days were extravagantly fond. Sometimeshe gratified their restless and roving habits by sendingthem in expeditions to various parts of the country, toacquire a knowledge of its resources, and to strengthenhis sway over the natives. He was so successful in securingthe amity or exciting the awe of the Indian tribes,220 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY, [1514.that a Spaniard might go singly about the land in perfectsafety ; while his own followers were zealous in their devotionto him, both from admiration of his past exploits andfrom hopes of soon being led by him to new discoveriesand conquests. Peter Martyr, in his letter to Leo theTenth, speaks in high terms of these (i old soldiers ofDarien," the remnants of those well-tried adventurerswho had followed the fortunes of Ojeda, Nicuesa, andVasco Nunez. "They were hardened," says he, "toabide all sorrows, and were exceedingly tolerant of labour,heat, hunger, and watching, insomuch that theymerrily make their boast that they have observed a longerand sharper Lent than ever your Holiness enjoined,since, for the space of four years, their food has beenherbs and fruits, with now and then fish, and very seldomflesh"*Such were the hardy and well seasoned veterans thatwere under the sway of Vasco Nunez ; and the colonygave signs of rising in prosperity under his active andfostering management, when in the month of June, thefleet of Don Pedrarias Davila arrived in the Gulf ofUraba.The Spanish cavaliers who accompanied the new governorwere eager to get on shore, and to behold the anticipatedwonders of the land; but Pedrarias, knowingthe resolute character of Vasco Nufiez, and the devotionof his followers, apprehended some difficulty in gettingpossession of the colony. Anchoring, therefore, about aleague and a half from the settlement, he sent a messengeron shore to announce his arrival. The envoy, havingheard so much in Spain of the prowess and exploits ofP. Martyr, dead 3. c. iii, Lok s translation.1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 221Vasco Nunez and the riches of Golden Castile, expected,no doubt, to find a blustering warrior, maintaining barbaricstate in the government which he had usurped.Great was his astonishment therefore to find thi redoubtablehero a plain unassuming man, clad in a cotton frockand drawers, and hempen sandals, directing and aidingthe labour of several Indians who were thatching a cottagein which he resided.The messenger approached him respectfully, and announcedthe arrival of Don Pedrarias Davila as governorof the country.Whatever Vasco Nunez may have felt at this intelligence,he suppressed his emotions, and answered themessenger with great discretion ; " Tell Don PedrariasDavila/ said he, " that he is welcome, that I congratulatehim on his safe arrival, and am ready, with all whoare here, to obey his orders."The little community of rough and daring adventurerswas immediately in an uproar when they found a newgovernor had arrived. Some of the most zealous adherentsof Vasco Nunez were disposed to sally forth, swordin hand, and repel the intruder ; but they were restrainedby their more considerate chieftain, who prepared to receivethe new governor with all due submission.Pedrarias disembarked on the thirtieth of June, accompaniedby his heroic wife, Dona Isabella; who, accordingto old Peter Martyr, had sustained the roaringand rages of the ocean with no less stout courage thaneither her husband or even the mariners who had beenbrought up among the surges of the sea.Pedrarias set out for the embryo city at the head oftwo thousand men, all well armed. He led his wife bythe hand, and on the other side of him was the bishop of222 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. |[1514.Darien in his robes ; while a brilliant train of youthfulcavaliers, in glittering armour and brocade, formed a kindof body guard.All this pomp and splendour formed a striking contrastwith the humble state of Vasco Nufiez, who came forthunarmed, in simple attire, accompanied by his councillorsand a handful of the "old soldiers of Darien," scarred,and battered, and grown half wild in Indian warfare, butwithout weapons, and in garments much the worse forwear.Vasco Nunez saluted Don Pedrarias Davila with profoundreverence, and promised him implicit obedience,both in his own name and in the name of the community.Having entered the town, he conducted his distinguishedguests to his straw thatched habitation, where he hadcaused a repast to be prepared of such cheer as his meansafforded, consisting of roots and fruits, maize and cassavabread, with no other beverage than water from the river ; asorry palace and a meagre banquet in the eyes of the gaycavaliers, who had anticipated far other things from theusurper of Golden Castile. Vasco Nuflez, however, acquittedhimself in his humble wigwam with the courtesyand hospitality of a prince, and showed that the dignityof an entertainment depends more upon the giver thanthe feast. In the mean time a plentiful supply of Europeanprovisions was landed from the fleet, and a temporaryabundance was diffused through the colony.1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 223CHAPTER XVII.Perfidious conduct of Don Pedrarias towards Vasco Nunez,ON the day after his entrance into Darien, Don Petraras held a private conference with Vasco Nunez in presenceof the historian Oviedo, who had come out fromSpain as the public notary of the colony. The governorcommenced by assuring him that he was instructedby the king to treat him with great favour and distinction,to consult him about the affairs of the colony, andto apply to him for information relative to the surroundingcountry. At the same time he professed the mostamicable feelings on his own part, and an intention to beguided by his counsels in all public measures.Vasco Nunez was of a frank confiding nature, andwas so captivated by this unexpected courtesy and kindness,that he threw off all caution and reserve, and.opened his whole soul to the politic courtier. Pedrariasavailed himself of this communicative mood to draw fromhim a minute and able statement in writing, detailing thecircumstances of the colony, and the information collectedrespecting various parts of the country; the route bywhich he had traversed the mountains ; his discovery ofthe South Sea; the situation and reputed wealth of thePearl Islands; the rivers and ravines most productive ofgold ; together with the names and territories of the variouscaciques with whom he had made treaties.224 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.When Pedrarias had thus beguiled the unsuspectingsoldier of all the information necessary for his purposes,he dropped the mask, and within a few days proclaimeda judicial scrutiny into the conduct of Vasco Nunez andhis officers. It was to be conducted by the LicentiateGaspar de Espinosa, who had come out as Alcalde Mayor,or chief judge. The Licentiate was an inexperiencedlawyer, having but recently left the university of Salamanca.He appears to have been somewhat flexible inhis opinions, and prone to be guided or governed byothers. At the outset of his career he was much underthe influence of Quevedo, the Bishop of Darien. Now,as Vasco Nunez knew the importance of this prelate inthe colony, he had taken care to secure him to his interestsby paying him the most profound deference and respect,and by giving him a share in his agricultural enterprisesand his schemes of traffic. In fact, the good bishoplooked upon him as one eminently calculated to promotehis temporal prosperity, to which he was by no means insensible.Under the influence of the prelate, therefore,the Alcalde commenced his investigation in the most favourablemanner. He went largely into an examinationof the discoveries of Vasco Nunez, and of the nature andextent of his various services. The governor was alarmedat the course which the inquiry was taking. If thus conducted,it would but serve to illustrate the merits andelevate the reputation of the man whom it was his interestand intent to ruin. To counteract it he immediatelyset on foot a secret and invidious course of interrogatoriesof the followers of Nicuesa and Ojeda, to drawfrom them testimony which might support the chargeagainst Vasco Nunez of usurpation and tyrannical abuseof power. The bishop and the Alcalde received informVASCO NUNEZ 1>E BALBOA. 225nation of this inquisition, carried on thus secretly, andwithout their sanction. They remonstrated warmlyagainst it, as an infringement of their rights, being coadjutorsin the government ; and they spurned the testimonyof the followers of Ojeda and Nicuesa, as being dictatedand discoloured by ancient enmity. Vasco Nuftez wastherefore acquitted by them of the criminal chargesmade against him, though he remained involved in difficultiesfrom the suits brought against him by individuals,for losses and damages occasioned by his measures.Pedrarias was incensed at this acquittal, and insistedupon the guilt of Vasco Nunez, which he pretended tohave established to his conviction by his secret investigations;and he even determined to send him in chains toSpain, to be tried for the death of Nicuesa, and for otherimputed offences.It was not the inclination or the interest of the bishopthat Vasco Nunez should leave the colony; he thereforemanaged to awaken the jealous apprehensions of the governoras to the effect of his proposed measure. He intimatedthat the arrival of Vasco Nunez in Spain wouldbe signalized by triumph rather than disgrace. By thattime his grand discoveries would be blazoned to theworld, and would atone for all his faults. He would bereceived with enthusiasm by the nation, with favour bythe king, and would probably be sent back to the colonyclothed with new dignity and power.Pedrarias was placed in a perplexing dilemma by thesesuggestions ; his violent proceedings against Vasco Nunezwere also in some measure restrained by the influence ofhis wife. Dona Isabel de Bobadilla, who felt a great respectand sympathy for the discoverer. In his perplexity,the wily governor adopted a middle course. He226 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.resolved to detain Vasco Nunez at Darien under a cloudof imputation, which would gradually impair his popularity;while his patience and means would be silentlyconsumed by protracted and expensive litigation. In themeantime, however, the property which had been sequestratedwas restored to him.While Pedrarias treated Yasco Nunez with this severity,he failed not to avail himself of the plans of that ablecommander. The first of these was to establish a line ofposts across the mountains between Darien and the SouthSea. It was his eager desire to execute this before anyorder should arrive from the king in favour of his predecessor,in order that he might have the credit of havingcolonized the coast, and Vasco Nunez, merely that ofhaving discovered and visited it.* Before he couldcomplete these arrangements, however, unlooked-for calamitiesfell upon the settlement, that for a time interruptedevery project, arid made every one turn histhoughts merely to his own security.Oviedo, Hist. Ind. p. 2. c. 8.1514,] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 227CHAPTER XVIII.Calamities of the Spanish Cavaliers at Darien.THE town of Darien was situated in a deep valley surroundedby lofty hills, which, while they kept off thebreezes so grateful in a sultry climate, reflected and concentratedthe rays of the sun, insomuch, that at noontidethe heat was insupportable; the river which passed itwas shallow, with a muddy channel and bordered bymarshes ; overhanging forests added to the general humidity,and the very soil on which the town was built wasof such a nature, that on digging to the depth of a footthere would ooze forth brackish water. *It is not matter of surprise that a situation of this kind,in a tropical climate, should be fatal to the health ofEuropeans. Many of those who had recently arrivedwere swept off speedily ; Pedrarias himself fell sick andwas removed, with most of his people, to a healthier spoton the river Coronary ; the malady, however, continuedto increase. The provisions which had been brought outin the ships had been partly damaged by the sea, the residuegrew scanty, and the people were put upon shortallowance; the debility thus produced increased theravages of disease; at length the provisions were exhaustedand the horrors of absolute famine ensued.P. Martyr, clecad 3. c. vi.228 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.Every one was more or less affected by these calamities;even the veterans of the colony quailed beneaththem; but to none were they more fatal than to thecrowd of youthful cavaliers who had once glittered sogaily about the streets of Seville, and had come out tothe new world elated with the most sanguine expectations.From the very moment of their landing they hadbeen disheartened at the savage scenes around them, anddisgusted with the squalid life they were doomed to lead.They shrunk with disdain from the labours with whichalone wealth was to be procured in this land of gold andpearls, and were impatient of the humble exertions necessaryfor the maintenance of existence. As the famineincreased, their case became desperate ; for they wereunable to help themselves, and their rank and dignitycommanded neither deference nor aid at a time whencommon misery made every one selfish. Many of them,who had mortgaged estates in Spain to fit themselves outsumptuously for their Italian campaign, now perished forlack of food. Some would be seen bartering a robe ofcrimson silk, or some garment of rich brocade, for apound of Indian bread or European biscuit; others soughtto satisfy the cravings of hunger with the herbs and rootsof the field, and one of the principal cavaliers absolutelyexpired of hunger in the public streets.In this wretched way, and in the short space of onemonth, perished seven hundred of the little army ofyouthful and buoyant spirits who had embarked withPedrarias. The bodies of some remained for a day ortwo without sepulture, their friends not having sufficientstrength to bury them. Unable to remedy the evil,Pedrarias gave permission for his men to flee from it. A1514,] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 229ship-load of starving adventurers departed for Cuba,where some of them joined the standard of Diego Velasquez,who was colonizing that island ; others made theirway back to Spain, where they arrived broken in health,in spirits and in fortune.230 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514,CHAPTER XIX.Fruitless expedition of Pedrarias.THE departure of so many hungry mouths was sometemporary relief to the colony ; and Pedrarias, havingrecovered from his malady, bestirred himself to send expeditionsin various directions for the purpose of foragingthe country and collecting the treasure.These expeditions, however, were entrusted to his ownfavourites, and partisans ; while Vasco Nunez, the manmost competent to carry them into effect, remained idleand neglected. A judicial inquiry, tardily carried on,overshadowed him, and though it substantiated nothing,served to embarrass his actions, to cool his friends, and togive him the air of a public delinquent. Indeed, to theother evils of the colony was now added that of excessivelitigation, arising out of the disputes concerning the governmentof Vasco Nunez, and which increased to such adegree, that according to the report of the Alcalde Espinosa,if the law-suits should be divided among the people,at least forty would fall to each man s share.* Thistoo was in a colony into which the government had commandedthat no lawyer should be admitted.Wearied and irritated by the check which had beengiven to his favourite enterprises, and confident of theultimate approbation of the king, Vasco Nunez now de-hearers,dead. 2. 1. i. c. 1.1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 231termined to take his fortunes in his own hands, and toprosecute in secret his grand project of exploring the regionsbeyond the mountains. For this purpose he privatelydespatched one Andres Garabito to Cuba to enlistmen, and to make the requisite provisions for an expeditionacross the isthmus, from Nombre de Dios, and forthe founding a colony on the shores of the SouthernOcean, from whence he proposed to extend his discoveriesby sea and land.While Vasco Nufiez awaited the return of Garabito,he had the mortification of beholding various of his colonisingplans pursued and marred by Pedrarias. Amongother enterprises, the governor despatched his lieutenant-generalJuan de Ayora, at the head of four hundred men,to visit the provinces of those caciques with whom VascoNunez had sojourned and made treaties on his expeditionto the Southern Sea. Ayora partook of the rashand domineering spirit of Pedrarias, and harassed anddevastated the countries which he pretended to explore.He was received with amity and confidence by variouscaciques who had formed treaties with Vasco Nufiez ; buthe repaid their hospitality with the basest ingratitude,seizing upon their property, taking from them theirwives and daughters, and often torturing them to makethem reveal their hidden or supposed treasures. Amongthose treated with this perfidy, we grieve to enumeratethe youthful cacique who first gave Vasco Nunez informationof the sea beyond the mountains.The enormities of Ayora and of other captains of Pedrains produced the usual effect; the natives were rousedto desperate resistance ; caciques, who had been faithfulfriends, were converted into furious enemies, and the expeditionended in disappointment and disaster.232 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.The adherents of Vasco Nunez did not fail to contrastthese disastrous enterprises with those which had beenconducted with so much glory and advantage by theirfavourite commander; and their sneers and reproacheshad such an effect upon the jealous and irritable dispositionof Pedrarias, that he determined to employ theiridol in a service that would be likely to be attended withdefeat, and to impair his popularity. None seemed morefitting for the purpose than an expedition to Dobayba,where he had once already attempted in vain to penetrate,and where so many of his followers had fallen victimsto the stratagems and assaults of the natives.1514.J VASCO NUNEZ UE Bilboa. 233CHAPTER XX.Second Expedition of Vasco Nunez in quest of the Gold Temple ofDobayba.THE rich mines of Dobayba, and the treasures of itsgolden temple, had continued to form a favourite themeWith the Spanish adventurers. It was ascertained thatVasco Nunez had stopped short of the wealthy region onhis former expedition, and had mistaken a frontier villagefor the residence of the cacique. The enterprise of thetemple was, therefore, still, to be achieved; and it wassolicited by several of the cavaliers in the train of Pegwith all the chivalrous ardour of that romanticage. Indeed common report had invested the enterprisewith difficulties and danger sufficient to stimulate theambition of the keenest seeker of adventure. The savageswho inhabited that part of the country, were courageousand adroit. They fought by water as well as byland, forming ambuscades with their canoes in the baysand rivers. The country was intersected by drearyfens and morasses, infested by all kinds of reptiles.Clouds of gnats and mosquitoes filled the air ; there werelarge bats also, supposed to have the baneful propertiesof the vampire ; alligators lurked in the waters, and thegloomy recesses of the fens were said to be the dens ofdragons!*-. . " . t vi. * P. Martyr.234 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.Besides these objects of terror, both true and fabulousthe old historian, Peter Martyr, makes mention of anothermonstrous animal, said to infest this golden region,and which deserves to be cited, as showing the imaginarydangers with which the active minds of the discovererspeopled the unexplored wilderness around them.According to the tales of the Indians, there had occurred,shortly before the arrival of the Spaniards, aviolent tempest, or rather hurricane, in the neighbourhoodof Dobayba, which demolished houses, tore up trees bythe roots, and laid waste whole forests. When the tempesthad subsided and the affrighted inhabitants venturedto look abroad, they found that two monstrous animalshad been brought into the country by the hurricane.According to their accounts they were not unlike theancient harpies, and one being smaller than the other,was supposed to be its young. They had the faces ofwomen, with the claws and wings of eagles, and were ofsuch prodigious size that the very boughs of the treeson which they alighted broke beneath them. Theywould swoop down and carry off a man as a hawk wouldbear off a chicken, flying with him to the tops of themountains, where they would tear him in pieces anddevour him. For some time they were the scourge andterror of the land, until the Indians succeeded in killingthe old one by stratagem, and hanging her on theirlong spears, bore her through all the towns to assuage thealarm of the inhabitants. The younger harpy, says theIndian tradition, was never seen afterwards.*Such were some of the perils, true and fabulous, withP. Marty r,decacl. 7, c. 10.1514.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 235which the land of Dobayba was said to abound ; and, infact, the very Indians had such a dread of its dark anddismal morasses, that, in their journeyings, they carefullyavoided them, preferring the circuitous and ruggedpaths of the mountains.Several of the youthful cavaliers, as has been observed,were stimulated rather than deterred by these dangers,and contended for the honour of the expedition ; butPedrarias selected his rival for the task, hoping, as hasbeen hinted, that it would involve him in disgrace.Vasco Nunez promptly accepted the enterprise, for hispride was concerned in its success. Two hundred resolutemen were given to him for the purpose ; but hissatisfaction was diminished when he found that LuisCarrillo, an officer of Pedrarias, who had failed inaperilous enterprise, was associated with him in thecommand.Few particulars remain to us of the events of this affair.They embarked in a fleet of canoes, and, traversing thegulf, arrived at the river which flowed down from theregion of Dobayba. They were not destined, however,to achieve the enterprise of the golden temple. As theywere proceeding rather confidently and unguardedly upthe river, they were suddenly surprised and surroundedby an immense swarm of canoes, filled with armed savages,which darted out from lurking places along theshores. Some of the Indians assailed them with lances,others with clouds of arrows, while some plunging intothe water, endeavoured to overturn their canoes. In thisway one half of the Spaniards were killed or drowned.Among the number fell Luis Carrillo, pierced through thebreast by an Indian lance. Vasco Nunez himself was236 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1514.wounded, and had great difficulty in escaping to the shorewith the residue of his forces.The Indians pursued him and kept up a skirmishingattack, but he beat them off until the night, when he silentlyabandoned the shore of the river, and directed hisretreat towards Darien. It is easier to imagine than todescribe the toils and dangers and horrors which besethim and the remnant of his men as they traversed ruggedmountains, or struggled through these fearful morasses ofwhich they had heard such terrific tales. At length theysucceeded in reaching the settlement of Darien.The partizans of Pedrarias exulted in seeing VascoNuiiez return thus foiled and wounded, and taunted hisadherents with their previous boastings. The latter,however, laid all the blame upon the unfortunate Carrillo.66 Vasco Nunez," said they, "had always absolute commandin his former enterprises, but in this he has beenembarrassed by an associate. Had the expedition beenconfided to him alone, the event had been far different."1515.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 237CHAPTER XXI.Letters from the King in favour of Vasco Nunez. Arrival of .Arrest of Vasco Nunez. (1515.)ABOUT this time despatches arrived from Spain thatpromised to give a new turn to the fortunes of VascoNuflez and to the general affairs of the colony. Theywere written after the tidings of the discovery of theSouth Sea, and the subjugation of so many importantprovinces of the Isthmus. In a letter addressed to VascoNunez, the king expressed his high sense of his meritsand services, and constituted him Adelantado of the SouthSea, and Governor of the provinces of Panama and Coyba,though subordinate to the general command of Pedrarias.A letter was likewise written by the king to Pedrarias,informing him of this appointment, and ordering him toconsult Vasco Nunez on all public affairs of importance.This was a humiliating blow to the pride and consequenceof Pedrarias, but he hoped to parry it. In the meantime,as all letters from Spain were first delivered into hishands, he withheld that intended for Vasco Nunez, untilhe should determine what course of conduct to adopt,The latter, however, heard of the circumstance, as didhis friend the Bishop of Darien. The prelate made loudcomplaints of this interruption of the royal correspondence,which he denounced, even from the pulpit, as anoutrage upon the rights of the subject, and an act of disobedienceto the sovereign.238 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.Upon this the governor called a council of his publicofficers ; and, after imparting the contents of his letter,requested their opinion as to the propriety of investingVasco Nunez with the dignities thus granted to him.The Alcalde Mayor, Espinosa, had left the party of thebishop, and was now devoted to the governor. He insisted,vehemently, that the offices ought in no wise to begiven to Vasco Nunez, until the king should be informedof the result of the inquest which was still going on againsthim. In this he was warmly supported by the treasurerand the accountant. The bishop replied, indignantly, thatit was presumptuous and disloyal in them to dispute thecommands of the king, and to interfere with the rewardsconscientiously given by him to a meritorious subject. Inthis way, he added, they were defeating, by their passions,the grateful intentions of their sovereign. Thegovernor was overawed by the honest warmth of thebishop, and professed to accord with him in opinion.The council lasted until midnight; and it was finallyagreed that the titles and dignities should be conferredon Vasco Nunez on the following day.*Pedrarias and his officers reflected, however, that ifthe jurisdiction implied by these titles were absolutelyvested in Vasco Nunez, the government of Darien andCastilla del Oro would virtually be reduced to a triflingmatter ; they resolved, therefore, to adopt a middlecourse ; to grant him the empty titles, but to make himgive security not to enter upon the actual governmentof the territories in question, until Pedrarias should giveOviedo, part 2. c. 9. MS. Oviedo, the historian, was presentat this consultation, and says that he wrote down the opinionsgiven on the occasion, which the parties signed with their properhands.1515.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 239him permission. The bishop and Vasco Nunez assentedto this arrangement; satisfied, for the present, with securingthe titles, and trusting to the course of events toget dominion over the territories.*The new honours of Vasco Nunez were now promulgatedto the world, and he was every where addressed bythe title of Adelantado. His old friends lifted up theirheads with exultation, and new adherents flocked to hisstandard. Parties began to form for him and for Petrafor it was deemed impossible they could continuelong in harmony.The jealousy of the governor was excited by these circumstances; and he regarded the newly created Adelanado as a dangerous rival and an insidious foe. Just atthis critical juncture, Andres Garabito, the agent ofVasco Nuftez, arrived on the coast in a vessel which hehad procured at Cuba, and had freighted with arms andammunition, and seventy resolute men, for the secret expeditionto the shores of the Pacific Ocean. He anchoredsix leagues from the harbour, and sent word privatelyto Vasco Nunez of his arrival.Information was immediately carried to Pedrarias, thata mysterious vessel, full of armed men, was hovering onthe coast, and holding secret communication with hisrival. The suspicious temper of the governor immediatelytook the alarm. He fancied some treasonable plotagainst his authority ; his passions mingled with his fears;and, in the first burst of his fury, he ordered that VascoNunez should be seized and confined in a wooden cage.The Bishop of Darien interposed in time to prevent anindignity which it might have been impossible to expiate,Oviedo, part 2. c. 9. MS.240 SPANISH VOYAGES OP DISCOVERY. [1515.He prevailed upon the passionate governor, not merely toretract the order respecting the cage, but to examine thewhole matter with coolness and deliberation. The resultproved that his suspicions had been erroneous ; and thatthe armament had been set on foot without any treasonableintent. Vasco Nunez was therefore set at liberty,after having agreed to certain precautionary conditions ;but he remained cast down in spirit and impoverished infortune,by the harassing measures of Pedrarias.1515.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 241CHAPTER XXII.Expedition of Morales and Pizarro to the shores of the PacificOcean. Their visit to the Pearl Islands. Their disastrous returnacross the mountains.THE Bishop of Darien, encouraged by the success ofhis intercession, endeavoured to persuade the governor togo still further, and to permit the departure of VascoNunez on his expedition to the South Sea. The jealousyof Pedrarias, however, was too strong to permit him tolisten to such counsel. He was aware of the importanceof the expedition, and was anxious that the Pearl Islandsshould be explored, which promised such abundant treasures; but he feared to increase the popularity of VascoNunez, by adding such an enterprise to the number ofhis achievements, Pedrarias, therefore, set on foot anexpedition, consisting of sixty men, but gave the commandto one of his own relations, named Gaspar Morales.The latter was accompanied by Francisco Pizarro, whohad already been to those parts in the train of VascoNunez, and who soon rose to importance in the presententerprise by his fierce courage and domineering genius.A brief notice of the principal incidents of this expeditionis all that is necessary for the present narration.Morales and Pizarro traversed the mountains of theisthmus by a shorter and more expeditious route than thatwhich had been taken by Vasco Nufiez, and arrived onthe shores of the South Sea at the territories of a cacique242 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.named Tutibra, by whom they were amicably entertained.Their great object was to visit the Pearl Islands:the cacique, however,, had but four canoes, which wereinsufficient to contain their whole party. One half oftheir number, therefore, remained at the village ofTutibra, under the command of a captain named Pena-lost;the residue embarked in the canoes with Moralesand Pizarro. After a stormy and perilous voyage, theylanded on one of the smaller islands, where they had someskirmishing with the natives, and thence made their wayto the principal island of the Archipelago, to which, fromthe report of its great pearl fishery, Yasco Nunez hadgiven the name of Isla Rica.The cacique of this island had long been the terror ofthe neighbouring coasts, invading the main land withfleets of canoes, and carrying off the inhabitants into captivity.His reception of the Spaniards was worthy of hisfame. Four times did he sally forth to defend his territory,and as often was he repulsed with great slaughter.His warriors were overwhelmed with terror at the firearmsof the Spaniards, and at their ferocious bloodhounds.Finding all resistance unavailing, the caciquewas at length compelled to sue for peace. His prayersbeing granted, he received the conquerors into his habitation,which was well built, and of immense size. Herehe brought them, as a peace-offering, a basket curiouslywrought, and filled with pearls of great beauty. Amongthese were two of extraordinary size and value. Oneweighed twenty-five carats ; the other was of the size ofa Muscadine pear, weighing upwards of three drachms,and of oriental colour and lustre. The cacique consideredhimself more than repaid by a present of hatchets,beads, and hawks-bells : and, on the Spaniards smiling at1515.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 243his joy, observed, (i These things I can turn to usefulpurpose, hut of what value are those pearls to me?"Finding* however, that these baubles were precious inthe eyes of the Spaniards, he took Morales and Pizarro tothe summit of a wooden tower, commanding an unboundedprospect. "Behold, before you," said he, "the infinitesea, which extends even beyond the sun-beams.As to these islands which lie to the right and left, theyare all subject to my sway. They possess but little gold,but the deep places of the sea around them are full ofpearls. Continue to be my friends, and you shall have asmany as you desire; for I value your friendship morethan pearls, and, as far as in me lies, will never forfeit it."He then pointed to the main land, where it stretchedaway towards the east, mountain beyond mountain, untilthe summit of the last faded in the distance, and wasscarcely seen above the watery horizon. In that direction,he said, there lay a vast country of inexhaustibleriches, inhabited by a mighty nation. He went on to repeatthe vague but wonderful rumours which the Spaniardshad frequently heard about the great kingdom ofPeru. Pizarro listened greedily to his words, and whilehis eye followed the finger of the cacique, as it rangedalong the line of shadowy coast, his daring mind kindledwith the thought of seeking this golden empire beyondthe waters.*Before leaving the island, the two captains impressedthe cacique with so great an idea of the power of the kingof Castile, that he agreed to become his vassal, and torender him an annual tribute of one hundred poundsweight of pearls.Hen-era, d. 2. 1. i. c. iv. P, Martyr, d. Sec. x.244 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.The party having returned in safety to the main land,though to a different place from that where they hadembarked, Gaspar Morales sent his relations BernardoMorales, with ten men in quest of Penalosa and his companions,who had remained in the village of Tutibra.Unfortunately for the Spaniards, during the absenceof the commanders, this Penalosa had so exasperated thenatives by his misconduct, that a conspiracy had beenformed by the caciques along the coast to massacre thewhole of the strangers, when the party should returnfrom the islands.Bernardo Morales and his companions, on their wayin quest of Penalosa, put up for the night in the villageof a cacique named Chuchama, who was one of the conspirators.They were entertained with pretended hospitality.In the dead of the night, however, the housein which they were sleeping was wrapped in flames, andmost of them were destroyed. Chuchama then preparedwith his confederates to attack the main body of theSpaniards who remained with Morales and Pizarro.Fortunately for the latter, there was among the Indianswho had accompanied them to the islands a caciquenamed Chiruca, who was in secret correspondence withthe conspirators. Some circumstances in his conductexcited their suspicions ; they put him to the torture anddrew from him a relation of the massacre of their companions,and of the attack with which they were menaced.Morales and Pizarro were at first appalled by theoverwhelming danger which surrounded them. Concealingtheir agitation, however, they compelled Chirucato send a message to each of the confederate caciques,inviting him to a secret conference, under pretence of^1515.1 VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 245Jgiving him important information. The caciques cameat the summons : they were thus taken one by one to thenumber of eighteen, and put in chains. Just at thisjuncture Penalosa arrived with the thirty men who hadremained with him at Tutibra. Their arrival was hailedwith joy by their comrades, who had given them up forlost. Encouraged by this unexpected reinforcement, theSpaniards now attacked by surprise the main body ofconfederate Indians, who, being ignorant of the discoveryof their plot and capture of their caciques, wereawaiting the return of the latter in a state of negligentsecurity.Pizarro led the van, and set upon the enemy at daybreakwith the old Spanish war-cry of Santiago! Itwas a slaughter rather than a battle, for the Indians wereunprepared for resistance. Before sun-rise, sevenhundred lay dead upon the field. Returning fromthe massacre, the commanders doomed the caciques whowere in chains to be torn in pieces by the bloodhounds ;nor was even Chiruca spared from this sanguinary sentence.Notwithstanding this bloody revenge, the vindictivespirit of the commanders was still unappeased,and they set off to surprise the village of a cacique namedBiru, who dwelt on the eastern side of the Gulf of Sf.Michael. He was famed for valour and for cruelty : hisdwelling was surrounded by the weapons and other trophiesof those whom he had vanquished; and he wassaid never to give quarter.The Spaniards assailed his village before day-breakwith fire and sword, and made dreadful havoc. Biruescaped from his burning habitation, rallied his people,kept up a galling fight throughout the greater part ofthat day, and handled the Spaniards so roughly, that,246 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.when he drew off at night, they did not venture to pursuehim, but returned right gladly from his territory.According to some of the Spanish writers, the kingdomof Peru derived its name from this warlike cacique,through a blunder of the early discoverers; the assertion,however, is believed to be erroneous.The Spaniards had pushed their bloody revenge to anextreme, and were now doomed to suffer from the recoil.In the fury of their passions, they had forgotten that theywere but a handful of men surrounded by savage nations.Returning wearied and disheartened from the battle withBiru, they were waylaid and assaulted by a host of Indiansled on by the son of Chiruca. A javelin from hishand pierced one of the Spaniards through the breast andcame out between the shoulders; several others werewounded, and the remainder were harassed by a gallingfire kept up from among rocks and bushes.Dismayed at the implacable vengeance they hadaroused, the Spaniards hastened to abandon these hostileshores and make the best of their way back to Darien.The Indians, however, were not to be appeased by themere departure of the intruders. They followed themperseveringly for seven days, hanging on their skirts,and harassing them by continual alarms. Morales andPizarro, seeing the obstinacy of their pursuit, endeavouredto gain a march upon them by stratagem.Making large fires as usual one night about the place oftheir encampment, they left them burning to deceivethe enemy while they made a rapid retreat. Amongtheir number was one poor fellow named Velasquez, whowas so grievously wounded that he could not walk. Unableto accompany his countrymen in their flight, anddreading to fall into the merciless hands of the savages,1515.] VASCO NUNEZ Dfc BALBOA. 247he determined to hang himself, nor could the prayers andeven tears of his comrades dissuade him from his purpose.The stratagem of the Spaniards, however, was unavailing.Their retreat was perceived, and at day-break,to their dismay, they found themselves surrounded bythree squadrons of savages. Unable, in their haggardstate, to make head against so many foes, they remaineddrawn up all day on the defensive, some watching whileothers reposed. At night they lit their fires and againattempted to make a secret retreat, The Indians, however,were as usual on their traces, and wounded severalwith arrows. Thus pressed and goaded, the Spaniardsbecame desperate, and fought like madmen, rushing uponthe very darts of the enemy.Morales now resorted to an inhuman and fruitless expedientto retard his pursuers. He caused several Indianprisoners to be slain, hoping that their friends would stopto lament over them; but the sight of their mangledbodies only increased the fury of the savages and the obstinacyof their pursuit.For nine days were the Spaniards hunted in this mannerabout the woods and mountains, the swamps and fens,wandering they knew not whither, and returning upontheir steps, until, to their dismay, they found themselvesin the very place where, several days previously, theyhad been surrounded by the three squadrons.Many now began to despair of ever escaping with lifefrom this trackless wilderness, thus teeming with deadlyfoes. It was with difficulty their commanders could rallytheir spirits, and encourage them to persevere. Enteringa thick forest they were again assailed by a band of Indians,but despair and fury gave them strength: they248 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.fought like wild beasts rather than like men, and routedthe foe with dreadful carnage. They had hoped to gaina breathing time by this victory, but a new distress attendedthem. They got entangled in one of those deepand dismal marshes which abound on those coasts, and inwhich the wanderer is often drowned or suffocated. Forawhole day they toiled through brake and bramble,and miry fen, with the water reaching to their girdles.At length they extricated themselves from the swamp, andarrived at the sea shore. The tide was out, but wasabout to return, and on this coast it rises rapidly to a greatheight. Fearing to be overwhelmed by the rising surf,they hastened to climb a rock out of reach of the swellingwaters. Here they threw themselves on the earth pantingwith fatigue and abandoned to despair. A savagewilderness filled with still more savage foes, was on oneside, on the other the roaring sea. How were they toextricate themselves from these surrounding perils?While reflecting on their desperate situation, they heardthe voices of Indians. On looking cautiously round, theybeheld four canoes entering a neighbouring creek. Aparty was immediately despatched who came upon thesavages by surprise, drove them into the woods, andseized upon the canoes. In these frail barks the Spaniardsescaped from their perilous neighbourhood, and, traversingthe Gulf of St. Michael, landed in a less hostile part,from whence they set out a second time, across themountains.It is needless to recount the other hardships they endured,and their further conflicts with the Indians ; sufficeit to say, after a series of almost incredible sufferingsand disasters, they at length arrived in a battered and emaciatedcondition at Darien. Throughout all their toils and1515.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 249troubles, however, they had managed to preserve a partof the treasure they had gained in the islands ; especiallythe pearls given them by the cacique of Isla Rica. Thesewere objects of universal admiration. One of them wasput up at auction, and bought by Pedrarias, and was afterwardspresented by his wife Voila Isabella de Boba-della to the Empress, who, in return, gave her fourthousand ducats.*Such was the cupidity of the colonists, that the sightof these pearls and the reputed wealth of the islands ofthe Southern Sea, and the kingdoms on its borders, madefar greater impression on the public mind, than the taletold by the adventurers of all the horrors they had past ;and every one was eager to seek these wealthy regionsbeyond the mountains.Herrera, Hist. Ind. d. 2, 1. i. c. 4.250 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.CHAPTER XXIII.Unfortunate Enterprises of the Officers of Per arias. MatrimonialCompact between the Governor and Vasco Nunez.IN narrating the preceding expedition of Morales andPizarro, we have been tempted into what may almost bedeemed an episode, though it serves to place in a properlight the lurking difficulties and dangers which beset theexpeditions of Vasco Nunez to the same regions, and hissuperior prudence and management in avoiding them.It is not the object of this narrative, however, to recordthe general events of the colony under the administrationof Don Pedrarias Davila. We refrain, therefore, fromdetailing various expeditions set on foot by him to exploreand subjugate the surrounding country; and which, beingignorantly or rashly conducted, too often ended in misfortuneand disgrace. One of these was to the province ofZenu, where gold was supposed to be taken in the riversin nets ; and where the Bachelor Enciso once undertookto invade the sepulchres. A captain named FranciscoBecerra penetrated into this country at the head of onehundred and eighty men, well armed and equipped, andprovided with three pieces of artillery; but neither thecommander nor any of his men returned. An Indian boywho accompanied them was the only one who escaped,and told the dismal tale of their having fallen victims tothe assaults and stratagems and poisoned arrows of theIndians.1515.] VASCO NUNE/ DE liALBOA. 251Another band was defeated by Tubanama, the ferociouscacique of the mountains, who bore as banners the bloodyshirts of the Spaniards he had slain in former battles. Infine, the colony became so weakened by these repeatedlosses, and the savages so emboldened by success, that thelatter beleaguered it with their forces, harassed it byassaults and ambuscades, and reduced it to great extremity.Such was the alarm in Darien, says the BishopLas Casas, that the people feared to be burnt in theirhouses. They kept a watchful eye upon the mountains,the plains, and the very branches of the trees. Theirimaginations were infected by their fears. * If they lookedtoward the land, the long waving grass of the savannahsappeared to them to be moving hosts of Indians. If theylooked towards the sea, they fancied they beheld fleets ofcanoes in the distance. Pedrarias endeavoured to preventall rumours from abroad that might increase thisfevered state of alarm ; at the same time he ordered thesmelting-house to be closed, which was never done but intimeof war. This was done at the suggestion of theBishop, who caused prayers to be put up, and fasts proclaimed,to avert the impending calamities.While Pedrarias was harassed and perplexed by thesecomplicated evils, he was haunted by continual apprehensionsof the ultimate ascendency of Vasco Nunez.He knew him to be beloved by the people, and befriendedby the Bishop ; and he had received proofs that hisservices were highly appreciated by the king. He knewalso that representations had been sent home by him andhis partizans, of the evils and abuses of the colony underthe present rule, and of the necessity of a more active andefficient governor. He dreaded lest these representationsshould ultimately succeed ; that he should be undermined252 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.in the royal favour, and Vasco Nunez be elevated uponhis ruins.The politic bishop perceived the uneasy state of thegovernor s mind, and endeavoured, by means of his apprehensions,to effect that reconciliation which he hadsought in vain to produce through more generous motives.He represented to him that his treatment of VascoNunez was odious in the eyes of the people, and musteventually draw on him the displeasure of his sovereign.66 But why persist," added he, " in driving a man to becomeyour deadliest enemy, whom you may grapple toyour side as-your firmest friend? You have severaldaughters give him one in marriage; you will thenhave for a son-in-law a man of merit and popularity, whois a hidalgo by birth, and a favourite of the king. Youare advanced in life and infirm ; he is in the prime andvigour of his days, and possessed of great activity. Youcan make him your lieutenant; and while you reposefrom your toils, he can carry on the affairs of the colonywith spirit and enterprise ; and all his achievements willredound to the advancement of your family and the splendourof your administration."The governor and his lady were won by the eloquenceof the bishop, and readily listened to his suggestions; andVasco Nunez was but too happy to effect a reconciliationon such flattering terms. Written articles were accordinglydrawn up and exchanged, contracting a marriagebetween him and the eldest daughter of Pedrarias. Theyoung lady was then in Spain, but was to be sent for, andthe nuptials were to be celebrated on her arrival atDarien.1515.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 253Having thus fulfilled his office of peace-maker, andsettled, as he supposed, all feuds and jealousies on thesure and permanent foundation of family alliance, theworthy bishop departed shortly afterwards for Spain.254 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.CHAPTER XXIV.Vasco Nunez transports ships across the mountains to the PacificOcean. (1516.)BEHOLD Vasco Nunez once more in the high career ofprosperity! His most implacable enemy had suddenlybeen converted into his dearest friend ; for the governor,now that he looked upon him as his son in law, loadedhim with favours. Above all, he authorized him to buildbrigantines and make all the necessary preparations for hislong desired expedition to explore the Southern Ocean.The place appointed for these purposes was the port ofCareta, situated to the west of Darien; from whencethere was supposed to be the most convenient routeacross the mountains. A town called Acta had beenfounded at this port; and the fortress was already erected,of which Lope de Olano was Alcalde ; Vasco Nunezwas now empowered to continue the building of the town.Two hundred men were placed under his command toaid him in carrying his plans into execution, and a sum ofmoney was advanced to him out of the royal treasury.His supply of funds, however, was not sufficient; but hereceived assistance from a private source. There was anotary at Darien, named Hernando de Arguello, a manof some consequence in the community, and who hadbeen one of the most furious opponents of the unfortunateNicuesa. He had amassed considerable property, and1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 255now embarked a great part of it in the proposed enterprise,on condition, no doubt, of sharing largely in its anticipatedprofits.On arriving at Acta, Vasco Nunez set to work to preparethe materials of four brigantines that were to belaunched into the South Sea. The timber was felled onthe Atlantic seaboard ; and was then, with the anchorsand rigging, transported across the lofty ridge of mountainsto the opposite shores of the Isthmus. SeveralSpaniards, thirty Negroes, and a great number of Indianswere employed for the purpose. They had no otherroads but Indian paths, straggling through almost imperviousforests, across torrents, and up rugged defiles, brokenby rocks and precipices. In this way they toiledlike ants up the mountains, with their ponderous burthens,under the scorching rays of a tropical sun. Manyof the poor Indians sank by the way and perished underthis stupendous task. The Spaniards and Negroes, beingof hardier constitutions, were better able to cope withthe incredible hardships to which they were subjected.On the summit of the mountains a house had been providedfor their temporary repose. After remaining herea little time to refresh themselves and gain new strength,they renewed their labours, descending the opposite sideof the mountains until they reached the navigable part ofa river, which they called the Balsas, and which flowedinto the Pacific.Much time and trouble, and many lives were expendedon this arduous undertaking, before they had transportedto the river sufficient timber for two brigantines ;while the timber for the other two, and the rigging andmunitions for the whole, yet remained to be brought.256 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.To add to their difficulties, they had scarcely begun towork upon the timber before they discovered that it wastotally useless, being subject to the ravages of the wormsfrom having been cut in the vicinity of salt water. Theywere obliged, therefore, to begin anew, and fell trees onthe border of the river.Vasco Nufiez maintained his patience and perseverance,and displayed admirable management under thesedelays and difficulties. Their supply of food beingscanty, he divided his people, Spaniards, Negroes, andIndians, into three bands : one was to cut and saw thewood, another to bring the rigging and iron work fromActa, which was twenty two leagues distant; and thethird to forage the neighbouring country for provisions.Scarcely was the timber felled and shaped for usewhen the rains set in, and the river swelled and overflowedits banks so suddenly, that the workmen barelyescaped with their lives, by clambering into the trees ;while the wood on which they had been working waseither buried in sand or slime, or swept away by theraging torrent. Famine was soon added to their otherdistresses. The foraging party was absent and did notreturn with food ; and the swelling of the river cut themoff from that part of the country from whence they obtainedtheir supplies. They were reduced, therefore, tosuch scarcity, as to be fain to assuage their hunger withsuch roots as they could gather in the forests.In this extremity the Indians bethought themselves ofone of their rude and simple expedients. Plunging intothe river they fastened a number of logs together withwithes, and connected them with the opposite bank, so asto make a floating bridge. On this a party of the .]VASCO NUNEZ DB BALBOA. 257yards crossed with great difficulty and peril; from theviolence of the current, and the flexibility of the bridge,which often sank beneath them until the water rose abovetheir girdles. On being safely landed they foraged theneighbourhood, and procured a supply of provisions sufficientfor the present emergency.When the river subsided the workmen again resumedtheir labours ; a number of recruits arrived from Acta,bringing various supplies, and the business of the enterprisewas pressed with redoubled ardour, until at length,after a series of incredible toils and hardships, VascoNunez had the satisfaction to behold two of his brigantinesfloating on the river Balsas. As soon as they couldbe equipped for sea, he embarked in them with as manySpaniards as they could carry ; and, issuing forth fromthe river, launched triumphantly on the great ocean hehad discovered.We can readily imagine the exultation of this intrepidadventurer, and how amply he was repaid for all his sufferings,when he first spread a sail upon that untraversedocean, and felt that the range of an unknown world wasopen to him.There are points in the history of these Spanish discoveriesof the western hemisphere, that make us pausewith wonder and admiration at the daring spirit of themen who conducted them, and the appalling difficultiessurmounted by their courage and perseverance. Weknow few instances, however, more striking than thispiece-meal transportation, across the mountains of Darien,of the first European ships that ploughed thewaves of the Pacific ; and we can readily excuse theboast of the old Castilian writers, when they exclaim,258 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516."that none but Spaniards could ever have conceivedor persisted in such an undertaking ; and no commanderin the new world but Vasco Nuiiez could have conductedit to a successful issue"*.*Herrera, d. 2. 1. ii. c. 1 1.1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA, 259CHAPTER XXV.Cruise of Vasco Nunez in the Southern Sea Rumours fromAda.THE first cruise of Vasco Nunez was to the group ofPearl islands, on the principal one of which he disembarkedthe greater part of his crews, and despatched thebrigantines to the main land to bring off the remainder.It was his intention to construct the other two vessels ofhis proposed squadron at this island, During the absenceof the brigantines he ranged the island with hismen, to collect provisions, and to establish a completesway over the natives. On the return of his vessels, andwhile preparations were making for the building of theothers, he embarked with a hundred men, and departedon a reconnoitering cruise to the eastward, towardsthe region pointed out by the Indians as abounding inriches.Having passed about twenty leagues beyond the Gulfof San Miguel, the mariners were filled with apprehensionat beholding a great number of whales, whichresembled a reef of rocks stretching far into the sea,and lashed by breakers. In an unknown ocean likethis, every unusual object is apt to inspire alarm. Theseamen feared to approach these fancied dangers in thedark; Vasco Nunez anchored, therefore, for the night,under a point of land, intending to continue in thesame direction on the following day. When the SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.ing dawned, however, the wind had changed, and wascontrary; whereupon he altered his course, and thusabandoned a cruise, which, if persevered in, might haveterminated in the discovery of Peru ! Steering for themain land, he anchored on that part of the coast governedby the cacique Chuchama, who had massacredBernardo Morales and his companions, when reposing inhis village. Here landing with his men, Vasco Nunezcame suddenly upon the dwelling of the cacique. TheIndians sallied forth to defend their homes, but wererouted with great loss ; and ample vengeance was takenupon them for their outrage upon the laws of hospitality.Having thus avenged the death of his countrymen, VascoNunez re-embarked and returned to Isla Rica.He now applied himself diligently to complete thebuilding of his brigantines, despatching men to Acta tobring the necessary stores and rigging across the mountains.While thus occupied, a rumour reached him thata new governor named Lope de Sofa was coming outfrom Spain to supersede Pedrarias. Vasco Nunez wastroubled at these tidings. A new governor would belikely to adopt new measures, or to have new favourites.He feared, therefore, that some order might come to suspendor embarrass his expedition ; or that the command ofit might be given to another. In his perplexity he helda consultation with several of his confidential officers.After some debate, it was agreed among them that atrusty and intelligent person should be sent as a scout toActa, under pretence of procuring munitions for theships. Should he find Pedrarias in quiet possession ofthe government, he was to account to him for the delayof the expedition;. to request that the time allotted toitmight be extended, and to request reinforcements and1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 261supplies. Should he find, however, that a new governorwas actually arrived, he was to return immediatelywith the tidings. In such case it was resolved to put tosea before any contrary orders could arrive, trustingeventually to excuse themselves on the plea of zeal andgood intentions.262 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [I5i6.CHAPTER XXVI.Reconnoitering expedition of Garabito. Stratagem of Pedrarias toentrap Vasco Nunez.THE person entrusted with the reconnoitering expeditionto Acta was Andres Garabito, in whose fidelity anddiscretion Vasco Nunez had implicit confidence. Hisconfidence was destined to be fatally deceived. Accordingto the assertions of contemporaries, this Garabitocherished a secret and vindictive enmity against his commander,arising from a simple but a natural cause.Vasco Nufiez had continued to have a fondness for theIndian damsel, daughter of the cacique Careta, whom hehad received from her father as a pledge of amity. Somedispute arose concerning her on one occasion betweenhim and Garabito, in the course of which he expressedhimself in severe and galling language. Garabito wasdeeply mortified at some of his expressions, and, being ofa malignant spirit, determined on a dastardly revenge.He wrote privately to Pedrarias, assuring him that VascoNunez had no intention of solemnizing his marriage withhis daughter, being completely under the influence of anIndian paramour; that he made use of the friendship ofPedrarias merely to further his own selfish views, intending,as soon as his slips were ready, to throw off all allegiance,and to put to sea as an independent commander.This mischievous letter Garabito had written immediatelyafter the last departure of Vasco Nunez from1519.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 263Acta. Its effects upon the proud and jealous spirit of thegovernor may easily be conceived. All his former suspicionswere immediately revived. They acquiredstrength during a long interval that elapsed without tidingsbeing received from the expedition. There weredesigning and prejudiced persons at hand, who perceivedand quickened these jealous feelings of the governor.Among these was the Bachelor Corral, who cherisheda deep grudge against Vasco Nunez for having oncethrown him into prison for his factious conduct; andAlonzo de la Puente, the royal treasurer, whom VascoNunez had affronted by demanding the re-payment of aloan. Such was the tempest that was gradually gatheringin the factious little colony of Darien.The subsequent conduct of Garabito gives much confirmationto the charge of perfidy that has been advancedagainst him. When he arrived at Acta he found thatPedrarias remained in possession of the government ; forhis intended successor had died in the very harbour.The conduct and conversation of Garabito was such as toarouse suspicions ; he was arrested, and his papers andletters were sent to Pedrarias. When examined hereadily suffered himself to be wrought upon by threats ofpunishment and promises of pardon, and revealed all thathe knew, and declared still more that he suspected andsurmised, of the plans and intentions of Vasco Nunez.The arrest of Garabito, and the seizure of his letters,produced a great agitation at Darien. It was considereda revival of the ancient animosity between the governorand Vasco Nunez, and the friends of the latter trembledfor his safety.Hernando de Arguello, especially, was in great alarm.He had embarked the most of his fortune in the expedientSPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.tion, and the failure of it would be ruinous to him. Hewrote to Vasco Nunez informing him of the critical postureof affairs, arid urging him to put to sea without delay.He would be protected at all events, he said, by the Fathers at San Domingo, who were at that timeall-powerful in the new world, and who regarded his expeditionas calculated to promote the glory of God as wellas the dominion of the king.* This letter fell into thehands of Pedrarias, and convinced him of the existenceof a dangerous plot against his authority. He immediatelyordered Arguello to be arrested ; and now devised meansto get Vasco Nunez within his power. While the latterremained on the shores of the South Sea with his brigantinesand his band of .hearty and devoted followers, Pedrains knew that it would be in vain to attempt to takehim by force. Dissembling his suspicions and intentions,therefore, he wrote to him in the most amicable terms,requesting him to repair immediately to Acta, as hewished to hold a conference with him about the impendingexpedition. Fearing, however, that Vasco Nunezmight suspect his motives and refuse to comply, he at thesame time ordered Francisco Pizarro to muster all thearmed force he could collect, and to seek and arrest hislate patron and commander wherever he might be found.In consequence of the eloquent representations made to theSpanish government by the venerable Las Casas, of the cruelwrongs and oppressions practised upon the Indians in the colonies,the Cardinal Menes, in 1516, sent out three Jeronimite Friars,chosen for their zeal and abilities, clothed with full powers to inquireinto and remedy all abuses, and to take all proper measuresfor the good government, religious instruction, and effectual protectionof the natives. The exercise of their powers at San Domingomade a great sensation in the new world, and, for a time,had a beneficial effect in checking the oppressive and licentiousconduct of the colonists.^1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 265So great was the terror inspired by the arrest of ,and by the general violence of Pedrarias, that,though Vasco Nunez was a favourite with the great massof the people, no one ventured to warn him of the dangerthat attended his return to Acta.266 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.CHAPTER XXVII.Vasco Nunez and ike Astrologer. His return to Ada.THE old Spanish writers who have treated of the fortunesof Vasco Nuilez, record an anecdote which isworthy of being cited, as characteristic of the people andthe age. Among the motley crowd of adventurers luredacross the ocean by the reputed wealth and wonders ofthe New world, was an Italian astrologer, a native ofVenice, named Micerr Codro. At the time that VascoNunez held supreme sway at Darien, this readerof the stars had cast his horoscope, and pretended toforetell his destiny. Pointing one night to a certain star,he assured him that in the year in which he should beholdthat star in a part of the heavens which he designated,his life would be in imminent jeopardy; butshould he survive this year of peril, he would becomethe richest and most renowned captain throughout theIndies.Several years, it is added, had elapsed since this predictionwas made ; yet, that it still dwelt in the mind ofVasco Nunez, was evident from the following circumstance.While waiting the return of his messenger, ,he was on the shore of Isla Rica one serene evening,in company with some of his officers, when, regardingthe heavens, he beheld the fated star exactly in thatpart of the firmament which had been pointed out by theItalian astrologer. Turning to his companions, with a1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 267smile, " Behold said he, " the wisdom of those whobelieve in soothsayers, and, above all, in such an astrologeras Micerr Codro! According to his prophecy, Ishould now be in imminent peril of my life ; yet, here Iam, within reach of all my wishes ; sound in health, withfour brian tines and three hundred men at my command,and on the point of exploring this great southern ocean."At this fated juncture, says the chroniclers, arrivedthe hypocritical letter of Pedrarias, inviting him to aninterview at Acta ! The discreet reader will decide forhimself what credit to give to this anecdote, or rather,what allowance to make for the little traits of coincidencegratuitously added to the original fact by writers who delightin the marvellous. The tenor of this letter awakenedno suspicion in the breast of Vasco Nunez, who reposedentire confidence in the amity of the governor ashis intended father-in-law, and appears to have been unconsciousof any thing in his own conduct that could warranthostility. Leaving his ships in command of FranciscoCompanion, he departed immediately to meet thegovernor at Acta, unattended by any armed force.The messengers who had brought the letter maintainedat first a cautious silence as to the events which hadtranspired at Darien. They were gradually won, however,*by the frank and genial manners of Vasco Nunez,and grieved to see so gallant a soldier hurrying into thesnare. Having crossed the mountains and drawn near toActa, their kind feelings got the better of their caution,and they revealed the true nature of their errand, andthe hostile intentions of Pedrarias. Vasco Nunez wasstruck with astonishment at the recital ; but, being unconscious,it is said, of any evil intention, he couldscarcely credit this sudden hostility in a man who had but268 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.recently promised him his daughter in marriage. Heimagined the whole to he some groundless jealousy whichhis own appearance would dispel, and accordingly continuedon his journey. He had not proceeded far, however,when he was met by a band of armed men, led byFrancisco Pizarro. The latter stepped forward to arresthis ancient commander. Vasco Nunez paused for a moment,and regarded him with a look of reproachful astonishment.(( How is this, Francisco?" exclaimed he.Is this the way you have been accustomed to receiveme? ?? Offering no further remonstrance, he suffered himselfquietly to be taken prisoner by his former adherent,and conducted in chains to Acta. Here he was throwninto prison, and Bartolome Hurtado, once his favouriteofficer, was sent to take command of his squadron.1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DK BALBOA. 269CHAPTER XXVIII.Trial of Vasco Nunez.DON PEDRARIAS concealed his exultation at the successof the stratagem by which he had ensnared his generousand confiding rival. He even visited him in prison,and pretended deep concern at being obliged to treathim with this temporary rigour, attributing it entirely tocertain accusations lodged against him by the TreasurerAlonzo de la Puente, which his official situation compelledhim to notice and investigate.Be not afflicted, however, my son ! ?? said the hypocrite," an investigation will, doubtless, not merely establishyour innocence, but serve to render your zeal andloyalty towards your sovereign still more conspicuous."While Pedrarias assumed this soothing tone towardshis prisoner, he urged the Alcalde Mayor Espinosa toproceed against him with the utmost rigour of the law.The charge brought against him of a treasonable conspiracyto cast off all allegiance to the crown, and to assumean independent sway on the borders of the SouthernSea, was principally supported by the confessions ofAndres Garabito. The evidence is also cited of a soldier,who stood sentinel one night near the quartersof Vasco Nunez on Isla Rica, and who, being driven totake shelter from the rain under the eaves of the house,overheard a conversation between that commander andcertain of his officers, wherein they agreed to put to sea270 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.with the squadron on their own account, and to set thegovernor at defiance. This testimony, according to LasCasas, arose from a misconstruction on the part of thesentinel, who only heard a portion of their conversation,relating to their intention of sailing without waiting fororders, in case a new governor .should arrive to supersedePedrarias.The governor in the meantime informed himself fromday to day and hour to hour, of the progress of the trial,and, considering the evidence sufficiently strong to warranthis personal hostility, he now paid another visit tohis prisoner, and, throwing off all affectation of kindness,upbraided him in the most passionate manner.Hitherto," said he, " I have treated you as a son,because I thought you loyal to your king, and to me ashis representative ; but as I find you have meditated rebellionagainst the crown of Castile, I cast you off frommy affections, and shall henceforth treat you as anenemy."Yasco Nunez indignantly repelled the charge, and appealedto the confiding frankness of his conduct asaproof of innocence. "Had I been conscious of myguilt," said he, "what could have induced me tocome here and put myself into your hands? HadI meditated rebellion, what prevented me from carryingit into effect? I had four ships ready to weighanchor, three hundred brave men at my command, andan open sea before me. What had I to do but tospread sail and press forward? There was no doubtof finding a land, whether rich or poor, sufficient formeand mine, far beyond the reach of your control.In the innocence of my heart, however, I came here1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA.promptly, at your mere request, and my reward is slander,indignity arid chains!"The noble and ingenuous appeal of Vasco Nunezhad no effect on the prejudiced feelings of the governor;on the contrary, he was but the more exasperatedagainst his prisoner, and ordered that his irons should bedoubled.The trial was now urged by him with increasedeagerness. Lest the present accusation should notbe sufficient to effect the ruin of his victim, the oldinquest into his conduct as governor, which had remainedsuspended for many years, was revived, andhe was charged anew with the wrongs inflicted onthe Bachelor Enciso, and with the death of the unfortunateNicuesa.Notwithstanding all these charges, the trial went onslowly, with frequent delays; for the Alcalde Mayor,Gaspar de Espinosa, seems to have had but littlerelish for the task assigned him, and to have neededfrequent spurring from the eager and passionate governor.He probably considered the accused as technicallyguilty, though innocent of all intentional rebellion,but was ordered to decide according to thestrict letter of the law. He therefore at length gavea reluctant verdict against Yasco Nunez, but recommendedhim to mercy, on account of his great services,or entreated that, at least, he might be permitted toappeal. "No!" said the unrelenting Pedrarias, "Ifhe has merited death, let him suffer death!" Heaccordingly condemned him to be beheaded. Thesame sentence was passed upon several of his officers,who were implicated in his alleged conspiracy ; amongthese was Hernando de Arguello, who had writtenSPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1516.the letter to Vasco Nuftez, informing him of the arrestof his messenger, and advising him to put to sea, withoutheeding the hostility of Pedrarias. As to the perfidiousinformer Garabito, he was pardoned and set atliberty.In considering this case as far as we are enabled,from the imperfect testimony that remains on record,we are inclined to think it one where passion andself interest interfered with the pure administration ofjustice. Pedrarias had always considered Vasco Nunez as a dangerous rival, and, though his jealousy hadbeen for some time lulled by looking on him as anintended son-in-law, it was revived by the suggestionthat he intended to evade his alliance, and to disputehis authority. His exasperated feelings hurried himtoo far to retreat, and, having loaded his prisoner withchains and indignities, his death became indispensableto his own security.For our own part, we have little doubt, that it wasthe fixed intention of Vasco Nunez, after he had oncesucceeded in the arduous undertaking of transportinghis ships across the mountains, to suffer no capriciousorder from Pedrarias, or any other governor, to defeatthe enterprise which he had so long meditated,and for which he had so laboriously prepared. It isprobable he may have expressed such general determinationin the hearing of Garabito and of others of hiscompanions. We can find ample excuse for such aresolution in his consciousness of his own deserts; hisexperience of past hindrances to his expedition, arisingfrom the jealousy of others; his feeling of somedegree of authority, from his office of Adelantado; andhis knowledge of the favourable disposition and kind1516.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 273intentions of his sovereign towards him. We acquithim entirely of the senseless idea of rebelling against thecrown ; and suggest these considerations in palliation ofany meditated disobedience of Pedrarias, should such acharge be supposed to have been substantiated.274 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [151 7.CHAPTER XXIX.Execution of Vasco Nunez. (1517.)IT was a day of gloom and horror at Acta, when VascoNunez and his companions were led forth to execution.The populace were moved to tears at the unhappyfate of a man, whose gallant deeds had excitedtheir admiration, and whose generous qualities had wontheir hearts. Most of them regarded him as the victimof a jealous tyrant; and even those who thoughthim guilty, saw something brave and brilliant in thevery crime imputed to him. Such, however, was thegeneral dread inspired by the severe measures of Pegthat no one dared to lift up his voice, eitherin murmur or remonstrance.The public crier walked before Vasco Nunez, proclaiming,"This is the punishment inflicted by commandof the king and his lieutenant, Don Pedrarias Da-vile,on this man, as a traitor and an usurper of the territoriesof the crown. "When Vasco Nunez heard these words, he exclaimedindignantly, " It is false ! never did such a crime entermy mind. I have ever served my king with truth andloyalty, and sought to augment his dominions."These words were of no avail in his extremity, butthey were fully believed by the populace.The execution took place in the public square ofActa; and we are assured by the historian, Oviedo, who1517.] VASCO NUNEZ DE BALBOA. 275was in the colony at the time, that the cruel Pedrariaswas a secret witness of the bloody spectacle, which hecontemplated from between the reeds of the wall of ahouse, about twelve paces from the scaffold!*Yasco Nunez was the first to suffer death. Havingconfessed himself and partaken of the sacrament, he ascendedthe scaffold with a firm step and a calm andmanly demeanour ; and laying his head upon the block,it was severed in an instant from his body. Three ofhis officers, Valderrabano, Othello, and Herman Minos,were in like manner brought one by one to the block,and the day had nearly expired before the last of themwas executed.One victim still remained. It was Herman de ,who had been condemned as an accomplice, forhaving written the intercepted letter.The populace could no longer restrain their feelings.They had not dared to intercede for Vasco Nunez, knowingthe implacable enmity of Pedrarias; but they nowsought the governor, and throwing themselves at his feet,entreated that this man might be spared, as he had takenno active part in the alleged treason. The daylight,they said, was at an end, and it seemed as if God hadhastened the night, to prevent the execution.The stern heart of Pedrarias was not to be touched.No," said he, " I would sooner die myself than spareone of them." The unfortunate Arguello was led to theblock. The brief tropical twilight was past, and in thegathering gloom of the night the operations on the scaffoldcould not be distinguished. The multitude stoodlistening in breathless silence, until the stroke of the ex-oviedo,Hist. Ind. p. 2. c. 9. MS.276 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1517.executioner told that all was accomplished. They thendispersed to their homes with hearts filled with grief andbitterness, and a night of lamentation succeeded to thisday of horrors.The vengeance of Pedrarias was not satisfied with thedeath of his victim ; he confiscated his property and dishonouredhis remains, causing his head to be placed upona pole and exposed for several days, in the publicsquare.*Thus perished, in his forty-second year, in the primeand vigour of his days and the full career of his glory,one of the most illustrious and deserving of the Spanishdiscoverers a victim to the basest and most perfidiousenvy.How vain are our most confident hopes, our brightesttriumphs! When Vasco Nunez from the mountains ofDarien, beheld the Southern Ocean revealed to his gaze,he considered its unknown realms at his disposal. Whenhe had launched his ships upon its waters, and his sailswere in a manner flapping in the wind, to bear him inquestof the wealthy empire of Peru, he scoffed at theprediction of the astrologer, and defied the influence ofthe stars. Behold him interrupted at the very momentof his departure; betrayed into the hands of his most invidiousfoe ; the very enterprise that was to have crownedhim with glory wrested into a crime; and himself hurriedto a bloody and ignominious grave, at the foot, as itwere, of the mountain from whence he had made his discovery! His fate, like that of his renowned predecessorColumbus, proves, that it is sometimes dangerous evento discern too greatly !Oviedo, ubi sup.1512.] VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 277THE FORTUNESOFVALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS,IT was in the year 1512 that Valdivia, the region ofDarien, was sent to Hispaniola by Vasco Nunez de Balboafor reinforcements and supplies for the colony. He setsail in a caravel, and pursued his voyage prosperouslyuntil he arrived in sight of the island of Jamaica. Herehe was encountered by one of the violent hurricaneswhich sweep those latitudes, and driven on the shoals andsunken rocks called the Vipers, since infamous for manya shipwreck. His vessel soon went to pieces, and Valdiviaand his crew, consisting of twenty men, escapedwith difficulty in the boat, without having time to securea supply either of water or provisions. Having no sails,and their oars being scarcely fit for use, they were drivenabout for thirteen days, at the mercy of the currents ofthose unknown seas. During this time their sufferingsfrom hunger and thirst were indescribable. Seven oftheir number perished, and the rest were nearly famished,when they were stranded on the eastern coast of Yucatan,in a province called Maya. Here they were set upon by278 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.the natives, who broke their boat in pieces, and carriedthem off captive to the cacique of the province, by whoseorders they were mewed up in a kind of pen.At first their situation appeared tolerable enough consideringthe horrors from which they had escaped. Theywere closely confined, it is true, but they had plenty toeat and drink, and soon began to recover flesh andvigour. In a little while, however, their enjoyment ofthis good cheer met with a sudden check, for theunfortunate Valdivia, and four of his companions, weresingled out by the cacique, on account of their improvedcondition, to be offered up to his idols. The natives ofthis coast in fact were cannibals, devouring the flesh oftheir enemies and of such strangers as fell into theirhands. The wretched Valdivia and his fellow victims,therefore, were sacrificed in the bloody temple of theidol, and their limbs afterwards served up at a grand feastheld by the cacique and his subjects.The horror of the survivers may be more readilyimagined than described. Their hearts died within themwhen they heard the yells and bowling of the savagesover their victims, and the still more horrible revelry oftheir cannibal orgies. They turned with loathing fromthe food set so abundantly before them, at the idea thatis was but intended to fatten them for a future banquet.Recovering from the first stupor of alarm, their despairlent them additional force. They succeeded in breaking,in the night, from the kind of cage in which they wereconfined, and fled to the depths of the forest. Here theywandered about forlorn, exposed to all the dangers andmiseries of the wilderness ; famishing with hunger, yetdreading to approach the haunts of men. At lengththeir sufferings drove them forth from the woods into1512.] VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 279another part of the country, where they were again takencaptive. The cacique of this province, however, was anenemy to the one from whom they had escaped, and ofless cruel propensities. He spared their lives, and contentedhimself with making them slaves, exacting fromthem the severest labour. They had to cut and drawwood, to procure water from a distance, and to carryenormous burthens. The cacique died soon after theircapture, and was succeeded by another called Tamar.He was a chief of some talent and sagacity, but he continuedthe same rigorous treatment of the captives. Bydegrees they sank beneath the hardships of their lot,until only two were left; one of them a sturdy sailornamed Gonzalo Guerrero, the other a kind of clerical adventurernamed Jeronimo de Aguilar. The sailor hadthe good luck to be transferred to the service of thecacique of the neighbouring province of Chateau, bywhom he was treated with kindness. Being a thoroughson of the ocean, seasoned to all weathers, and ready forany chance or change, he soon accommodated himself tohis new situation, followed the cacique to the wars, rose byhis hardihood and prowess to be a distinguished warrior,and succeeded in gaining the heart and hand of an Indianprincess.The other surviver, Jeronimo de Aguilar, was of a differentcomplexion. He was a native of Ecija, in Andalusia,and had been brought up to the church, and regularlyordained, and shortly afterwards had sailed in oneof the expeditions to San Domingo, from whence he hadpassed to Darien.He proceeded in a different mode from that adoptedby his comrade, the sailor, in his dealings with the Indians,and in one more suited to his opposite calling. In-280 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.stead of playing the hero among the men, and the gallantamong the women, he recollected his priestly obligationsto humility and chastity. Accordingly, he made himselfa model of meekness and obedience to the cacique and hiswarriors, while he closed his eyes to the charms of theinfidel women. Nay, in the latter respect, he reinforcedhis clerical vows by a solemn promise to God to resist alltemptations of the flesh, so he might be delivered out ofthe hands of these Gentiles.Such were the opposite measures of the sailor and thesaint, and they appear to have been equally successful.Aguilar, by his meek obedience to every order, howeverarbitrary and capricious, gradually won the good will of thecacique and his family. Taxmar, however, subjected himto many trials before he admitted him to his entire confidence.One day when the Indians, painted and decoratedin warlike style, were shooting at a mark, a warrior, whohad for some time fixed his eyes on Aguilar, approachedsuddenly and seized him by the arm. "Thou seest,"said he, "the certainty of these archers; if they aim atthe eye, they hit the eye if at the mouth, they hit themouth what wouldst thou think, if thou wert to beplaced instead of the mark, and they were to shoot at andmiss thee?"Aguilar secretly trembled lest he should be the victimof some cruel caprice of the kind. Dissembling his fears,however, he replied with great submission, "I am yourslave, and you may do with me as you please ; but you aretoo wise to destroy a slave who is so useful and obedient."His answer pleased the cacique, who had secretly sentthis warrior to try his humility.Another trial of the worthy Jeronimo was less stern andfearful indeed, but equally perplexing. The cacique had1513.] VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 281remarked his unexampled discretion with respect to thesex, but doubted his sincerity. After laying many pettytemptations in his way, which Jeronimo resisted withthe self denial of a saint, he at length determined tosubject him to a fiery ordeal. He accordingly sent himon a fishing expedition accompanied by a buxom damselof fourteen years of age : they were to pass the nightby the sea-side, so as to be ready to fish at the first dawnof day, and were allowed but one hammock to sleep in.It was an embarrassing predicament not apparently tothe Indian beauty, but certainly to the scrupulous Heronemo. He remembered, however, his double vow, and,suspending his hammock to two trees, resigned it to hiscompanion; while, lighting a fire on the sea shore, hestretched himself before it on the sand. It was, as heacknowledged, a night of fearful trial, for his sandycouch was cold and cheerless, the hammock warm andtempting; and the infidel damsel had been instructedto assail him with all manner of blandishments and reproaches.His resolution, however, though often shaken,was never overcome ; and the morning dawned uponhim still faithful to his vow.The fishing over, he returned to the residence of thecacique, where his companion, being closely questioned,made known the triumph of his self-denial before all thepeople. From that time forward he was held in greatrespect ; the cacique especially treated him with unlimitedconfidence, entrusting to him the care, not merelyof his house, but of his wives, during his occasionalabsence.Aguilar now felt ambitious of rising to greater consequenceamong the savages, but this he knew was onlyto be done by deeds of arms. He had the example of282 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1513.the sturdy seaman, Gonzalo Guerrero, before his eyes,who had become a great captain in the province in whichhe resided. He entreated Taxmar therefore to entrusthim with bow and arrows, buckler and war club, and toenrol him among his warriors. The cacique complied.Agtiilar soon made himself expert at his new weapons,signalized himself repeatedly in battle, and, from hissuperior knowledge of the arts of war, rendered Tax-marsuch essential service, as to excite the jealousy ofsome of the neighbouring caciques. One of them remonstratedwith Taxmar for employing a warrior whowas of a different religion, and insisted that Aguilarshould be sacrificed to their gods. " No," replied Tax-mar," I will not make so base a return for such signalservices: surely the gods of Aguilar must be good,since they aid him so effectually in maintaining a justcause."The cacique was so incensed at this reply that he assembledhis warriors and marched to make war uponTaxmar. Many of the counsellors of the latter urgedhim to give up the stranger who was the cause of thishostility. Taxmar, however, rejected their counsel withdisdain and prepared for battle. Aguilar assured himthat his faith in the Christian s God would be rewardedwith victory; he, in fact, concerted a plan of battlewhich was adopted. Concealing himself, with a chosenband of warriors, among thickets and herbage, he sufferedthe enemy to pass by in making their attack. Tax-marand his host pretended to give way at the first onset.The foe rushed heedlessly in pursuit; whereupon Aguelar and his ambuscade assaulted them in the rear. Tax-marturned upon them in front; they were thrown inconfusion, routed with great slaughter, and many of their1517.] VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 283chiefs taken prisoners. This victory gave Taxmar thesway over the land, and strengthened Aguilar more thanever in his good graces.Several years had elapsed in this manner, when, in1517, intelligence was brought to the province of thearrival on the neighbouring coast of great vessels ofwonderful construction, filled with white and beardedmen, who fought with thunder and lightning. It was,in fact, the squadron of Francisco Hernandez de Cordova,then on a voyage of discovery. The tidings of thisstrange invasion spread consternation through the country,heightened, if we may credit the old Spanish writers,by a prophecy current among the savages of theseparts, and uttered in former times by a priest namedChili Cabal, who foretold that a white and beardedpeople w r ould come from the region of the rising sun,who would overturn their idols and subjugate the land.The heart of Jeronimo de Aguilar beat quick withhope when he heard of European ships at hand ; he wasdistant from the coast, however, and perceived that hewas too closely watched by the Indians to have anychance of escape. Dissembling his feelings, therefore,he affected to hear of the ships with perfect indifference,and to have no desire to join the strangers. The shipsdisappeared from the coast, and he remained disconsolateat heart, but was regarded with increased confidence bythe natives.His hopes were again revived in the course of a yearor two by the arrival on the coast of other ships, whichwere those commanded by Juan de Grijalva, who coastedYucatan in 1518; Aguilar, however, was again preventedby the jealous watchfulness of the Indians fromattempting his escape, and when this squadron left the284 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1519.coast he considered all chance of deliverance at an end.Seven years had gone by since his capture, and he-hadgiven up all hopes of being restored to his countryand friends, when, in 1519, there arrived one day at thevillage three Indians, natives of the small island of Cozumel,which lies a few leagues in the sea, opposite the easterncoast of Yucatan. They brought tidings of anothervisit of white bearded men to their shores, and one ofthem delivered a letter to Aguilar, which, being entirelynaked, he had concealed it in the long tresses of his hairwhich were bound round his head.Aguilar received the letter with wonder and delight,and read it in presence of the cacique and his warriors.It proved to be from Hernando Cortes, who wasat that time on his great expedition, which ended in theconquest of Mexico. He had been obliged by stress ofweather to anchor at the island of Cozumel, where helearned from the natives, that several white men weredetained in captivity among the Indians on the neighbouringcoast of Yucatan. Finding it impossible to approachthe main land with his ships, he prevailed uponthree of the islanders, by means of gifts and promises,to venture upon an embassy among their cannibal neighbours,and to convey a letter to the captive white men.Two of the smallest caravels of the squadron were sentunder the command of Diego de Ordas, who was orderedto land the three messengers at the point of Cotoche, andto wait there eight days for their return.The letter brought by these envoys informed theChristian captives of the force and destination of thesquadron of Cortes, and of his having sent the caravels towait for them at the point of Cotoche, with a ransom for1519.] VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 285their deliverance, inviting them to hasten and join himat Cozumel.The transport of Aguilar on first reading the letter,was moderated when he reflected on the obstacles thatmight prevent him from profiting by this chance of deliverance.He had made himself too useful to thecacique to hope that he would readily give him hisliberty, and he knew the jealous and irritable nature ofthe savages too well not to fear that even an applicationfor leave to depart might draw upon him the severesttreatment. He endeavoured, therefore, to operate uponthe cacique through his apprehensions. To this end heinformed him that the piece of paper which he held inhis hand brought him a full account of the mighty armamentthat had arrived on the coast. He describedthe number of the ships and various particulars concerningthe squadron, all which were amply corroborated bythe testimony of the messengers. The cacique and hiswarriors were astonished at this strange mode of conveyingintelligence from a distance, and regarded the letteras something mysterious and supernatural. Aguilar wenton to relate the tremendous and superhuman powers ofthe people in these ships, who, armed with thunder andlightning, wreaked destruction on all who displeasedthem, while they dispensed inestimable gifts and benefitson such as proved themselves their friends. He, at thesame time spread before the cacique various presentsbrought by the messengers, as specimens of the blessingsto be expected from the friendship of the strangers. Theintimation was effectual. The cacique was filled withawe at the recital of the terrific powers of the whitemen, and his eyes were dazzled by the glittering trinketsdisplayed before him. He entreated Aguilar, therefore.286 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1519.to act as his ambassador and mediator, and to secure himthe amity of the strangers.Aguilar saw with transport the prospect of a speedydeliverance. In this moment of exultation, he bethoughthimself of the only surviving comrade of his past fortunes,Gonsalo Guerrero, and, sending the letter of Cortes tohim, invited him to accompany him in his escape. Thesturdy seaman was at this time a great chieftain in hisprovince, and his Indian bride had borne him a numerousprogeny. His heart, however, yearned after his nativecountry, and he might have been tempted to leave hishonours and dignities, his infidel wife and half savageoffspring behind him, but an insuperable, though somewhatludicrous, obstacle presented itself to his wishes.Having long since given over all expectation of a returnto civilized life, he had conformed to the customs of thecountry, and had adopted the external signs and decorationsthat marked him as a warrior and a man of rank.His face and hands were indelibly painted or tattooed;his ears and lips were slit to admit huge Indian ornaments,and his nose was drawn down almost to his mouthby a massy ring of gold, and a dangling jewel.Thus curiously garbled and disfigured, the honest seamanfelt, that however he might be admired in Yucatan,he should be apt to have the rabble at his heels in Spain.He made up his mind, therefore, to remain a great manamong the savages, rather than run the risk of beingshown as a man-monster at home.Finding that he declined accompanying him, Jeronimode Aguilar set off for the point of Cotoche, escorted bythree Indians. The time he had lost in waiting for Guerrerohad nearly proved fatal to his hopes, for when hearrived at the point, the caravels sent by Cortes had .]VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 287parted, though several crosses of reeds set up in differentplaces gave tokens of the recent presence of Christians.The only hope that remained, was that the squadronof Cortes might yet linger at the opposite island ofCozumel; but how was he to get there? While wanderingdisconsolately along the shore, he found a canoe, halfburied in sand and water, and with one side in a state ofdecay ; with the assistance of the Indians he cleaned it,and set it afloat, and on looking further he found thestave of a hogshead which might serve for a paddle. Itwas a frail embarkation in which to cross an arm of thesea, several leagues wide, but there was no alternative.Prevailing on the Indians to accompany him, he launchedforth in the canoe and coasted the mainland until he cameto the narrowest part of the strait, where it was but fourleagues across; here he stood directly for Cozumel, contending,as well as he was able, with a strong current,and at length succeeded in reaching the island.He had scarce landed when a party of Spaniards, whohad been lying in wait, rushed forth from their concealment,sword in hand. The three Indians would have fled,but Aguilar reassured them, and, calling out to the Spaniardsin their own language, assured them that he was aChristian. Then, throwing himself upon his knees, andraising his eyes, streaming with tears to heaven, he gavethanks to God for having restored him to his countrymen.The Spaniards gazed at him with astonishment: fromhis language he was evidently a Castilian, but to all appearancehe was an Indian. He was perfectly naked ;wore his hair braided round his head in the manner of thecountry, and his complexion was burnt by the sun to atawny colour. He had a bow in his hand, a quiver at his288 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1519.shoulder, and a net work pouch at his side in which hecarried his provisions.The Spaniards proved to be a reconnoitering party,sent out by Cortes to watch the approach of the canoe,which had been descried coming from Yucatan. Corteshad given up all hopes of being joined by the captives,the caravel having waited the allotted time at Cotoche,and returned without news of them. He had in fact madesail to prosecute his voyage, but fortunately one of hisships had sprung a leak, which had obliged him to returnto the island.When Jeronimo de Aguilar and his companions arrivedin presence of Cortes, who was surrounded by his officers,they made a profound reverence, squatted on the ground,laid their bows and arrows beside them, and touchingtheir right hands, wet with spittle on the ground, rubbedthem about the region of the heart, such being their signof the most devoted submission.Cortes greeted Aguilar with a hearty welcome, andraising him from the earth, took from his own person alarge yellow mantle lined with crimson, and threw itover his shoulders. The latter, however, had for so longa time gone entirely naked, that even, this scanty coveringwas at first almost insupportable, and he had become soaccustomed to the diet of the natives, that he found itdifficult to reconcile his stomach to the meat and drinkset before him.When he had sufficiently recovered from the agitationof his arrival among Christians, Cortes drew from him theparticulars of his story, and found that he was related toone of his own friends, the licentiate Marcos de Aguilar.He treated him, therefore, with additional kindness and1519.] VALDIVIA AND HIS COMPANIONS. 289respect, and retained him about his person to aid him asan interpreter in his great Mexican expedition.The happiness of Jeronimo de Aguilar at once morebeing restored to his countrymen, was doomed to suffersome alloy from the disasters that had happened in hisfamily. Peter Martyr records a touching anecdote ofthe effect that had been produced upon his mother by thetidings of his misfortune. A vague report had reachedher in Spain, that her son had fallen into the hands ofcannibals. All the horrible tales that circulated in Spainconcerning the treatment of these savages to their prisonersrushed to her imagination, and she went distracted.Whenever she beheld roasted meat, or flesh upon thespit, she would fill the house with her outcries. "Ohwretched mother! oh most miserable of women!" wouldshe exclaim, "behold the limbs of my murdered son"*It is to be hoped that the tidings of his deliverancehad a favourable effect upon her intellects, and that shelived to rejoice at his after fortunes. He served HernandoCortez with great courage and ability throughouthis Mexican conquests, acting sometimes as a soldier,sometimes as interpreter and ambassador to the Indians,and in reward of his fidelity, and services, was appointedregion, or civil governor of the city of Mexico.P. Martyr, detach. 4, c. 6.290 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY.Mice CODRO, THE ASTROLOGER.THE fate of the Italian astrologer, Micerr Codro, whopredicted the end of Vasco Nunez, is related by the historianOviedo, with some particulars that border uponthe marvelous. It appears that, after the death of hispatron, he continued for several years rambling about theNew World, in the train of the Spanish discoverers ; butintent upon studying the secrets of its natural history,rather than searching after its treasures.In the course of his wanderings he was once coastingthe shores of the Southern ocean, in a ship commandedby one Geronimo de Valenzuela, from whom hereceived such cruel treatment as to cause his death,though, what the nature of the treatment was, we are notprecisely informed.Finding his end approaching, the unfortunate astrologeraddressed Valenzuela in the most solemn manner: "Captain,"said he, "you have caused my death by yourcruelty ; I now summon you to appear with me, within ayear, before the judgment seat of God!"The captain made a light and scoffing answer, andtreated his summons with contempt.They were then off the coast of Veragua, near the verdantislands of Zebaco, which lie at the entrance of theGulf of Paria. The poor astrologer gazed wistfully withhis dying eyes upon the green and shady groves, and en-miceCODRO, THE ASTROLOGER. 291treated the pilot or mate of the caravel to land him onone of the islands, that he might die in peace. "MicerrCodro," replied the pilot, "those are not islands butpoints of land: there are no islands hereabout."There are, indeed," replied the astrologer, "twogood and pleasant islands, well watered, and near to thecoast, and within them is a great bay with a harbour.Land me, I pray you, upon one of these islands, that Imay have comfort in my dying hour."The pilot, whose rough nature had been touched withpity for the condition of the unfortunate astrologer, listenedto his prayer, and conveyed him to the shore,where he found the opinion he had given of the characterof the coast to be correct. He laid him on the herbagein the shade, where the poor wanderer soon expired.The pilot then dug a grave at the foot of a tree, wherehe buried him with all possible decency, and carved across on the bark to mark the grave.Some time afterwards, Oviedo, the historian, was onthe island with this very pilot, who showed him the crosson the tree, and gave his honest testimony to the goodcharacter and worthy conduct of Micerr Codro. Oviedo,as he regarded the nameless grave, passed the eulogiumof a scholar upon the poor astrologer: "He died," sayshe, "like Pliny, in the discharge of his duties, travellingabout the world to explore the secrets of nature." Accordingto his account the prediction of Micerr Coraheld good with respect to Valenzuela, as it had in the caseof Vasco Nunez. The captain died within the term inwhich he had summoned him to appear before the tribunalof God !*Vide Oviedo, Hist. Gen. 1. xxxix. c. 2.292 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1508.JUAN PONCE DE LEON,CONQUEROR OF PORTO RICO, AND DISCOVERER OF FLORIDA.CHAPTER I.Reconnoitering Expedition of Juan Ponce de Leon to the Island ofBoriquen.(1508.)MANY years had elapsed since the discovery and colonizationof Hayti, yet its neighbouring island of Boriquen,or as the Spaniards called it, St. Juan (since namedPorto Rico,) remained unexplored. It was beautiful tothe eye as beheld from the sea, having lofty mountainsclothed with forest trees of prodigious size and magnificentfoliage. There were broad fertile valleys also,always fresh and green; for the frequent showers andabundant streams in these latitudes, and the absence of allwintry frost, produce a perpetual verdure. Various shipshad occasionally touched at the island, but their crewshad never penetrated into the interior. It was evident,however, from the number of hamlets and scatteredhouses, and the smoke rising in all directions fromamong the trees, that it was well peopled. The inhabitantsstill continued to enjoy their life of indolence and1508.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 293freedom, unmolested by the ills that overwhelmed theneighbouring island of Hayti. The time had arrived,however, when they were to share the common lot oftheir fellow savages, and to sink beneath the yoke of thewhite man.At the time when Nicholas de Ovando, Governor ofHispaniola, undertook to lay waste the great province ofHiguey, which lay at the eastern end of Hayti, he sentas commander of part of the troops a veteran soldier,named Juan Ponce de Leon. He was a native of Leon inSpain, and in his boyhood had been page to PedroNunez de Guzman, Senor of Moral.* From an early agehe had been schooled to war, and had served in the variouscampaigns against the Moors of Granada. He accompaniedColumbus in his second voyage in 1493, andwas afterwards, it is said, one of the partizans of FranciscoRoldan, in his rebellion against the admiral. Havingdistinguished himself in various battles with the Indians,and acquired a name for sagacity as well as valour,he received a command subordinate to Juan de Esquibelin the campaign against Higuey, and seconded his chiefso valiantly in that sanguinary expedition, that, after thesubjugation of the province, he was appointed to the commandof it, as lieutenant of the Governor of Hispaniola.Juan Ponce de Leon had all the impatience of quietlife and the passion for exploit of a veteran campaigner.He had not been long in the tranquil command of hisprovince of Higuey, before he began to cast a wistful eyetowards the green mountains of Boriquen. They weredirectly opposite, and but twelve or fourteen leagues distant,so as to be distinctly seen in the transparent atmo-Incas, Garcilaso de la Vega, Hist. Florida, t. iv. c. 37.294 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1508.sphere of the tropics. The Indians of the two islandsfrequently visited each other, and in this way Juan Poncereceived the usual intelligence, that the mountains he hadeyed so wistfully abounded with gold. He readily obtainedpermission from Governor Ovando to make an expeditionto this island, and embarked in the year 1508,in a caravel, with a few Spaniards, and several Indian interpretersand guides.After an easy voyage, he landed on the woody shoresof the island, near to the residence of the principalcacique, Agueybana. He found the chieftain seated inpatriarchal style under the shade of his native groves,and surrounded by his family, consisting of his mother,step father, brother and sister, who vied with each otherin paying homage to the strangers. Juan Ponce, in fact,was received into the bosom of the family, and thecacique exchanged names with him, which is the Indianpledge of perpetual amity. Juan Ponce also gave Christiannames to the mother and step-father of the cacique,and would fain have baptized them, but they declinedthe ceremony, though they always took a pride in thenames thus given them.In his zeal to gratify his guests, the cacique took themto various parts of the island. They found the interiorto correspond with the external appearance. It was wildand mountainous, but magnificently wooded, with deeprich valleys fertilized by limpid streams. Juan Poncerequested the cacique to reveal to him the riches of theisland. The simple Indian showed him his most productivefields of Yuca, the groves laden with the most deliciousfruit, the sweetest and purest fountains, and thecoolest runs of water.Ponce de Leon heeded but little these real blessings,1508.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 295and demanded whether the island produced no gold.Upon this the cacique conducted him to two rivers, theManatuabon and the Zebuco, where the very pebblesseemed richly veined with gold, and large grains shoneamong the sand through the limpid water. Some of thelargest of these were gathered by the Indians and given tothe Spaniards. The quantity thus procured confirmedthe hopes of Juan Ponce ; and leaving several of his companionsin the house of the hospitable cacique he returnedto Hayti to report the success of his expedition. Hepresented the specimens of gold to the Governor Ovando,who assayed them in a crucible. The ore was not so fineas that of Hispaniola, but, as it was supposed to exist ingreater quantities, the Governor determined on the subjugationof the island, and confided the enterprise to JuanPonce de Leon.296 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER II.Juan Ponce aspires to the government of Porto Rico. (1509.)THE natives of Boriquen were more warlike than thoseof Hispaniola ; being accustomed to the use of arms fromthe necessity of repelling the frequent invasions of theCaribs. It was supposed, therefore, that the conquest oftheir island would be attended with some difficulty, andJuan Ponce de Leon made another, and as it were, a preparatoryvisit, to make himself acquainted with the country,and with the nature and resources of the inhabitants.He found the companions whom he had left there on hisformer visit, in good health and spirits, and full of gratitudetowards the cacique Agueybana who had treatedthem with undiminished hospitality. There appearedto be no need of violence to win the island from such simplehearted and confiding people. Juan Ponce flatteredhimself with the hopes of being appointed to its governmentby Ovando, and of bringing it peaceably into subjection.After remaining some time on the island, he returnedto San Domingo to seek the desired appointment,but to his surprise, found the whole face of affairs hadchanged during his absence.His patron, the Governor Ovando, had been recalledto Spain, and Don Diego Columbus, son of the renowneddiscoverer, appointed in his place to the command at SanDomingo. To add to the perplexities of Juan Ponce,a cavalier had already arrived from Spain, empowered1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 297by the king to form a settlement and build a fortresson the island of Porto Rico. His name was Christovalde Sotomayor; he was brother to the Countof Carmina, and had been secretary to Philip I. surnamedthe Handsome, king of Castile and father ofCharles V.Don Diego Columbus was highly displeased with theact of the king in granting these powers to Sotomayor,as it had been done without his knowledge and consent,and of course in disregard of his prerogative, as viceroy,to be consulted as to all appointments madewithin his jurisdiction. He refused, therefore, to putSotomayor in possession of the island. He paid aslittle respect to the claims of Juan Ponce de Leon,whom he regarded with an ungracious eye as a favouriteof his predecessor Ovando. To settle thematter effectually, he exerted what he considered hisofficial and hereditary privilege, and chose officersto suit himself, appointing one Juan Ceron to the governmentof Porto Rico, and Miguel Diazz to serve ashis lieutenant.*Juan Ponce de Leon and his rival candidate, Christovalde Sotomayer, bore their disappointment witha good grace. Though the command was deniedthem, they still hoped to improve their fortunes inthe island, and accordingly joined the crowd of adventurersthat accompanied the newly appointed governor.New changes soon take place in consequence of theIt the reader has perused the history of Columbus, he may rememberthe romantic adventure of this Miguel Diazz with a femalecacique, which led to the discovery of the gold mines of Hayria, andthe founding of the city of San Domingo.298 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.jealousies and misunderstandings between king Ferdinandand the admiral as to points of privilege. Theformer still seemed disposed to maintain the right ofmaking appointments without consulting Don Diego, andexerted it in the present instance; for, when Ovando,on his return to Spain, made favourable representation ofthe merits of Juan Ponce de Leon, and set forth his servicesin exploring Porto Rico, the king appointed himgovernor of that island, and signified specifically that DonDiego Columbus should not presume to displace him.1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 299CHAPTER III.Juan Ponce rules with a strong hand Exasperation of the IndiansTheir experiment to prove whether the Spaniards weremortal.JUAN PONCE DE LEON assumed the command of theIsland of Boriquen in the year 1509. Being a fieryhigh-handed old soldier, his first step was to quarrelwith Juan Ceron and Miguel Diazz, the ex-overnor and his lieutenant, and to send them prisoners toSpain.*He was far more favourable to his late competitor,Christoval de Sotomayor. Finding him to be a cavalierof noble blood and high connexions, yet void ofpretension, and of most accommodating temper, he offeredto make him his lieutenant, and to give him thepost of Alcalde Mayor, an offer which was very thankfullyaccepted.The pride of rank, however, which follows a maneven into the wilderness, soon interfered with the quietof Sotomayor ; he was ridiculed for descending so muchbelow his birth and dignity, as to accept a subaltern situationto a simple gentleman in the island which he hadoriginally aspired to govern. He could not withstandthese sneers, but resigned his appointment, and remainedin the island as a private individual ; establishing him-hearers,dccad. 1. 1. vii. c. 13.300 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509,self in a village where he had a large repartimiento orallotment of Indians assigned to him hy a grant fromthe king.Juan Ponce fixed his seat of government in a towncalled Caparra, which he founded on the northern sideof the island, about a league from the sea, in a neighbourhoodsupposed to abound in gold. It was in front ofthe port called Rico, which subsequently gave its nameto the island. The road to the town was up a mountain,through a dense forest, and so rugged and miry that itwas the bane of man and beast. It cost more to conveyprovisions and merchandize up this league of mountainthan it had to bring them from Spain.Juan Ponce, being firmly seated in his government,began to carve and portion out the island, to foundtowns, and to distribute the natives into repartimientos,for the purpose of exacting their labour.The poor Indians soon found the difference betweenthe Spaniards as guests, and the Spaniards as masters.They were driven to despair by the heavy tasks imposedupon them ; for to their free spirits and indolent habits,restraint and labour were worse than death. Many ofthe most hardy and daring proposed a general insurrection,and a massacre of their oppressors ; the great mass,however, were deterred by the belief that the Spaniardswere supernatural beings and could not be killed.A shrewd and sceptical cacique named Crayon, determinedto put their immortality to the test. Hearingthat a young Spaniard named Salted, was passingthrough his lands, he sent a party of his subjects to escorthim, giving them secret instructions how they wereto act. On coming to a river they took Salted on theirshoulders to carry him across, but, when in the midst of1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 301the stream, they let him fall, and, throwing themselvesupon him, pressed him under water until he was drowned.Then dragging his body to the shore, and still doubtinghis being dead, they wept and howled over him, makinga thousand apologies for having fallen upon him, and kepthim so long beneath the surface.The cacique Crayon came to examine the body andpronounced it lifeless; but the Indians, still fearing itmight possess lurking immortality and ultimately revive,kept watch over it for three days, until it showed incontestiblesigns of putrefaction.Being now convinced that the strangers were mortalmen like themselves, they readily entered into a genera]conspiracy to destroy them.*Herrera, dccad. 1. 1. via, c, 13,302 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.CHAPTER IV.Conspiracy of the Caciques. Fate of Sotornayor.THE prime mover of the conspiracy among the nativeswas Agueybana, brother and successor to the hospitablecacique of the same name, who had first welcomed theSpaniards to the island, and who had fortunately closedhis eyes in peace, before his native groves were made thescenes of violence and oppression. The present caciquehad fallen within the repartimiento of Don Christoval deSotomayor, and, though treated by that cavalier withkindness, could never reconcile his proud spirit to theyoke of vassalage.Agueybana held secret councils with his confederatecaciques, in which they concerted a plan of operations.As the Spaniards were scattered about in different places,it was agreed that, at a certain time, each cacique shoulddespatch those within his province. In arranging themassacre of those within his own domains, Agueybanaassigned to one of his inferior caciques the task of surprisingthe village of Sotomayor, giving him 3000 warriorsfor the purpose. He was to assail the village in thedead of the night, to set fire to the houses, and to slaughterall the inhabitants. He proudly, however, reserved tohimself the honour of killing Don Christoval with his ownhand.Don Christoval had an unsuspected friend in the verymidst of his enemies. Being a cavalier of gallant .]JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 303once and amiable and courteous manners, he had won theaffections of an Indian princess, the sister of the caciqueAgueybana. She had overheard enough of the war-councilof her brother and his warriors to learn that So-mayorwas in danger. The life of her lover was moreprecious in her eyes than the safety of her brotherand her tribe; hastening, therefore, to him, she toldhim all that she knew or feared, and warned him to beupon his guard. Sotomayor appears to have been of themost easy and incautious nature, void of all evil and deceithimself, and slow to suspect any thing of the kind inothers. He considered the apprehension of the princess,as dictated by her fond anxiety, and neglected to profitby her warning.He received, however, about the same time, informationfrom a different quarter, tending to the same point.A Spaniard, versed in the language and customs of thenatives, had observed a number gathering together oneevening, painted and decorated as if for battle. Suspectingsome lurking mischief, he stripped and paintedhimself in their manner, and, favoured by the obscurityof the night, succeeded in mingling among them undiscovered.They were assembled round a fire performingone of their mystic war dances, to the chant of an Areytoor legendary ballad. The strophes and responses treatedof revenge and slaughter, and repeatedly mentioned thedeath of Sotomayor.The Spaniard withdrew unperceived, and hastened toapprise Don Christoval of his danger. The latter stillmade light of these repeated warnings ; revolving them,however, in his mind in the stillness of the night, he beganto feel some uneasiness, and determined to repair in themorning to Juan Ponce de Leon, in his strong hold at304 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.Caparra. With his fated heedlessness, or temerity, however,he applied to Agueybana for Indians to carry hisbaggage, and departed slightly armed, and accompaniedby but three Spaniards, although he had to pass throughclose and lonely forests, where he would be at the mercyof any treacherous or lurking foe.The cacique watched the departure of his intendedvictim and set out shortly afterwards, dogging his stepsat a distance through the forest, accompanied by a fewchosen warriors. Agueybana and his party had not proceededfar when they met a Spaniard named Juan Gonzalez,who spoke the Indian language. They immediatelyassailed him and wounded him in severalplaces. He threw himself at the feet of the cacique,imploring his life in the most abject terms. The chiefspared him for the moment, being eager to make sure ofDon Christoval. He overtook that incautious cavalier inthe very heart of the woodland, and stealing silently uponhim burst forth suddenly with his warriors from thecovert of the thickets, giving the fatal war whoop. BeforeSotomayor could put himself upon his guard a blowfrom the war club of the cacique felled him to the earth,when he was quickly despatched by repeated blows.The four Spaniards who accompanied him shared hisfate, being assailed, not merely by the warriors who hadcome in pursuit of them, but by their own Indian guides.When Agueybana had glutted his vengeance on thisunfortunate cavalier, he returned in quest of Juan Gonzalez.The latter, however, had recovered sufficientlyfrom his wounds to leave the place where he had beenassailed, and, dreading the return of the savages, hadclimbed into a tree and concealed himself among thebranches. From thence, with trembling anxiety he1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 305watched his pursuers as they searched all the surroundingforest for him. Fortunately they did not think of lookingup into the trees, but, after beating the bushes for sometime,gave up the search. Though he saw them depart,yet he did not venture from his concealment until thenight had closed ; he then descended from the tree andmade the best of his way to the residence of certainSpaniards, where his wounds were dressed. When thiswas done he waited not to take repose, but repaired by acircuitous route to Caparra, and informed Juan Ponce deLeon of the danger he supposed to be still impendingover Sotomayor, for he knew not that the enemy had accomplishedhis death. Juan Ponce immediately sent outforty men to his relief. They came to the scene of massacre,where they found the body of the unfortunatecavalier, partly buried, but with the feet out of the earth.In the meantime the savages had accomplished the destructionof the village of Sotomayor. They approachedit unperceived, through the surrounding forest, and enteringit in the dead of the night, set fire to the straw-thatchedhouses, and attacked the Spaniards as they endeavouredto escape from the flames.Several were slain at the onset, but a brave Spaniard,named Diego de Salaam, rallied his countrymen, inspiritedthem to beat off the enemy, and succeeded in conductingthe greater part of them, though sorely mangledand harassed, to the strong hold of the Governor atCaparra. Scarcely had these fugitives gained the fortress,when others came hurrying in from all quarters,bringing similar tales of conflagration and massacre. Foronce a general insurrection, so often planned in savagelife, against the domination of the white men, was306 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.crowned with success. All the villages founded hy theSpaniards had been surprised, about a hundred of theirinhabitants destroyed, and the survivers driven to takerefuge in a beleaguered fortress.1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 307CHAPTER V.War of Juan Ponce with the cacique Agueybana*JUAN PONCE DE LEON might now almost be considereda governor without territories and a general withoutsoldiers. His villages were smoking ruins, and his wholeforce did not amount to a hundred men, several of whomwere disabled by their wounds. He had an able and implacablefoe in Agueybana, who took the lead of all theother caciques, and even sent envoys to the Caribs of theneighbouring islands, entreating them to forget all ancientanimosities and to make common cause against thesestrangers the deadly enemies of the whole Indian race.In the mean time the whole of this wild island was in rebellion,and the forests around the fortress of Caparra,rang with the whoops and yells of the savages, the blastsof their war conchs, and the stormy roaring of theirdrums.Juan Ponce was a staunch and wary old soldier and noteasily daunted. He remained grimly ensconced withinhis fortress, from whence he despatched messengers in allhaste to Hispaniola, imploring immediate assistance. Inthe mean time he tasked his wits to divert the enemy andto keep them at bay. He divided his little force intothree bodies of about thirty men each, under the commandof Diego Salaam, Miguel de Toro, and Luis deAnasco, and sent them out alternately to make suddensurprises and assaults, to form ambuscades, and to prac-308 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.time the other stratagems of partizan warfare, which hehad learnt in early life, in his campaigns against theMoors of Granada.One of his most efficient warriors was a dog namedBerezillo, renowned for courage, strength and sagacity.It is said that he could distinguish those of the Indianswho were allies, from those who were enemies of the Spaniards.To the former he was docile and friendly, to thelatter fierce and implacable. He was the terror of thenatives, who were unaccustomed to powerful and ferociousanimals, and did more service in this wild warfare,than could have been rendered by several soldiers. Hisprowess was so highly appreciated that his master receivedfor him the pay, allowance and share of booty,assigned to a cross-bow man, which was the higheststipend given. *At length the stout old cavalier Juan Ponce was reinforcedin his strong hold, by troops from Hispaniola,whereupon he sallied forth boldly to take revenge uponthose who had thus held him in a kind of durance. Hisfoe Agueybana was at that time encamped in his ownterritories with more than five thousand warriors, but inanegligent watchful state, for he knew nothing of thereinforcements of the Spaniards, and supposed Juan Ponceshut up with his handful of men in Caparra. The oldsoldier, therefore, took him completely by surprise, androuted him with great slaughter. Indeed it is said theThis famous dog was killed some years afterwards by a poisonedarrow, as he was swimming in the sea in pursuit of a Carib Indian.He left, however, a numerous progeny and a great namebehind him ; and his merits and exploits were long a favouritetheme among the Spanish colonists. He was father to the renownedLeoncico, the faithful dog of Vasco Nunez, which resembled himin looks and equalled him in prowess.1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 309Indians were struck with a kind of panic when they sawthe Spaniards as numerous as ever, notwithstanding thenumber they had massacred. Their belief in their immortalityrevived, they fancied that those whom they hadslain had returned to life, and they despaired of victoryover beings who could thus arise with renovated vigourfrom the grave.Various petty actions and skirmishes afterwards tookplace, in which the Indians were defeated. Agueybana,however, disdained this petty warfare, and stirred up hiscountrymen to assemble their forces, and by one grand assaultto decide the fate of themselves and their island.Juan Ponce received secret tidings of their intent, and ofthe place where they were assembling. He had at that timebarely eighty men at his disposal, but then they werecased in steel and proof against the weapons of the savages.Without stopping to reflect, the high mettled old cavalierput himself at their head and led them through theforest in quest of the foe.It was nearly sunset when he came in sight of the Indiancamp, and the multitude of warriors assembled theremade him pause, and almost repent of his temerity. Hewas as shrewd, however, as he was hardy and resolute.Ordering some of his men in the advance to skirmishwith the enemy, he hastily threw up a slight fortificationwith the assistance of the rest. When it was finished hewithdrew his forces into it and ordered them to keepmerely on the defensive. The Indians made repeatedattacks, but were as often repulsed with loss. Some ofthe Spaniards, impatient of this covert warfare, wouldsally forth in open field with pike and cross-bow, butwere called back within the fortification by their warycommander.310 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1509.The cacique Agueybana was enraged at finding hishost of warriors thus baffled and kept at bay by a merehandful of Spaniards. He beheld the night closing in,and feared that in the darkness the enemy would escape.Summoning his choicest warriors round him, therefore,he led the way in a general assault, when, as he approachedthe fortress he received a mortal wound from an arquebusand fell dead upon the spot.The Spaniards were not aware at first of the importanceof the chief whom they had slain. They soon surmisedit, however, from the confusion that ensued amongthe enemy, who bore off the body with great lamentations,and made no further attack.The wary Juan Ponce took advantage of the evidentdistress of the foe, to draw off his small forces in thenight, happy to get out of the terrible jeopardy intowhich a rash confidence had betrayed him. Some of hisfiery spirited officers would have kept the field in spiteof the overwhelming force of the enemy. " No, no,"said the shrewd veteran ; " it is better to protract thewar than to risk all upon a single battle."While Juan Ponce de Leon was fighting hard to maintainhis sway over the island, his transient dignity wasoverturned by another power, against which the prowessof the old soldier was of no avail. King Ferdinand hadrepented of the step he had ill-advisedly taken, in supersedingthe governor and lieutenant governor, appointedby Don Diego Columbus. He became convinced, thoughrather tardily, that it was an infringement of the rights ofthe admiral, and that policy, as well as justice, requiredhim to retract it. When Juan Ceron and Miguel Diazz,therefore, came prisoners to Spain, he received themgraciously, conferred many favours on them to atone for1509.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON, 311their rough ejectment from office, and finally, after sometime,sent them back, empowered to resume the commandof the island. They were ordered, however, on no accountto manifest rancour or ill will against Juan Poncede Leon, or to interfere with any property he mighthold, either in houses, lands, or Indians ; but on the contrary,to cultivate the most friendly understanding withhim. The king also wrote to the hardy veteran explainingto him, that this restitution of Ceron and Diazz hadbeen determined upon in council, as a mere act of justicedue to them, but was not intended as a censure upon hisconduct, and that means should be sought to indemnifyhim for the loss of his command.By the time the governor and his lieutenant reachedthe island, Juan Ponce had completed its subjugation.The death of the island champion, the brave Agueybana,had in fact been a death blow to the natives, and showshow much, in savage warfare, depends upon a singlechieftain. They never made head of war afterwards ; but,dispersing among their forests and mountains, fell graduallyunder the power of the Spaniards. Their subsequentfate was like that of their neighbours of Hayti. Theywere employed in the labour of the mines, and in otherrude toils so repugnant to their nature that they sankbeneath them, and, in a little while, almost all the aboriginaldisappeared from the island.312 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1510.CHAPTER VI.Juan Ponce de Leon hears of a wonderful country and miraculousfountain.JUAN PONCE DE LEON resigned the command of PortoRico with tolerable grace. The loss of one wild islandand wild government was of little moment, when therewas a new world to be shared out, where a bold soldierlikehimself, with sword and buckler, might readily carveout new fortunes for himself. Beside, he had nowamassed wealth to assist him in his plans, and, like manyof the early discoverers, his brain was teeming with themost romantic enterprises. He had conceived the ideathat there was yet a third world to be discovered, and hehoped to be the first to reach its shores, and thus to securea renown equal to that of Columbus.While cogitating these things, and considering whichway he should strike forth in the unexplored regionsaround him, he met with some old Indians who gave himtidings of a country which promised, not merely to satisfythe cravings of his ambition, but to realize the fondestdreams of the poets. They assured him that, far to thenorth, there existed a land abounding in gold and in allmanner of delights ; but, above all, possessing a river ofsuch wonderful virtue that whoever bathed in it wouldbe restored to youth ! They added, that in times past,before the arrival of the Spaniards, a large party of thenatives of Cuba had departed northward in search of1510.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 313this happy land and this river of life, and, having neverreturned, it was concluded that they were flourishing inrenovated youth, detained by the pleasures of that enchantingcountry.Here was the dream of the Alchymist realized ! onehad but to find this gifted land and revel in the enjoymentof boundless riches and perennial youth! nay,some of the ancient Indians declared that it was not necessaryto go so far in quest of these rejuvenating waters,for that, in a certain island of the Bahama group, calledBimini, which lay far out in the ocean, there was a fountainpossessing the same marvellous and inestimable qualities.Juan Ponce de Leon listened to these tales with fondcredulity. He was advancing in life, and the ordinaryterm of existence seemed insufficient for his mightyplans. Could he but plunge into this marvellous fountainor gifted river, and come out with his battered, warworn body restored to the strength and freshness andsuppleness of youth, and his head still retaining the wisdomand knowledge of age, what enterprises might henot accomplish in the additional course of vigorous yearsinsured to him !It may seem incredible, at the present day, that a manof years and experience could yield any faith to a storywhich resembles the wild fiction of an Arabian tale; butthe wonders and novelties breaking upon the world inthat age of discovery almost realised the illusions of fable,and the imaginations of the Spanish voyagers hadbecome so heated that they were capable of any stretchof credulity.So fully persuaded was the worthy old cavalier of theexistence of the region described to him, that he fitted314 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.out three ships at his own expense to prosecute the discovery,nor had he any difficulty in finding adventurersin abundance ready to cruise with him in quest of thisfairy-land,*It was not the credulous minds of voyagers and adventurersalone that were heated by these Indian traditions and romantic fables.Men of learning and eminence were likewise beguiled bythem : witness the following extract from the second decade ofPeter Martyr, addressed to Leo X., then Bishop of Rome:44 Among the islands on the north side of Hispaniola there isone about 325 leagues distant, as they say which have searchedthe same, in the which is a continual spring of running water, ofsuch marvellous virtue that the water thereof being drunk, perhapswith some diet, maketh olde men young again. And here Imust make protestation to your holiness riot to think this to besaid lightly or rashly, for they have so spread this rumour for atruth throughout all the court, that not only all the people, but alsomany of them whom wisdom or fortune hath divided from thecommon sort, think it to be true ; but, if you will ask my opinionherein, I will answer that I will not attribute so great power tonature, but that God hath no lesse reserved this prerogative to himselfthan to search the hearts of men, &c. P. Martyr, D. 2. c.10, Lok s translation.1512.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 315CHAPTER VII.Cruise of Juan Ponce de Leon in search of the Fountain of Youth.(1512.)IT was on the third of March, 1512, that Juan Poncesailed with his three ships from the Port of St. Germainin the island of Porto Rico. He kept for some distancealong the coast of Hispaniola, and then, stretching awayto the northward, made for the Bahama islands, and soonfell in with the first of the group. He was favouredwith propitious weather and tranquil seas, and glidedsmoothly with wind and current along that verdant archipelago,visiting one island after another, until, on thefourteenth of the month, he arrived at Guanahani, or St.Salvador s, where Christopher Columbus had first put hisfoot on the shores of the new world. His inquiries forthe island of Bimini were all in vain, and as to the fountainof youth, he may have drank of every fountain, andriver, and lake, in the archipelago, even to the salt poolsof Turk s island, without being a whit the younger.Still he was not discouraged ; but, having repaired hisships, he again put to sea and shaped his course to thenorth-west. On Sunday, the 27th of March, he camein sight of what he supposed to be an island, but wasprevented from landing by adverse weather. He continuedhovering about it for several days, buffeted bythe elements, until, in the night, of the second of April,316 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.he succeeded in coming to anchor under the land inthirty degrees eight minutes of latitude. The wholecountry was in the fresh bloom of spring; the treeswere gay with blossoms, and the fields covered withflowers; from which circumstance, as well as from havingdiscovered it on Palm Sunday, (Pascua Florida,)he gave it the name of Florida, which it retains to thepresent day. The Indian name of the country wasCautio.*Juan Ponce landed, and took possession of the countryin the name of the Castilian Sovereigns. He afterwardscontinued for several weeks ranging the coasts of thisflowery land, and struggling against the gulf-stream andthe various currents which sweep it. He doubled CapeCanaveral, and reconnoitered the southern and easternshores without suspecting that this was a part of TerraFirma. In all his attempts to explore the country, hemet with resolute and implacable hostility on the part ofthe natives, who appeared to be a fierce and warlikerace. He was disappointed also in his hopes of findinggold, nor did any of the rivers or fountains which he examinedpossess the rejuvenating virtue. Convinced,therefore, that this was not the promised land of Indiantradition, he turned his prow homeward on the 14thof June, with the intention in the way of making onemore attempt to find the island of Bimini.In the outset of his return he discovered a group ofislets abounding with sea-fowl and marine animals. Onone of them his sailors, in the course of a single night,caught one hundred and seventy turtles, and might havetaken many more, had they been so inclined. TheyHen-era, Hist. lud. d. I. 1. ix, c. 10.1512.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 317likewise took fourteen sea wolves, and killed a vast quantityof pelicans and other birds. To this group JuanPonce gave the name of the Tortures, or turtles, whichthey still retain.Proceeding in his cruise, he touched at another groupof islets near the Lucas, to which he gave the name ofLa Vieja, or the Old Woman group, because he foundno inhabitant there but one old Indian woman.* Thisancient sybil he took on board his ship to give him informationabout the labyrinth of islands into which he wasentering, and perhaps he could not have had a more suitableguide in the eccentric quest he was making. Notwithstandingher pilotage, however, he was exceedinglybaffled and perplexed in his return voyage among theBahama islands, for he was forcing his way as it wereagainst the course of nature, and encountering the currentswhich sweep westward along these islands, and thetrade-wind which accompanies them. For a long timehe struggled with all kinds of difficulties and dangers;and was obliged to remain upwards of a month in one ofthe islands to repair the damages which his ship had sufferedin a storm.Disheartened at length by the perils and trials withwhich nature seemed to have beset the approach toBimini, as to some fairy island in romance, he gave upthe quest in person, and sent in his place a trusty captain,Juan Perez de Ortubia, who departed in one of theother ships, guided by the experienced old woman of theisles, and by another Indian. As to Juan Ponce, hemade the best of his way back to Porto Rico, where hearrived infinitely poorer in purse and wrinkled in brow,Hen-era, d. 1. 1. L\.318 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1512.by this cruise after inexhaustible riches and perpetualyouth.He had not been long in port when his trusty envoy,Juan Perez, likewise arrived. Guided by the sage oldwoman, he had succeeded in finding the long-sought-forBimini. He described it as being large, verdant, andcovered with beautiful groves. There were crystalsprings and limped streams in abundance, which keptthe island in perpetual verdure, but none that could restoreto an old man the vernal greenness of his youth.Thus ended the romantic expedition of Juan Ponce deLeon. Like many other pursuits of a chimera, it terminatedin the acquisition of a substantial good. Thoughhe had failed in finding the fairy fountain of youth, hehad discovered in place of it the important country ofFlorida.*The belief of the existence, in Florida, of a river like that soughtby Juan Ponce, was long prevalent among the Indians of Cuba, andthe caciques were anxious to discover it. That a party of the nativesof Cuba once went in search of it, and remained there, appearsto be a fact, as their descendants were afterwards to be tracedamong the people of Florida. Las Casas says, that even in his days,many persisted in seeking this mystery, and some thought that theriver was no other than that called the Jordan, at the point of St.Helena; without considering that the name was given to it by theSpaniards in the year 1520, when they discovered the land ofChico.ra.1512.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 319CHAPTER ViiExpedition ofJuanPonce against the Caribs His Death. (1514.)JUAN PONCE DE LEON now repaired to Spain to makea report of his voyage to king Ferdinand. The hardyold cavalier experienced much raillery from the witlingof the court on account of his visionary voyage, thoughmany wise men had been as credulous as himself at theoutset. The king, however, received him with greatfavour, and conferred on him the title of Adelantado ofBimini and Florida, which last was as yet considered anisland. Permission was also granted him to recruit meneither in Spain or in the colonies for a settlement in Florida; but he deferred entering on his command for thepresent, being probably discouraged and impoverishedby the losses in his last expedition, or finding a difficultyin enlisting adventurers. At length another enterprisepresented itself. The Caribs had by this time become aterror to the Spanish inhabitants of many of the islands,making descents upon the coasts and carrying off captives,who it was supposed were doomed to be devouredby these cannibals. So frequent were their invasions ofthe island of Porto Rico, that it was feared they wouldultimately oblige the Spaniards to abandon it,At length king Ferdinand, in 1514, ordered that threeships, well armed and manned, should be fitted out inSeville, destined to scour the islands of the Caribs, andto free the seas from those cannibal marauders. The320 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1515.command of the Armada was given to Juan Price deLeon, from his knowledge in Indian warfare, and hisvaried and rough experience which had mingled in himthe soldier with the sailor. He was instructed in thefirst place to assail the Caribs of those islands most contiguousand dangerous to Porto Rico, and then to makewar on those of the coast of Terra Firma, in the neighbourhoodof Cartagena. He was afterwards to take thecaptaincy of Porto Rico, and to attend to the repartimi-entos or distributions of the Indians in conjunction witha person to be appointed by Diego Columbus.The enterprise suited the soldier-like spirit of JuanPonce de Leon, and the gallant old cavalier set sail fullof confidence in January, 1515, and steered direct forthe Caribbees, with a determination to give a wholesomecastigation to the whole savage Archipelago. Arriving atthe island of Guadaloupe, he cast anchor, and sent menonshore for wood and water, and women to wash theclothing of the crews, with a party of soldiers to mountguard.Juan Ponce had not been as wary as usual, or he hadto deal with savages unusually adroit in warfare. Whilethe people were scattered carelessly on shore, the Caribsrushed forth from an ambuscade, killed the greater partof the men, and carried off the women to the mountains.This blow at the very outset of his vaunted expeditionsank deep into the heart of Juan Ponce, and put an endto all his military excitement. Humbled and mortified,he set sail for the island of Porto Rico, where he relinquishedall further prosecution of the enterprise, underpretext of ill health, and gave the command of thesquadron to a captain named Zufiiga; but it is surmisedthat his malady was not so much of the flesh as of the1521.] JUAN PONCE DE LEON. 321spirit. He remained in Porto Rico as governor; but,having grown testy and irritable through vexations anddisappointments, he gave great offence, and caused muchcontention on the island by positive and strong-handedmeasures, in respect to the distributions of the Indians.He continued for several years in that island, in a stateof growling repose, until the brilliant exploits of HernandoCortes, which threatened to eclipse the achievements ofall the veteran discoverers, roused his dormant spirit.Jealous of being cast in the shade in his old days, hedetermined to sally forth on one more expedition. Hehad heard that Florida, which he had discovered, andwhich he had hitherto considered a mere island, was partof Terra Firma, possessing vast and unknown regions inits bosom. If so, a grand field of enterprise lay beforehim, wherein he might make discoveries and conqueststo rival, if not surpass, the far-famed conquest of Mexico.Accordingly in the year 1521, he fitted out two shipsat the island of Porto Rico, and embarked almost thewhole of his property in the undertaking. His voyagewas toilsome and tempestuous, but at length he arrivedat the wished for land. He made a descent upon thecoast with a great part of his men, but the Indians salliedforth with unusual valour to defend their shores. Abloody battle ensued, several of the Spaniards were slain,and Juan Ponce was wounded by an arrow, in the thigh.He was borne on board his ship, and finding himself disabledfor further action, set sail for Cuba, where he arrivedill in body and dejected in heart.He was of an age when there is no longer prompt andhealthful reaction either mental or corporeal. The irritationsof humiliated pride and disappointed hope, exasperatedthe fever of his wound, and he died soon after322 SPANISH VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY. [1521.his arrival at the island. "Thus fate says one of thequaint old Spanish writers, " delights to reverse theschemes of man. The discovery that Juan Ponce flatteredhimself was to lead to a means of perpetuating his life,had the ultimate effect of hastening his death."It may be said, however, that he has at least attainedthe shadow of his desire, since, though disappointed in extendingthe natural term of his existence, his discoveryhas ensured a lasting duration to his name.The following epitaph was inscribed upon his tomb,which does justice to the warrior qualities of the stout oldcavalier.Mole sub hac fortis requiescat ossa Leonis,Qui visit facts nomina magna suis.It has thus been paraphrased in Spanish by the LicentiateJuan de Castellanos.Quest sugar estrechoEs sepulchre del baron,Que en el nombre sue Leon,Y much mas en el hecho."In this sepulchre rest the bones of a man, who was alion by name, and still more by nature."1828.] APPENDIX. 325A VISIT TO PALOS.[The following narrative was actually commenced, by the authorof this work, as a letter to a friend, but unexpectedly swelled to itspresent size. He has been induced to insert it here from the ideathat many will feel the same curiosity to know something of thepresent state of Palos and its inhabitants that led him to make thejourney.]Seville, 1828.SINCE I last wrote to you I have made, what I mayterm, an American Pilgrimage, to visit the little port ofPalos in Andalusia, where Columbus fitted out his ships,and whence he sailed for the discovery of the NewWorld. Need I tell you how deeply interesting andgratifying it has been to me? I had long meditated thisexcursion as a kind of pious, and if I may so say, filialduty of an American, and my intention was quickenedwhen I learnt that many of the edifices mentioned in thehistory of Columbus still remained in nearly the samestate in which they existed at the time of his sojourn atPalos, and that the descendants of the intrepid Pinions,who aided him with ships and money, and sailed withhim in the great voyage of discovery, still flourished inthe neighbourhood.The very evening before my departure from Sevilleon the excursion, I heard that there was a young gentlesAPPENDIX. [1828.man of the Pinson family studying law in the city. I gotintroduced to him, and found him of most prepossessing appearanceand manners. He gave me a letter of introductionto his father, Don Juan Fernandez Pinson, residentof Moguer, and the present head of the family.As it was in the middle of August, and the weatherintensely hot, I hired a calesa for the journey. This isa two-wheeled carriage, resembling a cabriolet, but of themost primitive and rude construction ; the harness is profuselyornamented with brass, and the horse s head decoratedwith tufts and tassels and dangling bobs of scarletand yellow worsted. I had, for calasero, a tall, long-leggedAndalusian, in short jacket, little round crownedhat, breeches decorated with buttons from the hip to theknees, and a pair of russet leather bottinas or spatterdashes. He was an active fellow, though uncommonlytaciturn for an Andalusian, and strode along beside hishorse, rousing him occasionally to greater speed by a loudmalediction or a hearty thwack of his cudgel.In this style I set off late in the day to avoid the noontideheat, and after ascending the lofty range of hillsthat borders the great valley of the Guadalquiver, andhaving a rough ride among their heights, I descendedabout twilight into one of those vast, silent, melancholyplains, frequent in Spain, where I beheld no other signsof life than a roaming flock of bustards, and a distant herdof cattle, guarded by a solitary herdsman, who, witha long pike planted in the earth, stood motionless inthe midst of the dreary landscape, resembling an Arabof the desert. The night had somewhat advancedwhen we stopped to repose for a few hours at asolitary venta or inn, if it might so be called, beingnothing more than a vast low-roofed stable, divided into1828.] APPENDIX. 327several compartments for the reception of the troopsof mules and barriers (or carriers) who carry on the internaltrade of Spain. Accommodation for the travellerthere was none not even for a traveller so easily accommodatedas myself. The landlord had no food to give me,and as to a bed, he had none hut a horse cloth, on whichhis only child, a boy of eight years old, lay naked on theearthen floor. Indeed the heat of the weather and thefumes from the stables made the interior of the hovel insupportable,so I was fain to bivouac on my cloak on thepavement at the door of the venta, where, on wakingafter two or three hours of sound sleep, I found a contra-baptista(or smuggler) snoring beside me, with his blunderbusson his arm.I resumed my journey before break of day, and hadmade several leagues by ten o clock, when we stopped tobreakfast, and to pass the sultry hours of midday in alarge village, from whence we departed about four o clock,and, after passing through the same kind of solitarycountry, arrived just after sunset at Moguer. This littlecity (for at present it is a city) is situated about a leaguefrom Palos, of which place it has gradually absorbed allthe respectable inhabitants, and, among the number,the whole family of the Pinions.So remote is this little place from the stir and bustle oftravel, and so destitute of the show and vainglory of thisworld, that my calesa as it rattled and jingled along thenarrow and ill-paved streets caused a great sensation ; thechildren shouted and scampered along by its side, admiringits splendid trappings of brass and worsted, andgazing with reverence at the important stranger whocame in so gorgeous an equipage.I drove up to the principal posada, the landlord of328 APPENDIX. [1828.which was at the door. He was one of the very civilestmen in the world, and disposed to do every thing in hispower to make me comfortable ; there was only one difficulty,he had neither bed nor bed-room in his house. Infact, it was a mere venta for muleteers, who are accustomedto sleep on the ground with their mule cloths forbeds and pack-saddles for pillows. It was a hard case,but there was no better posada in the place. Few peopletravel for pleasure or curiosity in these out-of-the-wayparts of Spain, and those of any note are generally receivedinto private houses. I had travelled sufficientlyin Spain to find out that a bed, after all, is not an articleof indispensable necessity, and was about to bespeak somequiet corner where I might spread my cloak, when fortunatelythe landlord s wife came forth. She could nothave a more obliging disposition than her husband, butthen God bless the women! they always know how tocarry their good wishes into effect. In a little while asmall room, about ten feet square, that had formed athoroughfare between the stables and a kind of shop orbar room, was cleared of a variety of lumber, and I wasassured that a bed should be put up there for me. Fromthe consultations I saw my hostess holding with some ofher neighbour gossips, I fancied the bed was to be a kindof piece-meal contribution among them for the credit ofthe house.As soon as I could change my dress, I commenced thehistorical researches which were the object of my journey,and inquired for the abode of Don Juan FernandezPinson. My obliging landlord himself volunteered toconduct me thither, and I set off full of animation at thethoughts of meeting with the lineal representative of oneof the coadjutors of Columbus.1828.] APPENDIX. 329A short walk brought us to the house, which was mostrespectable in its appearance, indicating easy, if notaffluent circumstances. The door, as is customary inSpanish villages, during summer, stood wide open. Weentered with the usual salutation or rather summons,"Ave Maria!" A trim Andalusian handmaid answeredto the call, and, on our inquiring for the master of thehouse, led the way across a little patio or court, in thecentre of the edifice, cooled by a fountain surroundedby shrubs and flowers, to a back court or terrace, likewiseset out with flowers, where Don Juan Fernandezwas seated with his family, enjoying the serene eveningin the open air.I was much pleased with his appearance. He was avenerable old gentleman, tall and somewhat thin, withfair complexion and grey hair. He received me withgreat urbanity, and on reading the letter from his son,appeared struck with surprise to find I had come quiteto Moguer, merely to visit the scene of the embarkationof Columbus ; and still more so on my telling him, thatone of my leading objects of curiosity was his ownfamily connexion ; for it would seem that the worthy cavalierhad troubled his head but little about the enterprizesof his ancestors.I now took my seat in the domestic circle and soon feltmyself quite at home, for there is generally a franknessin the hospitality of Spaniards that soon puts a strangerat his ease beneath their roof. The wife of Don JuanFernandez was extremely amiable and affable, possessingmuch of that natural aptness for which the Spanish womenare remarkable. In the course of conversationwith them I learnt, that Don Juan Fernandez, who isseventy-two years of age, is the eldest of five brothers,330 APPENDIX. [1828.all of whom are married, have numerous offspring, andlive in Mortier and its vicinity, in nearly the same conditionand rank of life as at the time of the discovery.This agreed with what I had previously heard, respectingthe families of the discoverers. Of Columbus no linealand direct descendant exists; his was an exotic stockthat never took deep and lasting root in the country ; butthe race of the Pinzons continues to thrive and multiplyin its native soil.While I was yet conversing, a gentleman entered, whowas introduced to me as Don Luis Fernandez Pinson,the youngest of the brothers. He appeared to be betweenfifty and sixty years of age, somewhat robust, withfair complexion and grey hair, and a frank and manlydeportment. He is the only one of the present generationthat has followed the ancient profession of thefamily ; having served with great applause as an officerof the royal navy, from which he retired, on his marriage,about twenty two years since. He is the one,also, who takes the greatest interest and pride in the historicalhonours of his house, carefully preserving all thelegends and documents of the achievements and distinctionsof his family, a manuscript volume of which helent me for my inspection.Don Juan now expressed a wish that, during my residencein Mortier, I would make his house my home. Iendeavoured to excuse myself, alleging, that the goodpeople at the posada had been at such extraordinarytrouble in preparing quarters for me, that I did not liketo disappoint them. The worthy old gentleman undertookto arrange all this, and, while supper was preparing,we walked together to the posada. I found that myobliging host and hostess had indeed exerted themselves1828.] APPENDIX. 331to an uncommon degree. An old rickety table had beenspread out in a corner of the little room as a bedstead, ontop of which was propped up a grand cama de ludo, orstate bed, which appeared to be the admiration of thehouse. I could not, for the soul of me, appear to undervaluewhat the poor people had prepared with suchhearty good will, and considered such a triumph of artand luxury ; so I again entreated Don Juan to dispensewith my sleeping at his house, promising most faithfullyto make my meals there while I should stay at Moguer,and as the old gentleman understood my motives for declininghis invitation, and felt a good humoured sympathyin them, we readily arranged the matter. I returnedtherefore with Don Juan to his house, and supped withhis family. During the repast a plan was agreed uponfor my visit to Palos, and to the convent La Rabidaa, inwhich Don Juan volunteered to accompany me and bemy guide, and the following day was allotted to the expedition.We were to breakfast at a hacienda, or countryseat,which he possessed in the vicinity of Palos, in themidst of his vineyards, and were to dine there on ourreturn from the convent. These arrangements beingmade, we parted for the night; I returned to the posadahighly gratified with my visit, and slept soundly in theextraordinary bed which, I may almost say, had been inventedfor my accommodation.On the following morning, bright and early, Don JuanFernandez and myself set off in the calesa for Palos. Ifelt apprehensive at first, that the kind-hearted old gentleman,in his anxiety to oblige, had left his bed at tooearly an hour, and was exposing himself to fatigues unsuitedto his age. He laughed at the idea, and assuredme that he was an early riser, and accustomed to all332 APi ENDix. [1828.kinds of exercise on horse and foot, being a keen sportsman,and frequently passing days together among themountains on shooting expeditions, taking with him servants,horses, and provisions, and living in a tent. Heappeared, in fact, to be of an active habit, and to possessa youthful vivacity of spirit. His cheerful dispositionrendered our morning drive extremely agreeable;his urbanity was shown to every one whom we met on theroad ; even the common peasant was saluted by him withthe appellation of cabalkro, a mark of respect evergratifying to the poor but proud Spaniard, when yieldedby a superior.As the tide was out we drove along the flat groundsbordering the Tinto. The river was on our right, whileon our left was a range of hills, jutting out into promontories,one beyond the other, and covered with vineyardsand fig trees. The weather was serene, the air soft andbalmy, and the landscape of that gentle kind calculatedto put one in a quiet and happy humour. We passedclose by the skirts of Palos, and drove to the hacienda,which is situated at some little distance from the village,between it and the river. The house is a low stonebuilding, well white-washed, and of great length; oneend being fitted up as a summer residence, with saloons,bed-rooms, and a domestic chapel ; and the other as abodega or magazine for the reception of the wine producedon the estate.The house stands on a hill, amidst vineyards, which aresupposed to cover a part of the spite of the ancient townof Palos, now shrunk to a miserable village. Beyondthese vineyards, on the crest of a distant hill, are seen thewhite walls of the convent of La Rabidaa rising above adark wood of pine trees.1828.] APPENDIX. 333Below the hacienda flows the river Tinto, on whichColumbus embarked. It is divided by a low tongue ofland, or rather the sand bar of Salts, from the riverOriel, with which it soon mingles its waters, and flows ontothe ocean. Beside this sand bar, where the channelof the river runs deep, the squadron of Columbus wasanchored, and from hence he made sail on the morning ofhis departure.The soft breeze that was blowing scarcely ruffled thesurface of this beautiful river; two or three picturesquebarks, called mystics, with long latine sails were glidingdown it. A little aid of the imagination might suffice topicture them as the light caravels of Columbus, sallyingforth on their eventful expedition, while the distant bellsof the town of Huelva, which were ringing melodiously,might be supposed as cheering the voyagers with a farewellpeal.I cannot express to you what were my feelings on treadingthe shore which had once been animated by the bustleof departure, and whose sands had been printed bythe last footstep of Columbus. The solemn and sublimenature of the event that had followed, together with thefate and fortunes of those concerned in it, filled the mindwith vague yet melancholy ideas. It was like viewingthe silent and empty stage of some great drama whenall the actors had departed. The very aspect of thelandscape, so tranquilly beautiful, had an effect upon me,and as I paced the deserted shore by the side of a descendantof one of the discoverers, I felt my heart swellingwith emotions and my eyes filling with tears.What surprised me was to find no semblance of a seaport;there was neither wharf nor landing-place nothingbut a naked river bank, with the hulk of a ferry-boat,334 APPENDIX. [1828,which I was told carried passengers to Huelva, lyinghigh and dry on the sands, deserted by the tide. Palos,though it has doubtless dwindled away from its formersize, can never have been important as to extent and population.If it possessed warehouses on the beach, theyhave disappeared. It is at present a mere village of thepoorest kind, and lies nearly a quarter of a mile from theriver, in a hollow among hills. It contains a few hundredinhabitants, who subsist principally by labouring in thefields and vineyards. Its race of merchants and marinersare extinct. There are no vessels belonging to the place,nor any show of traffic* excepting at the season of fruitand wine, when a few mystics and other light barksanchor in the river to collect the produce of the neighbourhood.The people are totally ignorant, and it is probablethat the greater part of them scarce know even thename of America. Such is the place from whence salliedforth the enterprise for the discovery of the westernworld !We were now summoned to breakfast in a little saloonof the hacienda. The table was covered with naturalluxuries produced upon the spot fine purple and muscatelgrapes from the adjacent vineyard, delicious melonsfrom the garden, and generous wines made on the estate.The repast was heightened by the genial manners of myhospitable host, who appeared to possess the most enviablecheerfulness of spirit and simplicity of heart.After breakfast we set off in the calesa to visit the Conventof La Rabidaa, which is about half a league distant.The road, for a part of the way, lay through the vineyards,and was deep and sandy. The calasero had beenat his wit s end to conceive what motive a stranger likemyself, apparently travelling for mere amusement, could1828.] APPENDIX. 335have in coming so far to see so miserable a place as Palos,which he set down as one of the very poorest places inthe whole world; but this additional toil and strugglethrough deep sand to visit the old Convent of La Rabidaa,completed his confusion " Hombre!" exclaimed he,es una ruina ! no hay mas que dos failed !" " Zounds !why it s a ruin! there are only two friars there!" DonJuan laughed, and told him that I had come all the wayfrom Seville precisely to see that old ruin and those twofriars. The calasero made the Spaniard s last replywhen he is perplexed he shrugged his shoulders andcrossed himself.After ascending a hill and passing through the skirts ofa straggling pine wood, we arrived in front of the convent.It stands in a bleak and solitary situation, on thebrow of a rocky height or promontory, overlooking to thewest a wide range of sea and land, bounded by the frontiermountains of Portugal, about eight leagues distant.The convent is shut out from a view of the vineyard ofPalos by the gloomy forest of pines which I have mentioned,which cover the promontory to the east, anddarken the whole landscape in that direction.There is nothing remarkable in the architecture of theconvent; part of it is Gothic, but the edifice, having beenfrequently repaired, and being whitewashed, accordingto a universal custom in Andalusia, inherited from theMoors, it has not that venerable aspect which might beexpected from its antiquity.We alighted at the gate where Columbus, when a poorpedestrian, a stranger in the land, asked bread and waterfor his child! As long as the convent stands, this must beaspot calculated to awaken the most thrilling interest.The gate remains apparently in nearly the same state as336 APPENDIX. [1828.at the time of his visit, but there is no longer a porter athand to administer to the wants of the wayfarer. Thedoor stood wide open, and admitted us into a small courtyard.From thence we passed through a Gothic portalinto the chapel, without seeing a human being. Wethen traversed two interior cloisters, equally vacant andsilent, and bearing a look of neglect and dilapidation.From an open window we had a peep at what had oncebeen a garden, but that had also gone to ruin ; the wallswere broken and thrown down; a few shrubs, and ascattered fig-tree or two were all the traces of cultivationthat remained. We passed through the long dormitories,but the cells were shut up and abandoned; we saw noliving thing except a solitary cat stealing across a distantcorridor, which fled in a panic at the unusual sight ofstrangers. At length, after patrolling nearly the wholeof the empty building to the echo of our own footsteps,we came to where the door of a cell, being partly open,gave us the sight of a monk within, seated at a tablewriting. He rose and received us with much civility,and conducted us to the superior, who was reading in anadjacent cell. They were both rather young men, and,together with a noviciate and a lay-brother, who officiatedas cook, formed the whole community of the convent.Don Juan Fernandez communicated to them the objectof my visit, and my desire also to inspect the archivesof the convent to find if there was any record of the sojournof Columbus. They informed us that the archiveshad been entirely destroyed by the French. The youngermonk, however, who had perused them, had a vague recollectionof various particulars concerning the transactionsof Columbus at Palos, his visit to the convent, andthe sailing of his expedition. From all that he cited,1828.] APPENDIX. 337however, it appeared to me that all the information onthe subject contained in the archives, had been extractedfrom Herrera and other well known authors. The monkwas talkative and eloquent, and soon diverged from thesubject of Columbus, to one which he considered of infinitelygreater importance ; the miraculous image of theVirgin possessed by their convent, and known by thename of "Our Lady of La Rabidaa." He gave us a historyof the wonderful way in which the image had beenfound buried in the earth, where it had lain hidden forages,since the time of the conquest of Spain by theMoors ; the disputes between the convent and differentplaces in the neighbourhood for the possession of it; themarvellous protection it extended to the adjacent country,especially in preventing all madness, either in man or dog,for this malady was anciently so prevalent in this place asto gain it the appellation of La Arabia, by which it wasoriginally called ; a name which, thanks to the beneficentinfluence of the Virgin, it no longer merited or retained.Such are the legends and reliques with which everyconvent in Spain is enriched, which are zealously criedup by the monks, and devoutly credited by the populace.Twice a year on the festival of our Lady of La Rabidaa,and on that of the patron saint of the order, the solitudeand silence of the convent are interrupted by the intrusionof a swarming multitude, composed of the inhabitantsof Moguer, of Huelva, and the neighbouring plains andmountains. The open esplanade in front of the edificeresembles a fair, the adjacent forest teems with the motleythrong, and the image of our Lady of La Rabidaa is borneforth in triumphant procession.While the friar was thus dilating upon the merits andrenown of the image, I amused myself with those day338 APPENDIX. 1828.]dreams, or conjuring of the imagination to which I amalittle given. As the internal arrangements of conventsare apt to be the same from age to age, I pictured to myselfthis chamber as the same inhabited by the guardian,Juan Perez de Marchesa at the time of the visit ofColumbus. Why might not the old and ponderous tablebefore me be the very one on which he displayed his conjecturalmaps, and expounded his theory of a westernroute to India? It required but another stretch of theimagination to assemble the little conclave around thetable ; Juan Perez the friar, Garcia Fernandez the physician,and Martin Alonzo Pinson the bold navigator, alllistening with wrapped attention to Columbus, or to thetale of some old seaman of Palos, about islands seen in thewestern parts of the ocean.The friars, as far as their poor means and scanty knowledgeextended, were disposed to do every thing to promotethe object of my visit. They showed us all partsof the convent, which, however, has little to boast of, exceptingthe historical associations connected with it. Thelibrary was reduced to a few volumes, chiefly on ecclesiasticalsubjects, piled promiscuously in the cornerof a vaulted chamber, and covered with dust. Thechamber itself was curious, being the most ancient partof the edifice, and supposed to have formed part of atemple in the time of the Romans.We ascended to the roof of the convent to enjoy theextensive prospect it commands. Immediately below thepromontory on which it is situated, runs a narrow buttolerably deep river, called the Domingo Rubio, whichempties itself into the Tinto. It is the opinion of DonLuis Fernandez Pinson, that the ships of Columbus werecareened and fitted out in this river, as it affords better1828.] APPENDIX. 339shelter than the Tinto, and its shores are not so shallow.A lonely bark of a fisherman was lying in this stream, andnot far off, on a sandy point, were the ruins of an ancientwatch tower. From the roof of the convent, all thewindings of the Oriel and the Tinto were to he seen, andtheir junction into the main stream, by which Columbussallied forth to sea. In fact the convent serves as a landmark,being, from its lofty and solitary situation, visiblefor a considerable distance to vessels coming on the coast.On the opposite side I looked down upon the lonely road,through the wood of pine trees, by which the zealousguardian of the convent, Fray Juan Perez departed atmidnight on his mule, when he sought the camp of Ferdinandand Isabella in the Vega of Granada, to plead theproject of Columbus before the queen.Having finished our inspection of the convent, we preparedto depart, and were accompanied to the outwardportal by the two friars. Our calesero brought hisrattling and rickety vehicle for us to mount; at sightof which one of the monks exclaimed, with a smile,"Santa Maria! only to think! A calesa before the gateof the convent of La Rabidaa!" And, indeed, so solitaryand remote is this ancient edifice, and so simple is themode of living of the people in this bye-corner of Spain,that the appearance of even a sorry calesa might wellcause astonishment. It is only singular that in such abye-corner the scheme of Columbus should have foundintelligent listeners and coadjutors, after it had been discarded,almost with scoffing and contempt, from learneduniversities and splendid courts.On our way back to the hacienda, we met Don Rafael,a younger son of Don Juan Fernandez, a fine young manabout twenty-one, years of age, and who, his father in-340 APPENDIX. [1828.formed me, was at present studying French and mathematics.He was well mounted on a spirited grey horse,and dressed in the Andalusian style, with the little roundhat and jacket. He sat his horse gracefully, and managedhim well. I was pleased with the frank and easyterms on which Don Juan appeared to live with his children.This I was inclined to think his favourite son, asI understood he was the only one that partook of the oldgentleman s fondness for the chase, and that accompaniedhim in his hunting excursions.A dinner had been prepared for us at the hacienda, bythe wife of the capital, or overseer, w r ho, with her husband,seemed to be well pleased with this visit from DonJuan, and to be confident of receiving a pleasant answerfrom the good humoured old gentleman whenever theyaddressed him. The dinner was served up about twoo clock and was a most agreeable meal. The fruits andwines were from the estate, and were excellent ; the restof the provisions were from Moguer, for the adjacent villageof Palos is too poor to furnish any thing. A gentlebreeze from the sea played through the hall, and temperedthe summer heat. Indeed I do not know when Ihave seen a more enviable spot than this country retreatof the Pinzons. Its situation on a breezy hill, at nogreat distance from the sea, and in a southern climate,produces a happy temperature, neither hot in summernor cold in winter. It commands a beautiful prospect,and is surrounded by natural luxuries. The countryabounds with game, the adjacent river affords abundantsport in fishing, both by day and night, and delightfulexcursions for those fond of sailing. During the busyseasons of rural life, and especially at the joyous periodof vintage, the family pass some time here, accompanied1828.] APPENDIX. 341by numerous guests, at which times, Don Juan assuredme, there was no lack of amusements, both by land andwater.When we had dined, and taken the siesta, or afternoonnap, according to the Spanish custom in summer time,we set out on our return to Moguer, visiting the villageof Palos in the way. Don Gabriel had been sent in advanceto procure the keys of the village church, and toapprise the curate of our wish to inspect the archives.The village consists principally of two streets of lowwhite-washed houses. Many of the inhabitants havevery dark complexions, betraying a mixture of Africanblood.On entering the village, we repaired to the lowly mansionof the curate. I had hoped to find him some suchpersonage as the curate in Don Quixote, possessed ofshrewdness and information in his limited sphere, andthat I might gain some anecdotes from him concerninghis parish, its worthies, its antiquities, and its historicalevents. Perhaps I might have done so at any other time,but, unfortunately, the curate was something of a sportsman,and had heard of some game among the neighbouringhills. We met him just sallying forth from his house,and, I must confess, his appearance was picturesque.He was a short, broad, sturdy, little man, and had doffedhis cassock and broad clerical beaver, for a short jacketand a little round Andalusian hat; he had his gun inhand, and was on the point of mounting a donkey whichhad been led forth by an ancient withered handmaid.Fearful of being detained from his foray, he accosted mycompanion the moment he came in sight. "God preserveyou, Senior Don Juan! I have received yourmessage, and have but one answer to make. The APPENDIX. [1828.chives have all been destroyed. We have no trace ofany thing you seek for nothing nothing. Don Rafaelhas the keys of the church. You can examine it at yourleisure Adios, caballero!" With these words the gal -Hard little curate mounted his donkey, thumped hisribs with the butt end of his gun, and trotted off to thehills.In our way to the church we passed by the ruins ofwhat had once been a fair and spacious dwelling, greatlysuperior to the other houses of the village. This, DonJuan informed me, was an old family possession, but sincethey had removed from Palos it had fallen to decay forwant of a tenant. It was probably the family residenceof Martin Alonzo or Vicente Yanez Pinson, in the timeof Columbus.We now arrived at the church of St. George, in theporch of which, Columbus first proclaimed to the inhabitantsof Palos the order of the sovereigns, that theyshould furnish him with ships for his great voyage ofdiscovery. This edifice has lately been thoroughly re-repaired, and, being of solid mason work, promises tostand for ages, a monument of the discoverers. It standsoutside of the village, on the brow of a hill, lookingalong a little valley toward the river. The remains of aMoorish arch prove it to have been a mosque in formertimes; just above it, on the crest of the hill, is the ruinof a Moorish castle.I paused in the porch and endeavoured to recall theinteresting scene that had taken place there, when Columbus,accompanied by the zealous friar, Juan Perez,caused the public notary to read the royal order in presenceof the astonished alcaldes, regions, and alguazils :hut it is difficult to conceive the consternation that must1828.] APPENDIX. 343have been struck into so remote a little community, bythis sudden apparition of an entire stranger among them,bearing a command that they should put their personsand ships at his disposal, and sail with him away into theunknown wilderness of the ocean.The interior of the church has nothing remarkable,excepting a wooden image of St. George vanquishingthe Dragon, which is erected over the high altar, and isthe admiration of the good people of Palos, who bear itabout the streets in grand procession on the anniversaryof the saint. This group existed in the time of Columbus,and now flourishes in renovated youth and splendour,having been newly painted and gilded, and thecountenance of the saint rendered peculiarly bloomingand lustrous.Having finished the examination of the church, we re-suited our seats in the calesa and returned to Moguer.One thing only remained to fulfil the object of my pilgrimage.This was to visit the chapel of the Convent ofSanta Clara. When Columbus was in danger of beinglost in a tempest on his way home from his great voyageof discovery, he made a vow, that should he be spared,he would watch and pray one whole night in this chapel ;a vow which he doubtless fulfilled immediately after hisarrival.My kind and attentive friend, Don Juan, conductedme to the convent. It is the wealthiest in Moguer, andbelongs to a sisterhood of Franciscan nuns. The chapelis large, and ornamented with some degree of richness,particularly the part about the high altar, which is embellishedby magnificent monuments of the brave familyof the Puerto Carriers, the ancient lords of Moguer, andrenowned in Moorish warfare. The alabaster effigies of344 APPENDIX. [1828.distinguished warriors of that house, and of their wivesand sisters, lie side by side, with folded hands, on tombsimmediately before the altar, while others recline in deepniches on either side. The night had closed in by thetime I entered the church, which made the scene moreimpressive. A few votive lamps shed a dim light aboutthe interior ; their beams were feebly reflected by theguided work of the high altar, and the frames of the surroundingpaintings, and rested upon the marble figures ofthe warriors and dames lying in the monumental repose ofages. The solemn pile must have presented much thesame appearance when the pious discoverer performedhis vigil, kneeling before this very altar, and praying andwatching throughout the night, and pouring forth heartfeltpraises for having been spared to accomplish his sublimediscovery.I had now completed the main purpose of my journey,having visited the various places connected with the storyof Columbus. It was highly gratifying to find some ofthem so little changed though so great a space of time hadintervened ; but in this quiet nook of Spain, so far removedfrom the main thoroughfares, the lapse of timeproduces but few violent revolutions. Nothing, however,had surprised and gratified me more than the continuedstability of the Pinson family. On the morningafter my excursion to Palos, chance gave me an opportunityof seeing something of the interior of most of theirhouseholds. Having a curiosity to visit the remains ofa Moorish castle, once the citadel of Moguer, Don Fernantes undertook to show me a tower which served as amagazine of wine to one of the Pinson family. In seekingfor the key we were sent from house to house of nearlythe whole connexion. All appeared to be living in1828.] APPENDIX. 345that golden mean equally removed from the wants andsuperfluities of life, and all to be happily interwoven bykind and cordial habits of intimacy. We found the femalesof the family generally seated in the pathos, or centralcourts of their dwellings, beneath the shade of awningsand among shrubs and flowers. Here the Andalusianladies are accustomed to pass their mornings atwork, surrounded by their handmaids, in the primitive,or rather, oriental style. In the porches of some of thehouses I observed the coat of arms, granted to the familyby Charles V. hung up like a picture in a frame. Overthe door of Don Luis, the naval officer, it was carved onan escutcheon of stone, and coloured. I had gatheredmany particulars of the family also from conversation withDon Juan, and from the family legend lent me by DonLuis. From all that I could learn, it would appear thatthe lapse of nearly three centuries and a half has made butlittle change in the condition of the Pinzons. From generationto generation they have retained the same fairstanding and reputable name throughout the neighbourhood,filling offices of public trust and dignity, and possessinggreat influence over their fellow citizens by theirgood sense and good conduct. How rare is it to see suchan instance of stability of fortune in this fluctuating world,and how truly honourable is this hereditary respectability,which has been secured by no titles or entails, butperpetuated merely by the innate worth of the race! Ideclare to you that the most illustrious descents of meretitled rank could never command the sincere respect andcordial regard with which I contemplated this staunchand enduring family, which for three centuries and a halfhas stood merely upon its virtues.As I was to set off on my return to Seville before two346 APPENDIX. [1828.o clock, I partook of a farewell repast at the house of DonJuan, between twelve and one, and then took leave of hishousehold with sincere regret. The good old gentleman,with the courtesy, or rather the cordiality of a trueSpaniard, accompanied me to the posada to see me off. Ihad dispensed but little money in the posada thanks tothe hospitality of the Pinzons yet the Spanish pride ofmy host and hostess seemed pleased that I had preferredtheir humble chamber, and the scanty bed they had providedme, to the spacious mansion of Don Juan; andwhen I expressed my thanks for their kindness and attention,and regaled mine host with a few choice cigars, theheart of the poor man was overcome. He seized me byboth hands and gave me a parting benediction, and thenran after the calasero to enjoin him to take particular careof me during my journey.Taking a hearty leave of my excellent friend Don Juan,who had been unremitting in his attentions to me to thelast moment, I now set off on my wayfaring, gratified tothe utmost with my visit, and full of kind and gratefulfeelings towards Moguer and its hospitable inhabitants.APPENDIX. 347MANIFESTO OF ALONZO DE OJEDA.The following curious formula, composed by learned divines inSpain, wasjirst read aloud by the friars in the train of Alonzode Ojeda as a prelude to his attack on the savages of Carthage;and was subsequently adopted by the Spanish discoverers ingeneral, in their invasions of the Indian countries.]I, Alonzo de Ojeda, servant of the high and mightykings of Castile and Leon, civilizers of barbarous nations,their messenger and captain, notify and makeknown to you, in the best way I can, that God our Lord,one and eternal, created the heavens and the earth, andone man and one woman, from whom you, and we, and allthe people of the earth were and are descendants, procreated,and all those who shall come after us ; but thevast number of generations which have proceeded fromthem, in the course of more than five thousand yearsthat have elapsed since the creation of the world, madeit necessary that some of the human race should dispersein one direction and some in another, and that theyshould divide themselves into many kingdoms and provinces,as they could not sustain and preserve themselvesin one alone. All these people were given in charge, byGod our Lord, to one person, named Saint Peter, whowas thus made lord and superior of all the people ofthe earth, and head of the whole human lineage, whomall should obey, wherever they might live, and whatevermight be their law, sect or belief; he gave him also thewhole world for his service and jurisdiction, and though348 APPENDIX.he desired that he should establish his chair in Rome, asaplace most convenient for governing the world, yet hepermitted that he might establish his chair in any otherpart of the world, and judge and govern all the nations,Christians, Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and whatever othersect or belief might be. This person was denominatedPope, that is to say, admirable, supreme, father andguardian, because he is father and governor of all mankind.This holy father was obeyed and honoured aslord, king, and superior of the universe by those wholived in his time, and, in like manner, have been obeyedand honoured by all those who have been elected to thePontificate, and thus it has continued unto the presentday, and will continue until the end of the world.One of these Pontiffs of whom I have spoken, as lord ofthe world, made a donation of these islands and continents,of the ocean, sea, and all that they contain, to the Catholickings of Castile, who, at that time were Ferdinand andIsabella of glorious memory, and to their successors, oursovereigns, according to the tenor of certain papers drawnup for the purpose, (which you may see if you desire.)Thus his majesty is king and sovereign of these islands andcontinents by virtue of the said donation; and as king andsovereign, certain islands, and almost all to whom this hasbeen notified, have received his majesty, and have obeyedand served and do actually serve him. And, moreover, likegood subjects and with good will, and without any resistanceor delay, the moment they were informed of the foregoing,they obeyed all the religious men sent among them topreach and teach our Holy Faith ; and these of their freeand cheerful will, without any condition or reward, becameChristians, and continue so to be. And his majestyreceived them kindly and benignantly, and ordered thatAPPENDIX. 349they should be treated like his other subjects and vassals:you also, are required and obliged to do the same.Therefore, in the best manner I can, I pray and entreatyou, that you consider well what I have said, and thatyou take whatever time is reasonable to understand anddeliberate upon it, and that you recognise the church forsovereign and superior of the universal world, and thesupreme Pontiff, called Pope, in her name, and his majestyin his place, as superior and sovereign king of theislands and Terra Firma, by virtue of the said donation ;and that you consent that these religious fathers declareand preach to you the foregoing ; and if you shall so do,you will do well; and will do that to which you arebounden and obliged; and his majesty, and I in his name,will receive you with all due love and charity, and willleave you, your wives and children, free from servitude,that you may freely do with these and with yourselveswhatever you please, and think proper, as have done theinhabitants of the other islands. And besides this, hismajesty will give you many privileges and exemptions,and grant you many favours. If you do not do this, orwickedly and intentionally delay to do so, I certify toyou, that, by the aid of God, I will powerfully invadeand make war upon you in all parts and modes that I can,and will subdue you to the yoke and obedience of thechurch and of his majesty: and I will take your wivesand children and make slaves of them, and sell themas such, and dispose of them as his majesty may command; and I will take your effects and will do you all theharm and injury in my power, as vassals who will notobey or receive their sovereign, and who resist andoppose him. And I protest that the deaths and disasterswhich may in this manner be occasioned, will be the350 APPENDIX.fault of yourselves and not of his majesty 5 nor of me, norof these cavaliers who accompany me. And of what Ihere tell you and require of you ? I call upon the notaryhere present to give me his signed testimonial.THE END.