ANHISTORICAL INQUIRYPRECIOUS Menials.LONDON :PRINTED BY Thomas Davison, WHITEFHIAHS.3" ^52^^ a\ANHISTORICAL INQUIRYINTO THEPRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTIONPRECIOUS METALS.BY WILLIAM JACOB, ESQ., F.R.S.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.CONTENTSOFVOL. II.CHAPTER XV.On the origin of the trade of the Lombards and goldsmiths,and on the influence of their operations on coined goldand silver. — Increase of commercial intercourse. — Adjustmentof the relative values of coined money. — Riseof Lombards and goldsmiths. — Assay of plate. — Workmanshipof plate. — Seniorage on gold and silver coins.English gold coin little circulated. — Small quantity ofit in Henry VII. 's reign . . Page 1CHAPTER XVI.Of the commerce of Europe in the reign of Henry 7th asaffecting the locality of the precious metals. — Gradualdecrease of the precious metals till this time. — Laws directedagainst this. — The commerce of each countryviewed as a guide to an estimate of the proportion of theprecious metals each contained. — That of England. — OfFrance. — Of Spain and Portugal. — Of Italian theflourishing state of its manufactures — Germany. — Thehistory of the Fingers. — The northern states. — Effectsof exchanges upon the quantity of gold. — Great use of itin utensils in Italy. — Comparatively small in Germany,France, and England. — Lord Leicester. — Cardinal wolsey.— Duke of Northumberland — Watches . 14VI CONTENTS.CHAPTER XVII.On the acquisition of the precious metals from the discoveryof America, in 1492, to the opening of the mines of Po-tossin 1546. — Small quantity of gold at first found inAmerica. — The accumulation of years — Humboldt'sestimate rather too great. — The receipts from Mexico.Those from Peru much larger. — The mines openedof both gold and silver and amount obtained. — Applicationof these metals to domestic purposes and religioususes . Page 41CHAPTER XVIII.On the acquisition of the precious metals from the openingthe mines of Potosi, in 1546, to the end of the year 1599.Discovery of Potosi. — Amount of its produce. — Humboldt'sestimate. — Other mines of Peru. — Those of Chili.Brazil gold-washings. — Mines of Europe. — Estimate ofthe aggregate amount of the stock of gold and silver atthe end of the 16th century. — Of its application to domesticuses in Europe and in Asia. — Of the quantityconverted into coin . . . '57CHAPTER XIX.On the rise of prices simultaneously with the increase of goldand silver in the first century after the discovery ofAmerica. — Advance of prices in England. — Comparisonof those of 1480 and 1599. — Prices of corn during thistime. — Laws relative to the export of corn. — Rise ofrents noticed by Latimer. — Alteration in the value ofcoin and in the expenses of subsistence — Table of theadvance of prices in France. — Alteration in those ofSpain, Italy, and Germany . . .71CONTENTS. VllCHAPTER XX.Of the effect of the increase of metallic wealth on the variousclasses of society between 1483 and 1583. — Generalcomplaints of distress. — From the gentry, husbandmen,manufacturers, and merchants, from " A Brief Conceivetouching the Commonweal of this Realme of England." —Effects of the increase of prices. — In England, the crownbecoming comparatively poorer, the lauded proprietorsand cultivators benefited as Avell as merchants and manufacturers.— The labourers injured. — The rise of themiddle classes of society. — The effect of the first influxof gold and silver greater than that of larger quantitiessubsequently . . . Page 87CHAPTER XXI.On the increase of metallic wealth and the proportionate increaseof material wealth between the years 1600 and1 700. — Increase of produce from Potosi not large. — Severitiesexercised towards the natives. — Several newmines opened in Buenos Ayres. — Silver mine at Vascovery rich. — Those of quicksilver at Huancavelica muchinjured. — Gold washings in Chili. — The mines of NewGranada or Columbia. — Of Choco. — Of Mexico. — Methodof working them and their increased producesBrazil. — Increase of the use of gold articles. — Of coinedmoney. — Of population. — Of commodities and wealthgenerally. — Estimate of its amount . .115CHAPTER XXII.On the production of gold and silver from the year I7OO to1809 inclusive. — Mexico. — Its original state and methodof government. — Increase of wealth. — Estimate of theVlll CONTEXTS,increased productiveness of the mines. — Peru. — Its thinnessof population and little advancement. — Columbia. —Its gold and silver mines. — Chili. — Buenos Ayres. — Contrabandtrade ; gold furnished thereby. — The sum totalof the \^'hole produce of South America Page 145CHAPTER XXIII.On the rate of loss on gold and silver coin by abrasion in remoteand recent periods. — Increased rate of loss by abrasion.— Experiments at the mint on alloys and abrasion. —Greater loss upon silver and upon recent coinage. — Theleast upon British gold. — Recent experiments. — Calculationof the medium rate of loss on gold to the beginningof the Isti century. — Silver, loss on various pieces andits proportionate loss to gold. — General improvement incoinage in Europe . . . . 1G8CHAPTER XXIV.On the consumption of gold and silver and on the rate ofprices of commodities from I7OO to 1810. — The stock ofthe precious metals in Europe in I7OO. — Its dispersionby trade with India, China, America — Its increased usein articles of luxury in England and France ; for religioususes in Spain, Italy, Germany. — Increase of plate,spoons, watches. — Plating, gilding. — Trinkets. — Estimateof the amount, and that of coin. — Comparative pricesof wheat with coin in England, Dantzic, Spain. — Of otherarticles. — Increase of material wealth and coin in Englandand in Europe generally . . . .192CHAPTER XXV.On the production of gold and silver from the end of the year1809 to the end of 1829. — Decrease in the produce ofContents.tl)e mines. — Mexico; its internal wars — The mines ofGuanaxuato, Zaccatecas, Sombrerete, their general decrease.— Mines of Vasco. — Inferiority of the coin. —Amount coined. — Columbia, decrease of its gold washings.Estimate of gold and silver coined. — Peru. — Its wars.Wealth exported by exiles. — Amount of coined money.Dilapidated state of mines. — Present state of those ofHialgayoc, PascOjCallioma, Huantajaya, St. Rosa, and Lay-acta.— Estimate of the whole amount. — Buenos Ayres.Its wars and rapid decline of produce in all its mines.High rate of interest there. — Amount of dollars coined.Chili, — Mine at Huesco discovered in 1812. — Amountof gold produced. — Brasil. — Decrease of its gold washings.— Future prospects. — Gold from North America. —Estimate of the whole produce of America. — Gold fromHungary, Russia, and Asia. — Amount of it Page 225CHAPTER XXVI.On the consumption of gold and silver in the twenty yearsbetween 1810 and 1819, but especially on the applicationof them to other purposes than coin. — Gold and silvermanufactures in England. — In various towns. — Sweep-washes.— Refiners. — Quantity of gold refined. — Goldbeater'strade in London. — In the country. — Leaf-gold.Gilt buttons. — Toys and trinkets. — Plating. — Gildedchina. — Quantity of gold thus consumed. — Increased useof jewellery and gilt articles in every country. — Londonjewellers. — Fine gold. — Estimate of quantity consumedby them. — Silver goods. — Amount of duty paid. — Onwatches. — On plated goods. — Silver toys. — Estimate ofthe quantity annually consumed. — French jewellers. —Gold and silver watches. — Quantity consumed estimatedby Chapter — Consumption in Switzerland. — BavariaAustria. — Turkey . — Russia. — Prussia. — Large consumestion in the Netherlands. — Spain. — Italy. — General estimatefor Europe and America. — Quantity reproduced. —Trade With India and China. — Estimate of the gold transmittedby this means. — By the trade with the Levant. —General estimate of the quantity of coin ; its diminution.Page 270CHAPTER XXVII.Of the gold and silver of Africa and Asia. — African company.Quantity of gold imported by them. — General producevery small. — Eastern Africa — Silver and gold from Turkey.— Arabia and Persia. — Ava, Assam, Tibet;, CochinChina. — East India Company. — Malay peninsula. — InChina none of the precious metals coined. — Indian Islands.— Mines in Borneo. — Japan. — Estimate of thewhole amount of gold and silver produced in Asia. — Ofthat coined. — Small quantity of coin required in China.Chiefly silver. — Care taken of it. — Stationary prices.Estimate of the quantity of the precious metals consumedfor private use . . . 324CHAPTER XXVIII.On the proportion which that gold and silver which is coinedbears to that existing in other forms. — Consumptiongreater than the supply from the mines. — Consequent useand diminution of the stock of coin. — Proportion of cointo silver and gold in the possession of various classes ofsociety. — Consideration of each. — Of the stock of jewellers.— Of that in the Bank of England. — Total proportion.— Estimate of proportion in France, the rest ofEurope, and America. — Of the transfer of one stock intothe other at various times . . . 348CONTENTS.CHAPTER XXIX.Oil the prospect of future supplies of the precious metals. —The decrease of capital and state of war operate againstan increase in the produce of the mines. — Capital withdrawnfrom Spanish America. — Foreign capital requiredand carried there. — Thin population and scarcity of labourers,— Slavery. — Mines in Russia Page 358CHAPTER XXX.On the amount of paper money. — On the decline of prices. —Conclusion. — Review of previous calculation of currentcoin. — Paper money. — In Russia. — Its value. — Its depreciationin Austria. — Paper money in the remainder ofGermany. — France. — England. — United States. — Slightvariation of the metallic value of paper money generally.Amount of the circulating medium generally and itsdiminution. — Effect in lowering prices. — Counter operationof other causes. — Difficulty of estimating the changeson any articles. — General view of those in the prices ofthe produce of the soil. — Effects of rise or fall of priceson society relatively considered . . . 365ERRATUM.Page 214, in the running title, /or circulation, read calculation. ^AN INQUIRY,ETC.CHAPTER XV.On the origin of the trade of the Lombards and goldsmiths ;and on the influence of their operations on coined gold andsilver.The naval power of England, if strictly speakingit did not commence with the reign of Henry VII.,yet during that reign made a greater progress thanat any former period. The foreign trade of thecountry, and especially the carrying on of thattrade by English instead of foreign ships, keptpace with, or rather advanced before, the militarymarine power. The Hanse Towns, the Netherlands,Spain and Portugal, and the free States of Italywere partakers of this increase of commerce, andwith England and France all united in formingan extensive body, with interests which, thoughunited in their principal objects, were often opposedin detail. The mercantile people thuscomposed a kind of voluntary corporation throughVOL. II. BADJUSTMENT OF THE RELATIVE cup. XV.Europe, whose influence acted most powerfully onthe knowledge, the morals, the manners, the governments,the laws, and the religion of thewestern world. Half a century from the commencementof the reign of that monarch, by anew way to India being opened, and by thediscovery of x-\merica soon after, a new impulsewas given to the commercial spirit and enterprisewhich has continued to increase, in spite of occasionalinterruptions, to the present day.In this commercial intercourse, the severalcountries which produced more of any commoditiesthan were needed for their own demand,would sell them to such as required them forconsumption. But as one country wanted moreof some other than that other could supply, orthan it had equivalents to give in return to thatparticular country, the difference must be madeup by payments in the commodity which is calledmoney, or in something to represent that commoditywhich would become equally available inconfidence. The difference in the weight, thepurity, and the denomination of metal money inthe several countries wis very great ; and the riskand expense of conveying it to a distance were stillmore powerfully opposing obstacles. Hence arosethe invention of bills of exchange. The intricacyand complication of the several kinds of moneycurrent in the numerous trading states, such asthe small republics of Italy, and the various in-CHAP. XV. VALUES OF COINED MONEY.dependent sovereignties of the Hanse Towns, causedthe subject of exchanges to be a branch that requiredmuch science, much experience, and muchstudy ; and the more so as the several independentcommunities were constantly introducing new lawsand regulations affecting the value of the coinswhich they respectively issued.From the circumstances thus arising, in additionto the variety of languages used by the commercialpeople, the business of exchanges, which hadoriginated in Italy in the latter end of the twelfthcentury, and had rapidly extended to the othercountries, was confined to a few persons, from thedistrict where the profession had originated, calledLombards; who by their skill, craft, wealth, andinfluence acted a most important part, not merelyas the mediums of commercial intercourse betweenindividuals, but in all the political transactionsbetween the governments of the several communities,as well as in financial affairs betweenthe rulers and their subjects.In England and France and the other largercommunities of Europe, a profession similar tothat of the Lombards arose, which became necessaryin all of the larger operations of domesticcommerce. This was the trade of the goldsmiths,which at an early period had comprised not, asnow, only the dealers in or makers of gold andsilver articles, but also that trade which has sinceb2TRADE OF THE cHAP. XV.the separation of the two ancient branches receivedthe name of bankers.The trade of the goldsmiths consisted, in England,in exchanging the coins of foreign countrieswith those of their own. We can scarcely conceivein our time when, both in England and inFrance, all the current money is of a low butfixed value and of domestic coinage, of what importancethis trade must have been, withoutbearing in mind that a grain of gold or of silverat the period now under consideration, the reignof Henry VII., was at least equal in value toseven or eight grains in the present day, wheneverit was to be exchanged for corn, cloth, or any othercommodity. Those who exercised that trademust have found it necessary to acquire such aknowledge of chemistry, and such facility in performingits operations, as could enable them todecide certainly and speedily on the exact portionof alloy which each piece contained, and its exactweight, to the minutest subdivision of weights,with the greatest accuracy.The for greater part of the gold money and alarge proportion of the silver money must havebeen too valuable to have come into commoncirculation. When a quarter of wheat was worthfour or five shillings, he who purchased a bushel,or even a sack, would pay for it in copper, lead,or tin money. The same must have been theCHAP. XV. GOLDSMITHS AND Lombards.case of one who wanted beer when it was atthree farthings the quart, or wine when it wastwo-pence the quart, or mutton when it was lessthan a penny the pound. Thus, Holinshedspeaking of the poverty of the farmers about theyear 1500, says, '* If one of them did cast downhis purse, and therein a noble, or six shillings insilver (for such men cared not for gold, becauseit was not so ready payment, and they were oftenenforced to give a penny for the exchange of anangel), it was very likely that all the rest coiddnot lay down so much against it." At a timewhen, among a company of farmers, six shillingscould scarcely be found, it cannot be supposedthat the labourers, however employed, who werethe most numerous class, could have occasion forcoin of such value as even the silver pennies ofthat time.Whatever coined money may have been inexistencein that age, the far greater part of thatcomposed of silver and a still greater proportionof that struck in gold, would rest in the hands ofthe Lombards and the goldsmiths and such otherpersons as had to transact the larger operations ofbuying and selling. The monarchs, too, who bytheir parsimony or their extortion were enabledto amass treasure, would retain a large share ofthe coined or uncoined precious metals; almostthe whole of that retained by the Lombards wouldbe the foreign coin. The goldsmiths would preferASSAY OF PLATE. CHAP. XV.the coin of the realm, which would thus form aprincipal part of their stock of money, whilstthey would retain a large quantity of gold andsilver in ingots or in articles of furniture or ofornaments. The monarchs, as also the prelatesand nobles who were rich, would be as likely toretain the domestic coin or utensils of the preciousmetals as any of the foreign coined money. Thisdistribution would be caused by the state of thelawes then in existence. No tax was then as nowlevied on manufactured plate, but all articles madeof gold and silver were to be of the same degreeof purity as the coin of the realm.Whatever was manufactured in London or insome of the larger places was ordered to be assayedand stamped by the warders of the craft in suchtown ; but whatever was made in places " whereno touch was ordained" was to be stamped by themaker, and if found beneath the proper standard,it was confiscated to the crown \ In this state ofaffairs any article of plate would be of the samevalue, in equal weights, as gold or silver in ingots;and hence as occasion might require, the vesselsbeing worth no more than their weight, would beon every pressing emergency readily convertedinto coin. The workmanship of plate would inthat age cost but little, as luxury had not reachedthe point in that kind of art which it soon after-billsof Parliament second Henry ^'^I. cap, 12 and 13.CHAP. XV.WORKMANSHIP OF PLATE.wards attained in the hands of Bcnvenuto Celliniat Florence and of his successors in the otherparts of Europe. The taste displayed in theforms and the decorations of gold and silverutensils was very coarse both in France and inEngland. Voltaire, in his General History, says,the work of the goldsmiths in Paris was so badthat the king (Louis 12th) in 1501 forbade themanufacture, so that the French had their platefrom Italy." There seems good reason to believethat the English of that period did not excel theFrench artizans in the fabrication of gold andsilver articles. We may thus account for whatwe find often stated in the records of the age,that the religious houses, the nobility, and richindividuals, gave up to the monarch on pressingemergencies their plate for the public service.Such a surrender in the present day, when aheavy tax and the workmanship of artists makeplate of silver of more than double its value inweight', would be deemed a most oppressiverequisition, whereas, at the period referred to, thedifference between making payments in coinedmoney or in manufactured gold and silver wouldamount but to a trifle.In the reign of Henry VII., and in the presthas been commonly reported that a service of platepresented as a grateful memorial from Portugal to the Dukeof Wellington had cost about eighty-five thousand pounds forthe metals and eighty-six thousand for the workmanship.SENIORAGE ON COINS CHAP. XV.ceding period in which gold money had beencoined in England, there was a reluctance to takeit among the internal traders. This arose fromthe practice of the monarch to take a seniorage onthat coin as well as on the silver. The amountof this was wtU known to the Lombards andgoldsmiths ; and as the foreign gold coin, amongthat class, passed from hand to hand at a valuefixed by the weight of the pure gold it contained,and the English gold passed at the legal value,which was increased by the seniorage, it was theinterest of those two descriptions of traders tosecure what rested in their own hands in foreignrather than in English gold. It would be moreuseful to the Lombards in their foreign negotiations,and to the goldsmiths in the manufacturing branchof their trade.We may in this way account for the very smallamount of gold coinage in England between theyear when it commenced and the reign of HenryVII. ; it being at scarcely the rate of threethousand pounds yearly. This seniorage, however,prevented the application of the domesticcoined gold to any other purpose than that ofmoney, which probably was one of the inducementswhich had caused the practice.Ruding has exercised his accustomed laboriousdiligence on this as on every subject relating tothe coins of this kingdom, but with so little success,that he honestly confesses " that no veryCHAP. XV. OF GOLD AND SILVER.certain conclusions can be drawn from the amountof this deduction at any one time, as the rate ofthe seniorage seems to have been ever unsettled,and to have depended on the caprice, the avarice,or the necessities of the sovereign \" It appears,however, by the accounts he has collected (chieflyfrom the Vanstone manuscripts in the BritishMuseum), that in one period of the reign ofEdward IV. a troy pound weight of gold, whichwas coined into nominal money amounting totwenty pounds sixteen shillings and eight-pence,had cost to the merchant for the gold, eighteenpounds six shillings and eight-pence; to the masterof the mint, for coining, two shillings and four-pence ;thus leaving for seniorage two pounds seven shillingsand eight-pence, or more than thirteen percent.In the thirty-seventh year of Henry VIII,the troy pound of gold was coined into thirtypounds of legal money of the day. The cost ofthe gold to the merchant had been twenty-fourpounds eighteen shillings, thus leaving for thefabrication and the seniorage five pounds twoshillings, or a profit of more than sixteen percent.These two instances of exorbitant seniorageare the exceptions to the general practice ; as inno other years did it reach the same extent,though in a few they approached to it. On theaverage of the period from the eighteenth ofRuding, vol. i. p. 180.10 SENIORAGE ON COINS chap. xv.Edward III. to the fourth of Edward VI. theseniorage, with a few high exceptions, seems tohave amounted to between three and four percent.The seniorage on silver never seems to haveattained the monstrous height to which that onfold had been carried in some few instances. Itwas, however, raised or lowered according to thestate of the monarch's finances, or of his appetiteor power for grasping the wealth of his subjects.It is remarked by a noble writer, that *' theprofits of the seniorage were so much consideredby our monarchs as a certain branch of theirrevenue, that they were occasionally granted inwhole or in part, either to corporate bodies fortheir advantage, or for defraying certain chargesexpressed in the grant itself. They were sometimesgranted to individuals by way of pension.And when the right of seniorage was extinguishedin this kingdom, by act 18 Charles II. cap. 5,there was a pension, payable out of the profitsderived from it, granted under the great seal fortwenty-one years to dame Barbara Villiers of twopenceby tale out of every pound weight of silvercoin made at the English mint ; which thelegislature, out of a principle of justice, orderedto be continued out of the coinage duties imposedby that act"Lord Liverpool's letter to the king, p, 104,CHAP. XV.OF GOLD AND SILVER. 11This seniorage upon the coin must have operatedas an impediment to its general, and consequentlyits extensive, circulation; but a greater impedimentstill must have been encountered from the uncertaintyof the amount of that seniorage, whichvaried, and that to a great extent, in a shortspace of time. It has been before stated that inone of the years of the reign of Edward I\^, theseniorage on gold coins amounted to thirteen percent.; in the next year, it amounted to six percent.; and three years later, to only four per cent.In the thnty-seventh year of Henry VIII. theseniorage was more than sixteen per cent. ; in thethirty-sixth year of the same reign, it was onlyeight per cent.; and in the thirty-fourth year, notmore than three per cent. As the pieces of thesame reign bore the same stamp, they would circulateamong those of the inferior, but not thelowest, class of traders before their difference invalue would be detected; but if presented to thegoldsmiths or the Lombards, the discovery of theinferior value would be made, and the loss fall onthose least prepared to bear it.The great traders in money had modes of makingtheir payments and settling their balances amongthemselves without reference to the legal value ofthe coins, but according to their value in their weightin pure gold or silver. If they paid or received theEnglish coin at less than its legal value, they wereliable to heavy penalties ; and they unwillingly,12 DISINCLINATION TO TAKE cHAP. xv.therefore, embarrassed their transactions by passingthem even among themselves. The lesser tradersalso were taught by their losses to avoid, as fair asthey could, the English gold coin. This disinclinationtowards that description of money continuedstrong till the reign of Elizabeth, when agreat and general improvement in the currencyof the kingdom took place. It had not, however,wholly disappeared so late as 1774, when thegreat recoinage under George III. was effected ;for before that operation, when the guineas byfriction, by sweating, and by filing, had beengreatly reduced in weight, the minores of Portugal,which passed at twenty-seven shillings,were as general and were more preferred in all thewestern counties of England than the nationalgold coin, which, though a legal tender, had beengenerally very much diminished in weight.As the great dealers in money thus avoidedthat coined in England, and rather chose to circulatethat of foreign fabrication, it does not appearsurprising that at a time like the reign of HenryVII., when England had rapidly increased inwealth, the amount of its own coin of gold andsilver should have been so small, as it must necessarilyhave been if all that had issued from itsmints in two preceding centuries had been thenactually in circulation.Notwithstanding the small amount of domesticcoin, there must have been money to a largeCHAP. XV. GOLD COINS IN ENGLAND. 13amount, and most certainly to a much larger onein forciirn than in English coin. The riches ofthe kingdom increased during the reign of HenryVII.It is, indeed, true that the greater part of thismetallic treasure did not remain in the hands ofhis subjects sufficiently long to become as productiveas it might have been made, but wasextorted from them by the monarch by a varietyof legal and illegal oppressions, and served to fillthat treasury which was found amply stored athis death. The exact amount of that treasure itis difficult to determine: Coke states it at upwardsof five millions, Sir Robert Cotton at four millionsand a half; but the more probable estimate is thatof Bacon, which Hume has adopted, one millioneight hundred thousand pounds, being equivalentto near three millions of our present money; asum probably much greater than that in the possessionof all his subjects, and yet no more thanhis son and successor was enabled to dissipate inafew years; till at length he was compelled byhis extravagance to have recourse to the plunderof the church, and to the debasement of the coin,to defray the expenses of his government.14 ' EFFECT OF COMMERCE CHAP. xvi.CHAPTER XVI.Of the commerce of Europe in the reign of Henry VII., asaffecting the locality of the precious metals.The reign of Henry VII. in England, in whichthe first discovery of* America was made, is aperiod of peculiar importance to the subject ofthis inquiry, as it was that from which the circumstancesof the precious metals began to experiencea vast change. Up to that period thedecrease in the existing quantity had been proceedingduring several centuries, and immediatelyafter, an increase began which has continuedwithout any interruption, though with muchvariation, to our own time. It would be desirable,if it were attainable, to know the quantity,or nearly the quantity, of those metals existing inthe form of coins, and that in the shape of utensils,or of bullion; but as that knowledge cannot beobtained, it may be desirable to attempt somemode of estimation, which at least may have aplausible approximation to truth.It was supposed that the stock of gold and silvercould be increased by compulsory laws, and it wastherefore by acts of the legislature, both of Englandand Scotland, decreed that all merchants.CHAP. xvr. ON LOCALITY OF COLD AND SILVER. 15foreigners as well as natives, should import acertain quantity of coin or bullion in every shipin proportion to the value of the other goods, andshould expend all that coin and bullion, with allthe money received for their imports, in purchasingthe commodities of the country; but theywere forbidden to export any gold or silver, incoin or bullion, under very severe penalties. Weneed scarcely remark that these laws were foundin practice so injudicious, and so incapable ofbeing executed, that they were, in a few years,repealed in both countries.During the whole of this reign the trade hadincreased both in its imports and its exports ; andas the latter regularly exceeded the former, agreat increase in the deposit of the precious metalseither in the form of coin or of bullion must havetaken place in this kingdom. There seems goodreason to conclude that in proportion to the extentand population, those metals must have beenmore abundant in the British Islands than in anyof the larger kingdoms of Europe. The state ofthe general commerce of the countries of theworld, though an uncertain is perhaps the bestcriterion by which to form a judgment of theactual deposit of the precious metals in each individualcountry. That country which from itslabour and soil produces the most valuable commodities,will receive in exchange for them thegreatest portion of other articles. As gold and16 COMMERCE OF ENGLAND chap. xvr.silver are merely commodities, it may be assumedthat the greatest portion of them will be found insome form or other, and chiefly in that of utensilsand ornaments, in those countries which have themost intercourse by trade with foreign countries.In this view it may serve a useful purpose to take aslight survey of the commerce of the several kingdomsof Europe at the close of the fifteenth century,as a guide to the estimation of the portions of theprecious metals which they severally possessed.Attention is first naturally invited to the stateof commerce in our own country. Amidst theintestine wars between the houses of York andLancaster, though tillage had been lessened andcultivation neglected, there had been a constantintercourse kept up with the other countries ofEurope, but it had been chiefly conducted bymeans of foreign shipping. When Henry VII.succeeded to the throne, after conciliating thedomestic factions, his attention was directed tothe commerce of his dominions. One of his firststeps was to secure free access to his ports forforeign merchants, especially the Italians, and toprotect their persons and property in his dominions.This soon produced imports of variousmanufactured goods from that country, as well asthe richer commodities of the East, which werepaid for with the wool, cloths, lead, tin, and other\ productions of England. He entered into com-\ mercia treaties with other powers, and lessenedCHAP. XVI.FiiExcii co.M:\iEncE. 17the duties, by which the revenue, instead of declining,was improved from the larger quantity ofthe imports, whilst the domestic products given inexchange for such imports were raised in thrice.The attention of this monarch was particularlydirected to the increase of the ships and sailors ofhis kingdoms, and in this reign we find the rudimentsof that celebrated navigation act, afterwardspassed, to which the naval superiority of Englandhas been commonly attributed. By the law 14Henry VII. cap. 10, it was enacted that no winesof Gascony or of Guienne, nor the woads ofToulouse, should be imported into England,except in ships belonging to the king, or inEnglish, Irish, or Welsh ships navigated by seamenof those nations. This gave great encouragementto the constructing of ships, and causedthe education of a considerable number of seamen.The cloths made in England were bought upby the Steelyard company in an unfinished state,and sent to Flanders to be dyed, dressed, andfinished ; but Henry encouraged the perfectingthe cloths of his own kingdom, and is said to havefurnished capital for that and other purposes, andeven to have become a partner, and to have drawngain from mixing in such operations ; as he alsoappears to have done to a greater extent by thepractice which he pursued through his wholereign of employing his ships in trading voyages orhiring them to the merchants on freight.VOL. II, cIS FRENCH COMMERCE.CHAP. XVI.From the little attention which had been paidto the general principles which regulate the commerceof nations, it is not wonderful that someimpolitic or impracticable enactments should havebeen framed in that age.France at the period we are surveying had beenreleased from the rule of Louis XI,, whose reignhad been marked by cruelty, craft, and avarice,and whose objects had been much more directedto extend his power than to enrich his subjects.The sceptre was in the hands of a minor, whoexhausted the treasure accumulated by his father.Among other acts of his reign he paid to ourHenry VII. a kind of ransom of seven hundredand forty-five thousand crowns to withdraw fromhis invasion of France, and agreed to pay twenty-fivethousand crowns annually to England forever.By this and an unfortunate invasion ofItaly he dissipated his treasure and oppressedhis subjects. Though Louis had laid the foundationof a union of all the provinces of Franceunder one head, his projects had not yet fullysucceeded, and the territory was still divided intosmall and hostile sovereignties. It had few manufacturesand little surplus produce. Whatforeign commodities were needed were suppliedeither from the Low Countries ; from the citiesof Italy, which dispensed the luxuries of the east ;from Upper Italy, which furnished their raw silk ;or from England, which supplied a portion of theCHAP. xvr. TRADE OF SPAIN AND PORTUGAL. IQwool with which the inhabitants were clothed.The wine of France, the chief article of its export,was so low in price that the balance of trade withmost parts of Europe, the only division of the worldwith which that kingdom exchanged commodities,must have been against that country and beenpaid in the precious metals. These considerations,with the complaints to be found of the scarcityof money in all French writers who describe theperiod, and the high rate of interest paid on loansof moneys lead to the conclusion that the quantityof gold and silver actually existing in France wasfar less than was retained in our insular kingdom.Spain and Portugal had, from the time whenthe whole possessions of the Moors had been contractedwithin the boundaries of the small butfruitful kingdom of Granada, been gradually decliningfrom that wealth and splendour which theMahometan had displayed as long as Cordovawas the capital of their dominions. The struggleswhich attended the long contests in the peninsula,till their final termination in favour of the Christiansunder Ferdinand and Isabella, were not favourableto the national industry ; and the minesof silver which the Moors at earlier periods hadworked in their kingdoms of Jan and Seville, hadPhilip IV. fixed the rate of interest to be exacted in thefairs of Champagne at twenty per cent., whilst in Italy therate was at sixteen per cent, per annum, and in England oneper cent, per month.C 220 TRADE OF SPAIN AND PORTUGAL, chap. xvi.been either exhausted or suspended ; whilst thesands of the Varro, the Tagus, and the otherstreams, which formerly furnished some gold, hadceased to be productive. The commerce of thepeninsula, which had flourished whilst the Moorshad the sole possession and could maintain an intercoursewith their brethren in faith in Africaand Asia, became contracted as their dominionhad been lessened, and for two centuries had beenconfined to the exchange of a few commodities,which were of too similar a nature to be very extensive,between their chief trading city Malaga andthe territories of Africa on the coast of Barbary.It must be obvious from the circumstances ofthe two countries, that neither France nor Spainwere likely to possess so much metallic treasure inthe period we are viewing as at that time existedin England. It must be a matter of doubt ratherthan of certainty, if the stock of both countriesunited amounted to as much.Italy had been long increasing in wealth ofevery kind, and though a few cities only are commonlyspoken of in history, yet it is not possiblethat their affluence should not have extended tothe other parts of the peninsula, and have stockedthe smaller cities and towns with a larger proportionof the gold and silver of the world than was to befound in desolated France, in agitated Spain, orinEngland, where the contests of the two Roseshad produced some degree of desolation and aCHAP. XVI.TRADE OF ITALY. ^lneglected state of cultivation. The riches ofItaly had been long and gradually increasing ;the foundation was laid immediately after thedestruction of the kingdom of the Lombards, bythe fisheries carried on upon the shores of theAdriatic. From the art acquired by that profession,the Italians became the chief and mostexpert navigators \ They then opened a commercialintercourse with the rising dominions ofthe new Arabian prophet, which increased theirwealth and extended their naval power. In a fewcenturies, when a kind of spiritual insanity waskindled in western Europe, and vast forces wereto be transported to the shores of Asia, the shipsof the Italian cities were hired at enormous freightsby the soldiers of the cross, who expended thesavings of centuries in expeditions the pecuniaryprofit of which centred almost wholly among themerchants of the republics in the Italian peninsula.Commerce was naturally connected with, and inthat age dependent on, navigation. The intercourseof Italy with Greece and with the Arabs,and, through the latter, with India, made thecities of Italy the depositories and the dispensersThough the honour of the discovery of the mariner's compasshas been contended for on behalf of several individuals,it seems probable that the world is indebted for it to an Italiannamed Flavio de Gioca, of Amalfi, who constructed the firstwith only eight points, but that afterwards the instrument receivedvarious and gradual improvements in other countries andfrom other persons.— Anderson's Hist. Comm. vol. v. p. 144.TRADE OF ITALY. CHAP. XVI.of the valuable products of Asia to the Europeanworld. The incenses, the perfumes, the spices,and the precious stones, were sources of vast gains ;whilst the profit of freights on the bulky commoditieswith which Europe supplied Asia addedto the growth of the shipping branch of industry.Under the auspices and the influence of thisforeign trade, manufactures arose and flourishedin all the districts of the peninsula. Milan suppliedthe best and most costly weapons and armour ;Venice produced the most elegant plate, jewellery,and other ornaments ; Genoa and Bologna furnishedthe richest silks, satins, velvets, and embroidery.Many inventions which owe their origin to Italyand to this period contributed both to the fameand the wealth of that peninsula. Glasses forreading, in some measure resembling spectacles,had been invented by Spine, a Dominican monkof Pisa. Faenza fabricated within its walls a kindof earthenware or porcelain. Glass had been madeby the Venetians to some extent, and mirrors hadbeen introduced by that state, from whence clocksand watches had first became known. The manufactureof paper from pounded rags was an inventionfirst practised in Padua. To these may beadded the substitution of candles and tapers in theplace of the lamps which had formerly been used.This flourishing condition of navigation andcommerce, both external and internal, led to theCHAP. XVI.TRADE OF ITALY. 23discovery, or rather the resource, of trading inmoney, or what afterwards obtained the nameof banking. Assuming the denomination of thecountry in which it had originated, or, to speakmore correctly, had been revived, the Lombards ofItaly formed establishments in the trading citiesof all other countries ; and, as the channels throughwhich all the transactions in the precious metals,and their substitutes, bills of exchange, were conducted,such great profits accrued, and such greatfortunes were accumulated by the apparently smallcharges for brokerage, commissions, and exchanges,as made the most powerful monarchs of the age dependenton the Lombards for pecuniary assistance.We are thus warranted in assuming, that as thegreater part of the precious metals must of necessityremain in the country which is the mostrich in its stock of general commodities, the greatestportion of those metals which Europe containedwould be stored in the Italian peninsula.In the age to which we now look, the empire ofGermany, with the territories which have sincebeen amalgamated with it, comprehending Bohemia,Prussia, and Hungary, furnished the littlegold and silver which kept up the general stockof the European world.Those countries, under a rigid feudal system,were divided into various independent and pettysovereignties, all jealous of their neighbours, andfrequently embroiled with them. The roads and24 Tirade OF GERMANY.CHAP. XVI.rivers were insecure, and the protection either toproperty or persons passing along them dependentupon the interest, the caprice, or the cupidity ofthe various princes or nobles who ruled the severalminor dominions. In such a state of society theprecious metals, which were obtained by the labourof the vassals, might for a time be kept in securitywithin the walls of the castles of noble or princelyrobbers, but little of it would circulate in countrieswhere no protection was afforded to intercourse,and where commerce was consequentlyalmost unknown. In the keeps of the castles itwould be useless to the owners, and equivalentswould be sought for which would either secureand extend the power of its possessors, or serve todisplay their pomp and luxury in the exhibitionsof those tournaments which were the chief theatrefor displaying the power and the wealth of thosepetty sovereigns. The wants which such exhibitionsrequired were not supplied by domesticlabour. The arms and the decorations of theknights, the dresses and the ornaments of thehigh-born ladies, who by their presence gavesplendour and excitement to such assemblages,were the products of other countries, for whichnone of their own territories yielded any equivalentsbut silver and gold. Those metals would,therefore, be naturally exchanged for the costlyarmour of Milan, for the rich silks and velvetsof Bologna and Genoa, for the trinkets of Venice,CHAP. xvr. TRADE OF GERMANY. 25and for the perfumes, the spices, and the jewelsof Asia.From the various circumstances connected withGermany internally, from its possessing no foreigntrade or navigation, and from the prices of allarticles of the first necessity being lower therethan in France and England, which have beforebeen noticed S it does not seem probable, that thegold and silver resting in Germany and in thecountries combined with it in this view, could havebeen so great as in England, if it even equalledthat in France and Spain.History has indeed furnished us with the annalsof a German family, the Fingers, whose wealth,splendour, and finally honours, would raise our ideasof the commerce of that country to an extraordinaryheight. As illustrating the character of theage, it may not be out of place shortly to trace afamily whose exertions had great influence, notonly on the general commerce of the period inwhich they grew up, but more especially on themining operations of various parts of the world.This family, now a princely house, traces itsorigin as far back as the year 1370> vvhen thefounder of it, who had inherited a small manufactoryof linen cloth in a village near Augsburg,began to extend his trade, and continued it withsuch success that on his death, in 1409, he leftVol. i. p. 317.26 WEALTHY GERMAN FAMILY. CHAP. XVI.a capital, then deemed enormous for a trader,amounting to three thousand gulden \His descendants were skilful, industrious,economical, and upright, and they in the courseof a few generations established banking, mercantile,and mining transactions through almostevery part of the continent of Europe. Theyserved the house of Austria, and contributedmore to its exaltation than all the nobility of theirdominions. The Emperor Maximilian drew largepecuniary assistance from them on the securityof the earldom of Kerchberg and the barony ofWeisenhorn, which were mortgaged for seventythousand guldens. They were enabled, in 1509,at two months' notice, to furnish the emperor withone hundred and seventy thousand ducats, on thesecurity of Pope Julius II. and of the kings franceand Spain, and thus enabled that prince to put hisarmy in motion against the republic of Venice.At the assembling of the States of Germany in1530, the emperor, Charles V., lived in the magnificenthouse of Anthony Fugger in Augsburg,and that lofty Spaniard allowed his host accessto him at all times. By the pecuniary aid of himand his brother, Charles was enabled to equipthat expedition against Algiers which terminatedThere was in that age a gold coin denominated luhischegulden, and worth about seven shillings and sixpence inmoney of the present day; after 1535 they were scarce andM'orth only two shillings.CHAP. XVI. WEALTHY GERMAN FAMILY. 27SO unfortunately. It is related of this Anthonythat on the return of the emperor from his ex r^^>^sedition to the African shore, a fire of cinnamon, 7*^ V^*^^much more costly then than in the present day, \ ^ ./^-♦^ti^^j^uWwas kindled in the apartment prepared for him, \U-fytjiinto which the host, in acknowledgment of the I «honour of the visit, threw all the bills, bonds, andother securities, which he held for money advancedto his imperial guest. This mai is reportedto have died possessed of six million goldencrowns in ready money, besides estates, jewels, andgoods in every part of Europe and in both theIndies.When Charles V. was in Paris, and had surveyedall the wealth of the royal treasury, and the collectionof rarities assembled in that capital, hedeclared that *' he had one linen weaver in Augsburgwho had money more than sufficient to payfor the whole of the valuables he had seen."In the " Spiegel der Ehren^'" the splendour ofthe furniture, the magnificence of the palaces,and, above all, the unbounded charity of thisfamily is recorded and most lavishly praised;and it is affirmed of the successors of the twelvechildren which Anthony left, that they had sobranched out in the year 16 19, as to numberforty-seven counts and countesses, and as manychildren as there are days in the year; and thusthe blessings of Heaven rested visibly on theirsucceeding generations."28 WEALTHY GERMAN FAMILY. cHAP. XVI.One branch of this family has been alreadynoticed in this inquiry \ which was settled in Spain.Another branch at Antwerp lent to our HenryVIII., after he had dissipated the treasure bequeathedby his father, one hundred and fifty-twothousand pounds ; and to Edward VI., when thecoinage in his reign was reformed, one hundredand twenty-nine thousand Caroline florins. Thereare notices also of the same family in Genoa,Milan, and Ghent. Their commerce was stillcontinued, and seems not to have been held derogatoryto the rank of nobility, or even that ofsovereignty which they had attained. { They aresaid to have purchased, within ninety years, twoentire earldoms, six baronies, and fifty-sevenmanors, which were possessed among them as lateas 176^2, besides houses and lands of great valuein and around the city of Augsburg"*fThc two principal branches of the house stillexist among the ranks of the mediatised princesof Germany) Though now distinguished by someprivileges among the subjects of Bavaria andWittenberg, they are without political power; but/ their estates are said to comprehend twenty-oneGerman square miles, or near three hundredthousand English acres, and to be peopled withforty thousand inhabitants, chiefly dependent onthe cultivation of their lands")Vol, i. p. 274.j^KCHAP. XVI. TRADE OF THE NORTHERN KINGDOMS. ggThe wealth of the family wc have here tracedwas but in a small degree collected from theirtransactions in Germany. That country was toopoor to have contributed largely to it. Theirprosperity must have been created more by theoperations in Italy, in the Netherlands, and inSpain, than by those within the poor and feudalterritory comprehended within the Germanic empire.The metallic wealth which the familypossessed would, like the other commodities whichcomposed their property, be in the countrieswherein their commercial, or mining, or agriculturalestablishments were carried on, and inaproportion determined by the relative extent ofsuch establishments, and not by the division ofEurope, from which the family at the head ofthem had originally sprung.It can scarcely be supposed that any considerablequantity of the precious metals, either in theform of coin, of ornaments, or of utensils, was tobe found in the northern divisions of Europe atthe period now under our review. The richesdisplayed by Canute, to which we have in aformer part of this inquiry adverted, had beencollected at a time when their sea kings had risento naval power from the almost exclusive possessionof the fisheries. With their barks which,though feeble, were superior to those of the restof the world, they were seduced by their superiorskill in navigation first to plunder other countries,so TRADE OF THE NORTH OF EUROPE. CiiAP. XVI,and then to take permanent possession of favouredspots in them, till, in a short space of time, theybecame the settled owners and princes in England,Scotland, France, and the distant countryof Naples.The loss of the most enterprising and energeticportions of these northern people, with the extemporaneousrise of the Hanse Towns, and afterwardsthe Dutch, who became their successfulcompetitors in the fisheries, seems to have produceda general depression in the state of Denmark,Norway, and Sweden, which left them aprey to such internal feuds and hostilities, as hadbeen avoided during the excitement which thepreparation for offensive operations against thesouthern kingdoms had created. It is not necessaryto enter into the relation of the petty, butharassing, warfare which was carried on by thesekingdoms against each other, or the internalcontests which existed in each. They were, foraperiod, diminished during the reign of Margaretof Denmark, who was raised to the thronein 1385, and ruled, during thirty-six years, thethree kingdoms of Scandinavia, acquiring thename of the Semiramis of the north. After thedeath of that heroine, those three kingdoms becameagain separate sovereignties. They were commonlyat war with each other; whilst the risingstate of Lubec, by its wealth and its naval forces,acted, as suited best its commercial purposes, theCHAP. xvr. TRADE OF THE NORTH OF EUROPE. 31part of a mediator, or an ally to the contendingkingdoms. At the conclusion of the fifteenthcentury, these nations, having before been deprivedof their fisheries, saw, amidst their internalcommotions, their commercial navy transferred tothe rising independent cities of Lubec, Wismar,Rostock, Stettin, Stralsund, and Dantzick, andtheir military naval force, if not annihilated, wasfar inferior to that of the confederacy of theHanse Towns, in their immediate vicinity.In this condition, when the mines of silver, if.they had been at all worked, yielded but a triflingproduct, and none but minute particles of goldcould be collected from the streams by so thinlyspread a population ; whatever may have been thequantity of the precious metals existing in Europe,we can look but for a very small portion of themin these northern kingdoms. The chief productof Norway, its timber, was conveyed to Hollandby Lubec or Dutch ships, and to England andScotland by ships of those nations. The value oftimber depends chiefly on the freight, and theamount beyond that charge, small as it must havebeen, would be needed to pay for the scanty supplyof corn which those countries regularly required.The view here taken of the state of commercein Europe, about the period of the discovery ofAmerica, tends to show that for the purpose ofconducting such a trade a very small portion of32 OPERATIONS OF THE LOMBARDS. CHAP. XVI.the precious metals could have been required.The amount of the articles imported from andexported to foreign countries was small, whencompared with that of subsequent ages, and theLombards, by their operations in exchanges, wouldtend to lessen the demand for metallic money.The operations of the Lombards of that day hadnot received such extensive developments as theyhave since assumed, but as far as they did proceed,they tended to generalise payments and to drawthem to a focal point in the large cities where therewere courses or exchanges in which bills on onecountry could, by sale and indorsement, be exchangedfor those on others.Antwerp was the chief place for these kinds ofexchanges in the north, and Genoa in the southof Europe. A Hollander might sell his saltedfish to an Italian, and send his bill for the amountto Antwerp. A Londoner might sell wool toFlanders, and a bill for the amount to the sameplace, where it might be exchanged for the Hollander'sbill, and payment with it made in Italyfor the India or other goods which the Londonerhad purchased at the trading cities in that country.By such an operation the demand for metallicmoney would be vastly less than it would havebeen if the Englishman had sent money to Italyfor the India goods, and the Brabant money toEngland for his wool, and if the Dutchman, in-CHAP. XVI. ON EXCHANGES. 33stead of taking the value for his fish in clothsmanufactured by the Brabant from English wool,had taken home the amount in silver or gold.This effect of increasing the power of metallicmoney by exchanges is so familiar to all who havebecome acquainted with commercial subjects, thatperhaps some may judge this short elucidation tohave been necessary ; but though familiar tomany, it is not so universally looked at as is desirable,and it seems important to notice it, becausewhilst it may serve to show in what mannersmall sums of metallic money may perform greatcommercial operations, it also proves how fallaciousare the statements often introduced into commercialpolitics in the eager discussions on what is calledthe balance of trade.The balance of trade will always be in favourof the country which can produce the most valuein commodities with the least cost of labour \The greater proportion of commodities in generalwill rest in that country, and it will possess thelargest proportion of the metallic as well as ofAccording to Anderson the balance of trade in favour ofEngland in 1354 amounted by records of authenticity to255,214/. of that money, or about 590,000/. in money of thepresent day. The exports of wool, wool-fells, leather, andcoarse cloth, were 294,184/., and the imports, consistingalmost wholly of silks, fine cloths, wines, spices, and a fewother articles of luxury which were used only by the royalfamily and a small number of rich prelates and great barons,amounted only to 38,970/. — Anderson's Hist. Com. vol. i. year1354.VOL. 11. D34} BALANCE OF TRADE. cHAP. XVI.Other wealth, unless it be more advantageous tothe community or to the richest bodies of individualsto exchange such metallic wealth for othercommodities, the product of foreign countries.When commerce is free from restrictions, the goldand silver will thus flow in or issue forth accordingas it shall best serve the interests of the country.If it be of less value at home, it will goabroad ; if it be of more value at home, it will comeback ; and in either case it will be a beneficialoperation. As the most compendious of all commodities,and as the least liable to be injured bykeeping, and as the storing it is attended withthe least expense, the greatest portion will remainin the richest countries, even though it should notbe all needed to perform the function of money.A part will be applied to articles of furniture andpersonal ornaments, and the rich country willpossess a quantity of these greater in proportionto the extent of its general wealth in all commodities.We find this to have been the case with theseveral countries of Europe in the period we havebeen contemplating. Italy was the most flourishingin commerce and the most abundant in everyspecies of wealth, and whilst the inhabitants, whohad probably learned much from the Greeks,were making a progress in the fine arts, whichtheir wealth enabled them to pursue with success,they appear to have decorated their superb palacesCHAP. XVI. SILVER AND GOLD FURNITURE.not only with painting and statuary, but withservices of plate and utensils of silver and gold.This was the practice of the Pitt and their rivals,the Medici, at Florence, and of many other familieswho had become wealthy in the tradingcities, whether their prosperity owed its origin tocommerce or to that landed property which hadincreased in its value with commerce.In that age it is found that in Germany and inFrance gold and silver utensils are rarely noticed,and it would appear, from the descriptions givenof the tournaments and of the pageants, thatwhatever wealth could be spared for the merepurposes of display was devoted more to the purchaseof pearls and precious stones than to domesticutensils of the precious metals. Jewelscould be more easily preserved in turbulent times ;they could not be so readily sold, though theyappear to have been frequently pledged, even bysovereigns, and hence became more valuable asheir-looms to those who wished to found families,than gold and silver, whether coined or uncoined.We find in all descriptions of the tournaments ofthat age that the dames of the princely and noblehouses, as well as the knights, appeared decoratedwith jewels of great value. In England, thoughwealthier than Germany or France, according toits extent and population, the quantity of goldand silver applied to domestic utensils must haveD SGOLD AND SILVER FURNITURE. CHAP. XVI.been small, notwithstanding the exaggerated descriptionsof the quantity of it in some of theancient writers. When these pompous accountsare given in exact weights, we find their amountvery insignificant as compared with the generaland unfixed relations of the value.In Stowe's Survey is an account of the offeredof the Earl of Leicester in 1813. His magnificencemust have been equal almost to that of amonarch, his yearly expenditure amounting to7309/. of that money, or about equal to 18,000/.in money of the present day, but in effective valuemore than equal to one hundred thousand poundsat this time. Among other heads of expenditureis a charge for three hundred and seventy-one pipesof wine, at seventeen shillings per pipe, which maybecontrasted with another article, namely, that forsilver ; the disbursement for which, for the sameyear, appears to have been for the following articles,viz. twenty-four dishes, twenty-four saucers, twenty-fourcups, one pair of paternosters, and one silvercoffin. The whole weighed one thousand two hundredand thirty-six ounces, and the cost of it, at oneshilling and eight-pence per ounce, was 103/. 5s. 6d.We can scarcely suppose that the expenditure insilver by families of an inferior degree bore agreater proportion to their aggregate expenses \See Anderson, Hist. Com. vol. i. year 131.^.CHAP. XVI. GOLD AND SILVER FURNITURE. 37The very name of the field of the cloth of goldwould sive a high idea of the value of the metalthere displayed ; but if we look at it with othereyes, the illusion will vanish. That cloth was importedfrom Italy, and the whole imports ofEngland amounted to not more than fifty thousandpounds, including the products of the east,and the wines and other luxuries which the fewdignified priests and nobles consumed. Thevalue of the gold in this cloth, and indeed of thecloth itself with the gold, could be but of smallamount.At a later period, in the reign of Henry VIII.,and indeed when some of the gold and silver ofnewly discovered America must have been diffusedover Europe, we find a very particular accountin Stowe of the quantity of the precious metalswhich was collected by Cardinal Wolsey. Ashenentertaining the foreign ambassadors at HamptonCourt, we learn that " two hundred and eightbeds were provided for the guests. Every chamberhad a basin and ewer of silver, and some gilt ;yea, and some chambers had two livery pots withwine and beer ; a silver candlestick, having in ittwo sizes ; yet the cupboards in the two banquetingrooms were not once touched." At the feastgiven to these same ambassadors, '* two cupboardsextending across the banquet chambers were piledto the top with kite and illuminated, and withoutoS GOLD AND SILVER FURNITURE, chap. XVI.encroaching on those repositories, there remainedquite enough for the service of the tables."If credit were to be given to this descriptionof the plate of the cardinal, without any precisestatement of its amount, we should be ready toestimate it at a rate more proportioned to thestore of plate in noble families of the present day,than to the real paucity of such furniture in that age.We should perhaps estimate it to be equal invalue to what is reported of the Dukes of Marlborough,Devonshire, Northumberland, and Wellington,at much more than one hundred thousandpounds. We are enabled to correct this judgmentby a catalogue of the prelate's effects as preservedin the Federal (p. 375) when they were seizedand inventoried. The silver plate is stated to benine thousand five hundred and sixty-five ounces,valued in money of that day at 3*. 8r/. per ounce,and consequently in money of this time at 5s. perounce, worth near 2400/.The household book of the Duke of Northumberlandof the same age gives a picture of the furnitureof that nobleman, which shows how scarcethe most common accommodations of the presenttime must have then been. Though he had threehouses in Yorkshire which he inhabited in turn,he had furniture but for one, and carried everythingfrom one to the other at each removal.Beds, tables, chairs, kitchen utensils, all of whichclear. XVI. GOLD AND SILVER FURNITURE. 39were very coarse, were conveyed from louise toHouse in seventeen carts and one waggon, thoughthe family consisted of two hundred and twenty-threepersons. In no part of the book does thereappear to have been any expenditure for plate,and it seems probable that little if any was used.Pewter must have been a substitute for it, andthat not wholly the property of the Duke, asone of the charges in the account is for the hireof pewter vessels without noticing the descriptionof them.When alluding to the rarity of utensils of goldand silver, it is impossible to overlook the articleof watches, which now engross so large a share ofthose metals. The discovery of that invention formeasuring time, which is now in the pockets ofmillions, may be dated not earlier than the reignof Henry VIII., and it was by no means in commonuse even in the reign of Elizabeth. TheEmperor Charles V. had several which he seemsto have kept in order by great personal attention,and our Henry VIII. had one which was noticed bySir Isaac Newton, as being in existence in his day jbut at any rate they could scarcely have beenknown, and certainly not common at the time ofthe discovery of America in 1483.It could only be a conjecture, and necessarily aloose conjecture, if we were to attempt to statethe proportion which gold and silver in the formof furniture bore to the quantity of those metals40 PROPORTION OF THE TWO METALS. CHAP. XVI.which circulated in the form of coin. It wouldindeed be desirable to attain to something approachingto accuracy, because the latter beingalone the standard by which all other commodities,including the former, are measured, its increaseor diminution might be inferred from therise or fall of prices.CHAP. XVII.U92 TO 15 i6. 41CHAPTER XVII.On the acquisition of the precious metals from the discoveryof America in 1492, to the opening of the mines of Potosiin 1546.The first discovery of America tended ratherto increase than to gratify the eager desire for theacquisition of the precious metals. Columbusobserved among the first natives he met in Hispaniolasome ornaments of gold about their persons ;and with the excited feelings which prevailedamong his followers, and the erroneous idea hehad formed of his having arrived in Asia, the supposedcountry of gold and silver, it is not wonderfulthat the slight specimens of those metalswhich were visible should be considered as indicationsof immense treasures, which by perseveringefforts must soon become the property of thedaring adventurers.The aborigines of America were in that stateof rude life, which induced them to carry abouttheir persons the few ornaments they possessed ;and as the gold was merely an ornament, theywere eager to exchange it for any other, which byits novelty had a greater effect on their imaginations.We find in the narrations of the first EARLY COLLECTION OF GOLD cHAP. Evil.covered that hawks' bells were eagerly sought for,and the golden ornaments readily given in exchangefor them. It appears that an Indian gavehalf a handful of gold dust for one hawk's bell \Although there is mention made of coronets ofgold -, they were only in the possession of thecaciques, and no intimations are given of theirweight ; and it may be inferred that they werevery light, from Peter Martyr having recorded asan extraordinary fact that one person had obtaineda lump of gold weighing nine ounces \ It isclear that whatever gold had been collected bythe natives had been procured by washing thesands in the beds of the rivers ; and as that requiresa degree of labour, such as the wants ofthe Indians could not induce them to apply withenergy and perseverance, it is scarcely possible itshould have been of a large amount. Neither thefirst nor second vessels that returned from Americabrought any gold except a few trinkets. Theexpenses of the expedition and the small fruits ofthe discovery were a constant subject of complaintamong the ministers of Ferdinand, and with difficultysurmounted by the persevering spirit ofIsabella.After twelve years' occupation of Hispaniolaand the subjugation of its inhabitants, attempts1 Washington living's History of Columbus, vol. i. p. 330.~ Idem, vol. i. p. 34(5. ^ Idem, vol. ii. p. 78.CHAP. XVII.IN AMERICA. 43were unavailable to extract much gold by theexterminating degree of labour that was imposed ^by those rigid governors who had succeeded tothe milder rule of Columbus. In the regionswhere gold was found in the streams, each individual,above fourteen years of age, was requiredto pay, every three months, a Flemish hawk'sbell of gold dust (equal in the present day totwenty shillings in silver); and the caciques werecalled upon to pay a much larger amount — one ofthem, Maniocatex^, as much as ten pounds inthree months. This was, however, found to befar more than could be obtained, and the requisitionwas reduced to one half; but even thisdemand produced despair among the natives ; theyabandoned the labour of their fields ; a scarcity ofthe means of subsistence soon followed : what littlewas to be found was seized by the Spaniards ;great numbers of the Indians were left destitute offood, and thus many of their tribes were thinnedor extirpated by absolute starvation".As the possession of Hispaniola produced goldin such small quantities, and as even this was exhaustedwithin twenty years after the discovery,in spite of the forced labour of the aborigines,it is not surprising that the expectations of theadventurers of immense mineral wealth shouldIrving, vol. ii. p. 27G. ^ Idem, p. 282.44 EARLY COLLECTION OF GOLD chap. XVII.have led them to extend their incursions andexaminations in every available direction.Mr. Irving, with his usual diligence and taste,has compiled from the best authorities authenticaccounts of those immediate followers of Columbuswho pursued his views by exploring the severalregions which lay in the vicinity of the greatislands which he had discovered.The subject is interesting, but might in this inquirybe seductive enough to draw attention to theadventurous and persevering individual leaders, andto withhold it from the small portion of the preciousmetals which was found in America at the period ofits first discovery. In the " Voyages of the Companionsof Columbus," we find Alonzo de Ojeda,as early as 1509, on the coast of Cartagena, aftersuccessful hostilities against the natives, who werein a more civilized state than the inhabitants ofHispaniola, found in the plunder of their chiefplace, " the spoil in gold and other articles ofvalue to the amount of seven thousand castilians,"or thirty-seven thousand two hundred and eightydollars, equivalent to about eight thousand poundssterling \ Diego de Nicest, who followed thesteps of Ojeda, and made conquests on the shoresof Darien, collected great quantities of food andcotton, with bracelets, anklets, plates, and other1 Pate 72.CHAP. XVII.IN AMERICA. 45ornaments of gold to the value of ten thousandcastilians, or about eleven or twelve thousandpounds \ Vasco Nunez de Balboa, who followedOjeda and Nicest on the continent of America,and who first discovered the south sea, had, in1513, collected such a quantity of effects ofvarious kinds that the fifth part, which belongedto the crown, and was remitted to Diego Columbusin Hispaniola, amounted to fifteen thousand crownsof gold". After his discovery of the South Sea,Vasco Nunez is said, but on authority doubtfulas to the exact weight, to have received in theisthmus of Darien, from one cacique, five hundredpounds of gold, in exchange for beads, hawks'bells, and looking-glasses. On his return overthe mountains, he is related to have collected fromtwo caciques seven thousand crowns more inpearls and gold In another subsequent expeditionin the isthmus, against a chief namedTubanama, he obtained " amulets and other effectsof gold" to the value of two thousand crownsfrom the cacique himself, and from his subjects tothe amount of six thousand.The scenes of these exploits on the coast ofCartagena and in the isthmus of Darien were> Page 124.2 Irving, p. 150. The crowns of gold in that day weighedseventy grains, of which two were alloys, and consequently wereworth in our present money about ten shillings and sixpence.See Dictionary de Hacienda por Argiielles, too ii. p. 211.3 Page 188 and 192. " Page 196.4G EARLY COLLECTION OF GOLD CHAP. Insufficientlynear to the richer countries of Mexicoand Peru for some of the precious metals to havebeen derived from those sources. The streamsof their own mountains might have furnishedsome to even the most negligent searchers; andhence, though it is not possible to read theaccounts of that period without some suspicion ofexaggeration, yet when we consider the ages thatmay have passed in collecting gold, there seemsless reason to suspect any great statement inthe relation of the facts. In truth, the wholequantity for the first twenty-five years from thedate of the discovery to the possession of Mexicoand Peru was very small even if compared withthe diminished quantity which then existed in theancient world.Humboldt has estimated the average annualamount of gold and silver which America furnishedto Europe in the period from 149^ to 1500at about 52,000/. sterling \ No writer, perhaps,is entitled to more implicit credit for any factwhich came within his own knowledge ; few deservemore attention to any estimate which he hasformed. In this estimation could only be includedthat which the natives had collected before thearrival of the Spaniards, for the tribute imposedon the Indians by the successor of Columbus didPolitical Essay on New Spain vol. iii. book iv. cap. xi.p. 433.CHAP. XVII. IN AMERICA. 4.7not come into operation till the expiration of theperiod. It was not till 1502 that Ovando despatchedto Europe the first large quantity ofgold, the greater part of which was lost in thestorm, which wrecked most of the vessels, and thewhole of what was shipped did not exceed 25G0marcs in weight, and may be valued at between70,000/. and 72,000/. sterling.It seems necessary to guard against the exaggeratedlanguage of the early discoverers ofAmerica, who speak of enormous quantities ofgold, of immense wealth, of vast treasure ; and tocorrect this language by figures whenever in theirrelations we meet with any. In this way, instead ofdeeming Humboldt to have diminished the actualquantity of gold and silver found in America, weshall be disposed, if we venture to dissent from hisresults, to believe that he has rather under thanoverstated the quantities. According to the accountsof the various Spanish writers, the goldcollected by the successors of the first explorers,from the year 1500 to the invasion of Mexico byCortes in 1519, may have equalled, but scarcelycould have exceeded, that which Humboldt estimatesas the annual produce afforded by Americabetween 1492 and 1500, or about 52,000/. sterling.If, then, in the twenty-seven years betweenthe first discovery by Columbus in 1492 to thelanding of Cortez in Mexico in 1519, the annualproduce of gold be estimated at 52,000/. we shall48 EARLY COLLECTION OF GOLD CHAP. XVII.adopt an estimation in the particular period somewhatbelow that of Humboldt in the latter years,but not more varying than seems justified by theaccounts of Herrera and others respecting theoperations of various early adventurers.It is to be observed that, up to the invasion ofMexico, gold alone had been found in America,or, if any silver had been procured, it must havebeen in such small portions as not to be thoughtworthy of mention by any of the narrators of theevents of the period.Cortez commenced his invasion of Mexico in1519, and a great portion of the precious metalswhich had been collected in that country duringthe period of the existing government fell intohis power. At his advance towards the capital,the presents he received at Chalco are stated byhimself to have amounted to 2560 marcs of gold,or nearly 70,000/. sterling. Montezuma, on takingthe oath of fidelity to the Emperor of Spain, wasprevailed upon to pay a tribute which, calculatingfrom the fifth part paid into the chest of the army,must have amounted to near 65,000/. At the captureof Tenochtitlan, the plunder which fell intothe hands of the Spaniards is stated by VernalDia to have been equivalent to 80,000/. Theseinstances of mineral wealth found by Cortez andhis followers show that the Mexicans must havemade some progress in mining operations beforetheir country was visited by Europeans ; and thoughCHAP. XVII. AND SILVER IN AMERICA. PJthe quantity was small when compared with theproduct of succeeding centuries, it formed a sufficientindication of what might be obtained bymore strenuous and persevering operations.As soon as the Spaniards had gained full possessionof the country, they employed the wretchednatives in the laborious work of procuring theprecious metals. The masters had little skill, thedepressed inhabitants but little industry, yet, inthe space of thirty or forty years from the subjugation,mines were at work at Vasco, at Zulte-neque, and Pacha, which, if they yielded littletreasure when compared with the more modernproducts of Valencianana and other rich districts,yet brought into activity sufficient to show whatgreat application might effect, and enough, combinedwith a similar process in Peru, to produce agreat influence on the transactions ofthe ancient continentas soon as it had reached the ports of Europe.Twenty years after the conquest of Mexico hadbeen achieved by Cortez, Pizarro accomplished asimilar conquest in Peru. The inhabitants of thatcountry were of a milder character than those ofMexico ; they had practised more industry generally,and had especially been more successful intheir operations for procuring mineral wealth. Theprocess by which the Peruvians had procured theirgold and silver before the arrival ofthe Europeanswas, as may be expected from people in such aVOL. II. E50 EARLY Collection OF GOLD chap. evil.stage of society, simple, rude, and with little regardto extracting the whole of the precious metalsfrom the ores. The mines had been wroughtfor the Incas, and the use of mercury had notbeen adopted till more than forty years after theconquest. The smelting was performed in smallportable furnaces or cylindrical tubes of clay,very broad and pierced with a great number ofholes. In these the Indians placed layers ofsilver ore, galena, and charcoal, and the currentof air which entered the holes quickened the fireand gave it a great degree of intensity. Thesefurnaces were moved from one elevation to anotheraccording to the degree of high or low wind.When it was found that the wind blew too strongand consumed too much of the fuel, they were removedto a lower situation. By these means thenatives obtained argentiferous masses, which weresmelted again in their own cottages. This wasperformed by a number of persons, ten or twelveat a time blowing a fire through copper tubes,from one to two yards in length, pierced with asmall hole at the extremity towards the fire, whichthus acted in the same manner as the modernblowpipe. By such processes as these, though avery large portion of the silver must have remainedin the scoriae without combining with thegalena, yet such a quantity could be obtained as wouldsatisfy the demands of the fiscal officers of the Inca.CHAP. XVII. .\NL) SILVER IN AMERICA.To this method of working may be attributedthe quantity of metallic treasure which Pizarrowas enabled to extort from the Inca Atahualpa ashis ransom, which, according to Garcilasso de laVega, is stated at the enormous sum of eight hundredthousand pounds, or, according to Gomara,at the more probable amount of one hundred andforty thousand, or one hundred and fifty thousandpounds. The plunder of Cuzco was also verylarge, and though the amount of it is only givenby Herrera, a writer long posterior to the event,and whose authority does not appear, may beexaggerated at four hundred thousand pounds,yet there is evidence sufficient to prove that thetreasure found in that city was more than couldhave been collected if it had all arisen fromwashings, and if the Indians had not worked someof the mines.As soon as the Spaniards had secured their conquest,the greater part of the original inhabitantswere reduced to a kind of feudal slavery, knownby the name of repai'timientos. The people ofthe several mining districts were delivered overto Spanish officers, who compelled them to labourfor their benefit either in cultivating the land, indigging in the mines, or in any servile or domesticlabour. They were marched in bodies a long wayfrom their homes, to climates from their elevationof intense coldness, and widely differing from thoseE "-Z5^ PRODUCE OF MINES cHAP. xvi.fertile sunny valleys which were their favouriteabodes till visited by the Europeans. The MexicanIndians endured less oppression in this respectthan those in Peru, but much labour was extortedfrom both, and the fruits of it was an increasedquantity both of gold and silver, withina short space after the conquest of the respectivecountries.The mines opened in Mexico during the periodwhich followed the conquest have been alreadynoticed, to which may now be added those exploredand worked in Peru between the landingof Pizarro in 1,527 ^i^d the discovery of the mineralwealth of Potosi in 1545. The chief mines openedin Peru before Potosi were those in the provincesof Porch, Carangas, Oruro, Carabaya, and Chasnow called La Paz. There are no accountsto be found of the quantities they produced, butmerely their names are mentioned respectively asyielding either gold or silver, or both.In estimating the addition made to the store ofthe precious metals by the discovery of Americafrom the year 1492 to 1546, it seems necessary,after much attention to the subject, to deviate butlittle from the calculation which Humboldt hasmade, and that chiefly in the earlier years of theseries. The annual addition then in the twenty-nineyears between the discovery in 1492 to theconquest of the city of Mexico in 1521, at the rate6^ ^ \-^^ ^^•'^'^ •CHAP. Xvii.IN AMERICA. 53of £o2,000, would amount to £1,308,000The amount for the twenty-five yearsfrom the capture of IVfexico to thediscovery of Potosi, at the annualrate as estimated by Humboldt of£630,000 . . . 15,750,000Total addition in sixty-three years £17,058,000By a calculation before made in chapter x. ofthis inquiry, the quantity of the precious metals inexistencein the ancient world has been estimatedto have been reduced down to thirty-three orthirty-four millions. It has been also calculatedthat the mines of Europe yielded at the time ofthe discovery of America a portion of gold andsilver equal to that which was annually consumedby wear. If these various calculations approximateto truth, it would appear that an addition hadbeen made to the gold and silver in existence atthe rate of fifty per cent., or one half of the previousquantity.The process of consumption would, however,be going on contemporaneously with the production.In this period the largest quantity would beproduced in the earliest and the latest years. Thatwhich had been accumulated in prior ages by theaborigines would be acquired by the conquerors,and it would require some arrangements beforethe labour of the subdued inhabitants could bedirected and excited in such a manner as to bringS-¥54 APPLICATION OFCHAP. XVII.i^Minto action the treasures contained in their soil.In the fifty-seven years, upon the principle assumedin this inquiry as the rate of consumptionby friction, the loss upon the new acquisitions ofthe precious metals would amount to about onemillion five hundred thousand pounds, and thewhole quantity in existence may perhaps be fairlyestimated at about fifty millions sterling.It is impossible to form any calculation of theproportion which that part of the precious metalswhich was converted into money bore to thatwhich was applied to purposes of ornamental oruseful articles. The first would have an influenceon the prices of all commodities; the latter fallinginto the general mass of commodities would haveno influence on them.The age in which America was discovered wasone of intense religious feeling. New doctrines hadbeen propounded with zeal by its adherents, whichwere rejected with equal zeal by their opponents.The Spaniards who received the gold and silver fromthe new world vvcre remarkable for the most rigidadhesion to the ancient faith. Their veneration forits imposing and showy ritual, and their belief thatpresents to the virgin and the saints would benefittheir worshippers, had the effect of drawing to thepublic or private temples a portion of the firstfruitsof those precious metals which America hadyielded to their perseverance. The same feelingpervaded the rest of Europe ; and as the gold andCHAP. XVII. THE Precious METALS. 55silver were gradually transferred by commerce or v^by war to the several other kingdoms, a portion jof those metals was devoted by piety to the ser jvice of the deity and the saints. The protestantreligion, though it had raised its head, was thenin a weak condition, struggling not for the masterybut for existence ; and its influence was not /such as in any great degree to check the prevailing |disposition, to dedicate to the purposes of devotionsome portion of every new acquisition of wealth.When the goods of Cardinal Wolsey were confiscated,his plate was large for the age, as has been \already noticed; and most of the heads of the |religious houses in England, when their property /was seized by the rapacious Henry Vii, appear ito have possessed some store of gold or silverutensils. It was not, however, in England thatthe largest portion of the metallic wealth waswithdrawn from circulation to adorn religion. In jSpain itself; in Italy, then rich in general wealth Iacquired by commerce ; in the Netherlands, which /had been enriched by manufactures; and in the ■ecclesiastical states of Germany, whose agriculturehad been flourishing, the decorations of the religioushouses were increased, the dress of the of Idictating priests was covered with gold and silverembroidery, and the vessels for the holy rites |were changed gradually from copper or pewter tosilver.The extension of gold and silver utensils was56 APPLICATION OF THE METALS. CHAP. x\ II.not confined to ecclesiastics, but extended to theprinces, to the richer nobles, and in the free commercialcities to the more opulent burghers andmerchants.It does not seem probable, however, that alarge proportion of the metallic wealth of thatage would permanently remain in the quiet possessionof even religious communities. The warswhich were almost constantly carried on duringthe reign of the emperor Charles V., and especiallythose in Italy betwixt him and Henry I.of France, had exhausted the treasures of thesovereigns, and induced them to seize on muchof the ecclesiastical wealth to coin into money topay and support their armies. Among numerousinstances of pillage in that age is a remarkable oneof Henry I. of France, who stripped the tomb ofSt. Martin of a railing of massive silver, withwhich, in one of his fits of devotion, Louis XI.had encircled it. Another most striking instanceis that of the capture of Rome itself by the imperialistsunder Bourbon in 1527. It is recordedthat neither the barbarous and heathen Huns,nor the Vandals and Goths in former ages, hadextorted plunder by such outrageous means aswere adopted by the bigoted subjects of a catholicmonarch, who spared neither churches, monasteries,nor palaces, nor the houses of private persons, andwho collected booty to the amount of a millionducats.CHAP. XVIII.154(3 TO lo'jy. 57CHAPTER XVIII.On the acquisition of the precious metals from the openingthe mines of Potosi, in 1546, to the end of the year 1599.In the latter end of the year 1545 the minesof the Cerro de Potosi were accidentally discovered.According to the account of Herrera, the discoverywas owing to an Indian hunter, DiegoHualca, who in pulling up a shrub observedfilaments of pure silver about the roots. Onexamination the mass was found to be enormous,and a very great part of the population was therebydrawn to the spot and employed in extractingthe metal. A city soon sprung up, though in adistrict of unusual sterility. The mountain wasperforated on all sides, and the produce in a fewof the first years exceeded whatever has been recordedof the richest mines in the world.There are great doubts of what was the realquantity of treasure actually brought into existencefrom Potosi in the first ten years after thediscovery. Humboldt, who examined the matterwith his usual diligence and acuteness, says, " thebooks of accounts preserved in the archives of theprovincial treasury of Potosi go back no farther5S PRODUCE OF THE MINES cHAP. XVIII.than the year 1556 j but it is very reasonably believedthat the first years which followed thediscovery of the veins were the most productivein riches." Although the actual amount in thefirst ten years must be a matter of doubt, yetsome judgment may be formed from the succeedingtwenty-three years, from 1556 to 1578,of which the accounts have every appearance ofveracity.The Emperor Charles the fifth granted to hiscelebrated secretary of state, Don Francisco thomasde los Cobos, for two lives, a maravedi oneach marc of silver raised in Potosi. This gaverise to the tax afterwards imposed of a fifth of theproduce. The account of the Cobos, the imposthaving taken the name of the person in whosefavour it was first granted, from the years 1556 to1578, gives, as the amount of the tax, nine millionseight hundred and two thousand two hundred andfifty-seven pesos, and consequently the treasureproduced must have amounted to forty-nine millionseleven thousand two hundred and eighty-fivepesos or dollars, or annually to two millions onehundred and thirty thousand nine hundred andtwenty-five pesos, or about four hundred and fortythousand pounds sterling \Sandal, Alloa, and Solarzano, all of whomare quoted by Humboldt, would lead us to clc Hacienda vol. i. page 102.CHAP. XVIII. OF POTOSI. 59pose tlmt Potosi, in the earlier years of its working,yielded much more than is here estimated ; butwhoever has paid much attention to the more ancientSpanish writers, especially when they speakin round numbers, will receive their relations withconsiderable hesitation.There are some considerations which wouldlead to a doubt whether Potosi produced, in thefirst ten years of its being worked, so large aquantity of silver as in the years that followedafter 1556. The Indians, who had been compelledto perform the labour, must have beenunaccustomed to it, and would require time togain the habit of working with effective expedition.The method of extracting the silver by the processof amalgamation had not been introduced, asit was not discovered in Mexico, from whence itwas carried to Peru, till the year 1 557 ; and themines of mercury in Guancavelica had not thenbeen opened, and till they were, the amalgamationprocess could not have been used. As the minersof Potosi could only obtain the silver by smelting,and as fuel was not to be procured near the Cerro,a difficulty would present itself which could notbe overcome so completely as it must afterwardshave been when the practice of amalgamation wasintroduced.The feeling of confidence in Humboldt is somuch increased by every examination of his statements,that any slight difference from his rcprc-60 PRODUCE OF THE MINES chap, xvill.sensations seems to require an apology. Thedifferences, however, do not greatly affect theview now taken of the subject, in this case extendingover a period of ten years out of fifty-five ;they would not have been noticed, if it had notarisen from a more attentive examination of theaccessible documents than the proportion which itbears to the whole view would have induced.Humboldt procured correct returns of theamount of the Cobos at Potosi, from the year1.579 to 1789, from which he has calculated thequantity of money procured in those years in amanner deserving the highest confidence. Atpresent we have only to do with the years from1579 to 1600. This appears in the twenty-oneyears to have amounted to twenty-nine millionsone hundred and eighty-five thousand nine hundredand ninety pesos, or one million three hundredand eighty-nine thousand eight hundred andfifty-nine annually, being equivalent to about twohundred and eighty thousand pounds on theaverage.We have thus examined the statement of theCerro de Potosi with more minuteness than willbe necessary to apply to other mining districts, onaccount of the long and extensive fame which thatmountain has enjoyed, and to reduce, as far as canbe done, to accurate figures the extravagant representationsto which we have all been accustomedfrom our childhood.CHAT. XVIII.OF SOUTH AMERICA. 6lBesides those mines in Peru which have beenalready noticed in the period immediately followingthe discovery, and which continued in activityduring this second period, some others wereopened, though upon a small scale, at Huantajayoand Porch, within that viceroyalty. Chili, in thisperiod, came into the possession of the Spaniards,and the products of that district, chiefly consistingof gold, augmented the supply. Antioquia, aswell as Choco, furnished some gold as early as1539, and continued to do so from the time ofthe conquest to a late period. The greatest produceof gold and silver, even in that day, wasfrom the Mexican mines ; some of the most richwere in this period in a state of activity, though farinferior in the quantity they yielded to the pointthey had reached in the course of the two followingcenturies, when the supply of quicksilverbecame more abundant and was more extensivelyemployed in the process of amalgamation. Brazilin the hands of the Portuguese, at the same time,had employed the natives and some negro slavesin washing for gold ; the quantity thus procuredcannot be accurately ascertained. There is onlythe statement of Raynal on the subject, and noneof his accounts are entitled to credit, unless supportedby some better authority, which in thiscase he has not furnished.In the estimation of the quantity of gold andsilver added to the previous stock, which in 154G62 milnes OF EUROPE.CHAP. XVIII.has been already calculated at about fifty millionssterling, we may venture to consider the annualsupply on the average of the period to have nearlyapproached to ten millions of piastres or dollars,or about two millions one hundred thousand poundssterling;. This is so near to what Humboldt hasreckoned it, that there seems no necessity for enteringfarther into the causes of the variation.The miners in Europe were excited by thesuccessful operations in America to greater exertions,especially those in the Pyrenees, and inseveral parts of Languedoc, and it may be concludedfrom various representations that theannual supply from the ancient continent hadamounted to about one hundred and fifty thousandpounds.We thus assume that the aggregate additions offifty-four years were at the annual rate of twomillions two hundred and fifty thousand poundssterling, or that in the whole term the amount ofone hundred and twenty-one millions had beenproduced, to which the fifty millions before inexistencebeing added, would give as the quantityvj I in the year I6OO about one hundred and fiftymillions.The process of consumption would, however,be going on, and operate on the whole amount.There seems no reason in estimating the gradualdiminution in this period at a different rate fromwhat has been before assumed. We continue,(^^•^ \^^ r^ r- o cnr^,^CHAP. XVIII.CONSUMPTION.(33therefore, to calculate that one part in three hundredand sixty was annually consumed, or onetenth part in thirty-six years. On these principlesthe diminution on the fifty millions in existencein 1546 would reduce them in fifty-four years toforty-two millions seven hundred and fifty thousandpounds. The same gradual loss would be sufferedon the one hundred and twenty-one millions,but that can only be taken as the operationof the mean term of years, or of twenty-sevenyears. This diminution would thus amount toabout nine millions, and the result to which wearrive would be that at the end of the year 1599the stock of gold and silver actually in existenceamounted to about one hundred and fifty-fivemillions ; or as it may be stated in round numbers,at nearly five times as much aswas in the possessionof mankind in 1492, when America first becameknown to the Europeans. It would be of greatadvantage to the purpose of this inquiry to ascertainin the period under consideration, what proportionof the gold and silver obtained was appliedto conversion into coin, and what to the fabricationof articles of utility, magnificence, or luxury.Instead, however, of attempting to hazard conjectureson so obscure a subject, we must be contentwith such general observations as the aspect of theseveral countries of Europe present on looking attheir modes of thinking, and their manners andhabits. The Spaniards, into whose possession thef^/^W'64f APPLICATION OF THE METALS, chap, xvii.first harvest of the mineral treasures of Americacame, were as a nation most intensely imbuedwith religious feelings. Whatever descriptionmay be given to the Christianity that had formerlyprevailed in Spain, it had in the contest of sevencenturies with the Moors who were settled amongthem, and who possessed the most beautiful andfertile portions of their country, been changedinto a chivalric feeling, having little connexionwith the common duties of life, but exciting themto bold achievements, to the endurance of severeprivations, and to a strenuous exertion in suchenterprises as could inflict injury on the Mahometanunbelievers. Their piety was not thatof the humble devotee fraught with feelings ofrepentance, and accompanied with resolutions ofamendment, but of warlike partisans fighting forthe power or the purity of the holy virgin, or forthe excellence of real or imaginary saints, to whosehonour they had devoted their swords and theirzeal. To propitiate these beings, they vowed todedicate a portion of the spoil acquired by theiradventurous rapine ; and hence the churches, theshrines, and the altars were decorated with thegold and the silver collected by the first expeditionsto the American shores.The irruptions of the Mahometan into thedistricts around them rendered the treasures ofthe churches insecure, till the final conquest ofthat race had produced internal tranquillity at theCll.vr. XV 1 11. GOLD AND SILVER IN SPAIN. 65moment when the gold and silver of Americareached the country. Whoever has read the historiesof the early invaders of America must haveremarked how profuse Columbus and his followerswere in vows of presenting such offerings, andwill readily believe that many of such vows wereduly performed. Several of the most magnificentand costly cathedrals of Spain owe their constructionto the zeal of the period, whilst others ofmore ancient date received images, crucifixes,patting, chalices, and other vessels, in the room ofsuch as had been seized by the Moors, or as hadbeen converted by the Christian into money tofurnish the means for repelling or subduing theunbelievers \ The domestic peace which Spainenjoyed from the time of the conquest of Granadamust have tended to increase the mineral treasureswhich the church drew to itself, and no strongmotives presented themselves to cause any abstractionof those treasures.In Italy, also, much had been appropriated tosimilar purposes in Rome, as well as in the othercities ; but the frequent wars of which it was thetheatre probably tended to withdraw much of itfrom sacred purposes, and to convert it into themore current form of money. We have alreadynoticed the treasure seized by the army of Bournetwenty volumes of the work of Don Antonio Pons,entitled " J'iage cle Espana," contain particular relations ofthe decorations of the churches about this date.VOL. II. F66 ACCUMULATION OFCHAP. XVIII.boil in Rome, and we may easily believe that thesoldiers of the catholic emperor would not hesitateto apply the same rapacity to the other catholicchurches. The progress of the reformation in thenorth of Europe had lessened what little dispositionhad existed of a profuse expenditure in decoratingthe churches. The inhabitants had neverindulged in those feelings of chivalrous religionwhich were the characteristic of the natives ofSpain ; and though they built costly cathedralsand monasteries, either from their want of thesame kind of enthusiasm, or from their poverty,they were much less furnished with gold and silverutensils and ornaments than similar establishmentsin the peninsula.A considerable progress, however, appears tohave been made, in this period, in the applicationof the precious metals to articles of domestic ornamentand accommodation. The rich burghers ofAntwerp, Ghent, and the other cities of Flanders,are stated by Guicciardini to have had their housesfurnished with many vessels of massive plate. Wefind Holinshed, when speaking of the increaseof luxury in England, after noticing the introductionof pillows, and censuring it as effeminate,complains of *' the exchange of greene platters (ortrenchers) for pewter plates, and of wooden spoonsfor those made of silver."Many of our English nobility in this age hadlarge stocks of plate, especially the Earls of Lei-chap.Xvii. GOLD AND SILVER IN ENGLAND. G7chester and Derby, who displayed their magnificencein their several entertainments to QueenElizabeth. It appears that Burleigh possessed alarge quantity of plate. It is doubtful if it wasof the value of fourteen thousand pounds sterling,or fourteen thousand pounds weight, which wouldhave been worth forty-two thousand pounds sterling; but the probability is in favour of the largersum \ Such stores would, however, be in thepossession of a very few individuals, and the wholecould not produce a very great effect on the mass .of gold and silver which had been afforded by the /mines of America in the century.Whatever it may have amounted to, it musthave frequently passed from the form of utensilsto that of coin ; for as there was no tax on thesilver goods, and as the fashion was of little cost,it would be worth no more than its weight asbullion ; and it appears by the will of Burleigh,that in the bequests of the plate to his family hespecifies only the number of ounces to be givento the legatees, and appoints a goldsmith to seeit weighed out to them, without making any distinctionof the pieces.During the period we are now viewing, a courseof events commenced in the commerce of theworld which had a great influence on the preciousSee Hume's History of England, where in the Appendix,No. 3, and in note "" to the fifth volume, this matter is discussedand apparently settled.F 2GS GOLD AND SILVERCHAP. XVIII.metals. The route to India by the Cape of GoodHope, which the Portuguese had discovered, inducedother nations to follow in their steps. Assilver was found the most ready and beneficialarticle to exchange for the commodities of thecast, a great transfer took place of that substancebetween the European and the Asiatic world.This did not affect the quantity produced, butchanged the locality of it. In that change, however,it seems more than probable that a largeportion of the silver which passed to the eastwas abstracted from the use of it as money, andapplied to purposes of magnificence and splendour.From all we can learn of the ancient history ofIndia, we are warranted in concluding that atthe court of the Great Mogul, and among thenumerous feudal sovereigns who ruled in thatcountry, luxury in the use of gold and silver ornamentswas carried to a much higher point thanin Europe in that time, and indeed beyond whatis indulged in either in Europe or Asia in thepresent day. In India, as well as in the extensiveempire of China, at all times, the difference betweengold and silver in coin and in utensils wasvery slight. It has been the general practice topass the precious metals from hand to hand byweight, only first ascertaining the purity of themetals by the trials of the sheriffs, who have beenalways skilful in assaying.In the eastern part of Asia the Turks had be-chap.XVIII.IX INDIA AND ASIA. 69come a more settled people than in the formercenturies. Their government, which had beensuffered to rest after the annoyances of the crusades,assumed more magnificence, and allowed tothe people more leisure to follow profitable pursuits.Their exports drew from western Europeannual supplies of gold and silver, and the sultanand his great officers accumulated in their palacessome portions of these metals, and applied themto ornamental or useful domestic purposes. Fromthe compendious nature of the metals, and fromthe suspicious character of the government, it isprobable that a large portion, in comparison withthe whole quantity in Turkey, must have existedin that form rather than in coin.There is no evidence that any part of the produceof the precious metals from the Americanmines had passed direct from that continent toAsia during the sixteenth century. Whateversupply Asia received beyond the products of itsown mines must have been derived from Europeby its commerce, and it is well known that whatpassed either by the Cape to India and China, orby the Levant to Turkey, Persia, and Arabia, borebut a small proportion to the whole quantity whichAmerica supplied.In the absence of any precise facts, and withbut little confidence in an approximation to accuracy,we may venture to suppose that the preciousmetals which passed from Europe to Asia in the70 COIN AT THE END OF 1599. CHAP, xviii.hundred and twelve years from the first discoveryof America to the end of the sixteenthcentury amounted to one-tenth of the whole quantityproduced, or about fourteen millions ; and wemay further suppose that one-fifth of the gold andsilver had been abstracted from its primary useas money, and converted into other commoditieseither for use or for ornament. This would amountto about twenty-eight millions. The sum, then,which formed the stock of money current in Europeat the latter end of the sixteenth century wouldbe composed of the stock existing at the time ofthe discovery of America, c£ 34,000,000that produced in the hundredand twelve subsequent years, aftermaking allowance for the loss bynatural wear, . . 138,000,000172,000,000deducting from it what had beenconveyed to Asia, and what is supposedto have been applied to thepurpose of commodities of all kinds, 42,000,000^£130,000,000The stock of gold and silver coin in Europemay then be estimated, at the end of the year1.599, to amount to one hundred and thirty millionsof our present money.CHAP. XIX.RISE OF PRICES. 7ICHAPTER XIX.On the rise of prices simultaneously with the increase ofgold and silver in the first century after the discovery ofAmerica.Having arrived at a conclusion which will admitof great difference of opinion, and of the probabilityof which every reader must form his ownjudgment, that the quantity of coin in Europe hadin the first century from the discovery of Americabeen nearly quadrupled ; we will now considerthe effect produced by so vast an alteration in thequantity of that standard by which the value ofall other commodities was measured.If we could suppose that the general mass ofcommodities which are the subjects of exchangeshad increased in the same proportion as the preciousmetals, and were always exchanged by theintervention of those metals, we should naturallyinfer that the prices would remain stationary. Ifthe mass of commodities increased at a greaterrate than the metals, we should expect that priceswould decline ; but if those metals increased fasterthan the whole of the other commodities, we shouldlook for an advance in the prices of commoditiesgenerally.72 ADVANCE OF PRICES CHAP. xix.Difficult as the task has been found even to conjecturewhat has been the increase or decrease ofthe precious metals, and doubtful as are the resultsat which we have arrived, any estimation ofthe increase of commodities generally in Europewould be a far more Herculean task, and the conclusionsthat might be drawn would be infinitelymore disputable.In order to approximate to truth as nearlyas the subject will admit, we shall advert tothe prices of commodities in the two periodsabout the years 1480 and 1599, both in Englandand in France. For reasons which have been beforestated at length ^ we must have recourse tocorn, that commodity which can alone guide us,which, though the only one whose certain pricesare given, is, on account of the fluctuations inits productiveness, one of the most uncertain.It happens, too, that in the period under considerationthe variations of several years seem tobe enormously great.In a work entitled " A true Relation of themost remarkable Dearths and Famines which havehappened in this Realm since the coming in ofWilliam the Conqueror up to Michaelmas, 1745,"to. printed in 1748, there are some facts wellworth noticing and preserving. In the followingextracts the money of the several dates is re-> See vol. i. p. 340.CHAP. XIX.IN ENGLAND. 'JS(laced to money of the present day, in conformityto the scale stated in voL i. p. 324 and 325.In the year 1491 (7th Henry VII.) wheatwas sold at London for three shillings and fourpencethe bushel, which was accounted a greatdearth. In 11-94, wheat was sold at the sameprice. In the 13th Henry VIII. was a dearthof corne (with pestilence), for wheat was sold inLondon for forty shillings the quarter. In November,December, and January, 18th Henry VIII.(1526), fell such abundance of raine that thereofensued great floods, which destroyed corne fields,pastures, and beasts. Then was it drie till the12th of April, and from that time it rained everydayand night till the 3d of June, whereby cornefailed sore in the ye're following. In 1527 (19thHenry VIII. ), such scarcity of bread was in Londonthat many dyed for want thereof. The kingsent to the citie of his owne provisions six hundredquarters. The bread-carts then coming fromStratford were met at the Mile-end by a greatnumber of citizens, so that the mayor and sheriffswere forced to goe and rescue the same, and seethem brought to the markets appointed, wheatbeing then at thirty shillings the quarter ; butshortly after, the merchants of the stiliard broughtfrom Danse such store of wheat and rye that itwas better cheap at London than in any otherpart of the realm."In 1553, the first ye're of Queen Mary, at hermajesties coming to the crowne, victuals were so74 ADVANCE OF PRICESCHAP. XIX.plentiful that a barrel of beer was sold for eighteen,and four great loaves of bread for one pennyand a farthing. In 1557-eth Mary) wheat wassold before harvest at thirty shillings the quarter,but after harvest, at seven and sixpence, so that apenny loaf, which weighed in London the lastye're but ten ounces troy, weighed now twenty-sixounces. In 1558 wheat rose again to twenty-threeshillings the quarter. In 1573 (8th Elizabeth)about Lammas, wheat was sold in Londonat three shillings and three-pence the bushel, butshortly after it was raised to four shillings andfour-pence, five shillings and sixpence, six shillingsand sixpence, and seven shillings and nine-pence,which continued long after, yet there was no wantto him that wanted not money."In other accounts, especially in the ChroniconPrecious, we find the prices at some intervals ofthe period very lowy as in 1494 at six shillingsper quarter, in 1495 at five shillings, in 1499 atsix shillings ; and at other times, as in the years1551, 1552, 1553, 1554, 1555, 1556, 1557, 1558,1559, 1560, 1561, 1562, there was no variation,the price being in each of those years eight shillingsthe quarter, or eight shillings and ten-penceof our present nioney\• It is observed by Fleetwood (page 122) that the price ofwheat did not remain fixed exactly at eight shillings duringthe whole interval but that the variations were so inconsiderablethat the proprietors of the land, in settling the rentof it with the farmers, agreed that it should be estimated atthat price during the whole twelve years.Chap'. XIX. IN ENGLAND. 75The several laws passed between the years155 h and I6OI are, perhaps, the best criterion ofthe increased average price of wheat, because theyshow what was deemed by the legislators a priceso low as rendered it proper to admit of its beingexported to foreign countries ; and they seem moreappropriate, because the first of these laws passedat the time when the mines of Potosi had justbegan to flow from Spain through the rest ofEurope.By the acts 1 and 2 Philip and Mary, cap.5, in 1554, corn is forbidden to be exportedexcept when the price of wheat shall not exceedsix shillings and eight-pence, of rye four shillings,and of barley three shillings, per quarter. By anact, 1st Elizabeth, cap. 11, corn may be exportedwhen the prices do not exceed for wheat six shillingsand eight-pence, rye four shillings, andbarley three shillings, per quarter. By anotheract of the fifth of the same reign, exportation wasallowed when wheat does not exceed ten shillings,rye eight shillings, and barley six shillings andeight-pence, per quarter. The next act, thatof 1593, 35th Elizabeth, cap. J, sec. 8, allowswheat to be exported when not above twentyshillings; and by the act 1st James I., cap. 25,sec. 26, 1604, the exportation of wheat is allowedwhen the price does not exceed twenty-six shillingsand eight-pence the quarter. It seems thenclear that the legislators who framed these severallaws must have concurred in judging what was76 ADVANCE OF PRICES chap. xix.the proper standard by the respective rates of theseveral periods. If the price of six shillings andeight-pence for wheat in 1554 was deemed a fairstandard for both consumers and producers, itmay be inferred that fifty years later the price oftwenty-six shillings and eight-pence, in 1604, wasan equally fair standard \It is a subject of regret that the Oxford pricesof corn, for which the public is indebted to Mr.Lloyd, present a blank from the year 1328 to theyear 1583 ; we are not, therefore, able to makefrom them a contrast between the two periodswhich it is desirable to compare. The averageprice of wheat, by Mr. Lloyd's tables, for the tenyears from 1583 to 1592, appears to have beentwenty shillings and nine-pence ; of the ten yearsfrom 1593 to l602, thirty-three shillings andthree-pence; and from 1603 to I6l2, thirty-oneshillings and four-pence. It has been beforeshown, from the Chronicon Precious, that theaverage price in the twelve years, from 1551 to1562, in which there was no variation, was eightshillings and ten-pence. The parliamentary rateThese advances in the legal price to which wheat mustrise before it was exportable were continued by acts of parliament,thus :1623 by 21st James 1., cap. 28, at . . . . 32s.1627 by 3rd Charles I., cap. 4. the same rate continued.1656 by Cromwell ordinances, cap. 5 . 40*.1663 by 15th Charles II., cap. 7 . . . . 48*.1688 by 1st William and Mary, cap. 2 . . . 48*.With a bounty of 5s. when at or under . . . 48*.CHAP. XIX.IN ENGLAND. 77of prices would give in fifty years an advancefrom six shillings and eight-pence to twenty-sixshillings and eight-pence, or a threefold increase.The Oxford tables, as compared with prices inthe Chronicon from eight shillings and ten-penceto thirty-three shillings and three-pence, showan increase of near fourfold. It is possible thisapparent discrepancy may arise from the differenceof measure. Mr. Lloyd's prices are calculated bythe Winchester bushel of eight gallons. By anact passed in the loth Richard II., cap. 4, corn isordered to be sold only by the quarter of eightbushels; but it seems doubtful how far that law wasoperative, for the Oxford prices, though reducedinto the quarter of eight bushels, are kept inquarters of nine bushels, as are also those of Eaton.In the sermons of Bishop Latimer, especiallyin those preached before King Edward VI., areto be found several allusions to the advance ofprices which had taken place at that early periodafter the discovery of the mines of Potosi. Thefirst was delivered " in the shrouded at Paleschurch in London, 17th day of January, 1548 :"in that he relates the history of himself, or ratherof his family, saying, " My father was a yeoman,*' and had no landes of hys owne, onely he had afame of three or four pounds by yeare at the*' uttermost, and hereupon he tilled so muche as*' kept halfe a tossed men. He had walk for anhundred sheepe, and my mother milked thirty78 ADVANCE OF PRICES chap, xixkine. He was able and did finde the king a*' harness, with himselfe and his horse, while hecame to the place that he should receive theking's wages. I can remember that I buckledhis harness when he went into Blockhead field.He kept me to schola, or els I had not been ableto have preached before the kinge's majestie now.*' He married my sisters with five pounds ortwenty nobles apiece, so that he brought them*' up in godliness and feare of God. He kepthospitality for his poor neighbours ; and somealms he gave to the poore ; and all this did he*' of thesayde fame. When he that now hath itpayeth sixteen pounds by the year, or more, and*' is not able to doe any thing for hys prince, forhimselfe, nor for hys children, or give a cup ofdrink to the poore \"This rise of rents, which the bishop states inamanner not remarkable for its precision, does,however, deserve notice. When his father rentedthe farm in question (in Lincolnshire) at threeor four pounds a year, may refer to the time ofthe battle of Blockhead, fought in the reign ofHenry VII., I497» or fifty years before thesermon was delivered, when the same farm wasrented at sixteen pounds or more. This advancein rent, amounting to four or five hundred percent.,must, however, be in some measure apparentFirst sermon before King Edward, page 31. Edition of1575.CHAP. XIX.IN ENGLAND. 79rather than real ; because in the interval greatalterations had been made in the coin. In thereign of Henry VII. the pound weight of silverwas coined into forty-five shillings, twenty ofwhich made a pound sterling. In that part ofthe reign of Edward VI. in which Latimerpreached, for before his death an improvementtook place, the coin had been deteriorated, andthe pound of silver was coined into seventy-twoshillings. The pound of 1497 was worth twenty-sixshillings and eight-pence in our present money,and the pound of loll no more than seventeenshillings and eight-pence, and consequently the advanceof rent from four pounds to sixteen poundsnominally, was really from five pounds six shillingsand eight-pence to fourteen pounds two shillings,or little more than one hundred and sixty percent.This is a much more probable rate of advancethan what would be inferred from the barewords of the sermon. It corresponds with thecontemporaneous increase in the quantity of theprecious metals, and with the general advance ofprice in other commodities.The bishop was evidently unaware that theinflux of gold and silver from the new world wasproducing a gradual increase of prices, and likeother persons in that age sought, with more zealthan judgment, to find the causes of this extraordinaryphenomenon. He attributes this,which he treated as a great evil, to enclosures, tosheep walks, to registers, forestallers, and to any80 ADVANCE OF Prices chap. xix.cause but the true one, which in his warmthagainst his neighbours he had totally overlooked,or was unacquainted with.In uttering his indignation at the advance ofprices, he says, *' The position, if the poore man be'■' diseased, he can have no help without to much ;and of the lawyer the poore man can get no counsel,expedition, nor helpe in this matter, except*' he give him to much. At merchants' handes, nokynde of ware can be had except we give for it tomuch. You landlords, you retainers, I may*' say you step-lordes, you unnatural lordes, youhave for your possessions yearly to much. Forthat here before went for twenty or forty pound*' (which is an honest portion to be had gratis inone lordship of another man's sweat and labour),now is it let for fifty or one hundred pound by*' yeare. Of this to much cometh the monstrousand portentous dearth made by man, notwithstandingGoddoeth send us plentifully the fruitsof the earth, mercifully contrary unto our deserted.*' Notwithstanding, to much, which these rich menhave, cause such dearth, that poor men (whichlive of their labour) cannot, withthe sweats theirface, have a living, all kind of victuals is so deare,pigges, geese, capons, chickens, eggs, &c. These*' things with others are so unreasonably enhanced,and I thinke, verily, that if it thus continue, weshall at length be constrained to pay for a pigg** a pound."A sermon before a king must be necessarilyCHAP. XIX. IN England. 81loyiil, and the bishop displays no deficiency in thatvirtue ; though, in our day, it may be thought hewas somewhat too familiar, especially when recommendingthe youthful monarch to get a wife.*' These graziers, encloses, and rentrearers," hesays, *' are hinderers of the king's honor : forwhere as have beene a great many of householders*' and inhabitants, there is now but a shepherd and*' his dogged ; so they hinder the kinge's honor most*' of all. My lordes and masters, I say also that allsuch proceedings which are against the kinge's*' honor (as I have a parte declared before) and, asfar as I can perceive, doe intend plainly to makethe yeomanry slavery, and the clergy slavery.*' For such workes are all singular, private wealthand commodity. We of the clergy had to much,but that is taken away, and now we have to little.'* But, fortune own part, I have no cause to com-plaine, for, I thanks God and the king, I have"sufficient. And God is my judge I came not to"crave of any man any thing, but I know themthat have too little. There lyeth a great matterby these appropriations : great reformation is tobe had in them. 1 know where is a great market'* towne with divershameletsandinhabitantes, where*' doe rise years of their labours to the value of fiftypounds, and the vicar that serveth (being so greata cure) hath but twelve or fourteen marks byyeare, so that of this pension he is not able to buy** him books, no give his neighbour drink : all theVOL. II. GS2 ADVANCE OF PricesCHAP. XIX.*' wayne goeth another way." He farther adds — *' In'* this reahn are a great many folkes, and, amongstmany, I know but one of tender zeal, at themotion of his poore tenants, hath let downe hishides to the old rentes for their relife. For'* God's love let not him be a phenix, let him notbe alone, let him not be an hermit closed in awall : some good man follow him, and doe as he*' giveth example."An act passed at the end of the reign of Henrythe eighth, in the year 1545, which gives someidea of the expense of subsistence in that age, andshows it to have increased, though it is nearly asindefinite as the passages before extracted fromthe sermons of Bishop Latimer. By that act itis provided, that when the church of any parishwhose benefice does not exceed six pounds a yearis within a mile of another church, the small parishmay be annexed to the other church ; but if theparishioners of the small parish shall raise theirbenefice to eight pounds a year, the annexationmay be dissolved. This shows that eight poundsa year was deemed a sufficient remuneration forthe services of a parish priest, and enough tomaintain him, though it might not enable him tobuy books or exercise hospitality, which is thesubject of Latimer's complaint.Whatever may be the rate of advance on the pricesof commodities in the period between the firstdiscovery of America and the accession of EdwardCHAP. XIX.IN FRANCE. S3the sixth, it will hereafter be shown, as far asregards EnsLiud, that it was less than that whichoccurred in the succeeding period of nearly thesame length.The following table will show what was nearlythe advance on prices in France at a period takenabout the time of the discovery of America, andat another period about eighty years later. It isextracted and abridged from the publication byPoignard, at Paris, 1746, entitled " Essai sirles Mongols ; ou, Reflexion sur le Rapport entreV Argent et les Degrees."Year. Article. Price. Year. Price,.s. d. £,. s. d.1492 setier of wheat . 15 1588 8 14grinding a setier .012 1587 5 101494 a pigeon . .006 1588 072a rabbit . .030 17a capon . .030 17a pig . . .060 420100 herrings . 16 8 1587 3 101495 setier of wheat . 11 5 6 51499 setier of wheat . 26 8 1588 91500 setier of wheat . 30 1573 14 151501 setier of wheat . 30 1575 6 13 4a capon . .030 1578 191502 a pound of candles . 12 1587 7 6a pint of wine .004 1577 030a pint of oil . . 1 10 11- a voie of fire-wood . 18 4 1575 4 151503 a minot of charcoal .017 1572 080a pound of butter . 10 1578 5 68 10 4 62 15 4G 2IL Q4. bsrfl .- f-—ADVANCE OF PRICES CHAP. XIX.This account is given in livres, sols, and deniers,whose proportions to each other are the same asour pounds, shillings, and pence. In France, asin England, the process of diminishing the weightof the livre, which in the time of Charlemagnehad been a pound weight of silver, had been constantlygoing on from 7^8 to 1720, when itreached its present or rather its late value ofabout ten-pence halfpenny sterling.According to the table, as calculated in the'Trait ties 31o7inoies et cle la JiiriscVidion dela Coiir (les ]\Io?i?io}es," published by Bazinghen,1764, vol. i. p. 6i'2, it is shown that the value ofthe livre, as estimated by the pure silver it contained,was from 1483 to 1497 equal to four livresten sols of the existing livre, that from 1497 to1514 it was equal to three livres nineteen sols, andthat from 1573 to 1589 it was only worth twolivres twelve sols. The preceding table exhibits anadvance of prices nearly amounting to seven hundredpercent.; but when the discrepancies arisingfrom the variations in the value of the coin aretaken into the calculation, that enormous advancewill be reduced down to a rate of increase moreconsonant to that which appears to have takenplace in England at the same time. The advance,instead of being from eight pounds ten shillingsand four-pence to sixty-two pounds fifteen shillingsand four-pence, will be only from thirty-threepounds nine shillings and nine-pence to one hun-chat.XIX.IN SPAIN. 85died and fifty-six pounds eighteen shillings andtwo-pence, or at the rate of nearly four hundredand seventy per cent.There is good reason to believe that the pricesof commodities in the other kingdoms of Europeadvanced at nearly the same rate. This is indeedconcluded from evidence sufficient to satisfy theauthor, but which it would be difficult to producein a concise manner, and would be tedious to anyreader to investigate with all the necessary calculations.In Spain there are only to be found insome of the chronicles notices of prices, the weightsand measures connected with which, includingtheir variations, as well as those of the moneyused, are very great. We have, however, the testimonyof two Spanish authors of reputed veracityon this subject, which, though expressed in generalterms, is deserving of notice. Ortiz says, " Thegreat quantity of gold and silver which fell intothe power of the King of Castile caused it to fallto one-sixth of its former value ^."Don Sancho Montana, who published his workat Madrid in i'll), after boasting " cle que el oroy plata ran concha de esta nations'" adds, *' Beforethe discovery of the Indies, that w as to bebought for a quarto which now costs six reals,and he who possessed one hundred reals was asrich as he who now enjoys five hundred j for withCompendious do la Historia de Espana;, vol. iv. p. 413.PRICES IN ITALY. CHAP. XIX.the abundance of gold and silver its value hasfallen, and the value of whatever has to be boughtwith money has likewise increased"In Italy and Germany, from the number ofindependent states in those countries, whose coinwas in a constant state of change, and varied fromthat of its next neighbour, and whose weightsand measures were equally variable and generallylocal, it would lead the reader into a wilderness offigures and calculations, which could not be reducedto the simplicity that is to be found inEngland and France. In those two countriesweights and measures have altered but little, andthe alterations are easily marked ; and the poundsand the livres, though they have diminished inmetallic weight, and consequently in effectivevalue, are capable of having that weight and valueat any particular period ascertained with tolerablecertainty.Restauration de Espana, p. 211. In Gambia's 'commentarieson the BliningLaws of Spain' (vol. i. p. 102) is tobe found a variety of prices of commodities as fixed by an ordonnancein 1368. We do not quote from them, because theprices are given in tragedies, a money of account, whosevalue is very doubtful at that period.CHAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. ^7CHAPTER XX.Of the effect of the increase of metallic wealth on the variousclasses of society between 1483 and 1583.In the preceding chapter we have attempted toshow the influence exercised on the mass of commoditiesby the increased supply of the preciousmetals which the discovery of America had yielded ;and that within the first century after that eventthe quantity of those metals had increased nearlyfivefold, and the prices of commodities in thesame period been enhanced in nearly the sameproportion.It is now desirable to examine into the effectproduced on the several classes of society by acourse of events which were so new to the generationswho lived during the century in which thiscause first exhibited its operations.The silence of most contemporary writers onthe subject, or the allusions casually made by afew of them, show that the advance of prices madebut a slight impression during its progress. Itwas not till the end of twenty or thirty years thatthose who looked backwards with attention becamesensible of the great addition that had beenmade to them. It is to be remembered that toincrease fivefold in one hundred years, it is not88 THE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.necessary that the increase should on the wholecourse of those years be at the rate of five per cent,annually. Every addition would reduce the ratioof the succeeding addition, acting as compoundinterest does on money. If we take as an examplethe sum of all commodities to be ten millions ofpounds, and add to it two per cent, the first year,and to the sum so obtained, ten million two hundredthousand pounds, at the end of the secondyear, with the addition of two per cent., willbe ten million two hundred and four thousandpounds. In this way the prices of the commoditieswould be double, or twenty millions, in somewhatless than thirty-six years. In the next thirty-sixyears, at the same ratio of addition, the priceswould be again double, or forty millions. Thenext twenty-eight years would be more than sufficientto raise the prices of the commodities tofive times as much as at the beginning of the hundredyears.This view of the subject, thus expressed so asto make it intelligible without any algebraic operation,seems necessary to account for the little noticetaken of the great advance in prices between 1483and 1583 \ An advance of somewhat less thantwo per cent, is scarcely perceptible till some yearshave elapsed ; and those who do happen to observeit would be satisfied by attributing it to some localor temporary cause, rather than to so distant anThe exact annual addition of If per cent, to any sum willin one hundred years increase the original sum fivefold.CHAP. XX.INCREASED PRICES. 89operation as the increased production of mines inacountry so remote that even their existence maybeunknown.It woukl naturally be imagined, at a time whenmoney was looked upon almost exclusively aswealth, that an addition to it would have beenhailed with joy — that every individual and eachcommunity would have been gladdened at theknowledge that they were becoming more richthan they had before considered themselves. Thevery reverse of this, however, appears to have beenthe case, and complaints of distress were never sofrequent nor so loud as at the period we are nowreferring to.A valuable work on this subject was publishedin the reign of Elizabeth, in the year 1581, entitled"^ Sriefe Conceipte touching the commonwealof this Realme of England's' It is in theform of a dialogue between a knight, a landholderwho had served in parliament, a husbandman atenant to the knight, a merchant or shopkeeperin a large town, a manufacturer of caps or hats ofthe same place, and a doctor of divinity. Thedialogue is carried on with intelligence, withurbanity, and with views appropriate to the respectivecharacters of the speakers. The author,said by Watt to be a William Stafford \ displaysThe name in the title-page in the black-letter copy isW. S., Gentleman." Nothing certain is known of theauthor, but a bookseller in 17ol reprinted the " Conceipte,"90 THE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.much knowledge of the state of the country generally,and of the change that was then going on inthe relations of the several classes of society toeach other.This work, published about thirty years afterthe sermons of Latimer, from which quotationshave been presented to the reader, repeats andextends the complaints which the pious prelateuttered, and introduces a picture of future decayin England which rivals that of the bishop.The quaint language and the ancient and unfixedspelling in this work will need no apologywith any reader, and the phraseology is muchmore appropriate to the period it describes thanany sentences would be if constructed in moremodern English. eve give the complaints, therefore,in their own words, though not exactly inthe order in which they stand in the dialogue.The knight says, —All of my sorte — I meaneall gentlemen — havegreate cause to complain, now that the prices*' of thinges are so risen of all handes that youmay better live after your degree than we ; for** you may and do raise thepryce of your wares asand ventured, Avdthout authority or truth, to insert in the title-page" By William Shakespeare, Gent," doubtless thinkingthe name of the great poet would sell the work. As Shakspearewas born in 1564, and could be only seventeen at the time ofthe publication, it is next to impossible he could have been theauthor of a work containing so much accurate knowledge.CHAP. XX.INCREASED PRICES. 91the prises of vittayles and other necessaries doerise, and so cannot we so much ; for though itbee true, that of such landes as come to handeseyther by purchase orbydeterminationandendingof such termes of yeares that I or my ancestors** had granted them in time past, I do receive a*' better fine than of old was used, or enhance therent thereof, being forced thereto for the chargeof my household, that is so encreased over that itwas ; yet in all my lifetime I look not that thethird parte ofmy land shall come to my disposition,that I may enhance the rent of the same, but itshall be in men's holding either by leases or by*' copy granted before my tyme, and still conetinning, and yet lyke to continue in the same statefor the most part during my lyfe, and purchase mysonnes : so as we cannot raise all our wares asyou may do yours, and as me thinker it werereason we did ; and, by reason that we cannot, so** many of us as (yee know) that have departed outof the country of late have bene driven to giveover our households, and to keepe eyther a chamberin London, or to waste on the court uncalled,with a man and lackey after him where he waswont to keepe halfe a score of clean men in hishouse, and twenty or twenty-four other personsbesides everyday in the weeks, and such of us as*' doeabyde in the country still cannot with two huns'dredth a yeare keepe that we might have done withtwo hundred makes sixteen yeares ago." — " WeTHE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.are forced, therefore, to finish the third part ofour household, or to raise the third part of our*' revenues, and for that we cannot so doe of our*' owne landes that is already in the hands of othermen, many of us are enforced either to keepe*' pieces of our owne landes when they fall in ourowne possession, or to purchase some fame ofother men's landes, and to store it with sheep orsome other cattel, to help make up the decay ofour revenues, and to maintain our olde estatewithall, and yet all is little enough."The husbandman is not without his causes ofcomplaint, though he evidently had less reasonfor them than his landlord. Instead, however, ofproving his actual state to be bad, he dwells muchon the causes of the suffering which he pretendsthose ofhis class are subjected to. He says — '* These*' inclosures doe undone us all, for they make us to*' pay dearer for our land that we occupy, and causesthat we can have no land in manner for our moneyto put to tylkige, all is taken up for pasture — forpasture eyther for sheepe, or for grating of cattle*' — in so much that I have known of late a dozen*' ploughed within less compass than six miles aboutmee lade down within this seven yeares : and*' where threescore persons or upwards had theirlivings, now one man with his cattle hath all,which things is not the least cause of former up-roses;for by these inclosures many doe lack livings*' and be idle, and therefore for very necessity theyCHAP. XX.INCREASED PRICES. 93are desirous of a change, being in hope to conicthereby to somewhat, and well assured that, howeso ever it befall with them, it can be no harderwith them than it was before : moreover, all thingsare so deere that by there day wages they are notableto live. Those sheepe is the cause of allthese mischievous, for they have driven husbandryout of the country, by the which was increased** before all kind of victailes, and now altogethersheepeee, sheepeee, sheepeee. It was farre better when*' there were not only sheepe enough, but oxen, kine,swine, pig, goose, and capon, eggs, butter, and'* cheese yea and bread-corne and malt-corne enoughbesides, reared altogether upon the same lande."The manufacturer of hats also, in his turn, takesup the same lamentations. He agrees with thefarmer, and confirms it by his experience ; " For,"says he, '* I am faine to give my journeymen twopencein a day more than I w as wont to doe, and*' yet they say they cannot sufficiently live thereon.And I knows for truth that the best husband of*' them can save but little at the yeare's ende. Andby reason of such dearth as yee speake of, we that*' are artificers are able to keepe few or no prentices,like as we were wont to doe, and therefore cities*' which were heretofore well inhabited and wealthy*' (as yee knowe every one ofyou) are now, for lakeof occupiers, fallen to great poverty and desolation.*' It was never merry with poor craftsmen since gentlemenbecame graziers, for they cannot now aTHE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.dayes find tlieyr prentices and servants meat anddrynke, but it cost them almost double as muchas did before time; wherefore were many ofmyne occupation and other like heretofore havedyed rich men and been able to leave honestlybehind them for thy wife and children, and besidethat leave some notable bequest for somegood deeds, as to the making of bridges andrepairing of high waves, all of which thinges goeto wrack now every where. Also some were wontto buy lande eyther, for to help the poore beginnersof the occupations : yea, sometimes theyhad such superfluity as they could, over such bequests,leave another portion to finde a presterto found a chantry in some parish church ;and now we are askant able to live without debtorto keep few servants or none, except it beone prentice or two. And therefore the journeymen,what of our occupations and what ofclothiers, and all other occupations, being forcedto be without worke, are the most parte of theserude people that maketh these proves abode,to the great disquiet not onely of the queene'shighness, but also of her people."The merchant complains in a similar manner,and, affirming that poverty reigns in all the townsof England except London, and that their houses,streets, walls, bridges, and roads are hasteningrapidly to decay, continues to pourtray it in thefollowing words : —CHAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. ^ 95*' Albeit there be many things hyde downe nowwhich before time were occasions of much expences,as May-games, wakes, revels, wages atshooting, wrestling, running, throwing the stoneor barre, and, besides that, pardons, pilgrimages,offerings, and many such other thinges, yet I per-ceyve we be never the wealthier, but rather thepoorer: whereof it is long, I cannot well tell, forthere is such a general dearth of all thinges asbefore twenty or thirty yeares hath not been thelike — not onely of things growing within thisrealm, but also of all other merchandize that webuy from beyond the sea, as sykes, wines, ogles,wood, madder, iron, Steele, wax, flame, linensfustian, worsteddes, coverlets, carpets,and all hearses and tapestry, spices of all sortes,and all haberdasher ware, as paper, both whiteand browne, glasses, as well drinking and lookingas for glassing of windows, pines, needles,knives, daggers, hats, broaches, buttons, andlaces. I wot well all these doe cost nowe moreby the third part than they did but few yearesago. Than all vital is as deere or deeper away ne ;and no cause of God's part thereof, as farre as Ican perceive, for I never sawe more plenty ofcorne, grasse, and cattle of all sorte than wehave at this present, and have had (as yee know)all these twenty yeares passed continually, thankedbe our Lord God. If these inclosures were causethereof, or any other things els, it were a pitybut they might be removed."g6 THE EFFECTS OF CHAP. XX.The doctor seems the most rational man of theparty; for though at first he also complain, it iswith more moderation, and chiefly on the evilswhich had arisen from differences of religiousopinions, which he contends have been chieflyinflicted on the most honest and conscientiousmembers of his profession.Yee knowe well," he says, " though we haveleast cause to complain, we be not so plenteousas we have bene: the first-fruits and tenths are"deducted of our livings; yet of the rest we might«' live wel enough, if we might have quietness ofmind and conscience withall. Marry have younot seen how many learned men have bene putto trouble of late, within this twenty or thirtyyeares, and all for declaring their opinions intinges that have risen in controversy? Haveyou not known when one opinion hath bene'* set forth, and who so ever said against that was"put to trouble? And shortly after, when thecontrary opinion was furthered and set forth,were not they that prospered before put totrouble for saying their minds against this latteropinion ? And so neither of both partiesescaped, but, eyther first or last, came to be hit,** of whether side so ever he were, except it were*' some otherwise fellows that could change*' their opinions as the more or stronger part didchange theirs."The capper, who seems to have thought butlightly of either religion or learning, frankly tellstheCHAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. 97doctor his opinion on his profession, saying, " If*' I were of the queene's counsel, I would set you to*' the plough and carte, for the devil a whit of goodyea doe with your studies but to set men together*' by the ears, some with this opinion, and some*' with that, some holding this way, and some*' another, and that so stiffly as though the troth** must, as they say that have the upper hand in constension ; and this contention is not also the leastcause of former proves of the people, some*' holding of the one learning, and some of the*' other. In my minde, it made no matter though** we had no learned men at all."The knight objects to this opinion, ,and veryproperly asks, " if we had no learned men, howshould the prince have counsellors ? how shouldwe have Christian religion taught us ? how*' should we know the estate of other realms, andhave conference with them of all countries,** except it were through learning, and by thebenefit of letters ?"The capper, after some observations from thedoctor, concedes to this view taken by the knight,and says, '* I means not but I would have men tolearn to write and reade, yea, and to learned thelanguages used in couiitrys about us, that we** might tell our minds to them and they to us, yeaand that we might reade the holy scriptures inour mother tongue; and as for your preaching,(except yee agree better) it made no matter howVOL. II. H98 THE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.*' little we had of it, for of diversity thereof cometh*' those diversities of opinions."In concluding this part of the subject theknight sums up that in which all agree, " that the*' griefs standeth in these points, a dearth of all*' things in comparison of the former age, thoughthere be scarceness of nothing ; desolation of•' countries by enclosures; desolation of tones forlake of occupations and crates ; and division of*' opinions in matters of religion, which haleth*' men to and fro, and maketh them to contendone against another."After the picture thus presented, in the wordsof a cotemporary artist, we will now examine whatwas the actual effect of this vast increase ofmoney in the century which closed at the time ofthe publication of the " Brief e conceited Itseems clear that the advance of price on all thecommodities that were bought and sold must havebeen alike, except as regards articles whose priceswere affected by peculiar temporary or local causes.The same quantity of cloth would purchase a hator a gown ; the same measure of corn, except inyears of extraordinary scarcity or abundance fromthe state of the harvest, would procure a sheepor a cow. The value of all commodities wouldbear the same relation to each other as if nochange in the quantity of money had existed.The only alteration would be on the medium, bymeans of which the proportions between differentCHAP. XX.INCREASED PRICES. 99kinds of articles were adjusted. When any commoditieswere sold, the buyer would complain ofthe quantity of money he must pay, and thatwould leave a deep impression on his mind, whichwould not be removed by the higher price hewould obtain for what he sold. All would wishto buy cheap, but to sell dear. The gratificationof the last wish is more than destroyed by the non-gratificationof the first. This was evidentlythe case with the individuals whose views aredescribed by themselves in the dialogues. Everyonewho produced more than he consumed wouldfind at the end of a few years that his wealth,estimated as wealth commonly is in money, hadincreased considerably beyond his expectation.Every one who consumed more than he producedwould in a few years find that his wealth,estimated in the same manner, had diminishedmore than he had anticipated. This conditionof the two classes would have a beneficial effecton the aggregate wealth of the community. Theproducers would be encouraged to more strenuousexertions, and the consumers would be inducedto adopt a greater degree of parsimony. Thatportion of society who are both producers andconsumers, and they are probably by far thelargest class, would find little or no alteration intheir condition, except as far as the small differenceon the excess of their production over theirconsumption, or the contrary, which in mostH 2100 THE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.cases would be small. Whilst this process of thedeclining value of money was going on, those whowere in debt would discharge the demands uponthem, in proportion to the length of credit, withconsiderable gain ; whilst, on the other hand, thecreditors would receive payment in money of lessvalue than that at the time when they had giventhe credit. In this case, taken thus, the creditorwould suffer a loss, and the debtor would have again ; but as commonly the " borrower is servantto the lender," the latter would be more thanindemnified by taking a rate of interest so muchhigher as to cover the anticipated decline in thevalue of money; for after a few years of the coursehere supposed all would act from analogy, andupon the principle that as commodities had beengradually increasing, so they would continue toincrease, or, which is the same thing, that thevalue of money would continue to decline. ThusBishop Latimer, preaching in 1548, anticipatedthat before long a pig would be worth a pound,an expectation that was verified when the " Conceipte"was written, in 158 1.This mode of acting, if not of reasoning, fromanalogy is the most influential and the mostuniversal, and to it we owe the regular successionof agricultural labours; for the farmer ploughs andsows on no. other principle but that because thesummers of past years have brought his corn toperfection, so that the next summer will produceCHAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. llthe same effect on the hour on which he isengaged at every seed time. The same mode ofacting on analogy would be applied to otheroperations of industry. The weaver would perceivethat cloth had been constantly rising in itsmoney price ; he would conclude it would continueto rise, because it had done so ; and this wouldquicken his exertions, and induce him to bring (more cloth into the market. The same would be /the case with the producers of other articles, and \thus an impulse would be given to the productive |powers, which would continue as long as the increase ■of the precious metals should continue to lessentheir relative value to other commodities.There seems no other way in which the increaseof the gold and silver can be beneficial to a wholecommunity. The intrinsic value of it bears butasmall proportion to the various other kinds ofwealth which communities possess, and the valueof it, like that of all other commodities, is regulatedby the common principles of supply and demand.It is probable that in all ag-es those metals have fcost more in their production than their value ever \repaid. And if the amount of human sufferingsin the earlier ages of the world could be reduced toa money valuation, and to them were to be addedthe evils derived from them by their derangementof existing conditions in society, it would becomedoubtful if the increase of industry, which at particularperiods has been caused by it, has been102 THE EFFECTS OFCHAP, XX.more than a balance to the misery they have occasioned.This is, however, a view which it becomesnecessary to turn aside from, and look at thosederangements which were occasioned among differentclasses by thereat influx of the precious metalsm the first century after the discovery of America.The several monarchs who ruled in the differentdivisions of Europe were commonly thelargest proprietors of the land in their dominions,and chiefly subsisted on their produce, which wastransferred to them partly in kind, partly in variousfeudal services, and partly in money. The portionpaid in money was chiefly in the form of fines atthe renewal of leases, with small fixed annual rents,which were in many cases almost nominal, orwhich became so when the value of money declined.In England a pepper-corn rent wascommon, but it originated at a time when thatspice was of more than five hundred times itspresent value if exchanged for silver, and perhapsfive thousand times that value when exchange-ed forocorn or wool.In time of war our monarchs obtained moneyfrom their subjects under various names andpretexts, but in peace chiefly depended on theirlands, with some addition from the customs andfrom the coinage. The latter was made availableby Henry VII. and Henry VHI. to an extravagantextent, and by Edward \T. till theCHAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. 1 U^last year of his reign. In the reign of Mary herdemands were in some measure supplied from thetreasures of her husband, Philip of Spain. Elizabeth,who placed confidence in enlightened ministers,was led to avoid the evil of debasing the coin,and in the latter years of her reign placed it ona proper footing, which has been continued eversince with slight variations. The rigid frugalityshe practised, her abstinence from wars, and thehigh tone of authority which she exhibited to herparliaments, preserved her from pressing on hersubjects, who from a feeling of loyal attachmentwere ever ready to satisfy her demands. Duringthese reigns the income derived by the crownfrom the lands had been very little increased,whilst all the expenses of living, whether laid outfor foreign or domestic commodities, had beenraised to at least four or five times as much as ahundred years earlier. It is then evident thatthe wealth as well as the power of the crown musthave diminished very considerably in the periodwe are reviewing.It does not indeed seem improbable that thecontinued increase of expenditure, whilst a greatpart of the royal income was stationary, was oneof the causes which produced the civil wars in thereign of Charles I., and at length cost the lossof his life to that unfortunate monarch.The condition of the proprietors of the soilnaturally attracts attention next to that of thesovereigns. Where the rent was paid in produce.104- THE EFFECTS OF CHAP. XX.and that produce was partly consumed in theirhouseholds, they would be benefited to the extentof the increased price of that surplus which was tobe sold, provided such surplus amounted to morethan the cost of the foreign commodities whichthey might purchase. If their estates were letout, as was mostly the case, to tenants for lives orfor a long term of years, the fines on renewals aswell as the rents would be fixed at the commencementof the leases at the value of money of theperiod when they were granted, and during thecurrency of such leases the landlord would receiveless than the value of his land by receiving paymentin money which was depreciating from yearto year, as additions were made to the stock ofgold and silver. As far as regarded the demesnelands in the occupation of the proprietor, whethersuch lands were in tillage or in pasture, and especiallyin the latter case, the profit of the possessoron what he sold would be annually increased bythe declining value of the precious metals in whichhe would be paid for his produce.Whenever an estate was charged with incumbranceseither of the nature of mortgages or ofsettlements on the other brandies of a family thanthe possessor of it, or for pious or charitable purposes,the annual depreciation of money wouldtend to relieve it of the burden, and with a greateror less degree of rapidity, according to the lengthof the terms of the leases under which its partsmay have been granted out to tenants.CHAP. XX.INCREASED PRICES. 105From what has been already stated of the effectof the depreciation of metallic money on thecondition of the proprietors of the soil, it isnatural to proceed to that of the real cultivators,the operative husbandmen. England presents apicture of this class in society which, with the exceptionof a part of the Netherlands, is to be seenin no other country on the globe, and to whichperhaps it is indebted for its peculiar advantages,both social and political, in a greater degree thanto any other single cause.The system of cultivating lands on a kind ofpartnership plan prevails almost universally ; thelandlord supplying the cultivator with the requisitestock of cattle and implements, and receivinga stipulated share of the produce, either in kind,in labour, or in money, instead of what we denominaterent. Whether this system be a continuationof that practised by the Greeks, afterwardsby the Romans, and handed down sincetheir dominion has ceased to the French, theSpaniards, the Italians, and in some degree to theGermans, under the names of the Metayer orMeyer system, it has not, happily for GreatBritain, been much if ever known in this island.It is not designed here to enter into an examinationof the effect of the various modes in whichthe owners of land have arranged with the cultivatorsin different countries. It is a large field ofinquiry, which would lead too far from the immediateobject under consideration. It is besides the10() THE EFFECTS OFCUAP. XX.less necessary, because in a work lately issued fromthe Cambridge university press more facts arecollected on the subject of rent than are to befound in any other work, accompanied with themost judicious observations on the advantages anddisadvantages of the different modes by which itis extracted \The cultivators in this country, at the periodwe are considering, were under contracts withthe proprietors of the soil to pay certain smallannual money payments. Those payments werefixed at the commencement of the term forwhich the leases were granted, the greater partof which were for ninety-nine years, but determinableafter the death of three lives. A finewas almost universally paid on the granting thelease, and as each life dropped a fine was paid forarenewal.It seems almost certain that the fine as well asthe annual, or, as it was commonly called, *' thelord's rent," was fixed with reference to the rateof prices which the produce bore at the commencementof the term. The first term when a renewalwould become necessary, on the death of the firstof the three lives, would be about thirty-threeyears. A fine would then be demandable for a new1 See An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth and on theSources of Taxation — Part 1st, Rent — by the Rev. RichardJones, M. A. of Glanville and Caius College, Cambridge.CHAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. 107life. Supposing produce to have risen as we haveshown it did in the period, at the rate of a hundredand fifty per cent., the value of the new lifeto be placed in the farm would have been muchmore than saved by the advance of prices, whilstthe rent had remained unchanged. In this waytenants of the description here noticed would withprudence and care have saved more in the courseof a century, during which prices had graduallyadvanced to five times their former rate, thanwould be sufficient to purchase their own firms.By this view of the subject we see that the cultivatorsin England became capitalists, and if theychose rather to rent than to buy land, were enabledto provide from their capitals the necessarystock of cattle and implements, and to furnish thesums required to pay their labourers till the fruitsof their industry should arrive at maturity, andbecome applicable to that and the other purposesof cultivation.It is difficult to account for the different coursewhich rural affairs assumed in England from whatat the same period presents itself to our view onlooking at the continental kingdoms, where theoperative cultivators became metayer occupants,and have entailed on their successors all the evilswhich seem inseparably connected with that system,and which are the greater evil from the difficultieswhich oppose its amelioration.Much of this difference may be attributed toour insular position, and to the security to prossTHE EFFECTS OF chap. xx.party so much exposed as that of the cultivatoris, which is derived from that cause. After thetermination of the wars between the houses ofYork and Lancaster, England remained in a stateof internal tranquillity. The wars with Scotlandwere mere border warfare, and the effect of themwas scarcely felt except in the northern counties.The internal disturbances in Norfolk, in Devonshire,in Yorkshire, and some other parts, werelocal and transient ; and taking the whole of theperiod from the accession of Henry VII. to thecivil war in the reign of Charles I., England maybesaid to have enjoyed such domestic peace aswas quite sufficient to give general security to propertyand general confidence in its continuance.Whilst thus for more than a century and a half,during the period in which the greatest advancein prices had been making, no hostile foot hadtrodden the English soil that could put the laboursof the cultivators in jeopardy, and whilst onemonarch ruled the whole kingdom, the countrieson the continent were desolated by continualwars, and their internal arrangements subject toconstant disruptions from the number of pettysovereignties into which they were divided.France indeed, at the early part of the period, hadbeen enabled to unite into one kingdom the dukedomof Britain, the earldoms of Provence andDauphine, and the kingdom of Navarre ; but thecivil wars on account of religion, and the state ofinternal disquiet which extensively prevailed, ren-chap.XX. INCREASED PRICES. 109tered all property which, like that of the produceof the soil, could be serviceable to hostile bodiesextremely insecure. Italy and Germany weredivided into such a great number of separatesovereignties perpetually at variance with eachother, that any property exposed in the fieldsor the villages was constantly liable to militaryseizure.Ill those countries the operative cultivators musthave been benefited by the advance of prices, suchat least of them as escaped the rude hands of themilitary depredators; but their experience musthave warned them from investing it in agriculturalstock and implements, and they could have hadno occasion to expose themselves to such hazardousexperiments when the landowners were quite readyto furnish stock, and thus incur all the risk, whilstthe cultivator was to be a sharer of the benefit.Other causes may have contributed to give toEnglish agriculture that peculiarly beneficial directionwhich it received at the period when theinflux of the precious metals had its greatest influenceon prices. It is, however, grateful to ourfeelings to trace the rise of a class in society whichis known in no other country, that of capitalistscultivating the lands of proprietors, paying fixedsums for the use of the lands, and exercising; theirskill and industry for their own benefit in the firstinstance; for the benefit of the proprietor, if he beawise and good landlord ; and for the benefit of110 THE EFFECTS OF chap. xx.the community ; which is more copiously and regularlysupplied with all the products of the soil,and on more advantageous terms, than by anyother known system.If the mere labourers in agriculture be lookedat, it is to be feared that their condition will notappear to have been benefited by the great advanceof prices. The rates of wages to day labourersdo not seem to have risen in the same proportionas the necessaries of life, and the laws passedunder Elizabeth for the relief of the poor are sufficientevidence of their wretched condition. Itmay deserve some slight investigation, not certainlywith a view to any benefit to the same classin the present day, whose whole circumstances areso totally different, but to account for the undoubtedfact at the period now under consideration.In consequence of the great advance of prices,each cultivator was solicitous to fix on objectswhose produce would sell most readily, and forthe highest prices. The extension of the woollenmanufactory in England, and the great demandfor English wool in Flanders, had raised the priceof that product at a much greater rate than wasexperienced in corn and other vegetable substances.The conversion of arable land into sheep walks,which was the common subject of complaint, andforbidden by laws enacted for the purpose, causeda diminution of the demand for labourers, andthat in two ways: a flock of sheep required fewCfiAP. XX. INCREASED PRICES. Illservants, and the manure they supplied made thecorn land more productive, so that with a muchsmaller portion of labour a quantity of corn wasraised quite equal to the wants of the community.Though manufactures were increasing, they couldnot absorb the surplus of rural labour. The privilegesof guilds and corporations, and the rightsof journeymen, which excluded all who had notserved apprenticeships, were obstacles to the employmentof the agricultural labourers, not tonotice that in general they were ill qualified forsuch occupations. Another cause from which thepoor suffered arose from the condition of thoselanded proprietors whose estates were let at longleases, who found when every article they consumedwas doubled or tripled in price their incomesremained unaltered. They were compelledto diminish their establishments, and as the modeleast painful was the dismission of their uselessor cumbersome domestics, we find constant complaintsof the numerous serving men who wantedoccupation.The manufacturers of the period must have beenin prosperous circumstances. Every raw materialwas rising, but still the demand was increasing.What was dear when purchased became still dearerby the operation of the mines, and was felt in thesale of it. In the present day the process of manufacturingby machinery gives such rapidity to thewhole operation, that there is scarcely time for a112 THE EFFECTS OFCHAP. XX.gradual advance to take place between the commencementand the completion of a piece of cloth ;but in that day, when machinery was unknown,and the division of labour was not carried to thepresent minute extent, the making a piece of clothoccupied more months than it does now days. Atthis slow rate the general increase of price of allcommodities would insure a profit by the delay, inaddition to the regular profit on the manufacture.The merchants, whether wholesale or retail,whether confined to the home or extended to theforeign trade, must have benefited in proportionto the stock of goods they kept in their warehousesand their shops. The dealer in a rising articlenecessarily gets money, because the rise, whateverit may be, comes in addition to the regular profitsof his trade.The navigation of the European world was muchextended in this period, and though it was buttrifling compared with the extent to which it hasbeen since carried, yet, as far as it had proceeded,it increased the wealth of the merchant adventurerswho eno-ao-ed in it, and added additional and importantmembers to that class of society.The effect of this prosperous state of the operativecultivators, of the manufacturers, and of themerchants and retail traders, has been prolongedthrough more than three centuries, and has givento European society in general, but to that ofEngland more especially, a form utterly unknownCHAP. XX.INCREASED PRICES. 113ill the ages which had preceded the discoveryof America. It has given rise to a chess of personsproperly denominated the middle order, whopossess the greater part of the wealth, the activity,the intellect, and the influence in those parts oftheworld whose position and connexion and civilizationmay be said to rule the globe.Although the quantity ofthe precious metalsproduced from the mines was less in the period wehave surveyed than in each ofthe two centurieswhich succeeded it, yet it is of much importanceto the purpose of this inquiry. The quantityintroduced acted upon the small quantity previouslyin existence with most powerful effect. Itquadrupled or quadrupled the portion of money.It lowered its value as a commodity in the sameproportion ; or, in other words, it raised the valueof all commodities at the rate here stated. Insubsequent periods, it will be seen that the largerquantities of gold and silver that were extractedfrom the mines produced much less effect, becausethey acted upon the larger portions whichhad previously been accumulated.In fact, in no period of the world was thechange in all mercantile and agricultural relationsand connexions in any degree approaching to thatwhich took place between the termination of thefifteenth and ofthe sixteenth century. In thenext-century, though more of the precious metalswas produced, the change was less extensive ; andVOL. II. I114 THE EFFECTS OF, ETC. CHAP. xx.it was the same in the century between the years1700 and 1800, though the mines yielded stillmore. It is to fix attention on this great changethat such an extended view of the several classesof society who were interested in it has been taken.Its effect has been felt in every quarter of theglobe, and has had an influence on the prosperityof the whole civilized race of man — not by thewealth that the gold and silver amounted to, butby the stimulus it began to administer to everybranch of industry, by the impulse it communicatedto physical, mechanical, legislative, judicial, andeven moral investigations, and by the attachment itinspired to the sound principles which introducedlegal, civil, and political freedom.CIIAP. XXI.AMERICAN MINES. 115CHAPTER XXLOn the increase of metallic wealth, and the proportionate increaseof material wealth, between the years 1600 and 1700.In the continuance of this inquiry, as far asrelates to the produce of gold and silver from theirchief source the mines of America, the progress willbe both clear and easy. The facts and calculationsof Baron Humboldt are presented to the publicafter so much consideration, and accompaniedwith so much discrimination and impartiality, thatthey may be in most cases implicitly adopted. Hisaccount of the produce of Mexico will be followedtill the year when the documents procured by Mr.M ard, then his majesty's minister to that country,commences. These come down to the end of theyear 1825, and being collected from official sourcesought to be and probably are the most correct thatcould be obtained. The few years that follow tothe end of 1829 are supplied from sources ofvarious kinds — some from reports to the assembliesof the republic, and some from communicationsmade by persons resident in Mexico employedby the English mining-companies. In these lastthough there are some discrepancies which it maybedifficult to reconcile, their amount is so insig-I 2AMERICAN MINES. CHAP. XXI.nificant that an error cannot exist to an extentwhich would make a difference in the whole calculationof two per cent.Peru. Although there was much fluctuation in theproduce of the American mines during the seventeenthcentury, yet upon the whole there was anincrease, though not a large one. The mines inthe district of Potosi in Peru had declined to agreat extent. In the first fifteen years of the centurythey had yielded one million six hundred andseventy thousand three hundred and forty-fourpiastres, or about three hundred and fifty thousandpounds ; and in the last fifteen years, from 1685 tol699> both years inclusive, the average amountsto no more than five hundred and fifty-nine thousandnine hundred and forty-three piastres, orabout one hundred and sixteen thousand six hundredand sixty pounds. At the first discovery ofthat mass of mineral wealth, the Spanish conquerorsexercised the most unlimited dower overthe natives. They were driven to the severe labourof the mines in a cold and inhospitable climate,where subsistence was difficult to be obtained ; andthe change fi"om the deep and warm and fruitfulvalleys where they had passed their time in tranquillityand abundance swept them away in greatnumbers. The interference of the government ofSpain, which sent commissioners and strict ordersto mitigate the lot of the natives, was ineffectual :the rude adventurers who had conquered theCHAP. XXI. AMERICAN MINES. Ilcountry thought little of the obedience due to apower so remote and inactive as that which ruledin the European peninsula. The waste of the indigenouspopulation was attempted to be suppliedby the importation of negro slaves from the Africanshores ; but this inhuman resource was far fromeffectual. The voyage to the river Plate, withthe journey over the Pampas and the Cordilleras,lessened the numbers of the captives and weakenedthe frames of those who arrived at the inhospitablecerro of Potosi, and when there the severity ofthe climate rendered most of them incapable oflabour.As the country between La Plata and Peru be BuenosIT* T Ayres.came more traversed, districts were discovered ofgreat natural fertility and salubrity, and establishmentswere formed near veins of minerals, whichupon more mature examination were found tocontain much silver and some gold. The negroslaves were applied to those operations, as well asthe few native labourers which the scanty populationcould furnish. In this way the country thenconsidered a part of Peru, but separated from itin 1788, and added to the viceroyalty of BuenosAyres, and since under the revolutionary regimenconverted into a kind of independent republic calledBolivia, with Cuzco for its capital, became peopled,cultivated, and productive of the precious metals.In a few years mines were opened and workedin Carangas, Oruro, Andacava, and Chaquiapu118 AMERICAN MINES.CHAP. XXI.Peru(since called La Paz) ; and their operations werequickened by the stimulus arising from the desireto procure the mate or tea of Paraguay, whichsilver could most easily purchase, and which wasdeemed an indispensable refreshment for thosewho laboured in the mines.Northern In the same century the silver mines of Yauri-concha or Pasco, in the more northern part of Peru,were first opened, and yielded a large portion ofthat metal. It is thus that though Potosi, whichhad at first yielded the greatest quantity of silver,had declined, yet the other parts of Peru advancedin their issue of the precious metals so considerablyas more than to compensate for that deficiency.This increase, especially of silver, was greatly facilitatedby the extension of the mines of mercuryat Huancavelica. Those mines, as has been beforenoticed, were discovered as early as the methodof extracting silver by the process of amalgamationin 1576 ; but the quantity at first producedwas small when compared with that which theyreached between the years 1598 and 1684, afterwhich they appear again to have declined. Thequicksilver was under monopoly regulations, thegovernment making the delivery of it subservientto its purposes in securing the tax on the silver ;so that the quantity which each miner receivedwas a kind of check on the quantity of silver onWhich he ought to pay the tax or the king's share.The chief those mines became choked up aboutCHAP. xxr.AMERICAN MINES. 119the year 1790, which was a real calamity to themining-interests in South America. The superintendantof that day removed the pillars whichhad been left by the excavators of the galleries tosupport the roof. By the superincumbent pressurethe roof fell in, and the passages becameblocked up. *' The master miners'* says Humboldt,"accused the intendant of having removedthe pillars to ingratiate himself with the court ofMadrid, by procuring in a very few years a greatquantity of mercury. The intendant on his partaffirmed that he had acted alton-ether with theconsent of the master miners, who thought thepillars might be replaced by heaps of rubbish."This calamity is only noticed to show how difficultit must have been for the government of Spain tohave directed the important affairs of their veryremote possessions, and must form an apology formany instances of their mismanagement, if anyother apology be needed than the infinitely worsemanagement which has been adopted since thosecountries have had the task of self-government inflictedon them by their applauded liberators.Whilst the increase of silver was advancing inPeru, that of gold was also going on in SouthAmerica, in the countries to the north and southof that viceroyalty. In Chili both the Spaniards Chili.and their dependent Indians, with the unconqueredArmenians to the south of the river Biobio, weresedulously employed in washing for gold in those120 AMERICAN MINES. chap. xxi.streams which descend from the Cordilleras. Theclimate is mild and the soil fruitful; and perhapsless suffering was inflicted in the extractionof that than of any gold or silver in the othertimes and countries where it has been acquired.A recent traveller who has visited Chili remarks,*' It is usually observed in those countries wheregreat mineral riches exist, that the soil is of abarren and unproductive nature; but Chili affordsa striking and solitary exception to this rule.Streams abounding in gold wander through themost luxuriant corn-fields, and the farmer andthe miner hold converse together on their banks '.'*In the northern part of South America, formerlyknown as the new kingdom of Granada,but now forming what is denominated the Republicof Columbia, some little silver, but muchmore gold, was produced. The first conquerorsfound gold in Barquisemento, and in some otherplaces in the mountains to the north-east of thenevada of Merit, and in those to the south ofCaracas, but they appear to have been very earlyexhausted. In the century now under consideration,the chief quantity of gold was procuredfrom the valleys or ravines 'in the mountainousregions of Antioquia, in the valley of Cauca,between the central and western Cordilleras, andespecially in the province ofPopayan, at its southern1 Caldcleugh's South America, vol. i. p. 351.CHAP. XXI. AMERICAN' MINES. 121extremity. Some was also found, but only towardsthe latter end of the seventeenth century,in the province of Choco ; which afterwards yielded,in proportion to its extent, a greater quantityof that metal than any other part of the globe,though its climate is one of the most unhealthy inthe whole of America.The chief increase between 1500 and I6OO wasof silver from the viceroyalty of Mexico, where Mexico.the production of Zaccatecas, Guanaxuato, andthe other mining-districts had advanced from thevalue of two million piastres to that of fivemillions, and at the latter part of the century hadfar exceeded that annual average.oAlthough when the Spaniards conquered Mexicothey appear to have annihilated the higher classes,yet the population which was left was quite sufficientto supply labourers, and recourse wasnever had to the cruel and costly practice ofimporting negroes from Africa to execute themost servile part of the work, as had been donein Peru, Buenos Ayres, and Columbia. The introductionof cattle and of vegetable productionsfrom Europe, which had been unknown before inMexico, afforded abundance of subsistence; andif the population did not increase it did not greatlydiminish under the Spanish yoke. The feudalismwhich was found in Mexico was rather of apaternal than a slavish character ; and the samesystem was continued by the new proprietors of122 AMERICAN MINES. chap. xxr.the soil. Labourers were easily procured for themines by the assistance of the native caciques, whowere always ready to send their vassals to thespots where mines were opened, who either workedbelow the surface for the metals, or cultivatedthe land to raise food for those who performedthat labour, whilst their hereditary superiors drewsome gain to themselves from the employment ofthose of their respective clans. Humboldt assertsthat in the time he visited Mexico the work ofthe mines was executed alone by free labourers,and the knowledge obtained since a more constantintercourse has been admitted confirms theassertion.Whatever the health and strength of thosenatives of Mexico who inhabited the moist andsultry plains may have been, it seems that thosevvho live on the elevated levels are far betteradapted for severe labour, and far more capable ofenduring continued exertion, than any of thetribes that have been carried from Africa toAmerica. The burdens these men are now inthe habit of carrying on their backs up a steepascent from the bottom of the deepest mines tothe surface excite surprise in Europe, wheresuch labour is almost exclusively performed bymachinery. " The Indians, Tenateros,''* saysHumboldt, " vvho maybe considered as the beastsof burden of the mines of Mexico, remain loadedwith a weight of from two hundred and fifty toCHAP. XXI. AMERICAN MINES. 123three hundred and fifty pounds for a space of sixhours. In the galleries of the mines ( Valenciananaand Rays) they are exposed to a temperatureof from 71° to 77° of Fahrenheit, and during thistime they ascend and descend several thousandsteps in pits of an inclination of 45"."We meet," he says, " in the mines, with filesof fifty or sixty of these porters, among whomthere are men above sixty and boys of ten ortwelve years of age."The labour of this hardy race had been directedto the mines from the period when the Spaniardshad accomplished the quiet submission of thecountry. It was employed in numerous smallmines till about the beginning of the seventeenthcentury. But in or about the year 1630 themines of Guanaxuato began to be opened, or perhapsonly greatly extended, as the historical fiictsbefore that period are rather doubtful. Sincethat time, however, during the whole of that andthe following century, the progress in the labour,and of the results of it, have been regularlyincreasing. The mines of Vasco, Zultepec, pacha,and Tlapujahua, whose workings had commencedat the earliest period of the Spanish dominion,had languished in a state of comparativeinactivity, but in the period from iG^O to theend of that century had gone on regularly increasing,and the same was the case with thosemines which are within the district of Zaccatecas.124 AMERICAN MINES. ciiAP. xxr.In a country like Mexico, where the population,though much extended, was numerous, as thecapital to set labour in a state of active operationwas augmented, it was natural that the chief objectto which that labour was applied should becomemore and more productive.Mexico, in the age under consideration, yieldedgold as well as silver. It was found sometimesalone, but more commonly in the silver and otherores, and when so found was separated by a subsequentprocess. Without entering more minutelyinto a subject where all the ancient documentsare obscure, we may safely conclude with Humboldtthat the whole of the precious metals producedin Mexico had so increased between I6OOand 1700, that, in the last ten years of the century,the mines delivered to the mints, in goldand silver, to the amount of more than fivemillions of piastres. Upon a review of what isrecorded of Peru, Columbia, Chili, and BuenosAyres, as it has since been called, we concludethat the quantity supplied by them in the samecentury was somewhat larger. Taking these together,we average them at ten million five hundredthousand dollars or piastres. Besides what wassupplied to the mints, and paid the duty to thecrown, the same accurate writer calculates thatone-fifth part of both metals was conveyed awayby contraband means — a calculation by no meansunreasonable when the high duty is considered,CHAP. XXI. AMERICAN MINES. 125and looking at the extensive frontier which was tobe guarded. This would make the supply amountto twelve million six hundred thousand piastres.Brasil at that time had begun to collect gold,though not to the extent which it reachedin the following century ; it may, however, besafely estimated, even then, at one million dollars.To the supplies from America may be added whatlittle the mines of Europe and the rivers of Africacontributed to the general stock, which appearsto have amounted to about one million four orfive hundred thousand dollars. Thus the sum offifteen million dollars annually, or taking the dollarsat four shillings and two-pence sterling, threemillion three hundred and seventy-five thousandpounds, would nearly agree with the estimatewhich Humboldt has assumed.This would give an increase to the preciousmetals in the whole century of three hundred andthirty-seven million five hundred thousand pounds.In the eighteenth chapter of this inquiry (page |70) the conclusion has been arrived at that the |stock in Europe applied to the purposes of moneymight amount to about one hundred and thirtymillions sterling. If the same allowance be madefor wear in the hundred years as has been beforepresumed, that coin which was in circulation atthe end of the year 1.599 would in the year 1699be reduced to eighty-seven million pounds.In the former period it has been estimated that126 APPLICATION OF chap. xxi.the silver and gold which was transferred fromAmerica to India through Europe amounted annuallyto one-tenth of the supply furnished by thewestern continent. Although the Dutch, theEnglish, and the French had shared with thePortuguese in the trade to India, and had enlargedit very considerably, yet there is no reasonto conclude that the demand for silver and goldfor the trade with Asia had proceeded throughthe whole of the century at a rate which wouldmake it necessary to send to the east a larger proportionof the whole produce than in the precedingcentury. If then, as before, the supply forthe east be taken as one-tenth, the additionalquantity to be applied to Europe would be threehundred and four million seven hundred andfifty thousand pounds.It is difficult to fix v/hat proportion of thisamount would be applied to other purposes thanthat of money. It is natural to conclude thatwith the low price of any commodity the consumptionof it will increase. This is the samewith the precious metals as with every other commodity,though some confusion of ideas arisesfrom viewing them most commonly in their othercharacter, that of a measure of the value of allother commodities. An ounce of silver may beconsidered as worth at all times five shillings orsix francs, and therefore an alteration in its valueis marked in a different manner from that of otherCHAP. XXI. THE PRECIOUS METALS. 127commodities, which are never measured by themselves.But if silver or gold be measured bycorn, meat, cloth, or other articles, those whowant such articles can procure a larger quantityof them for the same weight of those metals. Theholder of silver has thus a larger surplus of hispeculiar goods, which may be, and a part probablywill be, destined to be converted into goods ofsilver, as well as applied to other luxurious indulgences.As the conversion of money into plate dependsmuch on the low prices of the precious metals,so it is forwarded by peace and prosperity, andgenerally retrograde in seasons of war or turbulence.The beginning of the century was aseason of more than usual tranquillity. In England,till the civil wars under Charles the firstbegan, there was external and internal peace. InFrance, till the year l6'-20, there was no foreignwar ; and the internal war concerning religion,though furious whilst it continued, lasted, withpeaceful intervals between, not more than eightyears. Spain, though not reconciled to the lossof the Netherlands, ceased to carry on war there,and was only disturbed for a few years by thePortuguese having separated themselves from thatkingdom. The prosperity of Holland was rapidlyapproaching to its greatest height. Germany wassubject to that tremendous scourge the thirtyyears' war on account of religion, in which the128 APPLICATION OFCHAP. XXI.heroism of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden wasdisplayed, to the tremendous annoyance of thecountry whose liberties he secured. Italy, thoughthe commerce of its trading cities was lost, was atleast tranquil. The beginning and the end of thecentury were far from a state of insecurity ; andit seems natural to conclude that if a great part ofthe gold and silver which was collected and hadbeen appropriated to luxury in the first forty yearshad been, during the middle of the century, convertedinto coin, much of it would return again tocommodities in the succeeding years of tranquillity.The decorations of the catholic churches andmonasteries were still increasing. The dresses ofcivil and military men were decorated with a profusionof gold and silver lace and embroidery.The residences of kings, princes, nobles, magistrates,and rich citizens were furnished withlooking-glasses and pictures in silver frames ; andeven tables are still to be seen in many houses ofthat age, if not of massy silver, yet cased with acovering of that metal. The precious metals didnot then indeed descend to ranks so low as thosewhich now use them ; but even the traders, clergy,lawyers, and others of the middle ranks began tocollect a few spoons of silver, and a few otherarticles of domestic furniture of that metal. Goldrings were very much increased, and ear-rings, aswell as necklaces, of the same metal, were a commonornament with all of the middle and manyCHAP. xxr. GOLD RINGS. 129even of the labouring and mechanical classes offemales. Few of the women would enter into themarried state till the joint savings of herself and herlover had amounted to sufficient to purchase a wed-lingeringof gold. In this age the manufacture ofwatches of silver and gold became much simplifiedand improved, and the use of them vastly extended.As long as the making them remained in thehands of a few ingenious and skilful persons whowere rather artists than artisans, the price washigh, and the numbers worn were comparativelyfew ; but as fast as the value of the cases inwhich the machinery was enclosed declined, andas the forming the interior parts was dividedamong different descriptions of workmen, so fastdid the demand increase, and a watch became thecommon appendage to the dress of every manand most women in the augmented number ofpersons in the middle ranks of society.The use of an article among a few hundred, or,when comprehending all Europe, of a few thousandrich or noble families, may be considerable ; butwhen it extends to the millions, however smallthe portion of each may be, the whole mass collectedwill be increased to an incalculable extent.If we suppose Europe at that period to havecontained one hundred million inhabitants, andone-tenth of these to have been married or widowedfemales, with each a gold ring of only apennyweight of gold, the value of them wouldamount to two million pounds sterling. 1£ weVOL. II. K130 WATCHES AND ORNAMENTS. chap. xxi.suppose that one-tenth of the inhabitants had asilver watch, and one-hundredth part a gold watch,with cases weighing two ounces, the whole wouldamount to near twenty millions sterling. Thesupposition is made without any assumption of itscorrectness, and merely to show the prodigiousextent and consequent consumption of an articlewhen from the decline in its value it descends tothe most numerous classes of society.In the preceding century, the silver or thegold which formed the hilts of the knights'swords, or the spurs fixed on their heels todenote their rank or their valour, the embroideryon the cloaks of the magistrates, the jewels on thehabiliments of kings, nobles, and high-born dames,might give splendour to the tournaments andattract the notice of the chronicler or historian ;but the value of such decorations would amountbut to a most insignificant trifle when comparedwith the whole of those smaller portions of goldand silver possessed by the many millions in theranks below them, who in the century that followedbegan to assume their just station in society.Under consideration of all the changes in thecircumstances of European society, it seems fairto conclude that the proportion of the preciousmetals in the seventeenth century which wasapplied to other purposes than making moneyhad much increased beyond that proportion whichit bore in the sixteenth century, and which hasbeen estimated in this inquiry as one-tenth. ItCHAP, XXI.COIN IN 1599. 1.31seems, therefore, probable, that instead of one-tenthonly being diverted from its application ascoin to that of ornaments and furniture, an assumptionmay be admitted that it at least amountedto one-fifth.In that view of the subject gold and silverwould have been added to the coined money tothe amount of two hundred and forty-four millionpounds. But allowance must be made on thissum for the regular wear, at the rate before estimated,of one part in three hundred and sixtyannually, which would amount to about thirty-fourmillion pounds; thus leaving, at the end ofIce, coin in circulation in addition to what existedat the end of 1599, as may thus for greaterclearness be exposed in figures.Stock of coin left at the end of 1599 i:;i.SO,000,000Deducted from this hy abrasion and loss in thecourse of a century," to the end of 1099 43,000,000Produce of the mines in 100 years 337,500,000Transferred to India and China inpart by the Philippine Islands 33,250,00087,000,000304,250,000Deduct a fifth converted to otherobjects than that of coin 60,250,000244,000,000Deduct from this by wear and loss 34,000,000210,000,000£297,000,000By this account, taking the stock of coinedk2132 INCREASE OF COIN AND chap. xxi.money at the end of 1599 at one hundred andthirty million pounds, and of that stock at the endof 1 699 at two hundred and ninety-seven millionpounds, we find an increase in the hundred yearsat the rate of about one hundred and fifty percent.,or double and a half.The doubts respecting the prices of corn havebeen before fully stated, but at the two periodswhose comparison it is now necessary to make,though still subject to doubt, there are moreaccurate records than in the preceding series ofyears, when for want of better criteria recoursehas been reluctantly had to them.The prices of corn here referred to are those ofOxford, taken from the valuable publication ofMr. Lloyd' ; and to avoid the influence of variationon the productiveness of the series of years, a greaternumber of years is comprehended in the estimation.In the twenty years from 1483 to 1502, bothincluded, the average price of wheat was twenty-sevenshillings the Winchester quarter ; in thetwenty years from 1583 to 1602 the price wasthirty-six shillings per quarter, or an advance ofthirty-three per cent. Malt in the first periodwas sixteen shillings and a penny, in the lastperiod twenty-two shillings and a penny, whichshows an advance of thirty-eight per cent. ThisSee Appendix, No, IV., in Lloyd, p. 325.In the prices of malt no allowance is made in this calculationfor the duty of four shillings per quarter first imposed in 1697,and for the subsequent alterations in the rate of duty.ciJAP. xxr.INCREASE OF WEALTH. 133view of the rise, taken from accurate tables, doesnot appear to correspond with that which theacts of the legislature would lead us to infer. Ashad been before noticed in 1593, the price ofwheat at twenty shillings the quarter was deemedsufficiently low to warrant permission to export it ;but in 1688 exportation was not allowed whenwheat was above forty-eight shillings. If theseenactments may be taken as the proportion ofprice between 1593 and 1688, the advance wouldbe nearer to the increased quantity of the moneyin circulation than is sloven by the Oxford tablesof jNIr. Lloyd.It is, however, scarcely possible that the increaseof prices should keep an even pace with therate of augmentation of the precious metals. Itmay be so in the early increase of money, butcould not long continue. The additional quantityof money, acting as a stimulus to industry,would increase the mass of commodities to be exchanged,and thus a greater portion of moneywould be needed to circulate them. This may befamiliarized by an hypothetical case. Let it besupposed that the whole mass of commodities isreduced to two articles, corn and cloth, in equalquantities, as one hundred thousand quarters ofcorn and one hundred thousand pieces of cloth —that the cost of production of each quarter of cornand each piece of cloth is the same. The valueof them in exchange would then be equal. We131 INCREASE OF COIN AND CHAP, XXI.must suppose the value of them to be a poundweight of silver, or sixty-two shillings. If thesame quantity of silver remained, and the corn wasincreased to two hundred thousand quarters andthe cloth to the same number of pieces, their exchangeablevalue with each other, the demandcontinuing in equal proportion, would be the sameas before. But when exchanged for silver theywould obtain a less quantity of that metal. Incommon language they would fall in price. Ifthe silver were doubled in quantity, the cloth andthe corn, with the same value to each other, wouldbe the same with respect to silver, and the pricewould be said to be stationary. If one-half thesilver was annihilated, the cloth and the cornwould both be equally affected by it, and, withoutchanging their position relative to each other,would become of less value in exchange for silver,or would be said to have fallen in price. Thoughthis mode of stating a case may serve to illustratethe effect of the rise or fall of prices, yet it cannotbe made applicable universally.Whilst from the years 1600 to I7OO the augmentationof the stock of gold and silver was inprogress, the general stock of commodities in likemanner, but at what proportional pace it is difficultto determine, was also advancing. The goldand silver in a country, contrary to the opinionsof the vulgar, are the least part of its wealth. Theycan scarcely, under any of the changes of metallicCHAP. XXI. INCREASE OF WEALTH. 135value which they may cause in other commodities,amount to a hundredth part of the wealth of acountry, and in a prosperous state they will beara much less proportion. The possession of themisreal wealth only in a small degree, thoughevery addition to them produces real wealth bythe stimulus which the apparent advance of pricesgives to every kind of industrious exertion.It is impossible to collect any accurate ideas ofthe proportionate increase of commodities in general.An approximation only to accuracy can beexpected, and that with faint hopes of success.Between the reign of Elizabeth, which terminatednear the end of the sixteenth century, andthat of William, which ended nearly one hundredyears later, there had been an increase in populationin England as well as in the other countriesof Europe. The inhabitants of England and Walesare calculated by Mr. Hickman to have been inthe year I7OO about five million four hundred andseventy-five thousand, and to have increased inthe course of the following century at the rate ofseventy per cent. As we have found, by the twocensuses taken since that of 1801, that our populationhas increased at a greater rate than in thelast century, so it seems natural to calculate thatit had increased more rapidly in the seventeenththan in the sixteenth. We therefore assume alower rate, and, estimating the population in theyear 1500 at three million eight hundred INCREASE OF COIN AND chap. XXI.sand, calculate that it had increased at the rate offifty per cent, in 1600, which is near enough tothe estimation of Mr. Hickman for the purposeto which it is here applied.As far as a slight but not thoughtless examinationcan be depended on, it appears that the otherportions of Europe must during the same periodhave experienced a similar but probably not anequal augmentation. It is fair to suppose thatFrance had kept nearly an equal pace with England.Spain, if she had increased her inhabitants, musthave done so, from the expulsion of the Moors andJews, and from the emigrations to America, at amuch slower rate. Germany could scarcely havemore than recovered in the last fifty years of thecentury the desolation and depopulation occasionedby the thirty years' war, which occupied the greaterpart of the first half of that century. Hungary,Poland, Prussia, and Switzerland had certainly increased,and probably nearly at a rate approachingthat of England ; whilst Italy, Holland, and theNetherlands had proceeded with a pace equal toour own. The northern kingdoms of Denmarkand Sweden, and the eastern empire of Russia,had in some measure, but to what extent must bedoubtful, probably also been getting more denselypeopled.On the whole we venture to assume, that in theperiod of one hundred years from I6OO to Soothemass of inhabitants in Europe had received anCHAP. XXI.INCREASE OF WEALTH. 137addition to their numbers of at least forty on thehundred. Now the bare subsistence of this increasedpopulation, even in exactly the same manneras their ancestors had lived, would require anaugmentation in the commodities which were thesubject of exchange commensurate with the increaseof their numbers, and to circulate suchcommodities, an addition of money at the rate offorty per cent.But mankind in Europe did not continue to liveas their ancestors had done. In the course of thecentury the production of necessaries, of comforts,and of luxuries had proceeded with more speedthan the progress of population. The prohibitionwhich existed in the time of Elizabeth, againstconverting arable land into pasture, had becomeobsolete in England. More cattle were rearedand fattened, and by the manure they supplied tothe soil more corn was produced on the sameportion of land with less labour, and thus labourerswere gradually furnished for other branches of industry.The author of Flea, who wrote in thereign of Edward I., says, " that if land yieldedonly three times the seed sown, the farmer wouldbe a loser unless corn should sell dear." Sir JohnCallum, in an account given of a farm in Norfolk,states the produce in the year 1390 to have beenwheat six bushels, barley twelve bushels, and oatsonly five bushels : that year was indeed an unproductiveone, and he rates the average annual prossINCREASE OF COIN AND chap. xxi.duce of all corn to be twelve bushels to the acre.In the century which we are viewing, at an early-partof it, the annual produce had increased, accordingto Harrison in his ** Description of Britain'*at least one-third. It was not, however, whollyon corn and cattle that an increase of productionhad taken place, but new articles had been introducedwhich became sources of real wealth. Thecommon cabbage was scarcely cultivated till thebeginning of the seventeenth century. Artichokes,currants, cherries, onions, asparagus, and, above all,potatoes, were introduced in the early part of thecentury. Turnips, carrots, parsnips, early pease,rape, and the several kinds of clover were onlyadopted in the middle of the century, and were notvery generally cultivated, or not nearly to the presentextent, at the latter end of it. The increaseof articles which these advances in cultivationbrought into the general market required moremoney to circulate them than was needed for themore common productions of the soil which hadpreviously been used. Corn, when grown uponthe small spots of land which farmers occupied inancient times, was chiefly consumed on the placeswhere it grew and by the labourers that raised it ;but these new products would be carried to otherplaces to find consumers ; they must be paid fornot with labour or with other agricultural productions,but with money.There must also have been a larger stock ofCHAP. XXI. Increase OF WEALTH. 139corn generally in store, either in the stacks or thebarns of the cultivators, or in the hands of dealersand millers. This may be inferred from the lessvariation in the price of corn in the century inquestion, when compared with the excessive fluctuationswhich are recorded of the preceding ages.In the whole hundred years from 1600 to Soothelowest price of wheat on the average of theyear was 19^. 10^/. per quarter, and the highestprice 31. 2s. 9d. ; whereas in former ages thevariations in its price, within the compass of afew years, was from 8^. to 6/., and in one instancefrom sey. to the enormous price of 19^. 4<y. Thegreatest variation in any one year in the seventeenthcentury was in 1662, when before harvestthe price was 4/. and after harvest, 2/. 5s. ; but inthe preceding century, in the year 1557, wheatwhich before harvest was at 21. 13s. 4d. fell afterthat to OS.From this contrast of fluctuations two inferencesmay be drawn : first that there had been a greatimprovement in the practice of cultivation, forgood husbandry has a tendency to counteract thevicissitudes of seasons; and secondly that theremust have been a stock at the end of each productiveyear, which could be retained by capitalists,and would diminish the weight with which a yearof scarcity would otherwise fall on the community.Not only the surface but the bowels of the earthcontributed to the production of additional com-140 INCREASE OF COIN AND chap. xxi.modifies. The product of the woodlands which hadbefore supplied the chief part of the fuel, near thedistricts in which it grew was consumed in the formof wood, and at a distance from those districts, andin the large towns and manufactories, in the form ofcharcoal. As the woods became exhausted, and thesoil devoted to arable or pasturing purposes, therepugnance to fossil coal was gradually removed,and the mines of that substance yielded a commodityof great amount, and that amount increasedaccording to the distance from the places of consumption.The metallic mines also had beenworked more extensively, and iron, copper, lead,and tin had been converted into tools, implements,and domestic utensils, not only sufficient for theinternal use, but supplying a surplus which formeda branch of the foreign export trade. The moreancient manufactures of woollen and worsted goodsand much linen cloth were woven, though a greatportion of the flax was obtained from Flanders,and much of the yarn was spun by the peasants ofGermany. As the food, fuel, and clothing of theinhabitants, and their implements, had been increased,so also their residences and the furniturehad increased in real amount. When Erasmusvisited England in the former century, the houseswere built of mud and wood, were thatched withstraw, and instead of floors the bare earth wascovered with rushes or straw ; but in the latterend of the seventeenth century, the dwellings inCHAP. XXI. INCREASE OF WEALTH. 141towns were chiefly constructed of stone or bricks,were covered with slate or tiles, and floored withtimber.The fine arts had made considerable progress In . -n q-othe preceding century, as well as in that underreview, and the statues, but especially the paintings,had acquired a great value. The great masters ofItaly, of Flanders, of Spain, of Holland, and evenof England and France, had produced works whichwere high in price, and which may be added tothe list of general commodities, and like the otherswould require the use of money to exchange anddistribute them.The trade which had been created in the precedingcentury by opening an intercourse withIndia by sea, and by the discovery of America, hadchanged the small and ill-equipped vessels fittedonly to perform coasting-voyages for large, well-built,and costly ships, appropriately constructed forthe long and perilous passage beyond the Cape ofGood Hope, to the eastern shores of America, andin some cases to the more remote parts of thatcontinent beyond Cape Horn.It would perhaps be presumption to attemptto estimate the amount of increase in the mass ofcommodities during this hundred years ; but ifthe number of inhabitants in England had beenincreased from three million eight hundred thousandto five million five hundred thousand, andif in this latter number each class had increased142 INCREASE OF COIN AND ciiapxxi.their wealth — not as measured by money, but incorn; in cattle; in the improved condition of thesoil ; in the number, condition, and furniture oftheir houses ; in their implements of industry anddomestic utensils ; in their fuel and clothing ; inthe stocks of goods in stack-yards, barns, shops,and warehouses ; in their carriages for business orpleasure ; in their ships and boats ; and, in short,in all the various descriptions of real wealth —we may fairly conclude that the five million fivehundred thousand individuals in I7OO enjoyed atleast double the amount of material wealth thatwas possessed by the three million eight hundredthousand in I6OO. If that conclusion be admitted,it must follow, that as the new commodities wouldfor the most part not be consumed by those whoproduced them, but must have been exchangedfor money, more than double the quantity of silver^^ and gold in the form of coin must have been requiredfor easy circulation, and to keep theirmoney prices from falling.This view has been more minutely directed toEngland than can be necessary with respect to theother European commonwealths. Some few of thosecountries advanced both in wealth and populationat a more rapid pace than England. It was thecase with Holland; with the Netherlands, thencomprehending the part now known as FrenchFlanders ; with the plains of Lombardy ; andperhaps with that which now makes a part ofCHAP, xxr, INCREASE OF WEALTH. 143France, but then Germany, distinguished as Alsace.France probably increased at a pace equalto England till the latter end of the century, whenthe boasted glory of Louis XIV. terminated inthe sufferings and depression of his dominions.Spain and Portugal did not probably improve sofast as those countries to which the treasures ofAmerica passed through them. The eastern andnorthern kingdoms preserved in general a sluggishpace, though they also advanced in substantialwealth, and probably reached a height asgreat, in proportion to the station from whencethey started, as the more civilized and more cultivatedpeople to the westward and southward ofthem.From the intercourse which existed throughthe greater portion of the period between the severalstates of Europe, the precious metals couldeasily pass from one to the other. The mistakenpolicy of the several governments induced them tomake laws prohibiting their conveyance from theirdominions ; but such laws, though they might embarrassthe transfer, could not prevent it, in commoditiesso compendious in proportion to theirvalue as gold and silver.They, like all other commodities, would go wheretheir value was highest; and thus there would be atendency in them constantly to produce an equilibriumbetween their own quantities and the quantMOVEMENT OF COIN. chap. xxi.titles of the mass of all the other commoditieswhich are exchanged through them.The value of money will depend on the ideasand habits of the possessor, and in saying it willgo where its value is highest no more is meantthan that the owner of it will use it in that waywhich he thinks will produce him the highest gratification.CHAP. XXII.AMERICAN MINES. 1 !■CHAPTER XXII.On the production of gold and silver from the year 1700 to1809 inclusive.It is not the design of this inquiry to enter intoa description ofthe mechanical inventions by whichthe ores were obtained from the bowels of theearth, nor the various chemical operations by whichthe precious metals were separated from the lessvaluable substances with which they are commonlycombined ; nor is it intended to enter into therelations of the different classes of society in thecountries where those metals were produced, fartherthan may appear to be necessary to accountfor the fluctuations in the quantities which atvarious periods they have furnished to the generalcommerce ofthe world.Mexico as long as it continued under the go Mexico.government of Spain yielded a vast mass of goldand silver. It had from the commencement ofthe European power in that country increasedgradually and regularly, with very few interruptions.We have no intention of entering into thehistory of the conquest and the continued submissionofthe native inhabitants. When Mexicowas first visited by the Spaniards, some progressVOL. II. L146 AMERICAN MIMES. clap. xxii.towards civilization had been made. The countrywas divided into regular provinces, was subject toone chief who ruled them by his deputies, and whoby an hereditary right seemed to have exercised theoffices of magistrates and priests. Whatever rudeinstitutions existed were under their protection,and they were the sole possessors of that kind ofknowledge which, slight as it may be, was sufficientto keep the great body of the people in tranquilsubmission to the power that was exercised.When the Spaniards invaded the country, theopposition that was offered originated with theseprivileged classes, and they were the chief victimsof the conquest. The royal, the noble, and thepriestly families were almost wholly destroyed,either by the contests, or by the victors after allregular opposition had ceased. The mass of thepeople, though they had been thinned in theirnumbers by war and famine, still remained withoutany such diminution as could make a scarcity oflabourers. Though there was abundance of labourers,there was a want of inducements to labour.The soil supplied with little exertion the slightand inferior food they needed. Their clothingand their residences were of a description suitableto a climate where the severity of seasons is unknown.Their knowledge of the arts of life andtheir skill in the exercise of them had reachedonly the very lowest steps of improvement, andthose who had conducted them to that step wereCHAP. XXII.AMERICAN MINES. 1 Neithercut off or removed from any more influenceover them.The natives were scattered tribes speaking differentdialects, at spots very distant from andlittle known to each other, and their characters,names, and circumstances were alike unknownamong the rude warriors who had obtained authorityover them.The regulations dictated by the distant Europeangovernment whose authority the adventurersacknowledged, but whose orders they evaded ordisobeyed, were of a paternal character. Theywere formed upon the idea that these untutoredIndians were in a state of pupilage — to be guarded,preserved, and taught like children, but withoutmaking any provision for a different treatmentwhen they should arrive at a more mature condition.Amongst these tribes there thus grew up,or perhaps was only continued, a tendency to clan-ship,in the progress of which a chief, either fromsome hereditary claims or from a selection amongstthemselves, was in authority over each tribe, andexercised the authority with that degree of firmnessor of rigour which has been generally remarkedin the rulers of uncultivated people.This nomination of chiefs to each tribe was,however, favourable to the views of the viceroys,who were appointed by Spain, and to the exerciseof power by the subordinate governors of theseveral provinces. It was desirable to raise someL 2148 AMERICAN MINES. chap exit.money to defray the expenses of government. Thetaxes paid on all goods by the more populous districtsand in the cities where the Spaniards hadformed settlements could not have been collectedfrom the Indians, or would have cost more in thecollection than their amount. Instead of imposingothers, a capitation tax was levied on the Indians,for which each chief was made answerable accordingto the numbers of which the tribe consisted ;and though it was but a trifle from each individual,it was made an instrument of oppression by thechiefs towards those of the several persons whocomposed the tribe. The Indians were prohibitedfrom buying or selling without the interventionof their chief, who treated all of them as thoughthey were in a state of nonage, directing theirlabours, superintending their domestic concerns,and punishing them as children are punished whendisobeying their parents.In the early progress of mining the chiefs wereable to send a part of their tribe to labour in thesubterranean works ; and the wages of their labourwas received by the cacique, and by him distributedamong those employed after reserving ashare to his own use.The change of this condition of society beganearly and continued gradually. The Spanish adventurersbrought with them few females, theynaturally formed unions with native women, anda new race increasing in number's in every genera-chap.XXII. AMERICAN MINES. 149tion sprung ii}>) who were freed from the trammelsof childhood in which their maternal ancestorshad been bound, but were by no means placedon an equality with that of their male progenitorsand others of the unmixed white race.As new classes arose, the labours of the mineswere increased, but there was a want of capitallong felt which prevented a rapid progress. Itwas necessary in mining to pay for labour beforeits produce could yield any returns. The purchaseof implements, especially of iron pointedwith steel, which were to be brought from Europe,required a large outlay ; and it was necessary, asfar as the practice of amalgamation extended, toprovide quicksilver, which, coming also from agreat distance, was an expensive commodity.Mexico was then in circumstances highly favourableto the growth of capital. She enjoyedinternal tranquillity ; there were no popular tumultsof the Indian inhabitants ; the Creoles wereneither sufficiently numerous nor influential toform a party; and fresh supplies of Europeanswere continually pouring in, who, whatever theirrank or qualifications might be, when unitedformed a kind of aristocracy, which, with occasionaland slight interruptions, was in generalobedient to the supreme authority of Spain. Inthe wars in which Spain was engaged, especiallywith England, almost every other part of SpanishAmerica had been invaded either by extensive150 AMERICAN MINES. chap. xxii.armaments or by predatory bands ; but Mexicofrom its physical position had been subject to nosuch attacks. It thus presents us with an objectscarcely observable in any other part of the globein any age, of a country which for three centurieshad never been exposed to internal or externalcommotions. As, during the continuance of thislong period, there was no fear for the security ofcapital invested in mines, or for that employed inagricultural improvements, however slow the progress,or however impeded by the colonial restrictionsand the arbitrary power in the hands ofthe viceroys, there must have been an increase inmaterial wealth correspondent to that which theproduce of the mines exhibits.Whether the increase be owing to other andto what causes, and to what extent, may be interestingto inquire ; but the simple fact that thesoil had neither been polluted by the blood of itsinhabitants nor by that of invaders, that no hostilefoot had trod its surface or attempted to land onits shores for three hundred years, is sufficientalone to account for the progress which Mexicohad made up to the time of her fatal revolution.In the course of three centuries, though thegreat mass of the aborigines had remained withbut little change in their circumstances, yet manyindividuals of the tribes, especially of those whoresided near the cities, had emancipated themselvesfrom the low condition of their race, andCHAP. XXII.AMERICAN MINES. 151by agriculture, by manufactures, or by commercehad become possessed of property ; and thoughnot received into the ranks of the Europeans, becameof great assistance in the creation of weultliand the accumulation of capital.Though the capital of the country was thus increasedchiefly by the labour of the original raceof people and of the races which had arisen by amixture of them with the new settlers, they werenot the great adventurers in mining-undertakings.There was little spirit of enterprise among thoseclasses, but what industry they exercised was accompaniedwith that rigid parsimony which is thesure but slow operating cause of the creation ofindividual and national wealth. But when capitalis created it naturally seeks employment, and themore cautious acquires or their successors mustfurnish means to more adventurous spirits to employthat capital in such ways as talent, enterprise,and perseverance can alone direct to successfulterminations.The extent of Mexico, the difference betweenits progress and that of the other portions of theAmerican continent, but especially the vast quantityof the precious metals which it has furnished,have made a slight view of the origin of its wealtha proper prentice to that which we proceed to consider— the actual produce of the mines of gold andsilver.The amount has been already examined into up152 AMERICAN MINES. CHAP. Xxii.to the end of the year 1699- From that periodthe progress during the first twenty or thirtyyears, though constant, was comparatively slow,but towards the latter end of the century becamemuch more rapid.The great mine of Valencianana, which, duringforty years, yielded to its proprietors a clearprofit of from eighty-five thousand to one hundredand twenty-five thousand pounds sterlingyearly, had been neglected till the year I76O, andafter ten years' labour and expenditure, when therich part of the vein had been reached, continuedfor upwards of forty years to yield more than halfa million sterling in gold and silver. The richdistrict of Guanaxuato, which in the years before1766 yielded only three hundred and eighty thousandounces of silver yearly, produced in the latteryears of its prosperity more than one million fivehundred thousand. The mineral repository ofCatorce was only discovered in the year 1773, butit yielded a very large quantity both of gold andsilver till 1798, when the value of the mineralsdeclined. The vein of Biscaina, though it beganto be worked at the beginning of the sixteenthcentury, did not become enormously productivetill 1762, though in twelve years from that periodthe owner of it had gained a profit of more thanamillion sterling, with part of which he presentedto the King of Spain two ships of war, one of themof one hundred and twenty guns, and, besides,CUAP. xxii. AMERICAN MINES. 153lent him upwards of two hundred thousandpounds, which was never after repaid. The minesof the district of Zaccatecas were about the year17-50 in such a state of abandonment that theyscarcely furnished silver to the amount of morethan one hundred thousand pounds ; but by thespirited exertions of an individual, Abode, in afew years after their produce was raised to tentimes that amount. Thus, whilst the numeroussmall mining-establishments, if they had not languished,had increased but slowly, the larger oneshere noticed, with some others, had made a mostastonishing progress.The gradual increase of capital which had producedthis effect had been aided by another favourablecircumstance. The supply of mercury hadbecome more regular, and at a cheaper rate. Inthe year 1590 the price was one hundred andeighty-seven piastres the quintal ; in sixty yearsafter it had fallen to eighty-two, in thirty yearsmore to sixty-two, and in the next ten years toforty-two. Mercury had been furnished by thegovernment at a monopoly price: it had beenused as an implement of favouritism by the viceroysin Mexico, and the officers under them in themining-districts. It had been chiefly drawn fromHuancavelica in Peru, or from Almaden in Andalusia;but after the calamities suffered by thosemines the court of Spain drew a large supply fromthe Austrian mines of Idria, by which, after gain-americanMINES.CHAP. XXII.Ing a profit of near twenty-five per cent., it was enabledto reduce the price to the miners in Mexico \The following is the statement of the produceof the mines of Mexico in gold and in silverdelivered to be coined at the several mints, inperiods of ten years, reduced into sterling moneysit the rate of four shillings and two-pence thepiastre, as extracted from Humboldt and Ward.In the teu years from1700 to 17091710 to 17191720 to 17291730 to 17391740 to 17491750 to 1759I76O to 17691770 to 17791780 to 17891790 to 17991800 to 1809£10,777,29813,697,29717,131,92118,860,35523,302,63326,197,93623,506,01234,912,85840,318,94848,191,71147,142,814304,039,783It is estimated by Humboldt that the gold andsilver of mexico which did not pay the duty tothe king was equal to one-fifth of that whichdid; and considering the circumstances favourableto contraband transactions, there is no reason tosuspect any exaggeration.Taking it at that amount, there may be added 60,807,956£364,847,739Thus there appears, during the whole periodof 110 years, an annual product averaging 3,316,706Humboldt, from whose work the foregoing observationson the great increase of the product of the mines in the middleof the last century are chiefly extracted, expresses his wishesthat the attention of INIexico could be directed to China to obtaina supply of mercury ; and he has lived to see the experimentmade of obtaining some from thence, and with hopes of greaterfuture success.CHAP. XXII. AMERICAN MINES. 155A division of Peru took place in this century, Peru,when its extent was diminished, first, by theseparation from it of the province of Quito,which was in Iris allotted to the kingdom ofNew Granada, now denominated Columbia; and,secondly, by detaching from it, in the year 1778*the districts of La Paz, Cochabaniba, Potosi,Oruro, Carangas, and some others, which were thenadded to Buenos Ayres, on occasion of that provincebeing erected into a viceroyalty. In viewingthe produce of the precious metals between theyears I7OO and 1810, it will be better to considerthem under the new than the old divisions.Peru, Columbia, and Buenos Ayres, when herespoken of, are intended to be distinguished as theyexisted in the beginning of the present century,and up to the time when the Spanish authoritybegan to be dissolved.In this diminished extent Peru, though it containsavast surface S has very few inhabitants : theydo not appear by any authentic census to exceedone million one hundred thousand persons, amongwhom are reckoned six hundred and eight thousandIndians, two hundred and forty thousand Meestees,and eighty thousand negroes ; and it is doubtful ifthey have increased or diminished since that censuswas taken in 1803".The extent of Peru, as given by Argiielles in his Dictionarylie Hacienda, is throe hundred and sixty thousand squaremiles, or about seven times that of England.^ The census here mentioned is in the work entitled Quiade Peru, por Hippolilo Ratione, printed in Lima, 1804.156 vVMERICAN MINES. chap. xxii.Humboldt attributes to tins thinness of thepopulation the little progress which Peru hasmade in the last two centuries ; but to that causemay be added a scarcity of capital to apply tomining, and the unfavourable situation in whichthe principal mines are found. The mines ofHuantajaya are, indeed, in a district not peculiarlysevere, but they are in a part of the province ofAi'ica which is entirely destitute of water ; andthe projects which have been long entertained ofconveying fresh water to it for the use of the menand cattle, and salt water from the small sea-portof Quinque for the amalgamation-works, have failedfrom the want of sufficient capital.The greatest quantity of silver in Peru has beenextracted from the mines of Yauriccocho or Laurico-cha, better known in Europe by the name of themines of Pasco. They are in the midst of mountainscovered with perpetual snow, and are themselvesat a height of thirteen thousand feet abovethe level of the sea, and consequently in a severeclimate and a barren soil. They are said to containmasses of silver quite equal to the quantityfound in the district of Guanaxuato in Mexico,and at no great depth below the surface. Butthe unhealthiness of the climate, the expense ofconveying necessaries to such an elevation, andthe water with which the pits are often submerged,have been hitherto impediments to extensiveoperations. In spite of the obstacles, these mineshave, however, annually delivered, during theCHAP. XXII. AMERICAN MINES. 157period under consideration, about eight hundredthousand ounces of silver.Some mines in the province of Truxillo, knownby the names of Hualgayac, Gumachuco, andConchuco, have been worked ever since the year1772, and have produced from four hundredthousand to eight hundred thousand ounces ofsilver annually. The ores of the district are saidby Humboldt to be richer than those of Potosi,more regular in their product than those of Huan-tajaya, and more easy to work than those ofYauricocha.Some gold was found in Peru, in the districtsof Pataz and Quails, on the ridge of the Cordilleras; some on the plains of Curimayo, nearthe town of Caxamarca ; and small quantities inother parts.As the gold and silver extracted in Peru wereordered to be carried to Lima to be coined, the onlycalculation of the quantity actually produced mustbe framed from the returns of the mint in that city.Of those returns no regular series is at presentattainable earlier than the year 1754. It has thereforebecome necessary to assume — relying uponthe reports of all writers that no great alterationhad taken place between I7OO and 1754 — theannual produce for the whole one hundred andten years between I7OO and 1810 to have beenat the same rate as for those years of which wehave statistical reports. In the fifty-five years158 AMERICAN MINES. CHAP. XXII.from 1754 to 1799, the gold and silver whichpaid the duty on its coinage at Lima amountedto two hundred and forty million four hundredand eight thousand and fifty-eight piastres. Ifwe take double that amount for the whole term,in which there can be no material error, it will befour hundred and eighty million eight hundredand sixteen thousand one hundred and sixteendollars, or one hundred million one hundred andsixty-nine thousand five hundred and twenty-fourpounds sterling.Columbia. That part of the former Spanish dominion inAmerica to which the name of the Republic ofColumbia has been given, and which comprehendsthe former viceroyalty of New Granada and thecaptain-generalship of Caracas, has never beenproductive of much silver ; indeed, in the latterperiods of the Spanish power, remittances of silverwere annually made from Mexico to defray theexpenses of the government in Caracas.The western part of this territory has from thefirst yielded a tolerably regular supply of gold. Thewhole is the produce of stream-works establishedin the alluvial districts. Gold veins have beenfound in the mountains of Guamoco and Antioquia,but their working was almost entirely neglected.According to Humboldt, the gold is the produceof three provinces only, of which the insalubriousdistrict of Choco furnishes one-half, and the remainderis supplied in about equal portions byCHAP. XXII.AMERICAN MINES. 159the province of Barbarous and that of Antioquia.It was coined and paid duty at the two mints ofSanta Fe de Bogota and Popayan. It was statedin 1801 to average about two million five hundredthousand piastres, and the quantity had notmaterially increased or diminished for a longperiod : it may then be permitted to be taken,during the period of one hundred and ten yearswe are viewing, at that rate, and thus yieldingtwo hundred and seventy-five million dollars,or fifty-seven million three hundred and forty-onethousand six hundred and sixty-six poundssterling.Some silver mines were discovered about theyear 1790 in the plain of Supra, when the oreswere found in the greatest quantity, but the operationswere suspended on account of certain law-proceedings.A mine was also opened at Mantain 1791 J which had only produced eight thousandseven hundred marcs of silver, in a period duringwhich the expenses had amounted to two hundredand sixteen thousand piastres, when the working wasabandoned. These mines of silver, though herenoticed, could only have an insignificant effect onthe annual produce during the long term from1700 to 1809.The province or captain-generalship of Chili cii.produced small quantities of gold, and duringthe last century still less of silver. Its produce,however, did not vary much, and the chief partiGU AMERICAN MINES. chap. xxrr.of the gold was procured by washing. In thelatter part of the century Humboldt states thecoinage at Santiago, the capital, where the taxwas collected, amounted to seven hundred andtwenty-one thousand piastres in gold, and onehundred and forty-six thousand in silver. Ar-gazellesmakes the amount in the first years ofthe present century about thirty thousand moreof silver and forty thousand more of gold. As,however, some of the earlier years may have beendeficient, it will be assumed that in the period ofone hundred and ten years from I7OO to 180<),the annual amount was eight hundred and fiftythousand dollars, being in the whole term ninety-threemillion five hundred thousand dollars, ornineteen million five hundred and thirty-twothousand one hundred and sixty-six poundssterling.Buenos The viceroyalty of Buenos Ayres, which inthe view we now take of it included Potosi, LaPaz, and the other western parts called the provincialde la Sierra, produced chiefly silver.The mountain of Potosi had declined in producefrom an annual delivery of upwards of a milliondollars to less than a third of that amount ; butas that source had failed others had become morecopious, especially La Paz, Carangas, and Oruro.Humboldt states the annual produce at four milliontwo hundred thousand dollars. Agreeing;to this estimate, the amount afforded in the oneriiAP. XXII.Contraband TRADE. iGlhundred and ten years should be four hundredand sixty-two millions, or ninety-six millions twohundred and fifty thousand pounds.In the preceding century the whole of theSpanish American dominions have been consideredas engaged in contraband transactions, toan extent that made it proper to add to thequantity of the gold and silver which paid thelegal duty one-fifth for that which was drawnsurreptitiously from the mines and smuggled outof the countries. As far as regards Mexico thatproportion has been deemed sufficient in thepresent century ; but in the other portions ofSouth America the contraband transactions weremuch more extensive through the whole of theeighteenth century.In the early part of that century, after thetreaty of Utrecht, a large supply of negroes wasconveyed by other nations to the Spanish dominions;and under the Assent contract, whichwas first made with the French, and afterwardstransferred to the English, it is calculated thatmore than fifty thousand slaves were conveyedchiefly to Buenos Ayres to be employed in themines of the western parts of that viceroyalty,and in some degree to Caracas and Cartagenato cultivate sugar, cocoa, coffee, and the otherproductions of the tropical climate. The intercoursewas not, however, limited to the sale ofslaves. Manufactured goods to a stipulated extentVOL. II. M16*2 CONTRABAND TRADE.CHAP. XXII.were permitted. One English ship was allowedannually to dispose of a cargo, and under covero^ - boF tenders are said to have been at handto supply other goods as fast as the permittedor registered cargo was sold. This kind ofcommerce continued from the beginning of thecentury to about the year 174*0, when the popularcry in England involved the country in a warunder pretence of Spanish outrages committed onEnglish contraband traders. It was a commercewhich offered great inducements to the Spanishsettlers to defraud the colonial revenue, and asthe temptation was strong, so it was increasedby the corrupt conduct of the officers of therevenue and the facilities thereby afforded to thesmugglers.This state of affairs, on what was then knownby the name of the Spanish main, continued fornear forty years, and though the war of 1740suspended first, and soon gave a different directionto the trade, it was continued under anotherform to the end of the century. Don Juan deAlloa, in his despatches to the court of Spain,enters into the details of this trade, which showsit to be very extensive, and that large quantitiesof silver and gold were surreptitiously exchangedfor the goods of England, Holland, China, andIndia \ This commerce was active on both shoresSee Notices Secrets de America, cap. 9.iCHAP. XXII. Contraband TRADE. lesof America. The traders from the interior ofNew Granada, as far as Popayan and Quito, repairedto Cartagena, Santa Maria, and Rio dela Hacha on the Atlantic for the European goods,and to Panama and Guayaquil for the productionsof Asia, the greater part of which were exchangedfor silver or gold, of which a large portion hadnever paid the tax to the revenue.In the succeeding period an intercourse betweenthe Spanish main was constantly kept open withthe Dutch Islands of Curator and St. Eustatia,with Jamaica, and with the Danish island of St.Thomas. Great quantities of silver and goldwere conveyed to those settlements in a form thatproved clearly their having never paid the duty.In the latter part of the century, during thewar, there was a very active trade with the Spanishcolonists along the whole coast of south America.English and American vessels, under the pretext ofsupplying negroes, conveyed large cargoes of Britishmanufactures to Buenos Ayres. Vessels under boththose flags, engaged in the southern whale fishery,took incidental opportunities of selling those goodswhich from the state of war could not be eitherconveniently or advantageously supplied from Spain,although they were most urgently required. Besidesthese, many English vessels, so strongly armed asto defy the Guard Costs, frequented the shoresof Chili and Peru, and carried on what was profess2CONTRABAND TRADE. CHAP. Xxii.signally called " the force trade." At Moro modena,Quaeque, and other landing places wherethere were only slight or no garrisons, such shipsanchored, and trains of mules were seen crossingthe mountains with silver, as it came from the amalgamationmoulds, with ornaments and utensils, withimages of the virgin and other holy persons, with crucifixesin great abundance, and with the spurs, bitsof the bridles and saddle furniture, all eager to exchangethem for the scarce manufactured articlesof cotton, linen, and wool, with which the marketsof England were fully stocked if not overloaded.On a review of this commerce, and taking intoconsideration the compendious nature of the preciousmetals, and the great effects which by theaccounts of all reports from Spanish Americamight be produced by bribery of the officers ofthe revenue, we are reluctantly compelled to differfrom Baron Humboldt in the estimate of the proportionbetween those metals which did, andthose which did not pay the duty between theyears I7OO and 1800, especially as we include,under the same head, some of that which passedfrom America to Asia by the Philippine Islands.The estimate of one-fourth, instead of the Baron'sestimate of one-fifth for Columbia, Peru, Chili,and Buenos Ayres, which is here assumed, wouldbe gold and silver which had paid the duty,thus : —CHAP. XXI r. AxMOUNT OF CPeruColumbiaChiliBuenos Ayres;OLD AND SILVER.jE 100, 169,524 Sterling57,341,66619,532,16696,250,000Produce paying dutyProduce on contraband273,293,35668,323,339341,616,695Produce of Mexico as before stated 364,847,739£706,464,434To this estimation of the produce of the goldand silver from Spanish america must be nowadded the gold furnished by the Portuguese territoriesin Brazil. Humboldt estimates theirannual produce in the year 1800 at four millionthree hundred and sixty thousand dollars. Hiscalculations do not, from any thing that appears,seem to have been drawn from any statisticalaccounts, and can be no safe guide. For the firsthalf of the century no notices but those of tooloose a nature to deserve confidence have beenattainable. In the appendix to the report of thebullion committee of the House of Commons inJune 1810, there is an account of the produce ofthe quintus, or duty of one-fifth from the 1st ofAugust 1751, to 31st of December 1794, for thetwo greatest mining provinces of Brazil, those ofMinas Geraes, and of Minas Novas ; and also ofthe district of Gazes. There were other minesin Brazil, in Cuiaba, Jacobins, and Matagroso,GOLD OF BRAZIL. CHAP. XXII.but their produce was very inconsiderable whencompared with that of Minas Geraes. By the accountsit appears ' that there was a decrease in theamount of the quintus on gold as thus shown :Arobas. Marcs. Ounces.Annual average from 1752 to 1762 104 7 51763 to 1773 90 3 11774 to 1784 69 20 41785 to 1794 45 41 5The actual produce of these two great miningprovinces in the fifty-one years yielded to thecrown by a tax of one-fifth the weight, three thousandthree hundred and sixty-nine Brazilian aro-basof gold. The aroba contains two hundredand twenty-six thousand six hundred and fortyfiveEnglish troy grains, and the value of eacharoba in sterling is one thousand eight hundredand twenty-one pounds seventeen shillings andfour-pence, and consequently the whole sum receivedin the fifty-one years was six million onehundred and forty-three thousand eight hundredand sixty-seven pounds sterling, which multipliedby five, gives as the amount of the produce thirtymillion seven hundred and nineteen thousandthree hundred and thirty-five pounds. The minesof Gazes, and those of Cuiaba, Jacobins, andMatagroso being uncertain, may without risk ofany great error be taken at nine million two hun-seeBullion Report of 1810, Appendix, No. 21.CHAP. XXII.GENERAL AMOUNTS. I67dred and eighty-one thousand six hundred andsixty-five pounds, making forty millions in thefifty-one years. We take the other fifty-nine yearsat the same amount, and add to the gold and silverof Spanish America between I7OU and 1810 eightymillions, thus calculatingSpanish America . . . £706,464,434Portuguese America . . . 80,000,000786,464,434Or an annual product of . . 7^146,767If to this be added the gold and silver of Europeand the gold dust from Africa, taken at 853,233We conclude that the sum of . . 8,000,000was the annual produce of the mines.168 WEAR OF COIN.CUAP. XXllI.CHAPTER XXIII.On the rate of loss on gold and silver coin by abrasion inremote and recent periods.It has been hitherto assumed in this work thatthe loss on the general mass of coined gold andsilver by wear alone amounts to a three hundredand sixtieth part yearly. As from the greater increaseof those metals more use of them was madefor money, so the more general and rapid circulationof them, and consequently a greater loss byabrasion, naturally took place. We are arrived ata period when it appears to be necessary to makean alteration in the rate of the loss occasioned bywear. In showing the grounds of that alterationit may be most convenient to go back and showthe grounds on which the former assumption wasmade.In examining this subject, reference must behad to the several experiments, the particulars ofwhich are detailed in the Appendix No. 1, to whichthe reader was referred in the first volume. Theexperiments made by the officers of the mint inApril 1807, and the loth December 1826, throwmuch light on the subject. It is, however, necessaryto go a little farther back to a course ofCHAP. XXIII.WEAR OF COIN. 169experiments conducted under the direction of acommittee of the privy council' between 1798 and1802, by those eminent chemists Mr. Cavendish,since deceased, and Charles Hatchettt, Esq., who,happily for himself and for all who know him, stillsurvives.The object of those experiments was not expresslyfor the purpose of ascertaining the loss ongold by abrasion in a given space of time ; but toascertain what kinds of alloys and what proportionof those several alloys formed the mixture of metalswhich rendered them when coined into moneyleast liable to loss by abrasion. Mechanical contrivanceswere adopted for rubbing against eachother pieces of metal of different proportions andkinds of alloys, and by comparison of their weightsbefore and after such rubbing, to determine whichdescription of them would form the metal leastsubject to loss for the future coinage of GreatBritain.It was ascertained by the experiments of theseaccurate and acute philosophers, that gold of thefinest quantity that could be used, viz. that consistingof twenty-three parts and three quarters ofpure gold, and one quarter alloy, suffered a muchgreater loss by friction than our standard gold oftwenty-two parts in twenty-four of pure gold, andThese experiments are recorded in the PhilosophicalTransactions for the year 1802, part first, page 160.170 WEAR OF COIN.CHAP. XXIII.two parts of alloy ; whether that alloy was of silveralone, or of silver and copper in equal proportions.Without entering into these numerous experiments,it is important to our purpose to remarkthat our British standard gold is proved by themto be less susceptible of loss by abrasion than thatof any other of the several kingdoms of Europe,or than any that is coined in either Spanish orPortuguese America \It appears by the same experiments that ourstandard silver suffers a much greater loss of weightby friction than the standard gold, and is equal tothat on gold of twenty-three carats and three-quartersfine. It is also made clear that there is aloss by friction on stamped pieces of gold, somewhatgreater than on pieces with smooth surfaces.It is shown by the Appendix No. 1, A, that theloss of weight on three hundred and fifty sovereignsin the year 182t), which had been coined• It appears that the loss on gold by the same quantity offriction was with the different alloys as follows, viz. : on ourstandard gold, if alloyed with silver alone or with equal partsof copper and silver, 4-^-^^^,, on 854 grains ; if alloyed with tinand copper, 15/,,"^ on 84G grains ; and if with iron and copper,21^'^J'jy on 825 grains. As the alloy in our new coinage consistschiefly of silver, it is said that a practice has lately been adoptedof sending the sovereigns to Paris, where, in consequence of animproved mode of parting the metals by sulphuric acid insteadof nitric acid, the silver was taken out, and an equal alloy of coppersupplied its place, and then being still standard, the gold iningots has been returned to England and recoined into sovereigns,which may be distinguished by their deeper colour, butwhich contain the legal quantity of 22 parts in 24 of pure gold.CHAP. XXIII.WEAR OF COIN. Quinineyears before, viz. in I8I7, was at the rate offour shillings and six-pence farthing on each hundredpounds. If then it be taken as five shillingsfor ten years, it will appear that one part in fourhundred only had been lost. It must, however,be considered that the sovereigns though coinedhad not been issued till the bank restriction wasremoved in the year 1823 ; that after that periodfew or none had travelled into the country ; thatnone were seen in Scotland or Ireland ; that whatevercame into the hands of the country bankerswere locked up till a safe opportunity presenteditself of returning them to London ; and that evenin London the circulation of one and two poundbank notes was greater than that of sovereigns.There seems to be a great difference in the loss ona parcel of gold coin in London between thattaken in a retail shop and that received from abanking-house. Thus by Appendix, No. 1, B.,it is seen that a given number of guineas in theyear Iso, collected in a retail shop, was deficientone pound three shillings and fourpence per cent.,whilst those received at a banking-house were onlydeficient eighteen shillings and eleven-pence percent.As the experiment at the mint was probablymade from a number of sovereigns taken fromthe Bank of England, they were most likely inbetter preservation than what would have beentaken from a banking-house ; as the bank at alltimes has been very strict in receiving no gold coin172 WEAR OF COIN. chap, xxiii.that is not the full legal weight. This was somuch the case that when gold rose so that a lightguinea as bullion was worth twenty-five or sixshillings, the bank refused to take it as money attwenty-one shillings.It may be farther observed with regard to thisexperiment of 1826, that those pieces which hadbeen coined but one year suffered a much greaterproportion of loss than those which had beencoined five years or nine years. Those of oneyear old suffered a loss of one shilling and threepence,which in the ten years would be twelveshillings and sixpence, whereas those of nineyears appear to have lost only at the rate of fourshillings and sixpence. It deserves also to beremarked that the dirt accumulated on the piecesis a better criterion of the length of time they hadbeen in circulation than the loss on weight. Ifthe period of circulation be measured by the portionof dirt adhering to the pieces, the conclusionfrom this experiment would be that the piecescoined in 1821 had circulated more, if not longer,than those coined in 1817. The first were foundto have three grains of dirt to each hundred pieces,and the second, though double their age, onlytwo grains of dirt to each hundred pieces. Thepieces which had been coined but one year werefound to have contracted dirt at the rate of morethan one grain and a half in that time. If thenthose of nine years old had equally circulated, theyCHAP. XXIII.War or COIN. 173cuirlit to have contracted more than thirteen ji^rainsof it on the hundred instead of two, as they appearto have done. If judgment be formed fromthis criterion, the result would be that the piecescoined in 1821 had been issued before those ofthe prior date, or that they had been despatchedto some distant part of the kingdom, and, afterpassing through a few hands, had at length comeback again to the bank from whence they hadbeen issued.The time when the new coinage was manufacturedfollowed a period of great inactivity atthe mint. The officers of that department hadenjoyed leisure and opportunity for exercisingthose talents for which they are eminently distinguishedin investigations and experiments to improvethe fabrication of money. Whatever themechanical or chemical sciences could contributeto that object was examined, and if found appropriate,was adopted. The best alloys were ascertainedby which the money should be made mostdurable, and yet not brittle. The form of thecoins was changed so as to render them less subjectto loss by abrasion, and other improvementswere introduced, which, not falling immediatelyunder the design of this inquiry, need not here beentered into, though they are of great advantageto the public, and reflect high honour on theeminent persons attached to that establishment.It must, from the observations before made, beIJ'h WEAR OF COIN.CHAP. XXIII.obvious that the coins issued, with all the improvementswhich have been so judiciously and solaboriously introduced, can exhibit no fair scale ofthe loss of gold by abrasion that can be applicableto all ages and to all countries. It would notform an accurate scale for the loss on the coins ofEngland that were issued in the earlier part ofthe reign of George the third. It would be lessappropriate to determine the loss on all the coinsissued from the continental mints, either in theold or the new world. It would least of all befittedto measure the loss on the coins in the timeof high antiquity in Egypt, Babylon, and Persepolis,or in the ages which followed, when theGrecian and Roman coins were fabricated, to saynothing of what was transacted in the dark ages.It is well known by the analysis of ancientcoins, as well as by the writings of Pliny \ that, inthe times of antiquity, alloys in the gold coinwere used of various kinds. Silver was too valuableto be applied to that purpose, and copperwas of much higher value than in modern times.Iron and tin were therefore employed to mix withthe gold, as thereby the colour of the metal wasscarcely perceptibly changed, and with the impsearly as the times of Livings Druses the silver moneyof Rome was mixed With one eighth part of alloy of brass andtin, as stated by Pliny in the 33d book, chap, iii., and in the0th chapter of the same book he says that Anthony, whenhe was one of the Triumviri, mixed iron with the silverdenier.CHAP. XXIII.WEAK OF COIN'. 175perfect knowledge of assaying that then existedthe small quantity of those inferior metals couldnot easily be detected.It has been shown by the experiments of MessieursCavendish and Hatchettt that if our Englishstandard gold, consisting of two parts of alloy intwenty-four, were to have that alloy formed of amixture of iron and tin, the loss by friction wouldbe five times as much as it is with the kind of alloyapplied at the mint '; if the alloy were copper andtin it would be nearly four times as much. Thereis no reason to conclude that the ancients everused any alloy except tin, iron, and copper, andwe may conclude therefore that the loss on theirgold coins was from four to five times as great aswould be experienced on the modern English goldcoins.The maximum of durability for gold coinsseems to be fixed at twenty-two parts in twenty-fourof pure gold with the appropriate alloys.When the fineness ascends or descends from thatpoint, the consumption by abrasion is increased.Thus the experiment of Mr. Cavendish and Mr.Hatchettt shows, as before stated, that gold of thefinest quality that can be worked, viz. of twenty-threecarats and three quarters fine, suffers a lossof four times that of the standard of twenty-twofine. On the other hand, the coins below thatSee note, page 1 70.176 WEAR OF Point.CHAP, xxrir.standard wear faster in proportion to their declinein fineness. The twenty franc pieces of Francewear faster than even our guineas did. TheSpanish doubloons are worse than the Frenchgold, and wear away faster ; and it is affirmed bysome accurate goldsmiths, that the gold used bythem of eighteen carats fine suffers a loss very■ much greater than even the Spanish coin.Our new gold coinage only commenced inI8I7, and the whole amount coined in that yearwas four million two hundred and seventy-fivethousand three hundred and seventy-seven pounds;and in the three next years the coinage amountedonly to three million eight hundred and fifteenthousand four hundred and sixty-four pounds, tenshillings \ Though partial payments in gold weremade at the bank, they were very soon suspended,and it was not till the large coinage of 1821, whennine million five hundred and twenty thousandseven hundred and fifty-eight pounds had beenprepared, that the necessary measure of a generalreturn to cash payments could be with safetyadopted. If we may judge from the small diminutionof bank notes after June, 1823, when therestriction on the bank ceased, and from currentrumours that the bank was overloaded with gold,we should conclude that very little of the newcoinage was in circulation before the latter end ofSee Appendix, No. II.CHAP. XXIII. WEAR OF COIN. 177the year 18Q5, when the panic in the commercialAvorld created a great drain, and dispersed thelarger portion of it. The experiments we are nowconsidering were conducted one year after thatpanic, and though some of the gold coins uponwhich they were made may have been coined nineyears before, they may not have been in circulationmore than a year or two.It would scarcely be an unfair mode of calculationto presume that the general mass of goldin circulation in December, 1826, when this experimenthad been tried, had not circulated morethan two years, or two years and a half on theaverage. If we take the average wear on the threedates of 18 17, 1821, and 1825 to have been ofthree years and a half, eight shillings and sentenceper cent, will be the loss in that time, orabout one pound four shillings per cent, in tenyears. This would show a loss on that gold coinat the rate of one part in eight hundred yearly.The report of the experiment of the mint doesnot seem to be such as can be satisfactorily appliedto general circumstances, not from any wantof accuracy, but from the peculiar period in whichit was made ; when the whole of our monetarysystem was passing through a crisis which renderedit unfit to become a scale for the measurementof the loss which in other times and countriesoccurs by the wear of gold.Any scale that can be framed must, however,VOL. II. N178 WEAR OF COIN. CHAP. XXIII.have the coinage of England for its basis ; but itmay be taken at a different time, when the peculiarcircumstances which existed — when, after along period in which gold was scarcely in use, itbecame again by degrees into general circulation —were not in operation. In the Appendix, No. 1,B, is exhibited some experiments made by theofficers of the Mint, in April, 1807, the object ofwhich was to ascertain the deficiency of weight ofthe average gold coins of the kingdom. At thetime the experiments were made, the suspensionof cash payments by the Bank had been maintainedten years. There had been, consequently,a suspension also of the wear of the gold, for ithad almost all disappeared and could scarcely besaid to be in circulation. Between the suspensionof the payments in gold at the Bank in 1797 andthe date of the experiments in 1807, as very littlefold had been coined, that which was in existencemust have been of the coinage of years antecedentto 1797* Before that year all guineas were scrupulouslyweighed, and what were found deficientwere withdrawn from circulation. Thus, in 1797>a number of guineas taken from a banker's or anyother shop could not exhibit a fair average of thewear of the mass of guineas, but only the averageof the wear of those which had not been reducedbelow the current weight. To ascertain the actualaverage weight of the whole mass it would be necessaryto know how many pieces had been with-chap.XXIII. WEAR OF COIN. 179drawn from them from being deficient. That,however, could not be known, and it becomesnecessary to have recourse to conjecture. It doesnot seem likely that the guineas to be met with in1807 were, on the average, of an older date thanthe year 17^7> and the circulation having beensuspended for ten years, they could not havesuffered more than ten years' abrasion. We seethat on one thousand guineas the loss from thestandard weight had been eighteen shillings andeleven-pence per cent., or that one part in a thousandand fifty had been lost. We see that on thehalf-guineas the loss from the standard weighthad been two pounds two shillings and seven-penceper cent., or one part in four hundred and sixty.The proportion of the half-guineas to the guineaswas, as recently, nearly as one to ten ^ not on thenumber of the pieces but on their value. Theaverage wear in the two sizes of coin would thenbe shown to be at the rate of one part in ninehundred and fifty.Such appears to be, as nearly as can be known,the loss in English gold coin, which was even atthat time the most durable of any in existence.It will have been observed, that the loss on thehalf-guineas was more than double the proportionto that on the guineas. It is indeed clear,See Appendix, No. 3, B.ISO WEAR OF coi.CHAP. xxii.by all experiments, that the smaller the piecesare, the greater loss do they suffer by abrasion.The gold coin of the ancients certainly approachednearer to the weight of the half-guineasthan to that of the guineas. The aureus and thebezant were but little heavier than the former, andsome of their coins were very much less ; andthus the loss from abrasion must have been muchgreater than on the average of our coin.It is true that a small portion of the existinggold among the ancients was actually in coin orinthat kind of circulation which would cause itto wear excessively; but, on the other hand, ifthe effect of the alloys they used was, as is shownby the experiments of Messrs. Cavendish and Hatchet,to increase the wear in a fourfold degree,instead of the annual loss being one part in ninehundred and fifty, it would have been at the rateof one part in two hundred and thirty-seven.Making due allowance, then, for the inferiorityof the metal, for the size of the pieces, and for theinferiority of the fabrication on the one hand, andon the other, for the less degree of circulation, itmay be assumed that a medium rate of loss wasmost proper, and that taking it at one part in sixhundred would be as near an approximation tothe loss of gold by abrasion as is likely to be obtained.It is upon that scale that the general rateof the consumption of the precious metals up toCHAP. XXIII. WEAR OF COIN. IgJthe beginning of the eighteenth century has beencalculated in this inquiry.We come now to the other metal, silver, whichis of larger amount, and has been so at all periodsof the world, and which is subject to much moreloss than gold suffers. In examining this part of thesubject it becomes necessary to refer again to theMint experiment in Appendix, No. 1 , A. It will beremarked by that account that the same differencein loss in proportion to the weight of the piecesoccurs in silver as in gold. In this case, it will onlybe necessary to consider the case of the shillingpieces, which nearly equal in amount the crowns,half-crowns, and sixpences \ and may be taken asshowing the average loss on the whole - ; thegreater loss on the sixpences balancing the lessloss on the larger description of pieces. Thoughthe pieces were coined in 1816 and 1817, thegreat issue of them did not take place till 1818,and then not more than one-third of them wereissued. It appears, then, that the loss in eightyears on the shilling pieces had been at the rateof two pounds five shillings and eleven-pence oftheir value, which would show a loss at the rateof one part in three hundred in each year. Thisis, however, on the supposition that the whole hadbeen issued at the time, and that the whole hadcontinued in constant circulation ; but it is wellSee Appendix, No. 3, B. * Appendix, No. 3, A.182 WEAR OF COIN. CHAP. XXIII.known that more silver was coined than the circulationcould absorb, — that much was left in depositat the Bank which could not be issued, — thatthe bankers, especially in the country, were fullof complaints of the dead weight of the silver coinsthat were accumulated in their coffers, of whichthey could make no interest until they incurredthe expense of sending it to London, where onlyit could be exchanged for better money whichcould be used in discounting or lending out onsecurities. There was no outlet for it in foreigncountries from the high value affixed to it. Itwas issued at the rate of sixty-six shillings to thepound weight of silver, and as that pound was notworth quite sixty-two shillings in gold, it was considered,and very properly, not as money, but as atoken of money, and no one, even in the countrywhere the fictitious value of it was enforced by law,would keep more of it than was necessary in smalltransactions to make payments of fractions of apound.It is neither the design to blame or to applaudthe conduct of members of the governmentwhich fixed our present silver coinage, and the circumstancedoes not come under consideration herefurther than as it may lead to a calculation of whatmay be deemed the fair rate of its loss by wear.If we estimate, as we are fully justified in doing,that one-third of the silver coin was in a constantstate of rest, either with the Bank of England orCUAP. XXIII.WEAK OF COIN. 18Scountry bankers, and that two-thirds of thosepieces on which the experiment was made hadscarcely or at all circulated, we shall come to theconclusion that the wear of the silver coin is aboutone part in two hundred annually ; but this regardsEnglish standard silver alone, and not thecoins of inferior fineness.This rate corresponds with that reported in theexperiments related in Lord Liverpool's letter tothe King ^ It appears that the officers of theMint, in 1787> hid made an experiment on thesilver coins of the kingdom which were then incirculation, and which were much depreciated bywear. The deficiency was ascertained to be at thefollowing extraordinary rates, viz. : — on the crownpieces, 3^^ per cent. ; on the half-crown pieces,9-j-f-fi ; on the shillings, 24^441 ; and on the sixpences,38-|-|^f per cent. -The same experiment was repeated again elevenyears after, in 1798, when the additional deficiencyin weight was found to be, on the crowns, ^^ ;on the half-crowns, lair > on the shillings, 5- 3^^0 >and on the sixpences, 3^^^ per cent.The less increased deficiency on the crowns andhalf-crowns may be accounted for from the rarityof those pieces, especially of the former, which hadbecome so scarce that whoever got one of themwas disposed rather to retain it as a pocket-piece• Lord Liverpool's Letter, p. 187. ^ Appendix, No. 1, C.184 WEAR OF COIN.CHAP. XXIII.or curiosity than to put it in circulation. Theless additional loss on the sixpences may be accountedfor from the circumstance that most ofthose pieces had by wear become so thin that theywould have broken in two when they had lost morethan forty per cent, of their standard weight, andinstead of being worth, as bullion, their originalvalue of sixpence, were not worth more than threepencehalfpenny. The shillings, as being the commonestpieces, are the coins on which the greatestreliance may be placed in any calculation. Theirvalue far exceeded that of all the other pieces, andmay therefore be assumed as the fittest scale ofdepreciation by wear.The loss on the shillings in this last experimentwas at the rate of about five per cent, in ten years,which agrees with what has been before estimatedas the loss on the new coinage since 1816, or aboutone part in two hundred in each year.It is to be observed that this wear on the silvercoin between I787 and 1798, was a proof of thedegree of loss produced on that particular descriptionof silver coin which was in circulation at thatperiod. Now every one whose recollection carrieshim back to that time will bear testimony to thefact that the shillings by wear had almost all lostthe faintest traces of any impression having beenmade upon them. No legend was visible, norcould the outlines of the head enable the reiffnto be determined. They were for the most partCUAP. XXIII.WEAR OF COIN. 185merely smooth pieces of silver. The wear onthem therefore must have been less than on suchpieces as, from being more recently stamped, hadmore raised surfaces.Practical men to whom the subject of the losson the metals has been one of much consideration,from being of importance in their several branchesof the gold, silver, and jewellery manufactures,commonly calculate a much greater degree ofloss on silver than is here shown. One gentlemanof great accuracy and acuteness, and muchconversant in the application of those metals inhis manufactory, communicates his opinion thus.*' The loss on coined silver is full one hundredthpart or one per cent, per annum. If one hundredpieces of 1815 and 1816, and upwards tothe last date on the silver coin be examined, itwill give this result. Though this loss is muchgreater than on gold, it is easily accounted for;for first, the same degree of friction will produce agreater diminution of weight, and secondly, theconstant and never ceasing circulation of the silvercoinage far exceeds that of gold, since it never willbe hoarded or kept in a state of rest, it not beinga measure of value in this country, but a token orrepresentation of value."These experiments on silver having been madeon coins of the English standard, are not adaptedto form a scale by which to measure the effect ofabrasion, either on the silver coin of the ancients186 WEAR OF COIN. chap, xxiii.or on that of the modern continental kingdoms,whose silver money was of far inferior fineness.For on silver as on gold coins the rate of loss willincrease in the same proportion as the fineness ofthe silver in the pieces is diminished : and therate will be farther increased as the size and weightof the pieces, as is the case with the continentalcoin, is less.It may now be proper to advert to the groundson which the rate of loss by friction on the moneyof ancient times has been assumed to be one partin three hundred and sixty annually. In remoteantiquity gold coins were unknown till long aftersilver coins had been fabricated, and, descendinglower, when such coins had been introduced, theamount of the silver very far exceeded that of thegold money. It is impossible to form an accurateor even an approximate estimate of the relativeamount of the two kinds of money. It becomes,therefore, necessary for the purposes of calculationto frame a supposititious relation. We assume thenthat the proportionate amount of the gold moneyto the silver money was as one to five, or that fivetimes as much silver as of gold circulated. Thisrate has not been fixed upon without much considerationof the low prices of all commodities whichrequired for their exchange only the lower kindof money ; of the product of the mines throughthe several ages, and of the relative value of goldto silver in the different periods of history.CHAP. xxii.WEAR OF COIN. 187If, then, the rate of loss by wear on gold moneywas at the rate of one part in six hundred, andthat money was one sixth of the circulating medium,and if the rate of loss on the silver moneywas at the rate of one part in one hundred andfifty, the mean rate of depreciation would be asnear to one part in three hundred and sixty ascan be calculated. The silver is estimated at onefourth greater degree of friction than our standardsilver, because it was at no time equal in finenessto our standards, and in most periods, and sometimesfor generations, vastly inferior.Although the amount of silver in circulation asmoney at all times must have been greater thanthat of gold, yet, as the gold has six times thedurability of silvery the relative value of the twometals to each other could not be maintainedunless the mines produced the two metals in proportionto the loss on them by wear respectively.It seems probable that the due proportion waskept up during the existence of the Roman power,and through the dark ages which succeeded, tillthe discovery of America, and till the dispersionover the world of the excessive surplus produce ofsilver above that of gold. The value of gold tosilver had varied but little before the mines ofPotosi were discovered. Among the Romansgold to silver seldom varied more than from nineto eleven for one, that is, a pound of gold wasrarely worth either more than eleven or less than188 RELATIVE VALUE cHAP. xxii.nine pounds of silver ; nor did the relative valueof the metals fluctuate more in the long course ofcenturies to the time when the new sources ofmineral wealth in the western world were in fullactivity. Since that period the relative value ofthe two kinds of metal has been gradually changed,and gold is become near fifteen times as valuableas silver, or one pound weight of gold is nearlyequal to fifteen pounds of silver. Humboldt hasestimated the quantity of gold and silver producedfrom the whole of America, since the discovery uptothe year 1S03, to be one hundred and sixty-twomillion pounds weight of the former, and seventhousand one hundred and seventy-eight millionpounds of the latter. The weight of silver to thatof gold has been thus about as forty-four to one.Thus the value of the silver produced since thediscovery of America is three times that of gold ;but the loss by wear on silver is four times that ofgold. In process of time, therefore, it is clearthat, from its durability, gold would gain in valueupon silver ; that is, a pound of gold would becomeworth more than fifteen pounds of silver.This effect was produced at first in part from thegreater proportionate quantity of silver that wasprocured, and in part by a less quantity of thegold which existed at the time of the discovery ofAmerica having been lost by wear than of thesilver then in use. In what degree each of thesecauses tended to preserve the equable proportionateCHAP. XXIII.OF GOLD TO SILVER. 189value of gold to silver during the two past centuriesit would be difficult to determine. But onething is certain, that as prices rose with the increasedquantity of both precious metals, therewould be a larger portion of gold used as coin tomake large payments, for which silver antecedentlywas used, and of silver to make those paymentsfor which copper or other inferior metals had sufficed.From hence it may be concluded that the proportionatevalue of the gold in the form of coinhad changed its relation to that of silver. Bothhad vastly increased, but gold in rather the greaterdegree. There was action and reaction. The metallicwealth acted on material wealth by raisingthe prices of it ; and that re-acted on the preciousmetals by requiring a larger portion of themto effect the necessary exchanges.Taking into the calculation the superior valueof the gold which was used for ornamental purposeson the one hand, and which must have beenwithdrawn or withheld from its application to coinage,as will be hereafter shown in detail ; andadverting to the vastly superior value of the silverwhich came from America in the form of coinedmoney on the other hand ; it seems fair to presumethat the proportion of one coin to the otherin circulation had been changed towards the endof the seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth190 IMPROVEMENTS IN CHAP. XXIII.century. As far as various considerations uniteto enable a judgment to be formed, it may beassumed that the value of the silver money in existence,including the dollars of the Americancoinage, was as four to one of that of the goldmoney.If the wear of the coined money was the samethrough the time that passed from the year I7OOto 1810, the loss by friction on both kinds ofmetal would be at the rate of one part in fourhundred and twenty annually. In the remainingcalculations the rate of loss will be estimated uponthis principle, and it will be extended to the wholemass of coin of Europe and of America.One reason for making a change in the estimatedloss at this particular period is that a generalreformation in the state of the coinage was thenintroduced. In England the evil of a debasedcoinage was severely felt and loudly complained ofduring the reign of William III., and it appearsthat the silver coin which was by far the greatestin nominal amount had from clipping and othercauses become so very deficient, that upon weighinga large quantity at the Exchequer in l695, itwas found that which should by tale have weighedtwo hundred and twenty-one thousand four hundredand eighteen ounces, did in fact weigh nomore than one hundred and thirteen thousandseven hundred and seventy-one ounces, thus show-chap.Xxii.FABRICATION OF COIN. Idlingthat the debasement or deficiency was at therate of forty-eight pounds twelve shillings and fourpenceper cent. '■It became impossible to proceed farther withouta renovation, and though opposed by some powerfulfactions in both houses of parliament, the measurewas resolved on by small majorities, althoughthe country was at the time in the midst of anextended and expensive war.The restoration of the coin to its due purityand weight in England seems to have produced animprovement in the state of the coin on the continent.In France many changes were introduced,with the express purpose '' amur etre en 2jf'0])or-tion avec les Hats voisins et pom empecher qiCilsiC enlev assent Vor et V argent du royaume" .^^ —In Germany several of the smaller states formedconventions, by which it was agreed that the moneyshould circulate through the allied dominions uponcondition that each sovereign should coin it of thesame degree of purity. This was the origin ofthe best kind of money generally known by thename Qi Conventions geld. In Italy improvementsalso took place in the money of most of the states,and on almost the whole of Europe (for the exceptionsare few) : an increased degree of durabilitywas given to the coins in circulation about thesame period.^ Ruding, vol. ii. p. 387-^ About de Bazinghen, vol. ii. p. 207.192 CONSUMPTION OF GOLD AND SILVER, chap. xxiv.CHAPTER XXIV.On the consumption of gold and silver and on the rate ofprices of commodities from I7OO to 1810.In a former chapter the stock of metallic wealth inthe form of coin in Europe is estimated at the closeof the year l699, to have amounted to two hundredand ninety-seven million pounds sterling. Uponthe principle stated in the preceding chapter, thatone part in forty-two of the coin is consumed byfriction in the wear of it, in the space of one hundredand ten years between I7OO and 1810, thatstock would be reduced at the end of the periodvery considerably. In the first forty-two years thesum would be reduced to two hundred and sixty-sevenmillion three hundred thousand pounds, inthe second forty-two years to two hundred andforty million five hundred and seventy thousandpounds, and in the twenty-six succeeding years totwo hundred and twenty-six millions.In the hundred and ten years under consideration,the produce of the several mines of Americaand of Europe, with the gold dust from Africa,has been calculated at the rate of eight millionsannually, or in the whole period at eight hundredCHAP. XXIV. TRADE WITH INDIA.and eighty millions. The mode in which thisamount has been dispersed and disposed of becomesnow the subject of examination. The exportationof the precious metals, chiefly of silver,has in a former period been estimated for Indiaand China at one-fifth of the whole produce whichthe mines of America had yielded. The tradewith India was then in its infancy. It was at firstin the hands of the Portuguese, but the Dutchsoon became participators in it. The Englishand French companies had indeed existed, andcarried on some trade, but with little success,and to a contracted extent. The union of thetwo English companies in the beginning of thiscentury gave stability and extension to thecommerce, which advanced slowly at first, buttowards the latter end of it had increased so asto exceed that of all the other European statestogether.The use of tea, which increased and descendedgradually from the highest classes in England tillit became almost a necessary of life to the verypoorest, had caused a demand for silver for thetrade of China, which could not have been suppliedwithout that vast addition to the store which themines of America administered with increasingliberality. This commodity was so extended inthis country that its consumption had been increasedone hundred fold during the century,and even in the thirty years between 17»S0 andVOL. 11. o194^ TRADE WITH ASIA.CHAP. XXIV.1810 had risen from eight to twenty-five millionsof pounds weight. The demand for raw silkfrom China had also rapidly increased towards theend of the term in question, and it more thancounterbalanced the deficiency which was createdby our improvements in the porcelain and cottongoods, which had in some measure lessened the demandfor the nankeen and porcelain of China.The trade with India, like that with China, hadconstantly absorbed a large portion of the silver ofEurope. The greater part had passed by sea bythe Cape of Good Hope; but there was a current,constant though almost imperceptible, passingfrom the Levant to India in the south, and fromRussia to the north, the latter of which had vastlyincreased in the latter years of the term.On the states of North America establishingtheir independence, they became rivals with thekingdoms of Europe in the trade to India andChina, and conveyed to both large quantities ofsilver. It was especially after the wars whicharose from the revolution in France that the intercourseof the Americans with the east had thegreatest extension. They were the medium ofcommunication for a long time between Franceand Holland and their remaining territories inIndia. The continent of Europe was supplied bytheir shipping, under the protection of the neutralflag, with tea and the other commodities of Chinaand of India, and conveyed to those distant regionsCHAP. XXIV.TRADE WITH ASIA. IQ-^scarcely any of their own productions, but chieflythat silver which they obtained from SpanishAmerica and the West Indies in return for flourand other articles the produce of their soil.This vast demand for the east has been the subjectof calculation with several writers. M. For-bonnessupposes that between 1 1'9'2 and 17^24 one-halfof the gold and silver which America had suppliedto Europe had been absorbed by the Levant,the India, and the China trade. M. Gerboux, in hiswork on pecuniary legislation, has not merely advocatedthe same opinion, but has computed the proportionof wealth conveyed to the cast at a somewhathigher rate. Baron Humboldt, from whose workon Mexico these views of the two French writersare extracted, has taken pains to estimate the proportionof the exports to Asia of the preciousmetals which Europe had drawn from America.His estimation is made upon an examination ofthe exports at the time he composed his work,between the years 1803 and 1806, when theamount of gold and silver furnished by Americahad nearly reached its highest point, when the demandfor goods from India had not lessened, andwhen the exports to India of British productionswere far less than at present. His calculation istherefore neither accommodated to the earlieryears of the period we are considering, nor is itadapted to measure the proportions which withinthe few last years have existed. He states theo 2196 TRADE WITH ASIA.CHAP. XXIV.silver and gold brought to Europe annually atthat time to be forty-three million five hundredthousand piastres, of which he supposes there pastto Asia,By means of the Levant trade 4,000,000By the Cape of Good Hope 17,500,000By the way of Kiacha andTobolsk . . 4,000,00025,500,000 dollars ;or, at the rate we have adopted, ^5,31 8,750 sterling.This would lead to the opinion that nearly two-thirdsof the gold and silver furnished by the mineswere required and supplied to Asia; which seemsimprobable, considering the general poverty of itsnumerous inhabitants, and the small quantity ascompared with Europe of the several commoditieswhich furnished subjects of exchange.We should doubt if in the early parts of theperiod, when the supplies from America weresmaller, the trade of the east could require nearlythe same proportion of those supplies as at theperiod when Humboldt made his calculation. Thetrade of England at the latter part of the period,when, with the exception of the United States ofAmerica, she engrossed the whole commerce ofthe east, did not require a regular supply of theprecious metals to nearly the extent which Humboldthas averaged it at, but much nearer to two-fifthsthan to two-thirds of that quantity.CHAP. XXIV.TRADE WITH ASIA. 197With the exception of a short period after thepeace of Amiens, the trade of Europe with Indiaand China during twenty-two years, from lySSto1810, was almost an exclusive operation of theEnglish ; at least the direct trade of the rest ofthe world by sea did not amount to a third part ofthe whole. In those years the treasure exportedby the East India Company on their own account,as well as on account of the private trade, was fifty-fourmillion two hundred and twelve thousandeight hundred and seventy-nine ounces of silvercoin, chiefly dollars, and five million five hundredand eighteen thousand two hundred and one ouncesof silver bullion, with six thousand and five ouncesof foreign gold coin \ The value of this would,taking the silver at five shillings and the gold atseventy-five shillings per ounce, be nearly fifteenmillions sterling, or six hundred and thirty-fivethousand nine hundred pounds on the annualaverage. Now supposing the United States ofAmerica, the Danes, Swedes, and Portuguese togetherexported about half as much — and there isgood reason to deem such supposition approachingnearly to truth — we conclude the export of silverand gold in the period referred to to have been atthe rate of one million sterling annually. If we allowthe accuracy of Humboldt's statements as to theother channels by which gold and silver passed fromSec Appendix, No. 9, to the Bullion Report of 1810.198 TRADE WITH ASIA. CHAP. XXIV.Europe to Asia, we can scarcely calculate the absorptionof the latter division of the globe to havebeen more than two-fifths of the whole quantityproduced by America and Europe together. Inthe absence of that certainty or accuracy which isdesirable but not attainable on this subject, weshall assume that two-fifths of the metallic wealthfurnished by the mines of America and of Europeduring the period between I7OO and 1810 passedfrom the latter division of the globe into Asia.We come next to that application of gold andsilver by which the ornamental articles of dress,the decorations of public and private buildings,and the various domestic luxuries are supplied.The use of gold and silver, whether in articlesof furniture, dress, or decorations, depends muchon the degree of refinement which may exist inany age or country. They are rarely applied, andby a few individuals, in an age of rude hospitality,of boisterous conviviality, and of inebriating gratifications; they are the accompaniments of moreelegant enjoyments and more refined manners ;and if they appeared as they did in the palaces ofa few princes, nobles, and prelates, they were insuch union with the other furniture, with thewant of neatness, not to say of cleanliness, andwith the general arrangement of the whole establishment,as to form a most unappropriate combinationaccording to the more refined ideas of thepresent age.CHAP. XXIV. USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. 199The greater or less application of gold and silverto other purposes than money will depend muchon the increase of general wealth : not meaning bywealth money or metallic treasure, but that materialwealth which so much exceeds it in value. Ifa silver spoon be equal in value to a bushel of wheat,more spoons will be used than if it required twobushels to obtain it. In this, as in other commodities,the use will increase as the value of it measuredby other commodities 'decreases.In the early part of the period we are now contemplating,commencing with the year I7OO, littleprogress was made either in refinement of mannersor in the augmentation of general wealth inEurope, when compared with the progress thatthe latter portion of the period has exhibited.In France, though the early part of the reign of France.Louis XIV. had been distinguished by the splendourand magnificence which his flatterers calledglory, yet it had been much more distinguishedby thoughtless profusion, by reckless persecution,and by efforts directed to display rather than toutility, which covered with disgrace and mortificationthe close of his life. The regency of theprofligate Orleans found France in a state of weakness,not decrepitude ; but a peaceful series ofyears, in spite of national insolvency and occasionalhostilities, gave fresh energy to industry,whilst the voluptuous Louis XV. certainly introduceda refinement of manners. The increased200 USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. CHAP. xxiv.use of plate was the consequence of this temperateadvancement in prosperity and refinement. It isasserted by Necker, that the increase of plate, asascertained from the mint of Paris, between theyears 1709 and IJ^dt was in the proportion ofseven to one.According to the " Statistique general et particulartie la Frances published by Herbin, in1S03, the amount of the silver and gold consumedin France by the goldsmiths and jewellers was tenmillions of francs, beyond that which was obtainedby the melting of old vessels and old trinkets, andby burning the old lace and silks \ This, whichmay be called eight hundred and fifty thousandpounds sterling, rests on the authority of M.Necker, whose work is referred to by the " Societede Gens cle Lettres et de Savant -," who compiledthe work of which Herbin was the editor. At thetime that work was published, the use of thosemetals had risen to near the same standard as beforethe revolution, when Necker wrote, but duringthat miserable period there had been an astonishingdecline in that branch of industry. *' There werevery extensive fabrics of gold and silver articlesat Lyons, Bordeaux, Marseilles, Strasbourg, andsome other places ; but the events of the revolution,the want of internal consumption, and theStatistique generale, vol. ii. p. 181.- Necker, vol. iii. p. 74.CHAP. XXIV. USE OF GOLD AND SILVER.difficulty of exportation to foreign countries hadruined the greater part of them \"In this estimate of the consumption of goldand silver in France before the revolution is notincluded that which was used for watches. In1787j the number of watches sold in Paris isstated, in a memoir presented to the Bureau deCommerce, at twenty thousand annually, of whichone in twenty was of golden If we suppose anequal quantity to be sold in the rest of that kingdom,the cases of that number of watches wouldrequire as much gold and silver as would makethe value of those metals consumed within Franceamount to somewhat more than a million sterling.A great part of the watches sold in France were,even at the time to which we refer, imported fromother countries — chiefly from Geneva, but somefrom Neufchatel.At the beginning of the eighteenth century thegoldsmiths of Paris were under the inspection ofpublic officers, who, by a royal ordinance of 1703,were to attend the process of their manufacture,to ascertain the purity of the metal, and to forbidthe making basins and other articles heavier thanthe prescribed weight. They were bound to havetheir furnaces and forges in their open shops, inview of the public from the street, and to affix anotice of the fineness of the articles then in theHerbin, vol. ii. p. 180. - Ibid, vol. ii. p. 172.Q02 USE OF GOLD AND SILVER, chap. XXIV.process of manufacturing. This ordinance was,indeed, only the renewed promulgation of one ofthe year l602. The whole number of makers anddealers in gold and jewellery was restricted to threehundred persons in Paris and the suburbs, and theyformed a guild endowed with privileges and propertyin houses \The application of silver in France to variouspurposes of dress, furniture, and ornaments at thebeginning of the eighteenth century must have beenvery considerable. This maybe inferred from thenumber of articles which are specified in the ordinanceof 1703, in a catalogue framed for the purposeof fixing the parts of them on which theassay mark which indicated the fineness of themetal was to be stamped. These articles are morethan eighty in number, and show in some degreewhat was the fashion of the age and country.Besides ewers (ciguih^es), porringers {ecuelles)^snuffers, saltcellars, chafing-dishes i^rechaux),perfuming-pans, warming-pans, standing waiters(soticoupes), are among the domestic utensils.Those connected with the religious practices ofthe age are numerous, and many of the articlesmust have been heavy. Among these are cru-seeBazinghen^ vol. ii. p. 370. It appears that similarrestrictions existed in London, where the goldsmiths all workedin open shops near each other on the south side of Cheapside,near St. Paul's in houses that now are the property of theGoldsmiths' Company.CHAP. XXIV. USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. 20.Scities, chalices, flagons, processional and othercrosses, batons cle chantry, vessels for holy waterand for incense; besides chandeliers, lamps, shrines,reliques, images, boxes for holy oil, and varioussmall articles used in the different parts of devotion.Many parts of the dress made of gold orof silver, especially buckles for belts for the bodyand for the swords, are enumerated ; besides thehilts and guards of the swords and sabres, andmany ornaments for the harness of the war andother horses.This long list of articles contained in the ordinanceis framed to ensure the stamping of theseveral portions of the gold and silver articles, andto afford a security to the purchasers that theywere of the legal degree of purity ; but it showsthat a large portion of those metals must in thatage have been applied to other uses than that ofconversion into coin in France.The ordinance was not extended to articles ofless than an ounce in weight, and therefore, as faras relates to gold, the greater part of the objects towhich that metal was applied, such as rings forthe fingers and for the ears, beads for countingprayers, and small trinkets of various kinds, werenot amenable to the laws for assaying.At the early part of the period the consumption Spain.of the precious metals in Spain must have bornesome proportion to its wealth and its devotion.At the close of the seventeenth century we find204 USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. cHAP. XXIV.in Argiielles that the goldsmiths and silversmithsin Spain amounted to four thousand two hundredpersons. Their operations must consequentlyhave drawn, for the purposes of ornaments andutensils, a large share of that gold and silverwhich came from America in the form of coin.After the war of the succession, by which Spainhad suffered severely, she appears gradually tohave declined in general wealth, and probably inthe application of the precious metals to purposesof luxury ; for certainly there was little of luxuryto be seen in the houses of even the richer classesof inhabitants towards the close of the century.This may be seen by the report of a council ofstate held in June, 1794, when Spain was engagedin war with the French republic, and fromthe state of her finances was compelled to contemplatesome strong measures to obtain pecuniaryresources. An account, in what manner takendoes not appear, was laid before the council ofthe whole mass of gold and silver belonging tothe churches and other religious establishments,and to private individuals, stating it to amount toeleven million forty thousand pounds sterling \A suggestion was made to these bodies to give uptothe state what could be spared from the indispensablerequisites for the sacred rites and fromthe necessary uses of private persons ; but theArgiielles de Hacienda, vol. i. p. 66, and vol. iv. p. 345.CHAP. XXIV. USE OF GOLD AND SILVER.requisition was so feebly heeded, that very littleaccrued to the royal treasury, scarcely a sum exceedingten thousand pounds.A similar attempt in 1812 to obtain aid fromthe treasures of the religious establishments,though rigidly enforced, was scarcely more successful.The latter was at a time when the Cortes,who made the requisition, had been deprived ofpower over the greater part of the kingdom bythe French occupation, and it is not wonderfulthat it should have yielded no more than the smallsum of twelve thousand pounds.But though at these periods there may havebeen but little of the precious metals intractableby fiscal operations, it by no means follows thatthere was a great paucity in the whole country.The Spaniards, from the time of the Moorish occupation,had been accustomed to hide their goldand silver from the numerous depredators ; and as,after the destruction of the Mahometan power,no safe means of making interest was to be found,it is probable that a larger proportion of what didexist may have been hidden in Spain than in anyof the other countries of Europe.It would lead to an extensive and almost end italy, Germany,&.C.less inquiry to examine tito the progressive m-crease of gold and silver ornaments and utensilsin many other parts of Europe, as in Italy, inGermany, in the eastern parts, as Bohemia, Hungary,Poland, and Russia, or in the northern206 USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. cHAP. XXIV.kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden. The inhabitantsof all those countries, however it mayhave been with the governments, increased inmaterial wealth ; and we may fairly infer that inasimilar manner they must have increased in theapplication of that wealth to purposes of luxury,of show, of splendour, or of such gratifications ofan ornamental kind as best coincided with theirrespective tastes. The use of gold and silvermust therefore among them have become moreextended ; and as it descended from the higherranks to the more numerous bodies of which theranks below them consisted must have caused anincreased consumption in that way.The progressive steps in luxury are much moretraceable by us in England than in foreign countries.We shall therefore take no farther noticeof Holland, of the Netherlands, of the Hanse towns,or the independent republics of Italy, than toobserve that their progress in wealth and luxury,though checked by occasional interruptions, continuedgenerally through the whole of the century,and the application of the precious metals to thelatter purpose must have been nearly in the sameproportion.England. In the reign of Queen Anne there seems, fromthe accounts preserved at Goldsmiths' Hall, tohave been a very sudden increase in the manufactureof plate. It may be difficult to accountfor the fact, but perhaps the rich services pre-chap.XXIV. USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. 207seated to the Duke of Marlborough may havestimulated the more opulent part of the nobilityand such public bodies as were possessed of wealthto attempt to imitate, if not to rival, the splendiddecorations of the heroic and successful general.However that may be, it seems that the mass ofold silver and gold articles of furniture still re-maidens: in its ancient form is of the fabricationof that reign. This is the case with the plateof the Duke of Devonshire, and of other distinguishedfamilies, as well as of that belonging tothe Goldsmiths' Company of London and to otherpublic bodies.The introduction of tea, but especially the extensionwhich it gradually received, till it has becomethe daily fare of almost the whole community,had an influence on the consumption ofsilver for small spoons. They were scarcelyknown in the previous reign, but multiplied inthe reign of Anne, and have gone on increasingfrom that time to the present, when they maybecounted by millions, perhaps by hundreds ofmillions.Between the reign of Anne and the latter endof that of George the second, the progress of theapplication of silver and gold was at a slower pace ;but between I7C0 and 1770 a fresh impulse seemsto have been given, which has continued up to thepresent time, though with some variations in itsrapidity. When table-spoons of silver had suppressUSE OF GOLD AND SILVER. CHAP. XXIV.seed those of pewter, as they had done those ofhorn or wood, they were fabricated of very lightweight,and such of them as are now remainingwill be found to be not much heavier than thetea-spoons made in more recent times.Table-forks are articles of late introduction ;they were not universally placed at table tilla comparatively recent period. Even with thehigher classes of society, forks of silver had notsupplanted those of steel or iron at the commencementof the reign of George III.; and itwas towards the middle or end of that reignbefore they became universal among that class,and general among the classes immediately belowthem. Their use has gone on increasing ; and thesilver used in the making of them, with the severalkinds of spoons, forms the mode in which one-halfthe silver consumed in England is used.Between the years I760 and I78O, many articles,either new in name, as tea-urns and tureensor as tea-pots and coffee-pots, made of silver insteadof other substances, were introduced. Thesewith silver waiters instead of those called japanand wine-coolers, had much increased in useSilver plates, dishes, and covers were broughtdown to classes of lower rank than had beforebeen able to afford such expensive articles.The use of watches, as general wealth was augmented,increased with it ; and especially afterthey became the product of the labour of artisansCHAP. XXIV. l*!=^E OF GOLD AND SILVER. ^09alio formed the separate parts upon the principleof the division of hour, and left to the mechanicalartists the more delicate task of adjustingthose parts, and of regulating the rate oftheir movements. Instead of a watch being thedistinguishing appendage to a man of wealth andfashion, it has become the useful companion of allbut the poorest and idlest of the community.Among even the middle ranks it has grown intouse, not merely for the heads of the family, butfew of the junior members, or even of the domesticservants, are without them. The increasednumber of watches, especially since it has beenpermitted to form the cases of a lower degree offineness of the gold and silver than our standard,has been such that they must be counted bymillions.The introduction of plating with silver oncoppers and especially since the manufacture hasbeen removed from London to Birmingham andSheffield, has caused a vastly increased consumptionof silver, especially from about the year I78O tothe present time. It was necessary to advert tothe fact in this part of the subject, though theextent of it will be more fully considered in asubsequent part of this inquiry.The consumption of gold by the several descriptionsof gilders towards the latter end ofthe period under consideration experienced a vastincrease. The number of gold beaters was tripledVOL. ir. P^10 INCREASED USE OF chap. xxiv.in twenty years. The application of gold to theseveral branches of the water-gilder's art felt asimilar increase, and the practice of gilding manyof the larger articles of silver plate was extended.The gilding in the interior of houses hadcommenced, and absorbed much gold, though theprogress of that particular kind of ornament hadnot been so great as in more recent periods. Sincethe fabrication of porcelain in Europe has surpassedthat of China both in beauty and in use,the fashion of profuse gilding has been generallyextending among the potteries in England, aswell as in those of France, Prussia, Saxony, andother parts of the continent. This absorbs avery increasing quantity of fine gold, which islost when the pieces they ornament are broken.The most rapid increase in the application ofgold during the reign of George III., and thatwhich absorbed a greater portion of the metalthan all the other modes of consumption, was themanufacture of trinkets and jewellery. Broaches,clasps, lockets, bracelets, breast-pins, necklaces,chains, earrings, and a thousand nameless ornamentswhich the London jewellers and goldsmithshad formerly produced, were imitated at Birmingham,and reduced so much in price as to comewithin the reach of a much more numerous classthan had before indulged in the use of them.It is true the gold was of a lower fineness,much of it consisting of scarcely one half of thatCHAP. XXIV.GOLD AND SILVER. 211metal, but ])y various improvements in the alloysmingled with it, the ornaments looked as well ata lower cost ; and therefore in this way the proportionof gold consumed was very much greaterthan it would have been if the standard finenesshad been adhered to.Those few who can remember the fashion ofdress sixty years ago, may be disposed to thinkthe consumption of gold to have lessened, as faras regards the lace on the clothes of gentlemen.As late as the year 1770 few gentlemen appearedwithout an embroidered frock, or a laced coat ofgold or silver. Even with the middle class agold laced waistcoat formed a very common partof the dress, and gold laced hats were very generalto a later period. Though this use of goldand silver lace has disappeared, and though theofficers of the navy and army are less coveredwith lace, yet it is to be considered that theirnumbers in England as well as in other parts ofthe world have very much increased, and perhapsthe consumption has not been much, if at all,diminished.It is also to be remarked, that in this way thereis but little absolute consumption. The pieces ofold lace are collected and burnt, and the greaterpart of the precious metal is restored to its formerstate, and becomes fit for application to futurepurposes.These remarks on the increased application ofp 2212 INCREASED USE OF chap. xxiv.gold and silver to other purposes than that ofcoin are necessarily of a general nature. Thesubject does not admit of any estimation approachingto statistical accuracy, and whateverinferences may be drawn must depend rather oninquiries made at a subsequent period, than onany information that can be derived from theperiod to which they relate. Whoever has hadoccasion to inquire among refiners, gold-beaters,jewellers, or goldsmiths concerning the extent oftheir operations thirty or forty years ago, to saynothing of more remote dates, will have foundthe answers he obtains doubtful and contradictory,though the same persons can give accounts of itspresent state, which may inspire sufficient confidencein their accuracy to be made the basis ofsuch estimation as may be relied upon.It is for that reason, that though we find itnecessary from the plan pursued to estimate inthe present chapter the proportion of gold andsilver applied to other purposes than coin inEurope between 1700 and 1810, yet we deferto a future part of the work the chief of thespecific grounds by which that estimate must bebe sustained. In the mean time the reader is referredto Appendix, No. 5, where sufficient proofis exhibited of the increased use of gold andsilver for purposes of personal ornaments, and fordecorations and utensils. It is not without muchconsideration of all the circumstances which ac-clap.XXIV.GOLD AND SILVER. iil3company this complex inquiry that we have arrivedat the conclusion, that in the one hundred andten years in question, the quantity of gokl andsilver which was converted into other objects thancoin amounted to two-thirds of that which wasleft in Europe, after the part which was conveyedto Asia is subtracted from the total produce of themines.This estimate obtains some support from theviews taken of it by Necker in France, who in1789 reckons the annual amount of the gold andsilver used in that country for ornaments andutensils at near one million sterling. Humboldtin 1800 estimated the amount of the two metals soapplied at five million eight hundred and twenty-fivethousand Spanish dollars, or one million twohundred and thirteen thousand five hundredpounds sterling. He supposes the consumptionof all Europe to be to that of France as four to one,and consequently is disposed to view the wholeannual demand of this quarter of the globe atfour million eight hundred and fifty-four thousandpounds sterling. In the cursory view we havetaken, and the subject admits of only cursoryviews, we should consider the consumption ofEngland, at the time when Humboldt formedhis estimate, at about one million five hundredthousand pounds ; and that the rest of Europemay be calculated to consume about three timesas much, which would make the whole about four214 G«tCC^E?rFTGW OF THE chap. XXIV.X million five hundred thousand pounds. It is only» by different modes of calculating, on subjects intheir own nature very doubtful, that we can arriveat conclusions, which after all merely approximateto accuracy.We give, however, in one view the state of thecoined money of Europe, deduced in the way hereadopted, as follows :The coin in existence at the beginningof the year 1700, beingreduced by friction as stated inpage 192, would at the end of1809 amount to . . . £226,000,000To this, if added, the produce of themines . . . £880,000,000From which, deducted for the tradeof Asia, two fifths . .352,000,000528,000,000We suppose of this that two-thirdswas applied to other purposes thancoin 352,000,000I There would remain for coin 176,000,000I From which must be deducted forI wear on that quantity in thet period of one hundred and tenI years 22,000,000I154,000,000I Leaving as the stock at the end of1809 380,000,000If no material error has been made in this com-CHAP. XXIV. AMOUNT OF COIN. 215putatioii, and the coin had increased from twohundred and ninety-seven millions of pounds in .1699 to three hundred and eighty millions ofpounds in 1809, the addition would be at therate of about twenty-eight per cent. This computation,though by a very different process, givesa result so nearly approaching to those by For-bonnes,Gerboux, and Heron de Villefosse, thatit seems more entitled to confidence than thatof Necker, who rated the coin of France to benearly equal to that of all Europe, and the collectivestock not much to exceed one half ofthis estimate.In drawing a comparison between the pricesof wheat, which in spite of the objections to itthat have been stated in former parts of the inquirywe are compelled to adopt, it is necessaryto take the average of a long series of years. Itseemed also desirable to avoid years in which derangementsof the current coin of the kingdomwere in operation. On that account it was advisablenot to include any of the years after thesuspension of the bank payments in specie : thatsuspension had some effect on prices, but theextent to which it operated in various periodsmust have been a subject of discussion too longand too doubtful to be entered upon here. Theperiods for comparison are the thirty years between1665 and 1695, and the same number ofyears between 1765 and 1795.216 comparison: OF Traces CHAP. XXIV.It appears by the Windsor prices, as kept atEton College, that the average prices of wheat ofthe whole of the years between 1665 and 1695was two pounds and sixpence halfpenny the Winchesterquarter of eight gallons. The averageprice of the corresponding years in the followingcentury, or between 17^5 and 1795, was twopounds eleven shillings and a penny-halfpenny.By the Oxford prices in the Appendix, No. 4,it will appear that the wheat sold there, whoseprices are taken at two periods in each year, viz.Lady-day and Michaelmas, was, on the average ofthe same two periods of thirty years, as follows :in the first series at one pound sixteen shillingsand ten-pence per quarter, and in the secondseries two pounds nine shillings and sixpence. Ifthese two tables of prices are classed together, thebases of the calculation will be more extended,and the rise on the century will be from one poundeighteen shillings and eight-pence to two poundsten shillings and three-pence, and show an advanceof thirty per cent on the earliest prices.This coincidence between the increase of thestock of coin and of the price of wheat in thecourse of a century may be accidental, or may belocal and applicable to England, and not to thecountries on the continent of Europe ; but as faras a judgment can be formed from the few datathat can be collected, the advance was similarduring the part of the period for which accountscilAl'. XXIV. WITH INCREASE OF COIN. 217are to be found. Thus in Spain the average priceof wheat in the market of Seville, from the year1701 to 17'26, was fourteen reals ^ thirty-onemaravedis the fanega j from 1727 to 1752 it wasseventeen reals twenty-two maravedis ; and from17^5 to 1787 it was twenty-six reals eleven ma-ravens".This shows a greater advance than appears bythe English accounts. It may not, however, beproper to assume the price of wheat in Spain as ascale to measure the value of gold and silver withthe same confidence as may be given to the pricein England. It is not so universally the food ofman as with us, and the variations in price aremore enormous. In the hundred years we areconsidering, the lowest price of wheat in Englandwas one pound three shillings and a penny, andthe highest price three pounds nine shillings andfour-pence, thus varying as from one to three ; butinSpain the lowest price was seven reals, and thehighest thirty-nine, or from one to five and a half.Not having correct prices of wheat in Franceat the latter portion of the eighteenth century, wemust make the contrast between two periods at acentury from each other, the first beginning withThe real is the twentieth part of a dollar, and is dividedinto thirty-four maravedis. The fanega is two-thirds of anEnglish bushel.2 See Appendix, No. 2d, to the Bullion Report.21 S COMPARISON OF PRICESCHAP. XXIV.1616 and ending with 1645, the second in I7I6and ending in 1745. The average of the firstthirty years ^ was eleven livres five sols ; that of thesecond, seventeen livres eleven sols, six deniers forthe setier of Paris, thus showing an advance at therate of somewhat more than fifty per cent, in thecentury. In the same two periods the price ofoats varied much more, being in the first thirtyyears six livres ten sols, and in the latter twelvelivres eight sols, or near one hundred per cent.The wheat-market of Dantzic is regulated moreby the variations of fertility in the whole of Europethan that of any other place. Its prices dependmore on the harvests of distant countries than onthose from whence its supplies are drawn. It mayexhibit a better scale of fertility in a series ofyears, but a less satisfactory one of the value ofgold and silver. Without giving importance tothe statement, it would scarcely be proper whollyto omit the notice of the advance in price at thatgreat market. We have no correct list of pricesat an earlier period than the year I7OO. Theaverage price from that year to 1725 was onehundred and thirty-five florins for the last of tenquarters. In the last twenty-five years of thatcentury, from 177<5 to 1800, the average price wasthree hundred and thirty-seven florins for the^ Essai sur les JMonnoies et sur le Rapport entre Sargentet les Degrees, page 181.CUAP. XXIV. WITH INCREASE OF COIN. 219same measure ; showing an advance of near threehundred per cent This must have been attributablechiefly to the great scarcity of corn whichwas experienced in France at the beginning ofthe revolution, and to similar deficiencies in thesupply of other countries. These, offering veryhigh rates, induced the transportation of cornfrom distances in the interior of the continent toDantzic, which could not have been borne but forthe almost famine prices in other countries.The kindness of the officers of the royal hospital?it Chelsea has furnished the contract prices of thechief articles consumed in that establishment forthe years 1730, 1731, and 1732, the oldest periodof which there are clear accounts ; and for theyears 1791, 1792, and 1793, after which the contractswere made in a different manner. It appearsby the account in Appendix, No. 6, that inthe sixty years the advance on bread, beef, mutton,cheese, and butter had been at the rate of twentyper cent., that on pease and oatmeal more, andthat on coals still more. On salt, beer, and candlesit is difficult to fix the accurate difference, asit might be occasioned by alterations in the taxeslaid on those articles. As far as the account extends,it seems a conclusive proof of a gradual advancein the money-price of those kinds of necesseJacob's Corn Report, ordered to be printed by theHouse of Commons, 14th May, 1826.220 INCREASE OF COIN CHAP. XXIV.series which form the sustenance of the great massof the population of the country.An advance in the price of so indispensable anarticle as wheat, or even of the prices of the generalmass of commodities in Europe, would beno decisive proof of the increase of the preciousmetals. If the whole material wealth of a countryreceives a great accession, and a correspondentaccession be made to the coin, prices would continueas before if the facility of circulating thatcoin should remain without alteration.If we where to judge from England alone, therewould be little hesitation in concluding that themass of material wealth had increased in the onehundred and ten years, at a greater rate than theprecious metals. This is obvious from the increaseof the population, and from that population havingbeen better fed, clothed, and lodged, at the conclusionthan at the commencement of the century.The sources of wealth of every kind had yieldedmore copiously. The soil was better cultivated,and therefore yielded more of the annual necessariesof life; the surplus of exchangeable productshad been augmented so that foreign necessariesor comforts could be more easily and abundantlyprocured. The facilities of distribution had beenimproved by the repairs or construction of roads,canals, rivers, harbours, and docks. The implementsof industry, which diminish the use andCHAP. XXIV. AND OF MATERIAL WEALTH. ^221extend the power of human labour, lead receivedgreat improvement. A new natural power, whichhad not before been used, was practically adaptedto perform that work which required the severelabour both of man and of animals. The applicationof steam to abridge labour, which had begunabout the middle of the period, forms of itself anera in the history of the wealth of this country.It is not necessary to notice the vast increase ofour shipping within the period, though it is bothan aid to wealth and a proof of its growth, for itmay be comprehended, with wheel carriages, underthe class of the facilities of distribution.A variety of causes may have contributed tothis increase of material wealth in England, someof them peculiar. It may be in part owing to thewars in which we have engaged, not having beencarried on upon our own territory; to our freedomfrom internal commotions ; to the security withwhich property of all kinds is protected ; to thesure if not the speedy operation of the laws ; tothe lightness of our taxation, which being drawnfrom property expended in consumption, is less onthe mass of wealth from which it is extracted,though it is greater when calculated by the numberof individuals that pay it, than is levied in anyof the other countries of the civilized world.As far as regards England, it is not necessaryto prove the vast accession of material wealthwithin the period under consideration. In the222 INCREASE OF COIN chap. xxiv.continental kingdoms it is probable there has beena progress made, but it has been attended withmany and lengthened interruptions in all of them,and in some the effects of those interruptions werefelt during many of the years of tranquillity whichfollowed the events of 1814 and 1815.Viewing Europe as a whole, comprehendingwith it England, and taking into the view theUnited States of America which had risen fromlow beginnings to become a wealthy and independentpower, we are compelled to believe thatthe whole mass of material wealth had increasedat a rate much beyond that which has been shownto have been the rate of increase of the preciousmetals. If we could be led to estimate the rateof the advance in material wealth to have beenvery much beyond the increase of the rate of metallicwealth, we might expect that the prices ofcommodities in general would have fallen insteadof having risen in the period under consideration.It must, however, be borne in mind that times ofinternal turbulence favour the conversion of metallicwealth from articles of luxury into currentcoin. This operation especially was proceeding inthe early part of the wars which originated in theFrench revolution. In France itself the most tangibleproperty of the royal and noble families whobecame emigrants was their plate and jewels. Thesame was the case with the churches, monasteries,and other public establishments. Whether thatCUAP. XXIV. AND or MATERIAL WEALTH. 223plate was sold to supply the means of emigration,whether it was confiscated by the decrees of theconvention, or devoted to unauthorised pillage,the greater part of it would, for the sake of morefacility in its circulation, be converted into coinedmoney. In Italy, where the churches, shrines,and religious institutions were richly furnishedwith ornaments of silver and gold, the greater partwas seized either by the assailants or the defenders,and was converted into coin. The same courseof events may be observed in the Netherlands, inAustria, in the parts of Southern Germany, and,though at a later period, in Saxony, in Prussia,and the north of Germany, and finally in Portugaland Spain.During the first ten years of the French revolution,there could be little disposition to apply goldand silver to articles of luxury ; and it is henceprobable that the greater portion of those metalswhich were drawn to Europe from the mines wasappropriated to coin. These circumstances mayin some measure account for the rate of the pricesof general commodities not having fallen, thoughthe mass of material wealth had increased fasterthan the metallic wealth by which its value wasmeasured.After the destruction of the Republic under theconsulate, but more under the Empire, some degreeof security was given to property in France. Thelove of magnificence was displayed in the use of224 RETURN OF TRANQUILLITY, chap. xxiv.gold and silver utensils and ornaments, but theapprehensions of the rest of Europe from the ambitioustendency of France communicated littlefeeling of security to the continental kingdoms.It was not till the fall of the empire and the establishmentof general tranquillity that the coinwhich had been borrowed from the plate was inany great measure restored to its former use.It would be anticipating the subject of a futurechapter to do more than remark that the establishmentof the peace of 1815, and the state of generalsecurity and tranquillity which followed it, havetogether had the effect of withdrawing from coinand applying to luxury much of the preciousmetals.CHAP. xxr. CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES. QQ5CHAPTER XXV.On the production of gold and silver from the end of the year1809 to the end of 1829."We are now arrived at a period when a greatand sudden change took place in the production ofthe mines of gold and silver. After a space ofmore than three centuries, during the whole ofwhich there had been a constant increase of thequantities obtained, and each succeeding decennialperiod yielding a larger portion than the similarnumber of years that preceded it, the whole of themines in every part of the western continent declinedgreatly in their produce ; and though theyhave in some measure been restored, it has beenby slow degrees, and they are yet very far fromhaving approached the copious produce which theyyielded before their general abruption from Europeangovernment.As Mexico is that division of America which Mexico,contains the largest population, and yields thegreatest portion of the precious metals, it naturallyclaims our first attention. Xo contrast can begreater than is exhibited during the three centurieswhich preceded its convulsions, and the twentyyears which have passed since their commencement.The troubles of Mexico began with the firstVOL. II. QPOLITICAL EVENTS CHAP. XXV.invasion of Spain by the French. When the intelligenceof the capture of the royal family andthe transactions at Bayonne reached that country,the Viceroy Iturrigaray seems to have acted anindecisive part, as if balancing in his mind whetherto yield to the power Buonaparte had assumedover all the Spanish dominions, or to acknowledgeand obey the newly created Junta of Seville, whohad claimed similar power. The old Spaniards inthe capital composed a faction which had been thechief instrument of each successive viceroy incontinuing the authority of Spain. They seizedthe viceroy, and under the pretence of an accusationof heresy, committed him to the prison of theinquisition, and from thence transferred him toSpain, where, though imprisoned for some years,his conduct was never investigated.In the course of three centuries the mass ofenergetic inhabitants had become composed of thenatives of the soil, but descended from Spanishancestors. They were treated by the Europeans,who exercised political and judicial power, andwere the richest part of the population, as an inferiorclass. Among these, called the Creoles,discontent was generated and rapidly extended ;and as the great body of the Indians were easilyinfluenced by them through the priests, a changewas operated which quickly converted the languid,simple, and superstitious natives into furious, vindictive,and unfeeling revolutionists. A feebleCHAP. XXV.IN MEXICO. 227and unstable provincial government of nearly twoyears fanned the embers of insurrection, though itsuspended the explosion till 1810, when it burstforth with dreadful fury.The priests were the chief actors in counciland the leaders in the field of the armies of theinsurgents. Their watchwords were. King Ferdinand,God, and the Virgin of Guadaloupe.These operated powerfully on an ignorant population,who had been taught that the old Spaniardswere desirous of delivering Mexico to the Buona-artists and the Atheists. The agitation amongthe peasantry and miners in the provinces remotefrom the capital had been at work nearly twoyears, when, in September, 1810, it burst forth inall its fury. Hidalgo, a priest of Dolores, after anenthusiastic harangue whose effect is representedas an electric operation, was soon enabled tocollect around him forty thousand men. He wasspeedily joined by native regular regiments, both ofcavalry and infantry, and immediately marched toGuanaxuato, the capital of the mining district,a city then said to have been peopled with eightythousand inhabitants, and to have contained silverin coin and bars to the amount of five milliondollars. The garrison was small, and the inhabitantsdisaffected, and the hordes of Hidalgo wereadmitted without opposition. He established atthat place a kind of government, and by the helpof some officers of the army who had joined him,Q 2228 POLITICAL EVENTSCHAP. XXV.introduced some military arrangements among hisfollowers. He established a mint for coining thesilver, directed the bell-founders to cast cannon,and employed the most skilful mechanics andartists he could procure to work the mines. Adeputation from Valladolid, a city of forty thousandinhabitants, invited Hidalgo to visit thatplace, and receiving there fresh accessions of numbers,he marched to take possession of Mexico,the capital.The insurgents appeared before Mexico witha force of regulars and irregulars amounting tomore than seventy thousand, who could be opposedbut by a few, and those ill-disciplinedtroops. The viceroy had sent two divisions ofhis forces in different directions, who had unitedin the rear of the insurgents ; this so alarmed thelatter, that they abandoned the attack on thecapital, and retired upon Guanaxuato. They werethere attacked and defeated, and the city wasoccupied by the royalists, who inflicted the mostsummary and barbarous vengeance on the inhabitants.Hidalgo collected the remnant of his forces andretired upon Guadalaxara, where the standard ofrevolt had been erected. Here again he was defeatedand his army dispersed ; but as fast as areverse was experienced in one part of the country,such was the state of excitement, that equal numbersquickly appeared in arms in some other.CHAP. XXV. IN MEXICO. 229Hidalgo was however at length entrapped andput to death. Other adventurers succeeded himin the command, sometimes of large bodies,and sometimes of only irregular and fugitivebands. The most distinguished of the leadersof the bands, Rayon, Tern, and the energeticpriest Morellos, were in succession taken and executed; but the restoration of tranquillity, andthat of a doubtful nature, was not accomplishedbefore the year 1815. It was, however, a trucerather than a settled peace ; for a small expeditionunder the younger Mina, with a few hundred adventurerscollected in Europe and in the UnitedStates of America, was sufficient again to kindleinto action the turbulent spirits of Mexico. Thatbold young man with some of his followers were,after wonderful bravery and perseverance, takenand executed ; but not till in their operationsthey had destroyed the great works of the mineof Valencianana. The Spanish authority which hadbeen re-established over the exhausted countrycould do but little to restore prosperity in theshort interval, till the revolution in Spain itselfburst forth and soon spread to Mexico.The Cortes of Spain, whatever love of freedomthey may have expressed as regards the Europeanpeninsula, certainly discovered no disposition todiminish the authority their predecessors in powerhad exercised over the transatlantic dominions.230 DECLINING PRODUCE CHAP. XXV.A viceroy appointed by the Cortes arrived inMexico just as the authority of those who commissionedhim had been disowned in that country.A general who had led the Spanish armies, Turbid,placed himself and the troops he commandedat the head of a revolution. The viceroycould not resist, and he either joined oraffected to join with them, but was removed bydeath before his designs could be developed.The power fell into the sole hands of Turbid,who attempted to retain it under that kind ofrepresentative government which, whenever theexperiment has been attempted, has utterly failedof success. He was nominated president, andafterwards emperor ; he abdicated, banished himself,returned again to try his influence, and onlanding was paid the penalty of his folly by thehands of military executioners.In the seven years that have passed since thatevent, a variety of projects of constitutions havebeen tried, a variety of rebellions have been raised,and in spite of loans originating in the knaveryacting upon the folly of Europeans, bankruptcyhas ensued, and scarcely a symptom of order, andnone of prosperity, has yet appeared.This slight historical sketch of the events inMexico for the last twenty years seemed necessary,in order to explain the causes of thedefalcation in the produce of the mines of thatCHAP. XXV. OF VARIOUS MINES. 231country, which is exhibited between that periodand the preceding one of the same number ofyears.The greatest contrast was between the years1809 and 1812. In the first of these, the moneycoined at the mint of Mexico was twenty-sixmillion one hundred and seventy-two thousandnine hundred and eighty-two dollars in gold andsilver ; and in the second only four million fourhundred and nine thousand two hundred andsixty-six. In the latter years, indeed, othermints were established — one in Durango, whichcoined eight hundred and eight thousand sevenhundred and ninety-two; and another in Zacca-teas, which furnished nearly one million fivehundred thousand.Besides the destruction of the works, whichwas considerable, the withdrawing of the capitalemployed in mining had a most injurious effect.The capitalists, whether engaged in mining, incommerce, or in agriculture upon a large scale,were disposed to fly from a country liable to theplunder and oppression of riotous and destroyingmobs. We learn from Mr. Ward's work, thatthough, after the suppression of the insurgents inJ 815, some small Spanish capitalists prosecutedsuccessfully some works at Catorce, Zaccatecas,and Sombrerete, yet, on the declaration of independencein 1821, most of them withdrewtheir capitals and returned to Spain or France,232 DECLINING PRODUCE chap. xxv.some with sixty or seventy thousand dollars.Thus the country suffered a loss which none ofthe successive governments upon the republicanplan were enabled to repair, because no confidencecould be placed on the stability of anylaws that were enacted, or on that of the individualsto whom the execution of them werecommitted.Whilst Mexico and the continental Spanishsettlements in America have been injured bythe flight of the capitalists, who were, generallyspeaking, the most intelligent, honest, and activepart of the community, the Island of Cuba, andthe southern part of Spain itself, and, in a lessdegree, the south of France, have been muchbenefited by the accession of capital which therefugees have transferred to those districts,though it was only the remnant of their formerfortunes.Mr. Ward, in his valuable work on Mexico,has communicated several facts relating to thedefalcation in the mines during the fifteen yearsof the civil wars, which serve to show the mostprominent districts where the diminution was felt.*' In Guanaxuato,'* he says, *' the amount of theprecious metals diminished from eight millioneight hundred and fifty-two thousand four hundredand seventy-two marcs of silver, and twenty-seventhousand eight hundred and ten marcs ofgold (the produce of the fifteen years precedingCHAP. XXV. OF VARIOUS MINES. 233the revolution) to two million eight hundred andseventy-seven thousand two hundred and thirteenmarcs of silver, and eight thousand one hundredand nine marcs of gold. At Zaccatecas thedifference appears to have been inconsiderable,amounting only to a decline of two million onehundred and sixty thousand nine hundred andsixty-three in the fifteen years of convulsion, ascompared with the iuniiediate period of the samelength which preceded it"The mines of Sombrerete declined in producefrom five hundred thousand to three hundredthousand annually. The produce of the minesof Catorce, which was second only to that ofGuanaxuato in the amount of silver raised, beingnearly three millions of dollars annually, was soreduced as to yield, on the average of the fifteenyears from the commencement of the insurrections,no more than five hundred and ninety-ninethousand four hundred dollars. The produce ofthe Biscaina vein at Real del Monte in sevenfavourable years before the revolution was sixmillion of dollars, or eight hundred and fifty-seventhousand and forty-two per annum ; andfrom 1809 to 1823 it only yielded, in all, twohundred thousand dollars, or at the rate offourteen thousand two hundred and eighty-fiveon the average of the period.Sec Ward's Mexico vol. ii. p. 19.284 DECLINING PRODUCE chap. xxv.'* If," says Mr. Ward, " it were possible toobtain returns from the other mining districts,the disproportion between the produce before andafter the year 1810 would be found to be equallystriking. In each district the principal mineswere abandoned, the machinery was allowed togo to ruins, and the silver raised was merely thegleanings of more prosperous times ; the workings(where any were attempted) being confined almostentirely to the upper levels \The only exception to this general decline wasin the mines of Vasco, which was a military stationconstantly defended by a numerous body ofroyalist troops. Though once taken by the insurgents,it was speedily retaken, and the Tribunalde siberia undertook to work the mines whichhad formerly been the property of Labor, a mancelebrated for wealth acquired by mining, andtheir operations were attended with such successthat the annual produce amounted to four hundredthousand dollars.It is a fact," remarks Ward, *' universallyadmitted, that in almost all the mining districts,although the towns have been ruined by the emigrationof the wealthy inhabitants, whose capitalswere formerly invested in mining operations, thelower classes have, throughout the revolution,found means to draw their subsistence from theWard's Mexico vol. ii. p. 21.CHAP. XXV. OF VARIOUS MINES. ^35mines. Under the denomination of huscones, orsearchers, they have never ceased to work ; andalthough, from the want of method in their operations,they have done the most serious injury tothe mines themselves, they have in general contrivedto extract from the upper levels, or fromthe old workings, neglected in better times forothers of greater promise, a very considerablequantity of silver. This desultory system is stillpursued in many parts of the country, and atZirmapan, Zaculapan, el Doctor, and many ofthe northern districts, a large population is evennow maintained by it \'*The silver obtained during the revolutionaryconvulsions which agitated the country with moreor less violence during the whole period we areconsidering was of very various degrees of fineness,as appears by the dollars coined both atthe royalist and the insurgent mints. Much ofthe silver coined in that time in those places wasso impure from the mixture of other substancesarising from the haste with which it was necessaryto convert it into coin, that at the present time itcan only pass current at a discount of from fifteento twenty per cent. ; but, on the other hand, muchof the gold contained in the silver, which wasconsiderable in some of the mines, was not seawardvol. ii. p. 24.236 DECLINE IN PRODUCE chap. XXV.rated from it, partly owing to there being noestablishment for that purpose near the mines, butchiefly from the despatch which the domestic stateof affairs rendered indispensable, in issuing thecoined money. Many millions of these last dollarsin the course of circulation found their wayto Europe, when the refiners in London and Paris,to their great gain, soon separated the gold fromthe silver. The dollars of that description haveat length almost wholly disappeared, but theirmelting has added considerably to the stock ofgold in Europe.Mr. Ward has traced with much inquiry andapparent accuracy the effect which the melancholypolitical events of Mexico have had on the productof the chief commodities of the territory,gold and silver. He very properly has judged thequantity of coin fabricated ^ as the best scale bywhich to form a judgment, and has corrected hisestimate by what information he could obtain respectingthe actual produce of the mines, and bythe number of dollars which were exported toother parts of the world.He has made a different division of the seriesof years from the one here adopted, having framedtables of fifteen years each, — one from 1796 to1810 inclusive, the other from 1811 to 1825;See Appendix, No. 7-CHAP. XXV. OF VARIOUS MINES. 237whilst, ill pursuance of our general plan, the viewwe now take must be of twenty years, from 1810to 1829, both years inclusive. Mr. Ward's returnscome down no lower than the end of theyear 1825, and there are consequently the fouryears from that time to the end of 1829 in whichwe must rely on information from other and uncertainsources, though analogy will be a sufficientguide to prevent any error of consequence. Directionshave been sent to our diplomatic residentsin the several mining countries, in consequence ofa motion made by the Marquis of Vanstone inthe House of Lords in 1830, to transmit accurateaccounts of the gold and silver they have recentlyyielded, but the returns to those orders have notyet arrived. The inspection of them would havebeen beneficial to this inquiry, but though theirdetails must be dispensed with, they cannot be ofmuch effect on our calculation of the whole periodof twenty years which we are now reviewing.Accounts are continually received of the advancesmade in mining operations. The writersare, for the most part, men engaged in variousemployments for the benefit of the companies ofEuropeans who have embarked capitals in theMexican mines. Such persons are necessarily sanguinein their expectations, and are not likely toform calculations of the future produce of themines below what may be realised : they are more238 DECLINING PRODUCE CHAP. XXV.likely to fall into the opposite error, and rather toover than under-state the expected produce. Thehighest estimate of what may be the actual coinagedoes not carry it higher than twelve milliondollars, which it is said " will probably be attainedby the year 1830."A periodical work entitled the *' QuarterlyMinime: Review," four numbers of which haveappeared in London, gives a variety of detailsof the operations of the several adventurers inAmerica, into which it is not within the compassof the plan of this inquiry to enter. It is, however,impossible to go through the pages of thatwork without coming to the conclusion that whatevermay be the future products of their undertakings,they have not had hitherto the effect ofincreasing the quantity of gold and silver raisedin Mexico to an extent much beyond what wasproduced in the year 1825, when their works hadscarcely commenced. In that year, by the statementin the Appendix, No. 7> it is seen that themints of Mexico, Guadalaxara, Durango, and Zac-cates together produced ten million seven hundredand forty-two thousand eight hundred andsixty-five dollars. As some progress may havebeen since made, we can scarcely be subject to anyerror in allowing for the years 1826 and 1827 theproduct to have amounted to eleven million fivehundred thousand dollars, and for the years 1828CHAP. XXV. OF VARIOUS MINES. 239and 18^29, twelve million dollars. Upon this modeof calculating, the whole gold and silver whichMexico yielded in the twenty years from the beginning;of 1810 to the end of 18f29 would amountto two hundred and twenty million forty thousandtwo hundred dollars, or an annual averageof eleven millions, being, at the rate hithertoassumed of four shillings and two-pence the dollar,in sterling money two million two hundredand ninety-one thousand six hundred pounds.Besides that which was coined into money, thereappears also to have been produced some silver inbars and some gold in ingots, which were deliveredto the treasury. It is shown in the Appendix,No. 7> that this, in the thirty-five years from 1791to 1825, was about ten million five hundred thousandounces of silver, and one hundred and fifteenthousand one hundred and thirty ounces of gold,amounting to near three million pounds sterling,or on the average of the thirty-five years to eighty-fivethousand seven hundred pounds yearly. Thissum is, however, counterbalanced by a greateramount of the precious metals, which, strange as itmay appear, Mexico actually imported from Europe.We find from Mr. Ward ' that three hundred andninety-six ingots of gold and four thousand twohundred and sixty-three ounces of doubloons,amounting together to one million six hundredWard's Mexico, vol. ii. p. 17-240 Guatemala. CHAP. XXV.and thirty-six thousand and forty dollars, were remittedfrom London by the house of Goldsmithand Co., as a part of the first loan ; which sum wasrecoined and included in the coinage of 1825, andseems to account for the excess of gold coined inthat particular year being so far above every otherthat had preceded it. We have the same authorityfor the fact that about that time the UnitedMexican Company remitted from London threehundred thousand dollars in gold.These amounts were thus nearly equal to thebars and ingots brought to the treasury in thoseyears; and we therefore may rest satisfied that theaverage annual amount of the produce of the minesin the twenty years from 1810 to 1829 could notexceed, if it amounted to, eleven million dollars.In Guatimala, or as it has been recently denominatedthe Republic of Central America, itappears some small portion of both the metals havebeen produced and coined into money. Whateverof gold and silver had been collected in Guatimalawas included in the returns from Mexico before1820. Since that period a mint has been established,whose operations may be judged of fromthe following account, obtained by a late visitorin that country, who, from his official situationmust have been enabled to procure correct information\Thompson's Narrative of a Visit to Guatimala, p. 520.CHAP. XXV.Guatemala.Year.Marks of silver.sparks of gold.Value in colla41,300351,12745,808389,37616,214137,82134,028314,2026,475126,578First sixmonths of12,155127,7511,446,855This amounts to three hundred and one thousandfour hundred and twenty-eight poundssterling in the five years and a half. From theunsettled state of public affairs in that districtsince 182o, it cannot be supposed much improvementhas been experienced, and it is notprobable that the four years and a half which havepassed since the termination of the above statementcould have yielded more than at the recordedrate, or that the whole of the ten yearsfrom 1820 to 1829 produced more than halfa million sterling.The most melancholy picture presents itself inthis, as in every portion of Spanish South Americato which our views can be directed. It is not thebusiness of this inquiry to trace the causes of thesufferings that have been endured in the smallerportions of that country, nor even to notice themfarther than as they may have effected a diminutionin the products of the precious metals.Columbia, as the ancient Spanish viceroyalty of Columbia.New Granada is now called, including what wasVOL. II. R242 MINES INCHAP. XXV.formerly the government of Caracas, has, perhaps,suffered more, and for a longer period, thanany other part of the southern continent. Its chiefproduce, as far as our purpose requires notice,was gold. This was procured in two ways: eitherby alluvial washing, or by river washing. Thefirst of these modes was practised exclusively byslaves; and some proprietors of those unfortunatebeings destined them to that occupation alone.The auriferous soils are moist in tropical climates,and peculiarly unhealthy; and the excessive labourrequired a constant supply to keep up the numberof labourers. Ashen the internal troubles brokeout in 1810 and 1811, those who obtained possessionof power issued decrees pronouncing freedomto the slaves, which, with whatever intentionit might have been designed, only increased themisery of their condition ; for wherever they werefound they were pressed into the military serviceof the several contending factions, who happenedto gain a temporary superiority in any of thedistricts.For some years past this operation of alluvialwashing for gold has been confined to secludedindividuals, who by their distance from the immediateseat of hostilities continued the employment,but with very little profit. This kind oflabour has been generally diverted to others ofa more profitable description. The soil on thealluvial land is naturally fertile, and with littleCHAP. XXV. Columbia. Oisindustry yields rich returns ; and on good authoritywe are assured that, " Lands which wereformerly only occupied for the purpose of goldwashing, have been converted into the rich fieldsof alio Negro, Medallion, and Antoquia, wherescarcely any persons now occupy themselves withgold washing." The river washing is at presentthe most extensively practised. The sand at thebottom of the rivers abounds in particles of goldand platina ; but this labour is attended withlittle profit. It is carried on by an indolentmixed race of independent peasants, who havefew wants, and who, by some exertion and occasionalsuccess, gain sufficient to subsist on veryscanty resources. According to the reports whichare entitled to most credit, the chief supply ofgold has been derived from this kind of labour,but the representations of its quantity are liable tomuch exaggeration ; and the accounts transmittedto Europe having been mostly written under theexcitement of the temporary mining mania whichprevailed a few years ago, should be received withgreat doubt, and believed with great hesitation.We know, generally, that gold and silver inColumbia, as in other parts of South America,only circulate when converted into coin ; that theinterest of money in the form of coin is very high,according to several accounts from one to two percent,per month with the best security, and thatR '2244 MINES IN CHAP. XXV.therefore it must be the natural tendency of eachto convert gokl dust into doubloons, or the half,quarter, or eighth parts of doubloons, as fast as themints can coin them.It is, then, on the produce of these mints thatreliance must be placed in calculating the goldand silver which the different modes of goldwashing yield. As the coining apparatus is bad,and the work performed is slow, there is, or was,for we have heard that great improvements havebeen lately introduced, a delay in the operationwhich, when interest was so high as we havestated, led to the introduction at the mints ofsome gold collected by private persons in theform of dust. The directors of the mint at Bogotapurchased such gold dust of those who hadcollected it, and coined it into doubloons andtheir subdivisions. By this operation a gain wasmade, between 1810 and 1823, of six hundredand seventy-seven thousand seven hundred andforty-six dollars, or one hundred and forty-onethousand one hundred and eighty-five poundssterling. This gain, however, did not far exceedthe current rate of high interest then paid intransactions between private individuals.There are two mints in the Republic of Columbia,at Bogota and Popayan. No exact accountshave been procured later than the end ofthe year 1825, but there is no reason to supposeCUAP. XXV.COLUMBIA. 245that any great alteration has taken place in thefour years after that date, and we may safelyadmit the presumption, that the average of thosefour years has been the same as the average of thefour years that immediately preceded them.The portion of silver produced in Columbia, asappears by the mint returns, is very inconsiderable,though sanguine adventurers have represented itas a most abundant substance. What is, however,afforded, is chiefly found impregnated with a largeproportion of gold. In the mine of ]Mozart,which yielded the most, the metal is said to haveconsisted of three parts silver, and one part gold.This metal was then ground to powder, and inthat mixed state conveyed to the mint and sold,where the two metals were separated and thencoined.An account of the gold and silver coined atthe mint of Bogota from the year 1810 to Iso,and calculated to the end of 1829 : —Year.Dollars in gold.Dollars in silver.Total.1,004,9699,1371,014,1061,017,7539,0371,026,790943,573 >1,146,552 S19,5502,109,6751,110,507^1,062,650 I53,7752,226,932Carried forward 6,377>503246 MINES INCHAP, XXV.Year, Dollars in gold. Dollars in silver. Total.Brought forward 6,377.5031816 761,220 11818 837,494 11820 1,247,4591821 1,293,4321822 1,037,0071823 759,366SI 37.400 1,660,23664,025 2,604,9161824 576,496 ? not given,1825 573,649 5 average assumed41,012 1,877,3852,050,880Dollars 16,407,042Supposing 1826, 27, 28, and 29 to havebeen equal to 1822, 23, 24, and 25,it would be . . . . 3,928,26520)20,335,307Average of the years . . . 1,016,760Or in sterling, annually . . £211,708The gold and silver which are yielded in thesouthern part of Columbia, including that whichwas formerly a part of Peru and then called thekingdom of Quito, but now a department of Columbia,are coined at the mint of Popayan. Thereturns from thence are as follows :CHAP. XXV.COLUMBIA.Account of the gold and silver coined at themint of Popayan from 1810 to 1825.Years.Dollars in gold.Dollars in silver,Total.886,056886,056/}no returns.c236,909236,909703,372703,372779,362779,362566,722566,722}no returns.495,8486,795502,643840,56316,043856,606742,97816,936759,9148)5,291,584Average of eight years 661,448This account, deficient as it is, is the only documentwe have been able to procure of a statisticalkind, and as the least unsatisfactory way of framingany calculation, it has appeared best to assume thatthe eight years of which there are no accounts, andthe four years since 1825, were as productive asthe average of the years for which we have returns.The want of accounts probably arises fromthe excess of turbulence and the continued internalagitations of the several years. Perhapsthat average is higher than can be justified, but as248 MINES IN COLUMBIA. CHAP. XXV.it will give a result different from the views wehave formed, it may be admitted at least as fairand candid, though it may somewhat over-state the.actual produce. AVe assume, then, that the twelveyears yielded on an average six hundred and sixty-onethousand four hundred and forty-eight dollars,or the whole twenty years thirteen million twohundred and twenty-eight thousand nine hundredand sixty dollars, or two million seven hundredand one thousand and thirty-three pounds, or annuallyone hundred and thirty-five thousand andfifty-one pounds \ ,We thus arrive at a result, deficient certainlyin accuracy and depending on probability only,that the mines of the whole of Columbia yieldedin the twenty years in question of gold and silvertogether to the amount of six million nine hundredand eighty-seven thousand five hundred andfifty-four pounds sterling, or at the rate of threehundred and forty-six thousand seven hundredand fifty-nine pounds annually.We have given no importance to the attemptsAn anonymous work published by Murray in 1827, byan English officer in the Columbian service, says, page 304,The quint or fifth of the gold yielded to the governmentthis year ( 1 826) thirty-two thousand seven hundred and forty-sevendollars, but the minister anticipates for the present yearan improvement in this branch of the revenue which will raiseit to fifty thousand." If this be a correct statement, the estimatehere made of the recent produce of Columbia must befar too high.CHAP. XXV.MINES IN PERU. 249made by joint-stock companies in England to workmines of the precious metals in Columbia. Theydo not appear to have had any effect in increasingthe products, nor are the prospects of futureoperations more cheering than the retrospect ofthe past transactions.The ancient Spanish viceroyalty, now the re- Peru.public of Peru, was highly productive of gold andsilver up to the troubles which agitated the country.These commenced in 1810, but were not severelydisastrous till 1814, when the mines graduallysunk till 1820. Then a kind of revival was perceived,till the operations carried on from Chiliunder the direction of General San Martin andLord Cochrane created fresh sufferings. Afterwards,the invasion from Columbia by Bolivarseems to have renewed the distress and diminishedthe products of the mines. Not only the failureof the mines, but the banishment of the mostwealthy, active, and intelligent inhabitants, theold Spaniards, contributed to deprive the countryof that capital without which mining can be butfeebly conducted.The banishment of the proprietors was carriedto such an extent that, though they were happyto escape with their lives and the wi-necks of theirproperty, there was exported from Peru in thesix years between 1819 and 1825 double thequantity of gold and silver which the mines hadyielded in those years.250 MINES INCHAP. XXV.Within the period we are considering no statisticalreturns have been procured except of thesilver for the first eleven years, which are asfollows :Year.Dollars.4,433,5813,963,5663,659,2823,409,5942,776,7602,494,4222,924,6272,653,0422,755,5922,942,2443,573,90735,586,617The only authentic information respecting thestate of the mines comes down no lower than theyear 1826. At that time high expectations wereindulged of a great extension of mining operationswhich was to arise from the application of Englishcapital. The account of the calamitous crisis withwhich England was visited at the end of the year1825 had not reached Peru when the descriptionsof the state of the mines here referred to were collected,and they must be considered as dictatedin some measure by the high state of excitementwhich was then in action in Peru,Owing to the revolution which broke out atLima in 1820, no documents or even intelligenceCHAP. XXV,PERU. 251can be obtained, as the tribunal of the mines hadceased to exist. The machinery of the mints atLima and Cusco had been wantonly injured, andall information from them was materially checked.In 1825 no more than eight hundred thousanddollars were coined, and in the present year (1826),though the mints are conducted under British superintendence,it is not expected that more thanone million five hundred thousand will be coined.The principal mines have been abandoned, thechief causes of which have been, the want of quicksilver,the decrease of population, and the inundations.It is, however, not unlikely that thewhole of the mines between 1820 and 1825 mayhave yielded near three millions of dollars in valueannually, as much of the silver in a rude state wastaken away from the mines by the different armiesthat occupied the country."The only estimate which can be formed of whatamount has been produced since 1825 must befrom some communications on the existing stateof the mines in 1826, which are entitled to creditfrom the character of the individual who has transmittedthem ; though subsequent events wouldcompel us to make some allowance for the sanguineexpectations then entertained.The following is an abridgment of the communicationshere referred to of the state of the minesin the several departments into which Peru hasbeen divided by its republican rulers.^Z5Q, REVIEW OF THECHAP. XXV.intendancy she iiiiiies of Hualgavoc and the adjoining; hillsofTruxiUo, ^ ^ J &now de ^rc the richest in Peru. The average returns forapartment of ^Libertas. many years were seven hundred thousand dollars,but since 1802 the produce has gradually decreased,and yielded in 1825 only three hundredand seventy thousand dollars. Two British merchantshave lately purchased some very valuablemines in these hills, and have proceeded to Englandfor the purpose of engaging engineers andpurchasing machinery.Intendancy 'pj^o celebrated mines of Pasco are situated inof Parma,now de this department. They abound in silver, copper,apartment of ^innin. iron, and lead, and good coal is also found in thesame neighbourhood. These mines, about theyear 1794, are said to have yielded more than twomillion dollars. An English company has purchasedsome of the principal mines of Pasco, butdoubts are entertained as to the permanency ofthis company, as the subscribers are alarmed at theexpenses already incurred and at the still furthercalls upon them.Intendancy, 'Y\\Q niincs in this department, though at worknow depart ^ "-'ment, of Jq 1820, are all now abandoned.Lima.Intendancy The mines In this department formerly producedofGua- .manna, now considerable quantities of silver, but are now aban-departmentofAyachuco. toned from having become inundated, and thusrequiring a large capital to render them again productive.now'dt^'an- '^^^^ mines of Calliope are still productive, butment, of ^^om those of Huantaiaya and Santa Rosa only aArequipa. J J jCHAP. XXV.MINES IN PERU. 253small quantity of silver is now produced. Themines of Huantajaya have lately been purchasedby an English merchant, who has proceeded toEngland for the purpose of engaging a companyto work them. The disadvantage of these minesis the want of fresh water.Silver abounds in this department. The famous intendancy,n T • 1 J r r> "°^^ departingof Layacota is now the property or an tenement ofglish merchant. The principal obstacle to itsworking; is the great lodgement of water in theO o oshaft, which, it is said, can be drained off by an oldadit.It will be seen by these extracts that the chiefhope of restoring the mines of Peru to a state oftolerable productiveness depended on the expectationthat the various companies in England formed,or about to be formed in 182.5, would furnish thecapital required for their restoration. The fate ofthose companies is now too well known to affordany expectation that they have supplied any effectiveaid since 1826. We therefore conclude, that themines which had been abandoned at that time havecontinued in the same dismantled and unproductivestate.For the purpose of completing the plan hereadopted, it is necessary to have recourse to someassumption, and we shall take as the ground ofthat assumption the highest estimate that is to befound in any accounts we have been able to collect.This, written in 1826, expresses an expectantPRODUCT OF PERU.CHAP. XXV.tion that the whole of the mines may producemore than one million five hundred thousand dollars,which shall be taken as two million.The whole production of silver in Peru thenmay be brought into one view as follows :Dollars.In the eleven years from 1810 to 1820^ bothyears included . . . 35,586,617In the five years, 1821, 1822, 1823, 1824,and 1825, the same amount as in the fivepreceding years, which appears to be . 14,849,412In the four 'years, 1826, 1827, 1828, and1829, at the annual rate of £2,000,000 8,000,000Amount of silver in twenty years . 58,436,029During the period in question we have noreturns of the gold from Peru, except forsix years from 1800 to 1805, in which theproduce was 1,875,723 dollars, or an annualamount of 312,620 dollars. Thestate of the hostilities must have diminishedthe produce in the fourteen subsequentyears; but we may estimate the wholetwenty years at that rate, being . 6,252,400Produce of gold and silver . • 64,688,429Or in sterling £13,476,751Or annually £ 673,837Buenos The Viceroyalty of Buenos Ayres or La Plata,which, as has been before stated, comprehended inits western limits the district since erected intowhat has been called the republic of Bolivia, seemsto have suffered more in its mining operations thanCHAP. XXV.BUENOS AYIIES. 255any other part of Spanish America except Columbia.The produce of the precious metals beforethe time of its revolutionary sufferings amountedannually to about four million two hundred andsixty thousand dollars, but since the commencementof those disastrous events it has graduallyat first and rapidly of late years declined. Thisseems to have been owing in a great part to thericher proprietors having been attached to the causeof Spain, and to the Indians having followed theirbenefactors. But when the Liberators invadedthose peaceful spots, the proprietors were eitherbanished orput to death, and their followers pressedinto the military service of the invaders. TwoEnglish travellers have visited those countries, andthough it is evident from the spirit of their worksthat their feelings were engaged on the side ofthe invaders or liberals, yet the picture they giveof the effects of this liberal desolation are so connectedwith the subject of decreased production ofthe precious metals that they are highly deservingof attention. Their description, though hereonly applied to one particular portion of theliberated continent of South America, may withfew exceptions be considered as equally applicableto every part of that vast tract of country.Captain Andrews passed from the city of BuenosAyres by Juijui Salta and Truman to Potosi.Nothing can be more melancholy than the descriptionhe gives of the whole district, but espe-256 POTOSI.CHAP. XXVchilly of the mining operations: he says (vol. ii.p. 17), " the celebrated mines of El Pan de Azucar,Rosario, and the golden Lavaderos of the Incogwere abandoned." "TheBineros or Lavaderosof the province so much spoken of as producingabundance of gold in dust, grains, and scales, yieldingnever less than twenty-three carats, have beenabandoned, though not one-third worked." AtTupiza the captain examined some mines on whichGeneral Planets, who fell in defence of theSpanish authority, had expended half a million ofdollars. The machinery in these mines was in amost dilapidated state, and the admits, though notquite finished, were already nearly choked up.The account the same author gives of the neighbourhoodof Potosi, which he visited in 18^6, containsstriking proofs of a vast decline. " From apopulation of one hundred and thirty thousandat the commencement of the revolution, Potosidwindled to nine thousand in 1826, but duringthe administration of General Miller had increasedagain to eleven thousand ^ ." At one period therewere one hundred and thirty-two stamping millsat work, but when Captain Andrews was there nomore than twelve were employed: he says, " manyof the emigrant proprietors obtained leave to returnand claim their property. These persons,however, have not a shilling to set the works1 Vol. ii. p. 115.CUAP. XXV. POTOST. '2.37going again, all their money having been sweptaway."Sir Edward Temple visited the same districts inthe same years as Capt. Andrews, and like himseems to have been employed to purchase mines forsome of those numerous abortive companies at thatperiod formed or projected in England. His accountdiffers but little from that of the other traveller." The population of Oruro," he says,does not exceed four thousand souls, and thoseare in great indigence, owing to the destruction ofthe mines of silver and tin which formerly supporteda brisk and extensive commerce, now nearlyextinct from want of those resources which wereabsorbed in the all-consuming civil war" Heasserts that all the mines in Potosi put togetherdo not produce near two hundred thousand marcsof silver yearly; that the districts of Potosi, Poreand Chayanta, yielded in 1826 of silverone hundred and seventy-seven thousand one hundredand twenty-seven marcs, or about one millionfour hundred thousand dollars, and that by subsequentdisturbances that produce had been lessened- . This amount is represented to be derived*' from the accumulated scrapings of many needyindividuals, employing a few thousand dollars forthe means of mere subsistence, beyond which theyTemple's Travels, vol. ii. p. 29.- Idem, vol. ii. p. 2.52.VOL. II. S258 INTEREST ON MONEY. chap. xxv.have not funds to work." It may be naturallyconceived that persons of the class which are heredescribed may be easily driven from their labourwhenever civil dissensions expose their compendiousbut petty treasures to military plunder.No better evidence can be given of the want ofcapital in these countries than one fact whichTemple relates. He was enabled to lend a sumof money upon the security of goods of gold andsilver, which were deposited in his hands, at theenormous rate of two andahalfper cent, per month ;and this was considered a favour, the current rateof interest in Potosi having risen from three tofour per cent, per month, whilst in the city ofBuenos Ayres the rate was only fifteen per cent,per annum ^ .The same author remarks, "that the mania ofunceasing change, which has so conspicuouslymarked the conduct of the South Americans intheir plans and modes of government, has recentlyextended with a violence that has again throwninto convulsion nearly the whole of the vast continent."The evils of the revolution have visited this districtwith greater weight than any other part ofAmerica. It was early invaded from Buenos Ayres,and a body of troops from that city under Puyredontook possession of Potosi as early as 1812, and after^ Temple, vol. ii. p. 217-CHAP. XXV. CHILI. 2.59having plundered the miners and other inhabitants,were compelled to abandon the place, but carriedwith them the greater part of the metallic wealth.Since that time it has known no tranquil times.It may therefore be naturally concluded, thatvery little industry could have been applied tomining during the whole twenty years from 1810to 1830.It will not be calculating too low if we estimatethe whole period to have yielded in gold and silverthe annual amount of . 1,500,000 dollars,or in the whole period . 30,000,000 dollars,or in sterling money . 6,305,000 pounds,or on the average of the 20years . . . 315,250 pounds.During the twenty years under consideration the Chi,produce of the mines of Chili has varied very considerably,but especially that of silver. In the twoyears 1810 and 1811, the amount of the lattermetal was four hundred thousand dollars. In theyear 1812, the mines of the Sierra Amarga at Huascowere accidentally discovered, and the produce ofthat and the following year amounted to aboutone million six hundred thousand dollars. In 1814<and 1815, partly from the exhaustion of the veins,and partly from the troubled state of the country,the quantity yielded declined to one half, or eighthundred thousand dollars. From 1815 to 1825,the produce gradually diminished, and on the avers2260 CHILI. CHAP. XXV.age of those years afforded annually three hundredand twenty thousand dollars. In the years sincethat, by a private communication from an intelligentperson, a resident in Chili, lately arrived inthis country, the annual amount is stated to havecontinued at the same rate up to the present time.According to this view the whole amount of silverproduced in Chili in the twenty years from 1810to 1830 will appear to be seven millions two hundredand eighty thousand dollars.Gold was formerly collected in Chili in muchlarger quantities than it has been of late years.The mines of that metal have fallen into disuse,partly from the scarcity of labourers, and partlyfrom the greater wages that can be obtained byminers from working in the silver, but more especiallyin the copper mines.During 1810 and 1811, before the revolutionbegan, the produce of gold continued as before atnearly one thousand pounds weight yearly ; fromthat to 1815 the amount may be taken at notmore than five hundred pounds weight ; from theend of 1815 to the beginning of 1826, at fourhundred pounds, and for the last four years atonehundred and eighty-five pounds.It appears by this estimate that the whole ofthe gold produced in Chili in the twenty yearsfrom 1810 to 1829, both years included, amountedto forty-eight thousand six hundred and fortyCHAP. XXV. BllASIL. 261pounds, or five hundred and eighty-three thousandsix hundred and eighty ounces, which, whenvalued at sixteen dollars tothe ounce, make . . 9,338,880 dollars,to which adding the silveras before estimated . 7,280,000 dollars,showing the whole productto be . . . 1G,6 18,880 dollars,or in sterling money . 3,462,266 pounds,or on the average of thetwenty years . . 173,113 pounds.The produce of gold in Brasil has for many Brass.years been declining. The process of that declensionfrom 1752 to 1795 is to be seen in theAppendix, No. 8, when during that period it felloff more than one half in the province of MinasGeras, which was then and still is the chiefsource of gold. Since that period we have beenable to collect no statistical reports of the amountof the gold obtained, though, from the relationsof the most intelligent travellers who have visitedBrasil, there has been a continued decrease in theproduct.W. C. von Eschwege, a scientific German, whopaid much attention to the gold washings, statesthe amount of gold yielded by ]\Iinas Geras asthree-fourths of that in all the provinces, and affirmsthat, when he visited Brasil, the whole amount ofthe duty of one-fifth was three hundred and262 BRASIL.CHAP. XXV.sixty thousand crusades There are two kindsof crusades, one the old of four hundred trees, theother the new of four hundred and eighty trees.Taking the medium of these, or that the crusadesare one eighth part of a pound sterling, theamount of the quinto, or duty of a fifth, would beforty-five thousand pounds, and the gross producefive times as much, or two hundred and fivethousand pounds. We are disposed to think thatthis was near the average production of the periodunder consideration, from the coincidence to befound in the casual remarks of other travellers ;thus Roster, an Englishman, who resided in thenorth of Brasil, states the amount of the goldas two hundred thousand pounds. Major von .Scoffer, who visited the mining provinces ofBrasil in 1822, asserts that no more than twenty-fourarobas of gold were delivered in to thesmelting house at Villa Rica, in Minas Geras,in the preceding year". This would make thedecline in ten years to be from two hundred andfive thousand to thirty-five thousand pounds.There was probably a decline after the yearJournal von Brassilien^ oder vermischte nachrichten lausTressilian, auf wissenschaftlichen Risen gesammelt^ von W.C von Eschwege, Weimar, 1818.Tressilian als unabhangiges Reich gescliildert von Rittervon Scoffer, Major der K. Brasillischen Ehrengarde, &c. &c.Altona, 1824.CHAP. XXV.BRASIL. 26s1812. When the war between England and theUnited States of America began, the price ofcotton rose so high, that the labour of the slavesin Brasil was found to be much more profitablyemployed in the cultivation of that commoditythan in washing the sands for gold ; and sincethat war has ceased, the cultivation generally oftropical productions has been the most beneficialapplication of labour.It is shown by Eschwege, in an official documentwhich he procured in Brasil, that the employmentof about sixteen thousand persons inthe six hundred and thirty-one lavas or goldwashings in Minas Geras obtained gold to theamount of three hundred and eighteen thousandseven hundred and ninety miles, or seventy-ninethousand six hundred and ninety-seven pounds.From this must be deducted one-fifth for duty tothe crown, or fifteen thousand nine hundred andfifty-nine pounds, thus leaving sixty-three thousandsix hundred and thirty-eight pounds for the purchaseof slaves to replace such as might be wornout by the severe labour, and to maintain thewhole number of the persons employed \ As thenet amount of the gold seems to be little morethan four pounds per head, it cannot appear extraordinarythat such a description of industrySee Appendix, No. 9.264 BRASIL.CHAP. XXV.should be abandoned and exchanged for the moreprofitable employment of ciiltivatmg sugar, cotton,coffee, and the other productions of the surface ofthe country'. It seems probable, from what isknown of the state of society in Brasil, that theslaves of those employed in seeking for gold areso far cultivators of the soil as to raise sufficientfood for the workmen of the lavas : but if thatbe the case, and their subsistence is so procured,the small apparent profit would be insufficient topay interest on the capital invested in slaves,especially in districts where, as in Minas Geras,the common rate of interest is one per cent, permonth. The prospect of great sudden gain, whichis always before the eyes of those seeking for theprecious metals, may induce numbers to continuean employment which may be clearly seen by theCount ]\Iollien, in his Travels in Colombia remarks thata mine which employs sixty slaves, and produces twentypounds of gold annually, is considered a good estate." Atthis rate each man is calculated to produce the third of apound. The gold found there is only of eighteen carats, calledoro halo, and worth about forty pounds sterling. The labourof each slave, then, produces thirteen pounds six shillings andeight-pence. In Colombia, however, provisions are by nomeans so cheap as in Brasil, and the constant state of internalhostilities has made labourers scarce, as the negroes are readyor are compelled to become soldiers, and thus to leave the finestestablishments to abandonment and ruin. — Million's Colombia,p. 376.CHAP. XXV.BRASIL. 265cooler portion of mankind to be on the whole alosing pursuit.It has not been deemed necessary to enter intoany inquiry respecting the experiments making bycompanies formed in England for procuring goldfrom Brasil. The operations had produced noeffect on the period under our consideration.According to the accounts printed in the QuarterlyMining Review, the produce of gold withinthe last year seems to have been very considerablymore than the same districts had previously furnished.No data present themselves from which to form ajudgment either of the proportion of the expenditureto the proceeds, or of the probability of theproducts increasing or diminishing in future. Dr.Walsh, who visited Brasil in 1829, states that inthe first six months of that year the works atCongo Sac had yielded two thousand and thirty-sevenpounds of gold ^ . This would amount tobetween eighty and ninety thousand pounds sterling.The persons employed in those works appearto be one hundred and eighty Englishmen,and six hundred other individuals, chiefly slavesand their families who had been purchased by theassociation. A few years will probably enable thepublic as well as the adventurers to determine howfar the undertaking is likely to be profitable orWalsh's Travels in Brasil, vol. ii. p. 212.Q66 UNITED STATES.CHAP. XXVotherwise. At present, as in all mining undertakings,the expectations of the persons engagedare very sanguine.It may not be improper to notice a kind ofmania on the subject of gold mines, which at presentprevails in some part of the United States ofAmerica, although it is of too recent a date tohave any influence on the subject of this inquiry.As far as it extends, it may be compared withthe excitement created in Ireland a few years agoby the discovery of some small portions of gold inthe mountains of Wicklow.Some gold had been found in North Carolinaas early as 1824 ; the amount was then only six thousanddollars ; in 1825, it increased to seventeenthousand ; in 1826, it rose to twenty thousand ;in 1827, to twenty-one thousand ; in 1828, toforty-six thousand; and in 1829, to one hundredand twenty-eight thousand. Besides the attemptsmade in North Carolina in the year 1829, thesame spirit of searching was extended to Virginia,where it obtained two thousand five hundred dollars,and to South Carolina, which yielded threethousand five hundred dollars. This tendencyhas extended southward to Georgia, where a mineis said to have been discovered near Glanville, inHall county. It is called a ridge mine, and therocks, when pounded, produce gold in a greater orless quantity. "On the 21st September, 1830,seven hands procured two hundred and five penny-chap.XXV. RECAPITULATION. 267weights of pure gold, equal to one hundred andeighty dollars ; but this appears to have beenmuch more than the average produce of a day'slabour ^"The whole of the amount of the gold and silversupplied by the late Spanish dominions in Americamay now be brought under one view thus :-p . . Amount in dollarsDivisions. - ,in twenty years.Mexico 220,043,200Guatimala 2,893,710Columbia 33,564,267Peru 64,688,429Buenos Ayres . . . 30,000,000Chili 16,618,880367,808,486Or in sterling at 4*. 2d. the doUar £ 76,626,768To this may be added the produce of Brasil 4,110,000Whole produce of America . £80,736,768In Europe the produce of gold and silver has declined,when the average of the last twenty yearsis compared with that of the one hundred and tenyears which preceded it. This is the case withthe Austrian dominions. Up to the year 1773,Hungary and Siebenbiirgen yielded the amountof five million florins in gold and silver. Afterthat year it declined to half that sum, and in theQuarterly INIiniiig Review, No. 5, p. 96.268 WHOLE PRODUCT CHAP. XXV,last twenty years has scarcely exceeded three millions.Within the last sixteen years there has been agreat increase in the produce of gold and silverfrom the Russian mines. These are, indeed, inAsia, but as their supply is brought to the mint inEurope, and from thence circulated, it coincideswith the plan here adopted to consider their productin the same view with that of America andEurope.According to a communication from BaronHumboldt, made since his return from Asia, tothe editor of '* PofFendorf's Annalen," it appearsthat the annual produce of the precious metals ofEurope and of Asiatic Russia amounts to twenty-fivethousand five hundred marcs of gold, and twohundred and ninety-two thousand marcs of silver;of which seventy-six thousand five hundred of silverand twenty-two thousand of gold are supplied fromthe Russian empire". The value of this gold isabout seven hundred and twenty thousand pounds,and of the silver five hundred and thirty thousandpounds, being together one million two hundredand fifty thousand pounds annually, or in theperiod of twenty ^ years from 1810 to 1829, twenty-threemillions ; to this the supply from America,Andrew Necesse Zahlenstatistik, p. 153.^ See Appendix No. 10, for a more particular account ofthe produce of the Russian mines.^ Of late the silver in England has increased, chiefly fromCHAP. XXV. OF THE TWENTY YEARS.eighty million seven hundred and thirty-six thousand,being added, will make together one hundredand three million seven hundred and thirty-sixthousand pounds ; but as the mines of Russia inthe early part of the period were less productivethan towards the end of it, we may make an allowanceof the three millions seven hundred andthirty-six thousand pounds for that circumstance,and take the whole amount as one hundred millions,or five millions annually.that found in the lead in some of the northern mines. It issaid to have amounted to as much as one hundred and eightythousand pounds in value. On the whole term here considered,the amount here is but small, and it affects the calculation ofHumboldt in too slight a degree to make any alteration necessaryin the estimate he has formed.9.69GOLD AND SILVER CHAP. XXVI.CHAPTER XXVI.On the consumption of gold and silver in the twenty yearsbetween 1810 and 1819, but especially on the applicationof them to other purposes than coin.It might have been supposed that as approachesare made to recent times, there would have beenless difficulty in arriving at some approximation tothe quantity of the precious metals that is annuallywithdrawn from the circulating medium, or thatis intercepted in its progress from the mines beforeit has been converted into coin. There are somefacts that can be more accurately ascertained, andmany calculations which may be framed with moreconfidence, but still the field Is so large and the certaindata so few compared with those that are moreor less doubtful, that the inquirer, after the mostassiduous attention, and the most rigid examination,will admit his own conclusions with hesitation,and be too diffident to feel a very strongdesire to persuade others to adopt his views.In the vast field that lies before us, it is necessaryto select that part which can be most easily andmost accurately examined, and therefore the stateof our own country will receive the first consideration.The greater part of the application both of goldCHAP. XXVI.:\rANUFACTURERS. ^71and silver to other purposes than the fabrication ofmoney takes place in London ; but in Birminghammuch gold and some silver are annually appliedto various ornamental purposes. In Sheffieldthere is much use of silver, chiefly for plating.In Liverpool and Chester many watches and somejewellery are produced, and those articles whichare liable to the duty are assayed at the latter place.At Derby there are several manufacturers of jewelleryand gold articles, who produce goods of aquality superior in the fineness of the metal tothose made commonly in Birmingham, but perhapsinferior to the best London jewellery. At Newcastle,York, and Exeter, are manufactures of goldand silver goods, and of jewellery. In Scotlandand in Ireland the goods they make, whichare not liable to duty, bear probably the sameproportion to those chargeable with it, as is foundin the manufacturing towns in England.There are few towns in this kino-dom wherethere are not to be found some gold and silversmiths,who use greater or less quantities of thetwo metals. Plain gold rings, and gold chainsfrom wire of appropriate size, are commonly madeby such workmen, and though the quantity byeach individual is small, yet the consumption ofthe whole number must be of considerable thoughunknown amount.See Appendix, No. 13.272 MANUFACTURERS. chap. xxvi.It would have been impossible to have obtainedfrom so many and such various quarters, whateverpains may have been taken, exact returns. It wastherefore thought proper to limit the personalexamination to the three principal places, London,Birmingham, and Sheffield. In the author's inquiriesamong the persons connected with theseveral branches of the trades that use gold andsilver in those three places, he has found somuch readiness to communicate information, somuch accuracy generally in the accounts renderedby some, verified by similar accounts suppliedby other individuals, and so much desire to pointout other sources of information, that he looksback to the time spent among those persons withmuch satisfaction.In each branch of the trade a certain number ofpersons were so kind as to furnish exact accountsof their own consumption of both gold and silver,and their opinions as to the quantities consumedby others in the same branch. By this a clue wasfurnished, when these several accounts were comparedwith each other, which led to calculationsthat approximated as near to accuracy as could beexpected in such an inquiry.In some cases the trade of a refiner of gold andsilver is combined with another technically distinguishedby the name of Siveep-ivashers. Thepersons employed in this branch purchase whateverrefuse is obtained from the floors of the variousCHAP. XXVI.Manufactures. 273descriptions of workshops in which the divisionsand subdivisions of the trade in gold and silver arecarried on. These sweepings, as they are termed,are first by stamping crushed into a minute dust.The mass is then amalgamated with mercury, whichtakes up the precious metals. This composition afterwardsundergoes a kind of distillation, in the courseof which the mercury is evaporated by heat, is thencondensed and preserved, and the precious metalparted for future application to the purposes forwhich it is needed.In pursuing our inquiry, the first step appearedto be to ascertain the quantity of gold which isannually produced by the whole of the refiners andsweep-washers. Whatever that quantity might befound to be, as the whole is applied to manufacturingpurposes, it would be a guide to the knovv-ledge of the remainder. There are certain branchesof trade in which refined or pure gold alone is used.The gold-beaters, the water-gilders, the gold lacemakers, the china-gilders, the gilders of buttons,and of toys, and trinkets, use only fine gold, orgold with such minute particles of alloy in it asare necessary to make it adhesive.The jewellers, too, who are the great consumersof gold, use partly refined gold, or at least a considerablenumber of the trade do so. The case,however, of that business will be presently consideredmore at large.VOL. II.'Z'^'i< REFINERS CHAP. xxv.As the reports of the quantity of the gold whichthe refiners and sweep-washers furnished to theseveral branches of the manufacturers of gokl articleswere very discordant, and varied accordingto the persons who supplied them, in the proportionof one to four, or even one to five, and asall farther calculations must in some measure dependon the degree of correctness which could beobtained on that first step, it appeared necessaryto attend to it most scrupulously.The business of a refiner requires a large capital.From the high value of the smallest particles oftheir commodity, a minute attention to everydetail is indispensable. It is impossible to conductthe delicate operations on which they areena-ao-ed without some considerable knowledge ofthe chemistry of metallic substances, which is, inmany instances, extended far beyond the boundsof their own trade. Traders of this descriptionare open and accurate in their communicationswith those from whom they fear no rivalry, andsuspect no improper or underhand intention ;and, except in one instance, every individualapplied to frankly stated his own product ofrefined gold, and gave his opinion of the productof other houses with whose transactions he hadany means of being acquainted. Out of twenty-threeor twenty-four houses in the country andin London in these branches of trade, elevenCHAP. xx I. OF GOLD AND SILVER. 275supplied to this inquiry the real quantity ofgold, which, on the average of the last years,they had refined. This was done under anassurance of secrecy as to each individual, butwith full permission to state the collective resultin any manner that might be deemed advisable.A small number of these houses refine more thanthirteen thousand ounces yearly, most of the remainderfrom six to eight thousand five hundred;and the produce of the whole eleven amounts toone hundred and eight thousand five hundredounces. There are twelve or thirteen others, ofwhich three may be calculated to refine aboutfour thousand five hundred ounces each, fourabout three thousand five hundred each, and theremaining four about two thousand five hundredeach. The whole may be brought under oneview, thus: —Ounces.Product of pure gold from eleven houses 108,500three houses 13,500four houses 14,000four houses 10,000146,000From the time that has been spent in this branchof the inquiry, from the number of persons fromwhom communications have been received, andfrom the consideration which has been since paidT 227G REFINERS. CHAP XXVI.to all the circumstances connected with the subject,the degree of confidence given to the resultarrived at is greater than can safely be bestowedon the future stages of the examination.The mode in which these hundred and forty-sixthousand ounces of pure gold are disposed ofamong: the several manufacturers becomes now atopic for consideration. The several modes havebeen attentively inquired into among the chiefpersons employed in the several seats of the manufacturesin this kingdom, and on a great part ofthem the information obtained has been tolerablydefinite.The various branches of gilding cause a greatannual consumption of the finest gold, or of goldwith such minute proportions of alloy as do notlessen its value more than one per cent., it beingnot more than two or three grains in the ounce.The gold-beater's trade is chiefly carried on inLondon ; to an inferior extent in Birmingham,Dublin, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Liverpool, andsome other places. The numbers of this branchare about eighty in London, and twelve or fourteenin the other places. One of the largestmakers of leaf gold stated his weekly use of thatmetal to be twenty ounces ; another, who maybeconsidered a medium manufacturer, showed bya reference to his accounts, which were kept withapparent regularity, that he had used sixteenCHAP. XXVI. GOLD-BEATERS. announcesand a quarter weekly; several were conversedwith who did not use, weekly, more thanthree or four ounces, and some who worked upstill less, and that chiefly by their own family,with the help of one or two apprentices. It cannotbe very incorrect, considering that the greaternumbers engaged in this branch of trade are of aclass that scarcely earn more than the wages of agood journeyman, if we estimate the average rateof the whole ninety gold-beaters at three ouncesweekly. A corroboration of this estimate hasbeen obtained by calculating the rate of wages,and comparing it with a given quantity of gold.The leaf gold, when finished, is placed betweenpaper, in leaves of three and three-eighth inchessquare, twenty-five of which form a book. Thesebooks are sold by the thousand, at various prices,according to the thickness of the leaves. It wasfound that eight pennyweights of gold could beconverted into a thousand books of the cheapest,that is the thinnest, kind. The cost of the gold,at eighty-seven shillings per ounce, amounted totwenty-nine shillings; the cost of the labour onit amounted to twenty-three shillings; and thethousand books thus produced were sold at twopounds fifteen shillings, thus leaving an apparentprofit of no more than three shillings to the manufacturer.He derives another and, perhaps,his chief profit from the portions of gold that are278 GOLD-BEATERS.CHAP. XXVI.saved as clippings, in reducing the leaves to theproper form and extent. In beating the gold, itis by repeated operations with the hammer broughtto the required thin state; but it is in largeleaves, of an irregular shape, and these, whenreduced to the prescribed form and size, necessarilyleave much clippings, all of which arecarefully preserved for future application, andcontribute some addition, perhaps ten per cent.,to the gains of the manufacturer.The account here given of the gold-beater'soperations applies more especially to the trade ascarried en at Birmingham, where the chief leafgold is of the thinnest kind, and in which, consequently,the wages bear the highest proportionto the value of the gold. In London, thoughsome little leaf gold is made, chiefly for the useof painters, as low as three pounds ten shillingsthe thousand books, the greater part is of a thicknesswhich makes it worth from four pounds tofour pounds ten shillings, and from that priceupwards, to as high as nine pounds. It thusappears that the proportion of the wages to thegold varies excessively ; in the thinnest leavesamounting to more than two-fifths, and in thethickest, which requires less hammering, to lessthan one-tenth.This disquisition may appear too minute, andmay, perhaps, be tiresome to the reader, but itCHAP. XXVI. GOLD-beaters. 279was made among other inquiries, to verify thecalculation, framed in another way, on the quantityof gold used by the gold-beaters. Havingascertained the number of hands, the rate of casesearned, and the weight of gold weekly used, in aparticular shop, and then learning the number ofworkmen in the other similar shops, an estimationwas made which came sufficiently near to thatproduced by the relations of the several personsconversant in that branch of business to satisfy theinquirer that his view could not be far removedfrom the truth.We arrive thus at a conclusion that the annualconsumption of all the gold-beaters in the Britishkingdom is about seventeen thousand five hundredounces of fine gold.Another description of gilding requires annuallya great portion of pure gold. This trade is sometimesdistinguished by the name of water-gilding,and a considerable branch of it by that of toy orbutton-gilding. The gold in the form of dust orfine powder is mingled with quicksilver, and, in aconsistency like paste, is applied to the metalsthat are to be gilt. The mercury causes the goldto adhere to the other metals, when by the applicationof heat it is evaporated, and leaves thegold on the surface of the object. The applicationof gold in this way may be distinguished by thetwo principal branches of the manufactures in280 GILDING. CHAP. XXVI.which it is used. The trade in gilt buttons ischiefly carried on in Birmingham, but extensivelyalso in London. In the first town there areupwards of fifty large, and many small establishments; in the latter a much smaller number, butthese are calculated to expend about three timesthe quantity of gold on the same number of buttons.From the influence of fashion within the three orfour last years the number of gilt buttons fabricatedhas somewhat declined, though the whole produceis still very large. Many of those for the use ofthe officers of the navy and army and othergentlemen are made at Birmingham, as are thosedestined for foreign markets, whilst the trade inLondon supplies a portion of them to the higherclasses, and has an almost exclusive monopoly ofsuch livery buttons as have arms or crests stampedon them.Communications received from ten of the largestmanufacturers in Birmingham led to the conclusionthat their weekly consumption of fine goldhad till within the last three years amounted totwo hundred ounces weekly, and that the severalsmaller houses, from their greater number, mightuse about three hundred ounces. Within thelast three years the demand has declined, and theconsumption of gold is estimated not to exceedthree hundred and sixty ounces. The quantityused in London is not supposed to amount toCHAP. XXVI.GILDING. ^81more than one-sixth of" that which Birminghamconsumes, and on these grounds we are led to theconclusion that the whole trade in gilt buttonshas, during the last twenty years, required asupply of gold of" about six hundred and fiftyounces weekly, or about twenty-one thousand eighthundred ounces yearly.A larger portion of gold is used by the manufacturersof gilt toys, a branch of trade which isfollowed in more than one hundred establishmentsin Birmingham, and several in London. Thevast quantity of wares of this description, of whichalmost every part of the world receives a supplyfrom England, would require an enumerationof all the personal and domestic ornaments andutensils that are known, whose value singly maybevery minute, but when the whole mass is included,comprehends a great amount.The gilding of these toys and trinkets is in partexecuted by the makers of them, but a verylarge part of such goods is formed by one class,and afterwards sent to another branch of tradecalled gilders, who execute only that part of thework. Among those who gild their own goods itwas found, in individual instances, that severalhad used from six to ten ounces of gold weekly ;that others, and those the most numerous body,used from three to four ounces weekly. Withthose who gild the goods of other people the conesGILDING.CHAP. XXVI.gumption of gold is much larger ; in one caseit was found to have been from twenty to thirty-ounces,and in some others from fifteen to twentyounces. It was impracticable to visit and collectaccurate returns from a number of tradesmen,amounting, in the two classes here treatedof, to more than one hundred and fifty in Birminghamalone, besides some in London. It wasdeemed sufficient to see some of the most respectableand intelligent, and from their accounts toframe the most probable average of the whole. Inthis way, and considering that, especially in London,a large portion of silver goods is gilded,either internally or wholly, we have been inducedto calculate the weekly consumption of gold inthe gilding of the description here noticed at sixhundred ounces weekly, or at thirty-one thousandtwo hundred ounces annually.The plating of gold, which will be furthernoticed when the subject of jewellery is under consideration,is supposed, by those well acquaintedwith the trade, to employ about fifty ounces offine gold weekly, or two thousand six hundredounces yearly.The use of gold in the potteries has very muchincreased of late years, as must be obvious to anyperson of observation who notices how profuselyit is applied to tea, to table, and to ornamentalchina. From the great number of the manu-chap.XXVI. CHINA GILDING. 283factures of that commodity, and from their notbeing very much concentrated — for though theyabound most in Staffordshire and Shropshire, thereare large establishments at Worcester, Derby, inYorkshire, and other parts of the kingdom — it hasbeen difficult to make such particular inquiriesas have been directed to other branches of trade.From the imperfect view we have been enabled totake, and from the opinion we have obtained fromsome of the larger dealers in china ware, we feeldisposed to consider the whole consumption to beabout one hundred ounces weekly, or five thousandtwo hundred ounces annually.The china manufacturers use only the finegold ; some is supplied to them by the refiners ofBirmingham and Sheffield, but the larger partprobably from those of London. It has been statedthat some of the manufactures have bought as muchas twelve or fourteen ounces a week, but it could notbe clearly shown that such was the regular demand,or taking the number of them into calculation theestimate would be much greater than is hereassumed. In this state of great uncertainty, ithas appeared more proper to take the opinionof those most conversant in the trade than toadopt any estimate on imperfect materials. Wehave now arrived at the end of the calculation ofthat portion of refined gold which is applied to allthe purposes of manufacturing, except to that in284 JEWELLERS.CHAP. XXVI.which the far largest proportion is annually consumed— the fabrication of those elegant ornamentscollectively, denominated jewellery.According to the best information that could,from the nature of the case, be obtained, we havearrived at a conclusion that, of the gold renderedpure by refining in the kingdom, amounting to onehundred and fifty-six thousand ounces annually,the application of it in the various ways that havebeen examined amounts to about eighty-eightthousand ounces, leaving nearly sixty thousandounces yet to be accounted for.It may be here remarked that with the exceptionof that gold which is used by the gold-beaters,the whole of the portions we have noticedmay be said to be not merely applied but absolutelyconsumed. Of the best gold it is supposed one-fifthmay be again recovered by the burning ofpicture frames and such other substances, exceptthe metals and the pottery, upon which the leaveshave been laid.The application of gold to jewellery must now beconsidered, in the course of which it will be seen,that the quantity so appropriated very far exceedsin amount all the other modes in which thatvaluable substance is made use of.Without being minute observers of fashion, orwithout being constant frequenters of those circlesin which its changes are most observable, it isCHAP. XX\'I.JEWELLERS. ^85impossible not to remark how great, though gradual,has been the increased introduction of goklornaments in the decorations of females. Thishas been especially remarkable within the wholeof the last twenty years, but perhaps much moreso within the last, than the first ten years of theperiod.Only a junta of jewellers, dressmakers, andladies'-maids could give a complete catalogue ofthe numerous ornaments of gold and silver whichhave of late been added to the dress of our femalesin the higher circles of society. Ornaments forthe head, including large combs of gold, necklacesand broaches of extended size, clasps andbuttons of gold to fasten the bodies of the gowns,bracelets and armlets, additionally numerous ringson the fingers, gold hooks and eyes for the draperyof the gowns, eye-glasses set in gold and securedby chains of gold, and a watch with goldseals, and trinkets too numerous to be mentionedby one not professionally a master of dress. Suchare the additions recently made to the applicationof gold to purposes of ornament.Whatever effect may be produced by suchfashionable changes when confined to the higherclasses, it is not bounded by their consumptionalone. The ornaments of this kind are first fabricatedof fine gold, and commonly in Londonalone. They are, however, soon imitated by otherworkmen in gold of inferior quality, in some JEWELLERS.CHAP. xxv.gree of inferior workmanship, at Derby and Liverpool,but more especially at Birmingham. At thelatter place much gold is so mixed with alloys, in thecombination of which much chemical knowledge isapplied, that it can be sold at all prices from ahalf to even a quarter the cost of standard gold.From metal of these several degrees of finenessornaments are made which enable the more numerousclass, a little below the fashionable world,to rival their superiors in fashion, and with nodanger of their inferiority being detected exceptby the very small number who are critical judgesof the metals.Another step has been made in the progressof suiting ornaments to the finances of a stillmore numerous class of lovers of dress. Of lateyears the practice of plating with gold in a mannersimilar to that long practised with silver hasbeen introduced. A thin plate of gold is fixed ona thicker one of inferior metal, and then by meansof the powerful flatting-mills the substance is extendedto the space desired, and presents a sheeton one side of thin gold and on the other of inferiormetal. From this metal thus compoundedgreat numbers of seals and other small articles aremade which are gold to appearance, and will retainthat appearance even when constantly wornduring ten or twelve years.The gilding of metal, by applying to it powdergold combined with quicksilver so as to leaveCHAP. XXVIJEWELLERS. 287only the gold on the surface, is another mode bywhich toys and trinkets are furnished at a cheaprate to those whose purses do not admit of theirbuying ornaments of either fine gold, alloyed gold,or gold plating. These are the millions in everypart of the world, each of whom obtains anddisperses a certain quantity of gold which, thoughminute individually, amounts to a sum of highvalue when the whole of the human race whoconsume such articles is comprehended in thecalculation.If among the male part of the public the use ofgold ornaments has not been adopted to the sameadditional extent as among the females, yet someprogressive increase is very apparent. The use ofgold chains for eye-glasses, the increased numberand size of seals, broaches, and breast-pins, andthe small waistcoat buttons of gold, or of gildingor plating, have caused a great consumption ofthat metal. Whoever has travelled much on thecontinent must have been struck particularly withthe size of the seals, the great number of trinkets,and the weight of the gold chains usually appendedto the watches both of the ladies and gentlemen.The fashions of Europe extend their influence toevery civilized part of the world. In America, inthe different colonial establishments founded byEuropeans in the West Indies, in Africa, Asia,and Australia, besides their domestic manufactures,they are supplied with ornaments consisting in a288 JEWELLERS.CHAP. XXVI.greater or less degree of gold and silver, someportions of which are again used by even thesavage tribes which are in contact with them.From this extensive spread of ornamental aswell as of useful articles, it must be obvious thatno calculation, with whatever care or research itmay have been preceded, can be of such a natureas to be more than an approximation to accuracy.The task, however, must be undertaken, and thereader be left to give that credit to the result thatshall be presented to him which in his judgmentit may merit.As the only fields of minute investigation athand on the subject of the trade of the jewellerswere London and Birmingham, what refers tothat trade in the following pages is chiefly confinedto those places, though they may, perhapswith justice, be extended to Liverpool, Derby,and the other towns where jewellery is fabricated.In London the most costly articles of jewelleryare devised and completely finished by the same persons; and, exclusive of the precious stones, which insome of the ornamental productive the chief costs,the greatest expenditure on them is the gold. Thatmetal is rarely used in a pure state, though insome of the more delicate parts, such as the filigreework, it is mixed with but a very small portion ofalloy. This fine gold is commonly supplied to thejewellers by the refiners, and that worked up bythem consists of the fifty-eight thousand ouncesCHAP. XXVI.JEWELLERS. 289which, according to the estimate before framed,remains, after the part appropriated to variousother purposes has been deducted. It forms,however, but the minor proportion of that usedby the jewellers.The gold used by the first-rate London jewellersis commonly of sixteen carats fine, or with two-thirdsof its weight pure gold. As that goldwhich can be purchased consists for the greaterpart of light guineas, light sovereigns, doubloons,Portugal pieces, and other foreign coin, it may beconsidered as of twenty-two carats fine, or astwo parts in twenty-four, or one twelfth less finethan the refiner's gold. The price of this standardgold is three pounds seventeen shillings andten-pence halfpenny per ounce, and such gold isalways a ready money article. The price of thepure gold of the refiners is four pounds sevenshillings and sixpence the ounce, and is sold oncredit. The difference of price is thus nineshillings and three halfpence the ounce, whilst thedifference in the real quantity of pure gold is onetwelfth part of four pounds seven shillings and sixpence,or seven shillings and three-pence halfpenny.The cost of refining and the loss of weight by thatoperation may be taken at sixpence the ounce.The difference in price, then, between the standardgold and the pure gold will appear to beone shilling and ten-pence more on the latterthan the difference in real value.VOL. II. u290 JEWELLERS.CHAP. XXVI.It must then be the interest of those jewellerswhose capitals are sufficiently large to enable themto buy their gold with ready money to purchasestandard rather than fine gold, with the exceptionof what is required for such delicate parts of thework as can only be executed with fine gold.In conversing with some of the largest manufacturersof jewellery whose trade consisted chieflyin making what are called heavy articles, such asmourning and wedding rings, snuff-boxes, chains,plain bracelets, and similar ornaments, it wasascertained that they used no refined gold. Twohouses especially, whose use of gold weekly exceedsone hundred ounces, asserted that theynever purchased any refined gold, but bought oldEnglish light guineas and sovereigns, or foreigncoin by weight, and lowered the quality to thedegree of fineness most applicable to the particularobjects for which they were designed. Anotherinformant, who paid the highest amount of dutyat Goldsmith's Hall, affirmed that he purchasedno refiner's gold ; and another, whose trade consistedin making the more delicate as well asthe heavy articles, stated that, " on taking anaccount of the various qualities of gold used intheir manufactory during the last four years, itwas found that the proportion of fine gold wasnearly six-tenths, and of standard gold, consistingof light guineas, ports, and doubloons, fourteenth."CHAP. XXVI.JEWELLERS. 291Among eighteen of the largest manufacturersof jewellery in London, the fact was ascertained,as nearly as such kind of facts can be, that theirweekly consumption of standard gold amountedin the whole to one thousand ounces, whilst thefine gold they used did not amount to more thanthree hundred ounces. This information is certainlyvery imperfect, when the master manufacturersin that trade, including those on a moderatescale, are more than ten times as numerous,and whilst the smaller manufacturers who workin obscure garrets, or in other lodgings, and useperhaps not more than two or three ounces ofgold monthly, are known to be many hundreds.Among this latter numerous description of workmen,some, to whom a short credit is an object,repair to the refiners for their small portions ofmetal ; whilst those who have a little money beforehandwill prefer buying a light guinea, a napoleon,a moidore, or some other foreign piece ofmoney, the weight of which may be best adaptedto their finances and the articles on which theyare employed.In calculations of this kind an inquirer shouldbe constantly apprehensive of exaggerated statementsand reports ; and that feeling has inducedus rather to trust to our own collection of facts,imperfect as it may be, than to any opinions orcalculations of individuals. The method hereadopted has been attempted to be explained, asu 2^9^ JEWELLERS.CHAP. XXV r.far as can be done without disclosing the namesof individuals or manufacturing firms, or withoutcommunicating the extent of the dealings of eachrespectively. The conclusion to which we havecome is that in the jewellery manufacture of England,including London, Birmingham, and theother places where gold is used, the consumptionof standard gold is four times as much as theweight of that which is used in that manufacture inpure gold as sold to the jewellers by the refiners.We would then state the actual conversion orapplication of gold in Great Britain to beFine gold used bygilders of the severalkinds, and by plates, 88,000 ounces ;By jewellers of allkinds, . . . 58,000146,000 at 4/. Is. 6rf. £638,750Standard gold usedjewellers, . . 232,000 3 17 10^ 902,270Gold watches, viz. in Londonannually 13,820 1, inBirmingham 600, in all theother places about 300 ; inthe whole 14.720 watches,which average two ounceseach, being 29,440 ounces,which, being only of 18 carats,may be valued at 3/. 5s. perounce, . . . 3 5 95,680e£l,636,700See Appendix, No. 16.CHAP. XXVI.JEWELLERS. 293This amount, considerable as it may appear,falls very far short of the communications ofopinion made by several intelligent persons connectedwith the various branches of the manufactureof gold — that of one gentleman, onaccount of his extensive practical use of gold, ofhis habitual accuracy, and his general knowledge,is entitled to attention. A variety of querieswere proposed to him on the several branches ofthe gold trade with which he was conversant,among others the following, viz. — " What quantityof gold is used, by the jewellers in such smallportions as are not liable to the stamp duties?"The answer in writing was as follows : —*' An amount which at first sight appears incredible,certainly not less than from four hundredand fifty to four hundred and eighty thousandounces of standard gold, or, in pounds sterling, asum of about one million nine hundred thousandpounds sterling, but more probably two millionsthan less.** It would be inconvenient to give here theprocess by which that result is obtained, but thereare several ways by which it has been tried, andlittle doubt, if any, exists as to its correctness.There are an innumerable number of articleswhich, from their delicate texture, cannot be assayedand stamped ; and others are made of suchinferior gold as scarcely to deserve the name ofgold ; and yet the quantity is so large that a very294 JEWELLERS.CHAP. XXVI.great portion of gold is consumed in the manufacture.Let any one look at the trinkets andthe personal ornaments of himself and his family,and he will see what an immense disproportionexists between the stamped and the unstampedgold. The quantity used is certainly not overstatedin the first part of this answer."It will thus appear that the result at which wehave arrived is about one hundred thousandounces less than what is estimated by this intelligentmanufacturer to be annually consumedby the jewellers alone, with which branch of theapplication of it he is most intimately acquainted.We come now to the consumption of silver inthe several manufactures of this country. In thoseof gold, from the value of the metal and the highduty which is imposed upon it, a very small proportionof that which is used is liable to be chargedwith the duty ; but on silver it would appear probablethat the quantity which does pay the duty isnearly equal to that which is not chargeable with it.In articles purporting to be gold there is commonlyso much of the inferior metals combined that itcannot legally be considered as gold, and the duty,which is seventeen shillings per ounce, cannot be enforced;but on silver, as the duty is but one shillingand sixpence the ounce, and what is purchased isexpected to be of standard purity, almost everyarticle heavier than five pennyweights is carried tothe assay officers to be stamped and to pay theCHAP. XXVI.SILVER GOODS. 295duty. In fact, very few gold articles, except mostmourning and some wedding rings and snufFboxes, pay any duty ; but spoons, forks, and othersilver goods exceeding five pennyweights, arecharged with the tax.We shall class the consumption of silver in Englandunder four several heads.The first division is that on which the officialreturns give the quantity of silver with a degreeof exactness that entitles it to the fullest confidence.It appears that the consumption from 1810 to18^29, both years included, amounted in Londonand in Scotland to twenty-three million fifty-fivethousand and eighty-two ounces ; in the countryplaces in England, supposing the whole of theduty in them to have been paid on silver, to ninehundred and eleven thousand seven hundred andforty ounces; and in Ireland to one million fivehundred and thirty-nine thousand five hundredand seventeen ounces ; thus showing the consumptionof the united kingdom for the twentyyears to have been twenty-five million five hundredand six thousand three hundred and thirty-nineounces, or at the average annual rate of one milliontwo hundred and seventy-five thousand three hundredand sixteen ounces.The next division of the use of silver is intothat for watches, the cases of which are stamped atSee Appendix, No. 13.296 SILVER GOODS.CHAP. XXVI.the assay offices, to determine the fineness of themetal, although they are not subject to any duty.It is seen that the number of watches stamped inLondon in the same twenty years was two millionfifteen thousand four hundred and sixty-one, orone hundred thousand seven hundred and seventy-threeannually, each being two and a quarterounces, would give an annual use of two hundredand twenty-six thousand seven hundred and fortyounces. The average number assayed at Birmingham,but chiefly made at Coventry, was about sixtythousand, weighing two ounces each, or one hundredand twenty thousand ounces. In Edinburgh,Glasgow, York, Dublin, Newcastle, Exeter, Sheffield,and Liverpool, those of which last place areassayed at Chester, the number may be taken togetherat eighty thousand, of two ounces each, orat one hundred and sixty ounces, thus makingtogether five hundred and six thousand sevenhundred and forty ounces.Another mode in which silver is used is that ofmaking plated goods, chiefly manufactured at Birminghamand Sheffield, and in no inconsiderabledegree in London. The rolling of silver in contactwith the inferior metals is performed by extensiveand powerful flatting mills, at each of thesethree places, but the largest portion as regards extentof surface is executed at Burning-ham. Thelowest kind of these rolled sheets produced by theBirmingham manufacturers does not contain moreCHAP. XXVI.PLATED GOODS. 297tluiii between three and four pennyweights of silverto each pound of the inferior metal on which it isplated. Much of this lower plate is sent fromBirmingham to Sheffield, and there manufacturedinto goods, which by its inferior quality when sold,as it frequently is, as Sheffield plate, injures thereputation of the productions of the latter town,and is a subject of complaint with the respectablemanufacturers there.The Sheffield plate generally contains more thanfive pennyweights of silver to the pound of copperor other metal, and much of it is plated on bothsides ; besides which the small beading which surroundsthe edges of the plated goods is formed ofsilver alone, which, though from its weight notchargeable with the duty, yet in the whole manufactureconsumes a large portion of silver. Theplated substances rolled by the flatting mills inLondon have commonly more silver applied to thesurface. Much of it is used by the plates to formornaments for coaches and for coach harness. Asthese ornaments suffer by friction from the frequentcleaning they require, it is necessary tohave a much thicker coating of silver than is requiredfor some other purposes. As far as canbe ascertained by inquiries of the plates, of theowners flatting mills, and of the manufacturers ofplated goods, we are disposed to estimate the silverused for that particular purpose in Birminghamand Sheffield, including with it that used at WalesSILVER GOODS.CHAP. XXVI.sail and its neighbourhood, chiefly for the saddlers'ironmongers, at about seven hundred and fifty-thousandounces annually. That which is forrolling in London, though of much better quality,being far less in quantity, may be safely estimatedat one hundred and fifty thousand ounces.There is another application of silver to whichonly conjecture can be applied. Many articlesare fabricated of that metal below the weight whichis amenable to the assay and the duty. Silverthimbles are annually made by hundreds of thousands,all below the accountable weight. Silverchains, either for eye-glasses or for watches, or forany part of the dress, are formed of links, eachof which as a single object is below the taxableweight. Pencil cases, necks of smelling bottles,locks to pocket books, to instrument cases, to portfolios,and small portions to the handles of penknivesand razors, and other personal and domesticornaments, when added together must form a largeannual amount of silver consumed, but not liableto the stamp tax. The gold-beaters use somelarge portions of that metal for making leaf silverfor gilding. According to the best account wehave been able to collect, silver in leaf can scarcelybe made thinner than two and a half times thesubstance of leaf gold ; as eight pennyweights ofgold will make a thousand books, whilst it requiresone ounce of silver to make that number. Theuse of leaf silver is certainly much less extensiveCHAP. XXVI.SILVER. 299than that of leaf gold, but considering the greaterweight of each leaf of the same size, perhaps theconsumption of one metal in this particular waymay be nearly equal to the other. There is anotherapplication of silver by an inferior, but numerousclass of artisans, denominated washing withsilver, but it has been found difficult to obtain anyclue to this branch of the trade by which even aconjecture could be formed of its extent.Taking the opinion of experienced dealers, andconsidering the observations here stated, we shouldnot be disposed to estimate the quantity of silverannually used in the several ways noticed in thepreceding paragraph at less than five hundredthousand ounces.Our estimate then of the annual quantity ofsilver applied in the British kingdoms to otherpurposes than that of coin appears thus :Ounces.That paying the duty . 1,275,316That used in watch cases . 506,740That used in plating . 900,000That for other minor purposes 500,0003,282,046At five shillings per ounce . £820,521If to this be added the quantity of gold as beforedetailed at one million six hundred and thirty-sixthousand seven hundred pounds, we may considerthe two metals as demanding two million four300 CONTINENTALCHAP. XXVI.hundred and fifty-seven thousand two hundredand twenty-one pounds annually.The view here taken of the consumption of theprecious metals in England receives some corroborationfrom the best accounts that can be collectedfrom the other parts of Europe. Thegeneral peace which prevailed in the greater partof the twenty years here under considerationseems to have had the gradual effects of extendingindulgence in articles of ornament and luxury ofevery kind. This has been so marked that notraveller who has visited the Netherlands, France,Italy, or Germany, at intervals, with a few yearsbetween, could have failed to remark the progress'from one date to another, of the greater applicationof gold and silver to purposes of personal ornaments,and to the higher class of domestic utensils.This has been strikingly obvious in most ofthe capitals of the several countries, in all the commercialcities, and even among the middle classes,including the inns and hotels. Even in the townsof inferior consequence, it has been remarked thatthe silversmiths, the watchmakers, and the jewellers,have increased greatly in their numbers,and have found the demand for their goods keepat least equal pace with the increase of their population.In France, the portion of gold and silver convertedinto articles of luxury approaches thenearest to that of England. A person who con-chap.XXVI.JEWELLERS. 301tesselated Paris only, and examined into thestate of its various manufactories, might be led toconclude, that the consumption of silver and goldin France was at least equal to that of England.But the chief, almost the exclusive, fabricationof jewellery, watches, clocks, and plate, is concentratedin the capital. Before the revolutionthere were large establishments for the fabricationof those articles at Lyons, Bordeaux, Marseilles,Strasbourg, and some other places. At that time,the number of workmen employed in thosebranches in Paris and in Lyons alone amountedto seventy thousand ; and the portion of thegold and silver used by them was estimated byNecker, in 1789, at about ten million livresannually \ But most of those establishmentswere reduced to ruin by the early politicalevents of the revolution, from the want of internalconsumption, from the difficulty of exportationto foreign countries, especially to thegreat fairs of Frankfort, Leipsic, and other partsof Germany, and from their commerce with thecolonies being almost annihilated.When France exchanged anarchy for a militarydespotism, security was in some measure restoredto property, at least, in the capital ; and theplunder of foreign countries, with the taste forSee Statistique Generale et Particulier de la France et deses Colonies, par P. E. Herbin, vol. ii. p. 180.302 FRENCH CHAP. Xxv.expenditure, introduced by the imperial courtand followed by the fortunate generals, restoredto Paris a considerable portion of the trade whichhad previously existed in it, but which had beenshared with the places before mentioned.On the return of the ancient family under whom,and under whom alone, a degree of liberty wasenjoyed, and when private property was in security,the manufactures of the several branchesof the precious metals partook in a large degreeof the general prosperity, and of the universalprogress which French industry exhibited.As early as 1819, within five years of therestoration, according to Chaptal, who had beenminister under the republic and the empire, andwhose evidence may therefore be viewed as thatof an unwilling witness, the number of watchesmade in France had risen from two hundredthousand in the year 1789, to upwards of threehundred thousands According to the statementof this author, the number of gold and silverwatches is now equal. The metal in the watcheshe values at fifty-seven francs for the gold, andsix francs for the silver, making the whole amountof the two precious metals appropriated to thisbranch to be nine million four hundred and fiftythousand francs. Besides these, there were manufacturedfive thousand pendulums or cabinetChaptal de Industria Francoise, vol. ii. p. 162.CHAP. XXVI.JEWELLERS. 303clocks, partly of gold, partly of silver gilt, andpartly gilded on inferior metal. Chaptal remarks,that the price of watches has so fallen, and theprogress of luxury and the easier circumstancesof the country have so increased, as to extend theuse of watches, and the consequent fabrication ofthem.It appears by this account that the weight ofgold and silver respectively, in the watches madein France, is not more than half the averageweight of those made in England. It is rare tosee double cases to French watches ; whereas inEngland it is nearly general with those of silver,and very extensively the case with those of gold.Besides this, the English watches with a singlecase are much more substantially framed thanthose which are manufactured in France.Of late years many of the internal parts of theFrench watches have been manufactured in thedepartments, chiefly in the Doubs, the Jura, andthe I'Ain. They are sent in an unfinished stateto Paris, where the movements are polished andadjusted, and the whole workmanship finally completed.The labour employed in making the largerarticles by the gold and silversmiths in France isstated by Chaptal to be no more than an eighthpart of the cost of the precious metal ; whilst onthe jewellery, the gilding, and the embroidery,the fabrication of which in Paris is immense,304 FRENCH JEWELLERS. chap. xxvi.the cost of the gold is not more than one-fifth ofthe price of the finished goods" He adds, *' Allthe statements I have been enabled to obtain,either from my official situation, or from themanufacturers, induces me to conclude that thegold and silversmiths in France employ annuallyof the two metals to the amount of sixteenmillions of francs, and the jewellery appropriatesannually to the amount of four millions ; of thisabout three-fifths is used in Paris alone'*According to these representations it is seen,that the watchmakers, goldsmiths, and jewellerstogether, must apply gold and silver in theirseveral fabrics to the amount of twenty-ninemillion four hundred and fifty thousand francs,or one million two hundred thousand poundssterling.These views of the consumption of gold andsilver in France were taken by the ex-minister inthe year 1819, when internal security had beenscarcely established, and when the foreign tradehad assumed no fixed and regular form. Since thatyear, from all accounts, the trade in each of thebranches here noticed had been vastly extended,and a proportionate quantity of the preciousmetals must have been consumed. The increasehad gone on regularly up to the events of July1830, when a sudden suspension of this as well as» Chaptal, vol. ii. p. 164,CHAP. xxv. SWITZERLAND. 305of almost every other branch of industry occurred ;whether the necessary or the accidental accompanimentof those events it would be foreign tothe purpose of this inquiry to investigate. Up tothat time, in the last ten of the twenty yearsunder our review, the consumption of gold andsilver must have far exceeded that of the first ten ;but, wishing not to exaggerate, we may fairlytake the authority of Chaptal as satisfactoryevidence, that the annual average did not amountto less than one million two hundred thousandpounds sterling.As a considerable quantity of gold and silverwas known to be consumed in Switzerland in thefabrication of watches, a friendship with a nativeof that country, a gentleman of great scientificattainments and great accuracy in all statements,gave a fair opportunity of requesting some informationon that subject. On his return homefrom England he favoured the author with theintelligent account contained in the Appendix,No. 11.Although the use of gold and silver in so smalla country as Switzerland can have but little influenceon the mass of those substances whichthe consumption of the whole of Europe demands,yet every statement marked with accuracy assiststhe estimation which it is necessary to make inthose countries, where few facts can be collected,and those only of a general or loose character.VOL. II. X306 SWITZERLAND.CFiAP, XX vr.By the statement of this gentleman it appearsthat the annual quantity of the two precious metalsused in the trade of Geneva and the wholeof Switzerland may be taken at the value of aboutthree hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling,supposing the estimate to refer to gold and silverof the fineness of our standard. There is stoodreason to believe that this is the case, because ithas been asserted by some persons well acquaintedwith the fact, that the greater portion of the goldis obtained by melting English sovereigns. Thisis said to be the most advantageous for the manufacturers,because ours is almost the only goldcoin on which no charge is made for seniorage.It would appear extraordinary, not to say suspicious,that a country of such contracted population,and generally so poor as Switzerland, shoulduse so large a proportion of the precious metals ;but it is to be recollected that the watchmakersand jewellers of Geneva are competitors, at thefairs of Leipsic, Frankfort on the Maine, Brunswick,and Frankfort on the Oder, with thosedealers in the same articles, who attend there fromParis, London, and Birmingham. The number ofwatches made in Neuchatel is to be accountedfor by the relation of that canton with the kingdomof Prussia, in consequence of which, theirfabrics are favoured and diffused through itsseveral provinces.Though watches, jewellery, and plate to a largeCHAP. XXVI.GERMANY. 307amount arc sold at the fairs before noticed, andfrom thence dispersed through the several divisionsof the east and south-east of Europe, yet ineach of those divisions there are manufactories forsuch goods, and some upon a respectable scale.In Bavaria, the silver manufactured in Augsburgis of large amount. In Munich, the capital, thereare sixteen goldsmiths and seventeen silversmiths,besides jewellers and watchmakers. Nuremberghas been long celebrated for its gilding ; and thegold-beaters there prepare much leaf gold, thequality of which is considered to be superior toany other. In Austria, though the EmperorJoseph the Second induced many French andSwiss watchmakers to establish themselves inVienna, foreign watches are sold cheaper andmore extensively than those of their own manufacture; but in gold and silver plate, theworkmen of Vienna combine solidity withelegance, and their articles are more abundantlyspread within the empire than any of French orother foreign fabrication. The jewellers of Viennamaintain the opinion that their work issuperior to any other in Europe. From thegeneral state of ease in which the great body ofthe inhabitants of those fertile dominions live,from the number of enormously rich nobles, andfrom the general taste for whatever is ornamental,the application of gold and silver to purposes ofutility and of decoration must be very con2308 GERMANY.CHAP. XXVI.miserable in the whole extent of the German andHungarian dominions of the house of Austria,though much of what is so used may not be ofdomestic fabrication. The countries adjoining toAustria, Poland and Turkey, are, in general, toopoor to indulge much in such expensive luxuriesas gold and silver ; and though in Warsaw,Cracow, and most cities of Turkey, there arejewellers, silversmiths, and watchmakers, theirtrade is greater in sale of the goods from theGerman fairs, than from similar articles of theirown fabrication. In the Russian empire, thoughthe nobility are disposed to any expenditure whichmay tend to show and magnificence, yet theybear but a small proportion to the whole population,and many of their estates are encumberedwith debts and settlements to an extent which hascompelled them to practise unwilling parsimony;and the few who are enabled to indulge inluxuries are more disposed to expend their moneyon foreign than on domestic plate and jewellery.The chief consumption of the precious metals inthe Russian Empire is in the ecclesiastical decorationsof their churches, in the sacred utensilsdedicated to their church service, but especiallyon the dresses of the clergy, which are profuselyornamented with gold.In the Prussian dominions generally, and thesame observations will apply to the greater part ofthe north of Germany, the nobility for the mostCHAP. XXVI.GERMANY. 3O0part are far iioni being in such affluent circumstancesas to allow of any great expenditurein articles of luxury. Whoever has been admittedto their hospitable but homely residences, whetherin the city or at their country castles, must haveremarked the small number and the light weight ofthe silver spoons, forks, or other articles of plate attheir tables, and the paucity of many of thosehousehold or personal ornaments and decorationswhich are to be seen in the dwellings of themiddle classes of society in England. There are,indeed, in Berlin several respectable manufacturersof silver goods and jewellery, and some watchmakers; there are others at Dresden, Leipsic,Breslau, Munster, Elberfeld, Aix la Chapelle,and Cologne, and in each of the other cities smallworkmen ; but we are disposed to estimate theconsumption of the north of Germany, exclusiveof that of Hamburg, Frankfort, and other tradingcities, to be less, in proportion to the population,than in Austria, Bavaria, Wittenberg, Baden,and the southern divisions of that country. In theHanse towns a great quantity of plate is manufactured,and great display made of every articleof luxury which can ornament the persons or thedwellings of the prosperous merchants and others.These, however, bear but a small proportion tothe individuals of the countries surrounding them,from the supply of whose wants, and from the310 NETHERLANDS. chap. xxvi.dispersing of whose productions, they extract theirwealth.The Scandinavian kingdoms, Denmark, Swedenand Norway, are too poor and too homely to needor to use much of either silver or gold, but whatthey do use is chiefly fabricated in their respectivecapitals, or some little is supplied from Englandor France direct, or through the cities of Lubecand Hamburg,In the kingdom of the Netherlands, thoughfrom recent events no longer distinguished bythat name, the use of gold and silver during theperiod here adverted to was perhaps greater, in proportionto the population, than in any other partof Europe. In the northern part of that kingdomespecially, the personal ornaments of gold andsilver descended to a lower class, chiefly of females,than elsewhere. Large plates of those metalsfitted to the shape of the upper part of the headwere a remarkable part of dress in the provincesof Overyssel, Utrecht, and Breathe; and necklaces,finger rings, and earrings, were to be seenin great profusion and of unusual size and weight.The richer inhabitants were proportionably suppliedwith the personal and domestic ornamentsappropriate to their respective ranks in society.Although, from the habitual economy of thenation, there was perhaps less positive waste thanin other countries, and perhaps much fewer(HAP. Xxv. SPAIN AND PORTUGAL. 811changes of fashion, yet there was sufficient of bothto afford good occupation to numerous goldsmiths,watchmakers, and jewellers, in Amsterdam, Rotterdam,Harlem, and Utrecht. In the BelgianNetherlands, too, since its junction with Holhuul,there was a general appearance of ease among theinhabitants, and a most manifest rapid increase ofgeneral prosperity under which the use of goldand silver utensils and decorations had been extensivelydiffused. It is as needless to speak ofthe misery produced by the reverse that has takenplace in the condition of those states, as it is tospeculate on what will be their future lot.In the southern kingdoms of Spain and Portugalthere has recently been but a smallportion of the precious metals in any other formthan that of coin. Much of the silver and goldwhich the several religious establishments in thosecountries possessed, and it was probably thelargest portion, had been seized during thecalamities which the invasion and the civil commotionshad inflicted on them. How far thesubsequent intervals of tranquillity had restored aportion of what had been confiscated, it is difficultto ascertain. In the several states of the Italianpeninsula there is so much poverty among thegreat mass of the population, that we cannotestimate the use of the precious metals at a highrate. It is true there is a tendency to CALCULATION?CHAP. XXVI.munificence among the higher classes, but they ingeneral have not the means of indulging theirtaste, except for the fine arts, in which the Italiansseem to excel other nations as much as they fallshort of them in what may properly be distinguishedas manufactures. The gold chains of Venicehave been long celebrated ; and the occupationof the jewellers and goldsmiths of Milan, Turin,Florence, and Rome, produce ornamental objects,some few of which may rival the productions ofsimilar workmen in Paris, London, and Vienna.This slight survey of the several countries ofEurope, with a view to the estimation of their useof the precious metals, is a very imperfect mode ofmaking such calculation. In the absence, however,of other guides, it is the only one that can be followed.We have seen in England, France, andSwitzerland, where from the few data that havebeen collected, a conclusion has been arrived at,which, though implicit reliance cannot be placedon it, is at least as near an approximation to truth-as the nature of the subject will admit of.In those countries which contain nearly one-fourthpart of the inhabitants of Europe, we havedeemed it fair to estimate the application of goldand silver to other purposes than that of coin atabout four million pounds sterling annually forthe last twenty years. These are not only therichest parts of Europe, and on that accountCHAP. XXVI. OF CONSUMPTION. 313capable of absorbing a larger portion of thosemetals, but they are also the great workshops inwhich are fabricated many of those luxuriousornaments and utensils which are furnished tothe gratifications of the richer inhabitants of othercountries, of countries where the few ornamentsof the numerous less rich individuals are suppliedby small internal manufacturers. If it be takeninto consideration that the small portions of goldand silver which the inferior classes make use ofmust, from their vastly greater numbers, exceedthat used by the rich, it will not be deemed anunfair assumption to calculate, that the hundredand sixty millions of persons in the rest of Europeannually consume two-fifths as much as the fiftyor sixty millions who inhabit England, France,and Switzerland. At this rate we shall considerthe whole application of the precious metals toornamental and luxurious purposes to be asfollows: —Great Britain . £2,457,221France . 1,200,000Switzerland 350,0004,007,221 Y^Estimated amount for the whole of the rest ofEurope being two-fifths . . . 1,605,490 [N-^^^thus making £5,612,711To this must be added the consumption of theUnited States of North America, of the newlycreated states in Spanish and Portuguese America,314 UNITED STATES.CHAP. XXVI,and the colonies still left to Europeans in thewestern world. The jewellery and plate inthose countries were commonly supplied fromEurope, and France and England had the largestshare of the trade. Of late years, in the UnitedStates, there has been a considerable progress madein even the more delicate kinds of manufacture.Since the enactment of the new tariff, whichimposed a heavy tax on the importation of jewellery,the manufacture of it has much increased. Duringthe inquiry among the jewellers in London andBirmingham, it was ascertained that many of theworkmen in the several branches had been induced,by offers of high wages, with security for thecontinuance of them, to emigrate to New York,Philadelphia, and Boston. From the great numberof families in that country, who are in easy circumstances,and who have a taste for the comforts andconveniences of life, we should estimate the demandfor gold and silver at a higher rate, according tothe free population, than that assumed as the consumptionof Europe j but on the other hand it isto be considered that during a part of the periodin question the greater portion of the demandwas satisfied from the workshops of the severalEuropean states. Under these circumstances wemay venture to estimate the quantity of the preciousmetals used in the United States at aboutone-twentieth of that consumed in Europe. Whatis consumed in Canada, Nova Scotia, and the Bri-chap.XXVI. GENERAL RESULT. 315tisli C'est Indies, is probably drawn from England,that of the French colonies from France, and alarge portion of that of Brazil and of the Spanishstates from the different European countries thattrade with them.We cannot then make any material error byadding to the consumption of gold and silver one-twentiethpart for that of America, or two hundredand eighty thousand six hundred and thirtypounds, thus making the whole amount to be five ) ; ntmillion eight hundred and ninety-three thousand \two hundred and forty pounds annually.A portion of the gold and silver here referredto is undoubtedly supplied from old and brokenornaments, from plate become unfashionable, fromthe burning of gold and silver lace and picture-frames,and from the sweepings of the shops ofthe refiners, the jewellers, the goldsmiths, gilders,and watch-case-makers.According to the information collected from themost considerable refiners, who are commonly thepurchasers of broken pieces of gold and silver, ofburnt lace and picture-frames, and of foreign goldand silver coins, the quantity of old metal used intheir trade is very small when compared with thatwhich is in ingots made from coin either of Spanish,Portuguese, East Indian, or European fabrication,all of which are easily distinguishable by those inthe trade. We have been assured by one very accurateperson who has superintended the purchases316 TRADE WITHCHAP XXVI.Aof gold and silver in one of the first houses in thetrade during more than thirty years, that not one-hundredthpart of what passes through their scalesconsisted of gold and silver that had before beenmanufactured. Similar assertions have been madeby all others who have been questioned on theparticular topic. We cannot, therefore, deemthese meetings of old gold and silver goods to havecontributed more than a fortieth part to the preciousmetals that have been applied to useful orornamental purposes during the last twenty years.In making, then, such a deduction on that account,we venture to estimate the whole quantityof the precious metals taken from the general stockof them, and destined to purposes of ornamentaland useful gratification, to amount annually to thesum of five million eight hundred and ninety-threethousand two hundred and forty-one pounds.In the former parts of this inquiry, in all therecent divisions of the subject, a large and ratherdoubtful allowance has been made for that portionof the precious metals which passed to the severalparts of Asia by the channels which Humboldthas traced. A great change has been effected inthe commerce of the East within a few late years,owing to circumstances which it is not within thedesign of this inquiry to do more than notice, asfar as they are connected with the subject of thedemand for the precious metals. That demandappears to have lessened within the last twentyCHAP. XXVI.India AND CHINA. 317years, and though hxrge quantities have beentransported there in some years, other quantitieshave been again returned to Europe, not, indeed,of the same species of metal, nor in equal quantities.Silver has been conveyed to Asia, andgold has been exported from thence.The account in the Appendix, No. 14, showsthe value of the imports and exports of gold andsilver into the dominions of the East India companyand into China both by the company andthe Americans. As far as it goes, being drawnfrom the official sources at the India House, itsaccuracy may be implicitly relied upon; but thereare some omissions which must be supplied fromcalculation, or rather from conjecture. In theaccount is not included the treasure which wascarried by the Americans to any part of Asiaexcept China. It is well known that in some ofthe years their trade to the English settlements,to the islands in the eastern Archipelago, and toother parts of India, was extensive. After thepeace of 1815 some of the other nations ofEurope, the French, Dutch, Danes, and Swedes,formed commercial expeditions to India andChina ; and though we have no specific returns,it may be safely assumed, from their supplyingfew goods which those countries needed, that theymust have carried the precious metals with whichto purchase their cargoes.318 TRADE WITH CHAP. XXVI.The account in the Appendix is made in currentrupees, which, though occasionally varying invalue, may be taken in the whole term as worthtwo shillings sterling each. The excess of theimports of gold and silver into India and Chinaby the Company and the Americans in the termamounted to twenty-eight million nine hundredand twenty-eight thousand seven hundred andeleven pounds. In the year 1820-21 the treasurecarried by the Americans to China is not inserted,and as their trade was as great in that as in theyears immediately before and after, we assumethat it amounted to one million one hundred andseventy-one thousand two hundred and eighty-ninepounds sterling, thus making the imports oftreasure thirty millions, or one million five hundredthousand pounds annually during the twentyyears.An exciting effect must have been producedon the continental states of Europe by the returnof peace after a long period, in which they hadbeen precluded from any direct intercourse withIndia and China. They had been long indulgingin complaints at their exclusion from that intercourse,their imaginations had formed highexpectations of its benefits, and they were eagerto commence operations to secure some of thosebenefits. Neither their soil nor their industryfurnished equivalents for the productions of Asia,cn.vp. XXVI.ASIA. 319and they must of necessity have transmitted miicliof the precious metals to make their purchases ofAsiatic commodities.Under a review of all the circumstances, it maybea fair assumption to calculate that the portionof the precious metals exported to India andChina by the Cape of Good Hope, which is notincluded in the account in the Appendix, No. 14,amounted to one-third of what is shown by thataccount, or about five hundred thousand poundssterling annually during the twenty years. Thiswill make the whole supply furnished to Asia inthat direction amount to forty millions, or at theaverage rate of two millions yearly. This isabout half the sum which Humboldt had estimatedfor the supplies of the same countries, when hewrote his work on Mexico, now almost thirtyyears ago.Humboldt calculated that silver to nearly theamount of four million dollars passed annuallyfrom Europe to China, through the Russian provinceson the Caspian Sea, and by the way ofKiachta and Tobolsk in Siberia. It is likely thatso industrious an author would make due examinationbefore he published such a statement ;but though it may have been correct then, yetthirty years have made a great alteration, and thebalance of trade is become so much in favour ofEurope, as will be seen in the Appendix, No. 15,that instead of Russia having any necessity to320 TRADE WITH ASIA.CHAP. XXVI.convey silver to the eastward, she now receives itfrom that part of the globe. Thus it is seen,that in the year 1829, there were received atPetropaulousk from China two thousand fourhundred and sixty ounces of silver, and in 1830three thousand five hundred and seventy-eightounces. At Semipalatinsk there were receivedeighty-three thousand seven hundred ounces in1829, and in 1830 eighty-nine thousand sixhundred and forty ounces." We see, also, thatthe Boukhares and the Taschkenes had broughtto Irbit, in the last year, ninety-four thousandfive hundred ounces \'*It is seen by the translations in the Appendix,No. 15, that the importations and exportationson the extreme eastern frontier of Russia nearlybalanced each other, so that there could be littlenecessity for the transmission of the preciousmetals, but that little has been in favour ofRussia. It is, however, different with thatbranch of the trade which passes through Testis,where the imports of the last two years have exceededthe exports. This may have caused thetransmission of some gold or silver. The amountof this appears to be but small, and if not quiteequalled by what must have flowed in a contrarydirection by way of Siberia, cannot be very farshort of it.See Appendix, No. 15.CHAP. XXVI.LEVANT. 321The trade with the Levant, by which thirty-yearsago, according to Humboldt, gold and silverto the amount of four million dollars were annuallytransferred from Europe to Asia, has been sochant-ed that it is a matter of doubt on which sidethe balance of payments is to be considered. Thevalue of the silk, of the opium, and of the otherdrugs, which are furnished by Asia, as far as thetrade of Constantinople and of Smyrna extends, ismore than equalled by the value of the goods sentto those markets from Europe. This has especiallybeen the case since the vast extension of thevarious kinds of English cotton goods has in somemeasure supplanted the use of Indian articles ofthat description in the Turkish dominions.We therefore see no necessity for consideringthe whole trade of Asia, taken collectively, to haveabsorbed more of the stock of the precious metalswhich Europe had collected from the mines ofAmerica, and from those within her own limits,than to the amount of two millions sterling annually,within the twenty years we have been reviewing.We have estimated the stock of the coin inexistenceat the end of the year 1809 to have beenthree hundred and eighty million pounds ; andthe additions made to it between that period andthe end of the year 1829, at the rate of five millionone hundred and eighty-six thousand eighthundred pounds annually, would make it one hun-vol.II. V322 ESTIMATE OF cHAP. XXVI.dred and three million seven hundred and thirty-sixthousand pounds.From the 380,000,000 of coin left in 1809,we deduct for loss by abrasion at the rate of onepart in four hundred and twenty in each year,which in the twenty years would amount to£18,095,220, thus leaving in 1829 . <t^ 361,904,780to which may be added the supply from themines . • • ' • 103,736,000>J)thus showing £465,640,780from which must be deductedthat convertedinto utensils and ments . . .£5,612,611and that transferred to^[]^.^ Asia . . 2,000,000^1'' £7,612,611 annually.Or in the twenty years . • 152,252,220This would show the estimated amount at theend of 1829 to be . • • £313,388,560Or less than at the end of 1809 . 66,611,440Or a diminution of nearly one-sixth part in the twenty years.During the period we have been considering,and indeed for many years before, the comparativevalue of gold to silver had scarcely experiencedany alteration. According to the view here taken,the amount of gold applied to purposes of luxuryhad far exceeded that of silver, perhaps in theproportion of four to one ; but, on the other hand,the treasure transferred to India and China hadconsisted chiefly of silver, and much more goldCHAP. XXVI. DECLINING QUANTITY. 3^3had been brought to Europe from those countriesthan had been conveyed to them. It has before,in the twenty-fifth chapter of this inquiry, beenattempted to be shown that the durability of goldin coin is in the proportion of four to one greaterthan that of silver. It has, too, been shown thatthe recently increased produce of the mines ofRussia has consisted chiefly of gold. These circumstances,on which our limits do not admit ofenlargement, might be shown to be sufficient toaccount for the equable rate of value which hasbeen preserved between the two metals during along period.Y 2324 PRECIOUS METALS chap. XXVII.CHAPTER XXVII.On the gold and silver of Africa and Asia.Attention in this inquiry has been hithertodirected almost exclusively during the few lastcenturies to the gold and silver of Europe andAmerica. These two quarters of the world havebeen so closely connected with each other sincethe discovery of the latter, and the intercoursehas been so incessant, that as far as relates to ourparticular subject they may very aptly be consideredin a common view. The case is differentboth with Africa and Asia. The first of thosequarters is in too low a state of civilization to holdmuch other intercourse than that which arisesfrom the sale of human beings ; which, as we haveseen, was the first step towards commerce in theearlier ages of the world. Asia is far more advancedin civilization, and the different countriesthat compose it have abundant intercourse of acommercial nature with each other; an intercoursewhich, excepting in the case of China, is muchgreater than that which it maintains with Europe,America, and Africa together.Africa. The gold that has reached Europe from Africahas consisted of small grains, stated to have beenCHAP, xxvi. OF AFRICA. 325collected from the streams, and carried about inquills as an article of traffic. In Morocco thereare reports that gold and silver mines were formerlyworked by the Portuguese in the provinceof Susa, near to Mesa, and similar reports havebeen circulated of the province of Bamboo, nearSenegal ; but in both cases the operation of obtainingit is said to have required such applicationof human labour that the employment yielded noprofit, and has been long discontinued.There is no way in which an accurate estimatecan be formed of the gold produced in Africa,and the only clue to guide an inquirer are theaccounts kept by the late African company, whichregistered only that brought to England by shipsof war. Such ships probably brought the largestportion, both on account of their greater securityand lower rate of insurance, and because most ofthe merchant vessels trading to Africa in theirway home first made a passage to the WestIndies to procure freight of colonial produce forEngland.According to accounts furnished from therecords of that company, the whole quantity soimported, from the year 1808 to 1818, both included,amounted to eighty-one thousand ninehundred and five ounces. Of this, in the sevenyears of war, from 1808 to 1814, there were fifty-onethousand five hundred and sixty-nine ouncesvalued at two hundred and five thousand three326 AFRICA.CHAP. XXVII,hundred and forty-four pounds, and in the followingfour years of peace, thirty thousand five hundredand sixty-nine ounces valued at one hundredand twenty-five thousand three hundred and eightypounds. As the Dutch and French, after thereturn of peace, carried on some trade with theirsettlements on the western coast of Africa, thatmay account for our annual importations havingbeen somewhat less in the four years of peace thanin the preceding seven years of war.This communication, imperfect as it is, furnishesa strong presumption that the produce ofgold from the African washings, the only sourcefrom whence that metal is derived, has been commonlymuch exaggerated. It may also serve toaccount for the fact, that though some largerpayments are made with gold dust, yet thoseof lesser amount are made in Spanish dollars,(^ which the lamentable extension of the slave tradehas introduced more copiously than at any formerperiod), and the fractional parts in those shellscalled cowries, which were the former currentmoney of the whole of Africa.It is well known that in the trade on the coastof Africa neither gold nor silver are made use ofas measures of value ; but that an ideal standard hasbeen adopted, originating at the period when theEuropeans first resorted to that coast. Thisstandard, called a bar, was at first used becausethe chief commodity in request was bar iron. AllCHAP, xxvi. AFRICA. 327Others were measured by it. Thus a slave, a pieceof cloth, or an India bast, was reckoned worth agiven number of bars ; and even iron itself was,and still is, measured by these imaginary bars.As gold is thus rendered a mere commodity andof less value than it would represent if it performedalso the function of money, it will generallyand profitably find its way to other countries,where, from being both a commodity and a measureof all others, it acquires a greater worth whenexchanged for other objects.We are therefore disposed to estimate at a verylow rate the whole produce of gold from Africa,and as no silver is known to be extracted fromthat part of the world, in our estimate of the productionand consumption of the world at large wehave not thought it necessary to take notice ofeither the western or eastern shores of that quarterof the world.The eastern coast of Africa, where the Poetasterfugues still retain some settlements for carryingon the slave trade, may be passed over with aslight notice. According to some of the authorsof the sixteenth century, Melinda, Sofala, Mozambique,and other spots on that side of Africa,afforded large portions of gold, but their accountantbe received with great hesitation.The latest traveller, Mr. Salt, who visited thoseplaces in 1809, represents their present supply ofgold as very insignificant, and has removed much328 TURKEY.CHAP. XXVII.of the delusion which had been spread respectingthe ancient produce of that metal. After remarkingthat the only way by which gold is nowprocured is by washing the sands of the rivers,he says, " in this manner a considerable quantityis still annually accumulated, though it seems tobe rapidly decreasing, for in 1593 the governor ofMozambique, George Menses, collected for himselfand the viceroy of India one hundred thousandcrusades, and I do not believe that onethird of this amount is now altogether annuallyproduced ^ ."Asia. In taking a review of the produce of gold andsilver from Asia, the field is so extensive and theinformation to be collected so imperfect, that noone, however industrious in his researches, canhope to do more than arrive at some foundationon which to ground an estimate.Turkey. In Asiatic Turkey few mines are now or haverecently been worked. The only district in whichsilver is procured is that of Urea, in the province• See Salt's Voyage to Abyssinia, page 68. The crusadeshere mentioned were probably the thirty-second part of anounce of gold, and equal to about two shillings and sixpencesterling.2 In making extracts from the various authorities on thesubject of Asiatic mining, Which were made without any viewto publication, the references to the authority were unfortunatelyomitted, and many of them cannot now be given ;but it is believed that the greater part, especially what respectsthe islands, was taken from the works of Crawford.CHAP. XXVII.AUABI.\ AND I'EUSIA. 329of Rerum. The amount is not known. Everythree months a caravan is despatched to Constantinople,consisting of about fifty horses, withthe bars of silver. As horses cannot travel inthose countries with a greater weight than aboutone hundred and sixty pounds, that number couldnot convey more than eight or ten thousandpounds, which, repeated four times, would amountto from one hundred to one hundred and twentythousand pounds sterling in value. The workmenemployed in these mines are, or were, chieflyGreeks \ Some silver is found in the lead minesof Argent, but probably to a small extent. Nosold is now known to be found in those countriesat present subject to Turkey, which, in the remoteages of antiquity, are recorded to have yieldedthat metal most abundantly.In Arabia no mines of the precious metals are Arabia andknown to exist, and from the great scarcity offuel, if any were found, it would probably be unprofitableto work them. In Persia, though inancient times silver was said to have been produced,none of the precious metals have for many yearsbeen sought for, though, from the testimony of anenlightened native of that country, we have recentlybeen assured that it is found in the lead minescombined with that metal, in such quantities aswould well repay the capital destined to thatTassels vol. xiii, p. 123.330 INDIA. CHAP. XXVII.purpose, if any such could be found and soapplied. In Afghanistan or Cabal, gold is said tobe found in some of the streams that flow fromthe mountains of Hindoo Cosh, and some silverin the country of the Cares, but nothing isknown as to the quantity of either \Ava. In Ava, or the Birman Empire, mining seemsto be an important source of the national wealth,but no data respecting the quantity of the preciousmetals thence furnished are attainable. There aresaid to be mines of silver in the eastern rangeof mountains towards the Chinese frontier, and,according to report, the rivers, especially the ChloeLien Kioup, or the river of golden sand, yieldgold dust.Assam. Although Assam has been added to the Britishdominions in India, the junction is too recent tohave yet afforded much information respectingthe operations in gold washing. The number ofpersons engaged in that pursuit was said to haveamounted to about twelve thousand, and to haveproduced annually thirty thousand ounces of gold.A mine, called Pakerguri, at the junction of theBramahaputra river with the Dontriri, is said to beworked for a short time in every year, duringwhich one thousand men are employed, who arepaid for their labour in land.Tibet. Tibet is rich in minerals. Gold is found inHamilton's East India Gazetteer; vol. i. p. 10.CHAP. Xxvi.INDIA. 331many parts in uncommon purity. The mines arethe exclusive property of the government, whichpermits one of them to be worked by contract tosuch an extent as shall yield a net amount ofabout five thousand ounces ; and the whole produceis, perhaps, scarcely to be estimated at morethan double that amount.In Cochin China both gold and silver have Cochinbeen extracted from the sand of the rivers, but,according to Issachar, the working of mineswas prohibited under the penalty of death. St.Croix asserts that the gold is of the purest kindthat is ever found, but that the quantity yieldedis very small.It does not appear by any accounts that have Nepaui,been collected, that any of the precious metalshave been procured in the country of the Ne-pause,or ni any part of Tartary, though invery remote ages a large portion of gold, accordingto history, was extracted from the lattercountry.The extensive territories of the East India companyafforded little of either gold or silver; none isfound within the governments of the three greatpresidencies. Some gold is procured on the Malabarcoast, in Coimbatore, and in the whole tractof country to the west and south-west of the mountains. According to the evidence ofMr. Saber before the East India committee ofthe House of Commons, the auriferous district332 CHINA.CHAP. XXVII.extends over two thousand square miles. It is,however, but slightly worked, and that wholly byslaves belonging to the proprietors of the soil.The individuals who own the land are jealous ofthe interference of strangers, and are themselvesextremely poor ; and thus, whatever amount ofmetallic treasure may exist in the soil, very littleof it is brought into circulation \Malay pen The Malay peninsula, from having been calledinsula. . "by the ancients Chersonese aurea, may be presumedto have formerly yielded much gold ; butif it produces any at the present time, little ornone of it makes its appearance in the tradingworld, but must be used by the natives as personalornaments.China. The notices we have respecting the produce ofgold and silver in China are very few, and thoseby no means definite. It is in general knownthat in the mountains on the eastern frontierthere are mines of silver. In the evidence ofMr. Crawford before the East India committee,it is stated that the province of Methuen yieldedgold, that of Houansi silver, and those of Khans,Gunnan, and Koneicheou both these metals ". Ofthe extent to which mining operations are carried,there are no data whatever.See evidence of East India committee ordered to beprinted, April 2, 1830.- Parliamentary Paper, ordered to be printed March 25,1830.CHAP. XXVI I. CHINA.By a recent account, which appccirs worthy ofcredit, " the whole revenue of China amounts toeighty-four million ounces of silver. Of this,about thirty-three millions are paid in metal, andabout fifty-one millions in grain and other commodities,consumed for the most part by the localadministration of the several provinces; a portiononly, to the amount of six million ounces, isannually remitted to Pekin \**No money, either of gold or silver, is coined inChina. The money in use there is the dollars ofSpain or of her late colonies, which, either wholeor divided into halves or quarters, are very generalon the sea-coast, or sheets of silver rolled thin soas to be easily divided into the portion required forpayment. The coined as well as the rolled silverpasses by weight, and every trader carries with himscales for weighing, and a touchstone to test thedegree of purity of the metal. The only moneycurrent in China of native fabrication is a smallbrass coin, known by the name of the cash, which,though one hundred and fifty of them are onlyworth one shilling sterling, are well adapted tothe use of a country where money is dear, or,what is the same, where all other commodities arecheap, in order to facilitate the exchanges of onedescription of common articles with others.In the contraband trade carried on in the out-bulletincs Sciences, No. 5, May, 1829.S34> CHINA.CHAP. XXVII.ports of China by some Europeans, which consistschiefly in supplying the prohibited drug, opiuin,it is represented that a large portion of a peculiarkind of silver is delivered in payment — it is distinguishedby the name of Syne silver, and hasbeen supposed to be exclusively the productof the native mines. A better knowledge has,however, taught us that it is indifferently eitherChinese or American, or any other silver whichhas undergone the process of refining, and madeso pure as to contain only two parts of alloy toninety-eight parts of silver. It has been saidthat large portions of this silver are smuggled out;but the term large, when applied by an individualillicit trader, may have a very different meaningfrom what it bears in the language of one who istreating of the whole export of an empire of suchextent, and containing so many millions of inhabitantsas are to be found in China. We areinduced to make this remark from observing thatin the year 18^8, when the export of silver fromChina to Calcutta was two million two hundredand forty-four thousand three hundred andtwenty dollars, the Syne silver was only nineteenthousand two hundred and ten, and all the restwas either in Spanish dollars, or in ingots ofSouth American silver. It is known that goldSee the examination of W. S. Davidson, esq., March 3,1830, and of Robert Rickards, esq., March 22, before theCommittee of the House of Commons.CHAP. XXVII.INDIAN ISLANDS. 335in China is never used to perform the function ofmoney, but is bought and sold exactly like pearls,diamonds, or other valuable commodities, andexclusively applied like them to purposes of luxuriousgratification.The islands in the Indian Ocean yield some Indian 11 /-(I • • 1 1 lands.quantities or gold. Ceylon is said to have onceafforded it, but at present none is extracted; norare there any authentic accounts of that metalbeing found in Java.Sumatra yields gold, both from the washing of Sumatra.the sand of the rivers, and from small mines inthe mountains of Monangkabo. The several districtsof the island are said to produce annuallyabout thirteen thousand ounces of gold of nineteencarats fine. A small part of this metal isdestined to increase the general stock of theworld, as the chief application of it is to ornamentaldomestic purposes, and especially togilding.Borneo has been long celebrated for its abounds Borneo.once of gold. It is chiefly found in alluvialdeposits, whence it is extracted, both by nativesand Chinese, but chiefly by the latter,who conduct their operations in a district betweenSymbols and Montana, called, from its chieftown, Contradict. The whole tract is alluvial,being intersected by numerous rivers of considerablesize, flowing from the mountainousinterior. The Chinese population in this INDIAN ISLANDS.CHAP. XXVII.vision is estimated to be about thirty-six thousand,of which about one fourth part are employedin procuring gold, and the remainder in variousbranches of trade and agriculture. They arealmost independent of the native chiefs, exceptthat they pay an annual tax or rent of fourthousand Spanish dollars to the Rajah of Symbols,in whose territory the mines are. These minesare longitudinal excavations, following the courseof the mineral strata, and not exceeding sixteenfeet in depth. The auriferous earth which is takenout during about thirty or forty days is washed,and it is said that in that space of time twohundred labourers will obtain from two hundredand fifty to five hundred ounces of gold, accordingas the particular spot excavated is moreor less rich. The whole of the gold from thisdistrict has been estimated at eighty-eight oreighty-nine thousand ounces annually, and that ofthe whole island at about one hundred and twentythousand.Celebes. In Celebes the gold is all found in the beds ofthe rivers in the form of a coarse sand. The inhabitants,though good seamen, are deficient inindustry and skill, or at least direct them negligentlywhen seeking for the precious metals. Thewhole amount of gold afforded is said not to exceedten thousand ounces, and that so mixed withmore impure substances as not to contain morethan eighteen carats to the ounce.CHAP. XXVII.INDIAN ISLANDS. 337In the island of Timor, gold was formerly Timor.yielded both in grains and lumps, but the inhabitantsare said to have an aversion to search for it,or even to touch it, and at one period assassinateda party of Dutchmen who had been sent into theinterior to collect it. It is now found in copperore, but the whole quantity does not exceed onethousand ounces \The Philippine islands are stated to yield annuallyabout fifteen thousand ounces of gold, whichis chiefly found in combination with copper.According to the accounts of those who visited Japan.Japan at an early period, that kingdom must haveabounded in gold. marco Polo relates that " theyhave gold in great abundance, but as it is notallowed to be exported, few merchants visit thecountry. The entire roof of the palace is coveredwith a plating of gold in the same manner as ourchurches are with lead. The ceilings of the hallsare of the same precious metal. Many of theapartments have small tables of pure gold considerablythick, and the windows have also goldenornaments." (P. 569.) P. Amiot, whose narrativeis of a later date, says, " Le Palais du Roi sefait remarquer par la maniere singular dont 11 estconstruit. II a neuf stages, et presente de touscotes un exterior brillant de I'orle plus fin."Description de Timor, par Van Hogendorp, dans les Annalesdes Voyages, t. vi. p. 280.2 Cassel, vol. xv. p. 820.\0I II. Z338 GENERAL PRODUCTS CHAP. xxvi.Kaempfer says, " Gold, the richest of all metals,is dug up in several provinces of the Japan empire.The Emperor claims the supreme jurisdiction overallthe mines in his dominions, and demands two-thirdsof all that is procured ; but of late, as I wasinformed, the veins not only rim scarcer, but theyyield not nearly the same quantity of gold theydid formerly ^ ."As from all accounts these mines have of latebecome less productive, it may have arisen in partfrom exhaustion, and in part from the large sharewhich the Emperor demands, which probablyleaves too little to the miners to pay the expense.The whole quantity which Japan contributes tothe general commerce of mankind is probablysmall, especially if the taste still prevails of applyinglarge portions of it to the decoration of theimperial palaces, and to articles of domestic furniture.Though it might have appeared negligentto have omitted all notice of Japan, it cannot bethought,especially with our imperfect knowledgeof the country, to have any important bearing onthe subject of this inquiry.On a review of the whole product of Asia,we should hardly estimate its annual amount,making an allowance for Ava, China, and Japan,at more than three hundred and eighty thousandounces of gold, and two hundred and sixty thousandounces of silver. If the former be valued atHistory of Japan, vol. i. p. 107-CHAP, xxvi.OF ASIA. 339three pounds five shillings, which, from its low degreeof purity, must be the correct price of suchgold, and the latter at five shillings, the value willthus appear :380,000 ounces of gold at 3/. 5s. £ 1,235,000260,000 ounces of silver at 5s. 65,000Silver in Turkey . . 100,000Whole produce of Asia . . £1,400,000 sterling.From want of correct data, we find it necessaryto supply their place with conjectures, and howeverremote those conjectures may be from accuracy,or however near they may approach to it, weentertain no doubt of the relative proportion ofthe two metals to each other being very near thetruth, and that the value of the gold yielded byAsia is from ten to twelve times as much as thatof the silver. From the earliest ages the exchangeof silver for gold was going on between the westernand the eastern world. Gold has been rarely usedin Asia as money, either coined or uncoined. Itwas needed like precious stones to ornament thepersons, the palaces, or the thrones of the princes.Its value was too great to be wanted in the usualcommerce of the country, and in large transactionssilver would be quite sufficient ; whilst for thoseof smaller amount, brass coin or cowries were betteradapted. Where gold did not perform the functionof money, it would be of less value when 2340 GOLD AND SILVERCHAP. XXVIIchanged with other commodities than in countrieswhere it was wanted to perform that office, andwherever it was most wanted it would naturallyflow.It is seen by the Appendix, No. 14, thatwithin the twenty years from 1810 to 1829, thetreasure transmitted to Europe from India andChina amounted to £7,814^,388 sterling, and thiswas almost exclusively gold. It approaches so nearlyto the whole amount which is here estimated to beannually supplied, that it becomes natural to considerin what manner the quantity left behindcould satisfy the wants of the inhabitants. Thequantity of coined gold is almost exclusively confinedto the territories of the East India company.There both gold and silver are coined, but in proportionsvery different from what is practised inEurope. Thus at the mint at Madras, the valueof the silver to the gold that is coined is as fifteento one ; of the rate at Calcutta we have not theexact proportion, but know generally that theformer very far exceeds the latter.The extension of the dominion of the East Indiacompany has lessened the number and diminishedthe splendour of the native independent princes.They were the persons who used or retained thegreaterportionof the gold. Before our power was extended,the several princes were either engaged inhostility or preparing for it. To them hoards of treasurewere necessary, and though gold was not theCHAP. XXVII.IN ASIA. 341usual current money, it could easily be exchangedfor it, and its compendious nature, which was favourableto concealment, or facilitated its removalfrom one fortress to another, must have made itone of the best preparatives for their defensive ormarauding operations. Gold was of use to themas an object of luxury, for the ornaments of theirpersons and their palaces, and the change that hastaken place by curtailing their power has deprivedmany of the means of their most luxurious gratifications.The security which has been given to the propertyof individuals, and the power of suppressingwarlike operations between the native princes,which have both been the consequence of the Britishpower, have rendered it unnecessary to formsuch large deposits of the precious metals as wereknown to be hoarded in former times by the severalcourts in India. That treasure which used to beinactive in the depositories of princes has beendispersed among their subjects, and thus withoutany increased production from the mines, and witha diminished importation from other countries,the inhabitants of India have from the greaterdiffusion of that which was formerly stationary, asufficiency of metallic money to prevent any greatdecline in the prices of the various commoditiesthey exchange for silver.From the state of society in Asia, a much smallerquantity of the precious metals is necessary than342 MONEY INCHAP. XXVII.in Europe, and in the parts of America settledby the English. In China and India, and in theother countries of the east, by far the greater portionof the inhabitants are employed solely on thecultivation of the land, and subsist chiefly on theproductions they themselves raise. They havelittle to sell and little to buy, and consequentlyrequire the use of a very small portion of metallicor other money. Mr. Barrow, speaking of China,says, " In the province of Kiang-nan, each growshis own cotton ; his wife and children spin it intothread, and it is woven into a web in his ownhouse, sometimes by his own family, but more frequentlyby others hired for the purpose. A fewbamboos constitute the whole machinery requiredfor the operation. Money he has none ; but hisproduce he can easily barter for any little articlesof necessity or luxury. The only coin in circulationis the Tcihen, a piece of some inferior metalmixed with a small portion of copper, of the valueof a thousandth part of an ounce of silver. Withthis small piece of money the little and constantlydemanded necessaries of life are purchased, suchas could not conveniently be obtained by barter.Silver is rarely lent out to interest except betweenmercantile men in the large cities. The legal interestis twelve per cent. ; but it is commonly extendedto eighteen, sometimes even to thirty-six ' .**1 Barrow's China, p. 562, 2nd edition.CHAP. XXVII.ASIA. 31^3As China is supposed to contain one half the inhabitantsof Asia, though in the territories longestruled by the East India company the wealth ofthe inhabitants may be somewhat greater, yet asin many and extensive portions of that quarter ofthe would the same advance has not been made,and the condition of the people is much lower, wemay consider the Chinese empire as a fair averageof the whole of Asia. It will be readily seen thatin such countries, notwithstanding some large operationsof commerce may be carried on in a few ofthe trading cities, or at the large fairs, the demandfor the precious metals must be very much lessthan is required by such communities as peoplethe whole of Europe, and that part of America inwhich the English have founded establishments.The money which circulates in Asia is chieflyof silver. This, as we have before shown, is muchmore susceptible of loss by wear than a currencyconsisting of gold. On that account the yearlyquantity required to replace that which is consumedmust be greater in proportion to the whole massin circulation than is needed in Europe, where alarge part of the money consists of the more durablemetal gold. On the other hand, it deserves tobe considered, that in the east, especially in India,more care is taken by every individual to preservethe money from friction than is practised in Europe.This may arise from the greater value of the piecesof money when compared with other commodities ;344 MONEY INCHAP. XXVII.but it has escaped the notice of no observing travellerin India that the natives, who have any rupees orother coin, instead of carrying them in a pursetogether, wrap up each piece singly in a cloth toprevent loss by rubbing. A less loss must havebeen suffered from friction also, owing to thegeneral practice adopted by princes and others intimesof insecurity of hoarding treasure. In theirvaults it would suffer nothing ; and in an experimentwhich we have seen recorded, some silvermoney which had been hoarded in the treasury ofa native prince had lost in weight only at the rateof one per cent, in thirty years, whilst a parcel ofother rupees of the coinage of 17-59 and I76O,which had been in general circulation, had intwenty-three years been worn so thin as to be nolonger passable, except by weight, and at a consequentgreat loss.As far as can be known by any examinationwithin our power, it does not appear that any greatchanges have taken place in Asia, in the prices ofarticles which form the principal means of subsistence.There may have been variations caused bythe greater or less productiveness of seasons, or bythe improvement or deterioration in the modes ofcultivation, or in the administration of the severalgovernments ; but there have been no such changesas were universally experienced in Europe onthe introduction of the produce of the mines ofAmerica, or of such as have been since occasionedCHAP. XXVII.ASIA. 345ill the United States of America by the emissionof paper dollars — in France by the circulation ofassignats — in Russia by the excess of paper roublesin Austria by her issuing a superabundance ofpaper florins — or as was felt in England by firstdeviating from, and then returning to, a currencyin the precious metals. We are then justified inconcluding that the supply of the precious metalsto India, China, and the rest of Asia, has beennearly that which was required to maintain anequable proportion between them and the muss ofother commodities.Whilst the mines of Asia have not increasedtheir products, the importations of treasure havelessened, and yet no sensible decline in generalprices has been experienced. The dispersion ofthe hoards which had been heaped up during thetimes of the insecurity of property has probablybeen found sufficient to render prices steady.As the population of Asia may be taken at aboutdouble that of Europe and America, and as we haveseen that the quantity of the precious metals consumedin the two latter divisions of the globe is tothat obtained by Asia in the proportion of fiveto two, we may conclude that the use of themisten times as great among the Europeans andAmericans taken by the individual as among theAsiatics ; but as the prevailing metal in Asia issilver, and a great part in Europe is gold, and as silverwears much faster than gold, we must conclude346 MONEY INCHAP. XXVII.that the annual supply required to keep up thestock is proportionably greater for Asia than forEurope.If the annual consumption, or rather application,of gold and silver in Asia be compared with thatin Europe and America, taken according to theestimated number of individuals in the respectivedivisions of the globe, the former will be seen tobe much less than the latter. If Asia containsfive hundred and forty millions of inhabitants, andconsumes yearly gold and silver to the amount ofthree millions four hundred thousand pounds sterling,it will amount to no more than one pennyhalfpenny per head. If Europe and America containtogether two hundred and seventy millions ofpeople, and consume yearly in gold and silver tothe amount of nine millions sterling, it will amountto eight-pence for each individual. Viewing theadvanced state of society in Europe, and in thatpart of America peopled by the descendants of theBritish islands, and comparing it with the state ofAsia, we are disposed to consider the rate herenoted as not an improper one to be applied to therelative general material wealth of the two divisionsof the world. It is not, however, applicableto the proportions of metallic wealth. That ofAsia, as it consists in a much greater degree ofsilver than it does of gold, to keep up the samestock, as that metal consumes faster, must requirea greater proportion of annual supply.CHAP. XXVII.ASIA. S47If we were to consider the coined and uncoinedgold and silver in Europe and America to be representedby a thousand millions sterling, and wewere to apply to it this scale, we should estimatethat of Asia as little short of two hundred millions,which would be about fifty millions more thanwould be found when due allowance is made forthe greater wear of silver, and than we are disposedto think, on considering the state of the easternpart of the world, is actually existing there.34-8 PROPORTION OF COIN chap, xxviii.CHAPTER XXVIII.On the proportion which that gold and silver which is coinedbears to that existing in other forms.We have seen that the consumption of goldand silver, and the application of those substancesto other purposes than the fabrication of coin, has,in the last twenty years, exceeded that supplyof them which the mines have afforded. Thegreater part of those metals are converted intocoin almost immediately on their being extractedfrom the mines. This is the case with nearly allthat is collected in what was Spanish America,with the gold of Brasil, and with that obtainedfrom the Russian mines. It must then have beenfrom the stock of coin either recently or antecedentlyformed, that the gold and silver thathave been consumed or appropriated to purposesof ornament must have been drawn. It may besafely inferred that the quantity of coin actuallyin circulation at the end of the term of twentyyears had been diminished. If the view we havetaken be correct, that diminution must haveamounted to one-sixth of the whole circulatingcoin of Europe and America.How far the portion of the precious metals thuswithdrawn from coin and applied to ornamentalCHAP. Xxvii TO OTIIKR Precious METALS. 349purposes may have increased the stock of thelatter, or have increased it at all, is a matter ofgreat doubt. It must depend on the quantity ofthe latter which is actually in existence, and onthe degree of loss to which that quantity is liable.Many persons have indulged in conjectures onboth those topics. Some have estimated thevalue of the gold and silver in the form ofutensils and ornaments to be three, and othersfour, times as much as that of the coin. Theyappear, however, to have taken only a partial andlocal view of the subject, and to have come totheir conclusions from observations made in England,where, undoubtedly, the whole weight ofgold and silver in other shapes is far greater thanthat in coin.An analysis of the classes of society in thiscountry may do something to assist conjecture.There probably are in England ten thousandfamilies, consisting of about one hundred andfifty thousand individuals, including children anddomestics, who are in possession of articles ofgold and silver whose value by weight, when divestedof the additions made by the tax, by theworkmanship, and by the profits of the manufacturerand the retailer, may together amountto five hundred pounds for each family ; or maybeworth, as mere bullion, five million poundssterling, although it may have cost to the possessorsmuch more than double that sum. We350 PROPORTION OF COIN CHAP. XXVllI.may allow for such families, in gold and silvercoin, fifty pounds, and considering that the heads ofsuch families generally keep more bank notesthan money, and discharge most demands onthem by orders on a banker, and that the childrenand domestics have seldom more than a fewshillings, this estimate will be judged sufficientlyhigh. With this class then the value of theirmanufactured gold and silver may be ten times asmuch as that of their coin of those metals.A number of families of inferior wealth maybeclassed together. This class, comprehendingsuch as would average an annual income of onethousand pounds, may be in number about onehundred and fifty thousand, and include onemillion five hundred thousand individuals. Ifthese, taken together, possess as much of plate,and of gold and silver in jewellery, as have costone hundred pounds for each family, the value ofit in weight will be greater in proportion to thecost, because it will consist chiefly in silver spoonsand forks, and in gold and silver watch-cases.The workmanship of these is much less, andthe profit of the manufacturer and retailer is alsoless than that of the highly ornamented andelaborately worked plate of the superior classes.With persons in such circumstances the amountof coined gold and silver will commonly be foundto be less than that possessed by those of higherexpenditure.CHAP. XXVIII. TO OTHER PRECIOUS METALS. 3.31If we estimate their coin at twenty pounds foreach family, it will then be exceeded by the valueof their plate, reduced to weight and disposed ofas bullion, in the proportion of three and a halfto one.At every step that we descend in the classes ofsociety, it will appear that the coined money andthe gold and silver utensils and ornaments in thepossession of families gradually approach to eachother in their intrinsic value, till they come tothe class of the very lowest day labourers, whosemoney, small as it is, usually exceeds the silveror gold they can retain, although some of thosewho subsist by their labour alone, may have somesmall article they prize, such as a wedding ring orsilver spoon, and which are commonly the lastthat necessity compels them to part with.There is one description of persons whose wealthmay not be great, but whose stock of plate must bemuch larger even by weight than their coined money.These are the keepers of taverns, hotels, coffeehouses,inns, and down to the smallest public-housesin the ten thousand villages of England.To their excess of gold and silver above theircoin may be added that which is accumulated bythe several corporate bodies within the kingdom.These include that of the corporation of London,that of the several rich guilds or companies in thecity, some of whose stock of plate is large, thatof the inns of court, of the several colleges of Oxford,Cambridge, Eton, and Winchester, and of the35^ PROPORTION OF COINCHAP. XXVIII.hundreds of corporations in the several cities andtowns of the kingdom. Besides all these storesof articles of furniture chiefly of silver, there arein the twelve thousand parish churches of England,and in the thousands of protestant dissenting, tosay nothing of the few catholic, chapels, a greateror less store of plate for the public service of ourmodest and simple forms of devotion, which, varyingas they do in value from one to one hundredpounds in each, must amount in the whole to alarge sum.The largest accumulations of gold and silver are,however, those in the shops of the numerous goldand silversmiths in the several cities and towns ofthis kingdom, and in the workshops of the variousmanufacturers who supply goods to them, and tothe merchants who export their wares to othercountries. There is good reason to believe thatno one class of traders in this country keep solarge a stock of wares by them, in proportion totheir actual sales, as those who deal in gold andsilver goods ; but especially in the higher kinds ofjewellery in which the most gold is employed.The perpetual changes of fashion in articles ofmere ornament are cherished by the constant exerciseof the faculties of tasteful invention, and theserender a succession of new objects indispensable tothe traders, though thereby the value of the remainderof their goods becomes gradually lessened,till they are worth no more than what the gold,which composes a part of them, will fetch as bullion.CHAP, xxviii. TO OTHER PRECIOUS METALS. 353The effect of this state of the trade is to keep alarge portion of gold in a constant state of inactivity.We have seen the annual supply of golddemanded by our jewellers estimated at £1,636,700,and we are induced to believe after much inquiryand consideration, that the stock of that metal inthe process of manufacturing, with that in theshops of the various dealers in jewellery, amountsto full four years' annual demand, or accordingto the view taken in the 26th chapter, to£6,546,800.If we assume the stock of silver in the hands ofthe manufacturers and dealers to be in the sameproportion to the annual demand as that of gold,it will amount to £3,280,000, and the value ofthe two metals thus in a state of transition willappear to be £9,9^6,000.We have hitherto considered only the quantityof coined gold and silver in the possession of individualsarranged according to supposititious classes.We must, therefore, now notice the accumulationof coin in the hands of that great corporation thebank of England. The stock of gold and silverin the vaults of the bank cannot be accuratelyascertained, but sufficient notices of the state oftheir treasure at particular past periods have comebefore the public, to ground assumptions thatcannot generally be very far from the truth. Weestimate then that in London, in the branchbanks, and in the hands of the London andVOL. II. A A351 PROPORTION OF COINCHAP. XXVIII.country private bankers, the stock of gold andsilver is one third of the whole metallic currencyof the kingdom. On that supposition, the amountof both the precious metals in the hands of the manufacturersand dealers will be about equal to thereserve stock in the hands of the bank and thebankers. By comparing the different classes ofsociety and their possessions in plate and jewelleryin the gradations before pointed out, we arrive atthe conclusion, that the actual value of all thet^f"^-"'^ I gold and silver in articles of dress and furniturek^ ^-Ml does not exceed the value of the coin of boths I metals in more than the proportion of two to one.sin other words, taking the amount of the coinedMoney at thirty millions, we should calculate theRemainder of the two metals at sixty millions.It has appeared the more necessary to extendour remarks on this subject, because the viewhere taken differs from what has been commonlypresented. We are disposed to think that thosewho have estimated the gold and silver in ornamentsand utensils at four times as great as thatin coin, have been induced to do so by estimatingplate and jewellery at the prices they cost to theowners, and not as is done here, according to theirvalue when brought to the crucible of the refiner.In France, the proportion between the coinedmoney and the plate and jewellery is very differentfrom what exists in England. The currencyconsists almost exclusively of metallicCHAP. XXVIII. TO OTHER PRECIOUS METALS. 3o5money, and therefore naturally exceeds that inEnghnid, where, from the state of credit andconfidence in the bank and in private bankers, sogreat a proportion of coin can be dispensed with.In France, great pains have been taken to ascertainthe amount of the coined money, which formsnine-tenths of the currency. The estimates vary fordifferent years, and according to various inquirers,from two thousand million to two thousand fivehundred million francs, or from eighty to onehundred million pounds sterling ; or to state itmore explicitly, the average quantity of coinedmoney to each person in France is at a ratebetween two pounds fourteen shillings and threepounds two shillings per head.The plate in use in France is commonly muchlighter than that used in England. The jewellerythat is worn is more ornamented. Neither onenor the other extends to such numerous bodies ofthe inferior classes ; and we should conclude, asfar as the observations of a traveller can allow ajudgment to be formed, that the value of the coinin France, supposing it to be as great as theauthors of the inquiries affirm, cannot be lessthan that of the other precious metals if thelatter be sold by weight.In every other country of Europe, exceptRussia, Sweden, and Portugal, the metallicmoney very much exceeds the paper, and generallyin a proportion equal to that of France.A Ai356 PROPORTION OF COIN chap, xxviii.The plate and jewellery are very lightly distributed,both in quantity and value, and we aredisposed to estimate it not higher, as mere bullion,than the value of the coined gold and silver. Inthe United States of America, in the British continentalcolonies of that division of the world,and in the West India islands, we should supposethe proportion between the precious metals inmoney and that in ornaments and furniture to benearly the same as in England ; and consideringthe quantity of paper money which has inundatedsome of the new states of Spanish and PortugueseSouth America, the relative quantities of metallicmoney may be nearly the same as in England andNorth America.^, J Taking this extensive view, it can scarcely be^■>*\\ calculated that at the present time the actualvalue of the precious metals in personal ; ments and in domestic utensils in Europe andvV America, supposing them to be brought to") ^^^ *v ^^^^ crucible, exceeds by more than one-fourth-y^ S that of the coined metals, or amounts to more'^4' than four hundred millions.\ ^0 These portions of uncoined metals may becomet, P a resource in time of need to supply the deficiencyin the coin, occasioned by the defalcation in themining countries. In England, a tax of thirtyper cent, on the fabrication, which practicallyapplies to silver extensively, and to gold in aminute degree, operates to prevent the uncoinedCHAP. XXVIII. TO OTHER PRECIOUS METALS. 357precious metals from being converted into coin.In the other parts of the world no such taxexists. In times of great agitation and insecurity,especially during internal commotions orinvasions, gold and silver articles are rapidly convertedinto money; whilst, during periods of tranquillityand prosperity, money is converted intoplate and jewellery. In the latter case confidencegives currency to various substitutes for coinedmoney, and its use may be greatly abbreviated ;but in the former case nothing can be used as asubstitute, since the credit of public or privateinstitutions of a banking nature, from whencesuch substitutes can alone originate, can neverenter into an equal competition with metallicmoney.FUTURE SUPPLIES chap. xxix.CHAPTER XXIX.On the prospect of future supplies of the precious metals.It has been seen in the preceding chapter thatthe prospect of increasing coined money by convertingutensils and ornaments into it, dependson the state of tranquillity or of turbulence of theseveral countries : in the first state, as substitutescan be used for coin, it becomes less necessary;and in the second case, as such substitutes areunattainable, the coin will be likely to receiveadditions from those various articles in whichthe precious metals have been employed. Theremay be action and reaction by which the quantityof coin may be diminished or increased,whilst in the whole portion of the precious metalsin existence there may be no general increase, orthere may be even a considerable decrease.The only general increase that can be contemplatedmust be from an augmentation of the productof the mines, and it will not, therefore, beirrelevant to our purpose to consider the probabilityof any large additions being made in futureto the quantities at present afforded from thesesources.We have seen, during the whole course of thisinquiry, that mines of the precious metals haveCHAP. XXIX. OF PRECIOUS Metals. 359only been worked at the expense of great toiland suffering of the people employed in them.In the earlier ages of the world, the extension ofslavery, and of the most oppressive kind, wasthe natural consequence of pursuing this descriptionof labour. In more modern times, since thediscovery of America, the working of the minescould only be effected by the forced labour of thenative inhabitants, and their numbers were rapidlythinned by the severe cruelties and privations towhich they were exposed by their new masters.In the washings for gold, whether in Africa orAsia, we have seen that the condition of those sooccupied is that of almost the lowest of humanbeings. If of late years Mexico has been an exceptionto this general representation, if the labourershave been better treated and better maintained,it has arisen from local and fortuitous circumstances,from the minerals being found inlarger beds, and from the application of largercapitals to their extraction and refining. In thesecircumstances, the loss has been rather that of thewealth of the adventurers than of the lives andsweat and strength of the labourers. In spite ofa very few instances of most unusual success, butasuccess which has enticed to their ruin manyother capitalists, the profit of mining, even inMexico and under the most favourable circumstances,has been far less in proportion to thecapital devoted to it than that derived from FUTURE SUPPLIES CHAP. XXIX.culture or from the ill-managed manufactorieswhich supply the greater part of the wants of theinhabitants of that country. If, however, capitalcould be beneficially employed, it would take along period before that which twenty years ago existedin Spanish America could be again collected inthe several countries where the mines are situated.The commotions which have unceasingly prevailedsince they renounced their connexion with Spainhave had the effect of expelling whatever capital wasmoveable. Silver and gold were the chief produce,and from their compendious nature could, eitherby law or against law, be easily carried away. Weknow that from Peru, in seven years, more thandouble as much silver was sent to Europe byBritish ships of war alone as all the mines afforded.The author was assured by Turbid that duringthe space of little more than one year, when hefilled the office of emperor in jNIexico, there wasexported from that country to Europe, to theUnited States, to Cuba, and the other West IndiaIslands, in coined money and bullion to the amountof more than one hundred and twenty milliondollars. Ever since that period, each ship of warand packet that has arrived has brought largesums to our merchants on account of persons whohave removed to Spain or the south-west of France,or other countries where bills on London could benegotiated, and the property be thus easily andsafely conveyed to its real owners.CHAP. XXIX. OF Precious METALS.Much of the capital that existed in SpanishAmerica has been removed to the island of Cuba.Although the loss attendant on the abstraction wasenormous, yet, having been invested in agriculture,it has increased the productions of that island,and notwithstanding the low prices of sugar andcoffee, has left the capitalists such a profit andgiven them such a sense of security as would besufficient to prevent its return to the distractedcountries from which it had escaped.Estimates have been framed of the amount ofcapital abstracted from Spanish America, in consequenceof its commotions, which carry it to anenormous extent. Without adopting any of these,we may safely maintain that it has been replaced inavery trifling degree by the operations of the miningassociations, formed chiefly in England, and on asmaller scale in other parts of Europe and NorthAmerica. The amount of these aids to mining,which cannot exceed four or five millions sterling,(a great part of which was improvidently squanderedbefore their operations commenced), canhave no perceptible influence on the future productionof the precious metals, even if the partieswho conduct them should acquire sufficient practicalknowledge to work the mines with profit —should retain sufficient perseverance to continue auniform course — and sufficient confidence with thepublic to obtain fresh supplies of money. TheseEuropean efforts, however, will manifestly appear^62 FUTURE SUPPLIESCHAP. XXIX.very insignificant if it be considered that thewhole capital of all the companies, supposing themto remain undiminished when their actual operationscommenced, would certainly not amountto a fiftieth, perhaps not to a hundredth, part ofwhat has been lost to America, or transmitted toEurope.It is evident from all the accounts which havereached Europe from Columbia, Peru, Chili, andBuenos Ayres, that a great scarcity of labourersis there experienced. The large proportion of thepopulation in these thinly peopled countries whichhas been compelled to become soldiers may accountfor this, but the fact is so strongly stated inevery report from thence as to leave no doubt ofits accuracy. Though the inhuman trade in slaveshas continued to convey negroes from Africa toCuba, none have lately been carried to the continent.Those who were in a state of slavery on theplantations in Columbia have been liberated, butbeing thus freed were almost universally pressedinto the military service. The white inhabitantsare too idle or too proud to labour, as long as theycan subsist on the productions of those more fruitfulsoils, where a few days' labour will raise foodfor a year's support — where little clothing andless fuel are required, and where a shed serves thepurpose of a dwelling. In such circumstances fewwill work with assiduity, and none without higherinducement than the hope of obtaining luxuriesCHAP. XXIX.OF PRECIOUS METALS. 363with which they are unacquainted, except byreport.Under all the circumstances of Spanish America,considering the small profit that mining as a wholeyields, with the want of capital and the scarcity oflabourers, there seems no more reason to concludethat any material increase can take place in theextraction of the precious metals than there is tosuppose that the agitations and commotions whichhave long prevailed will speedily terminate, orsuch a state of society be attained as will afford securityand protection to persons and to property.In Brasil the gold is chiefly obtained by thelabour of slaves brought for that purpose from theshores of Africa. How long the more civilizedparts of the world may ineffectually strive for theabolition of that inhuman traffic it is difficult toforesee. The continuance of the present state ofsociety and the present form of government inthat country is equally difficult to anticipate. Fromall accounts an explosion is not unlikely to takeplace, which may divide that country into as manydistinct communities as are to be seen in the Spanishparts of the new world. Bahia and San Paulohave no natural connexion with each other, andthere is still less between Pernambuco and MinasGeraes. The whole empire is a most incongruousmass, and more likely to dissolve into someanarchical forms than to settle into such a state ofsecurity as will induce any great increase of itsmetallic productions.364 FUTURE SUPPLIES. chap. xxix.The mines which Russia is now working areunder circumstances materially different from thoseof America. Our details of the workings are tooimperfect to enable us to judge how far the benefitderived from them is likely to induce any greatextension of their operations. The governmentof Russia and numerous individuals have an almostunlimited command of labour. The Cerfs whoare destined to perform it are accustomed to subsiston the coarsest kinds of food, and to be suppliedwith other necessaries in a much more parsimoniousmanner than the workmen under otherEuropean governments. They may thus be enabledto yield a greater profit to their masters by theextraction of the precious metals than they couldby employment in agriculture, in situations far removedfrom any market for agricultural produce.The easy transfer of the metals may alone make thesearch for them a more beneficial application oflabour than the cultivation of hemp, flax, or rye,which are too heavy to defray the expense of along land carriage, or even a conveyance by inlandriver navigation.On a review of the several countries whichyield gold and silver, no very sanguine hopes canor will be indulged that a great or material increasein their production is likely to take place in thecourse of a few years.CHAP, XXX.PAPER MONEY. 365CHAPTER XXX.On the amount of paper money. — On the decline of prices.Conclusion.It has been calculated in the twenty-sixth chapterthat between the end of the years 1809 and18^9 the current coin in Europe and Americahad been diminished from three hundred andeighty to three hundred and twenty millions, orinthe proportion of one-sixth part.During the whole time the currency of bothcountries consisted in part of various descriptionsof paper money, which acted in aid of the metallicmoney in the interchange of commodities. Thispaper money was in different periods and indifferentcountries at various degrees of depreciation,but in every case it retained some value,according to which gold and silver might havebeen purchased with it. We may therefore appropriatelyexamine what proportion the papermoney that circulated bore to the coined metallicmoney. It will be desirable, also, in the courseof the examination, to inquire if the value ofthe paper money, taking for that value thepower of purchasing gold and silver with it, was366 PAPER MONEY. CHAP. XXX.greater or less at the end than at the beginningof the period.Russia differs from all the other divisions ofour part of the world in not having returned topayments in metallic money. When its papermoney was first issued, and the quantity small, therouble was worth about three shillings and fourpencesterling, or of the same value as the silvercoin of that name. The increased quantitygradually depreciated the metallic value of thepaper till one silver rouble was worth four paperroubles. It had nearly attained this low value in1810, when the paper roubles amounted to fivehundred and seventy-seven millions. It wasnearly of the same, but somewhat greater, valuein 1830, though the amount had increased to sixhundred and thirty-nine millions.Taking the paper rouble at one twenty-fifthpart of a pound sterling, the value of the wholemass of paper money in the Russian empire wasin 1810 twenty-three millions, and in 1S30 twenty-fivemillions and a quarter. As there had beenan increase in the value of the rouble whenmeasured by the precious metals, we may assumethat all the paper money of Russia possessednearly the same power of purchasing gold or silverin the year 1830 as it had in 1810.In Austria the paper money known by the nameof Wie?ier JVlidrimg had increased till it amountednominally to one thousand and sixty millions ofCHAP. XXX. PAPER MONEY. 36?florins, and had at one period depreciated to suchan extent that a silver florin could purchase tenortwelve paper florins. That great depreciationcontinued but a short time, and after the peacewith France in 1810, and the subsequent marriageof Buonaparte with a daughter of the Emperor, asilver florin continued to be worth five paper florins.If it be taken at that rate in 1810, and the silverflorin be varied at two shillings sterling, the valueof the paper money circulating in Austria in 1810would be nearly twenty-one millions if used topurchase gold and silver. A return to speciepayments was effected in Austria about six years /k2>^h^ago, by an arrangement which could not havebeen adopted in a country where credit is essentialto prosperity. The old bills were exchanged fornew bills of two-fifths their nominal value, whichnew bills were payable on demand in silver money.The loss of three-fifths of the value of whateverpaper money was in circulation fell on the individualswho held it ; but as it was thus equallydistributed, and as the new currency was of greaterpower in the purchase of all commodities thanthe old, the arrangement was attended with lessinconvenience and dissatisfaction than could havebeen anticipated.It is not possible to state with moderate accuracywhat may be the amount of paper money in circulationin Austria, now that it is all exchangeableon demand, for specie; but, from opinions collected368 PAPER MONEY.CHAP. XXX,in Vienna at the time the above-mentioned operationwas carried into effect, from what is knownof the large negotiations at Frankfort to obtainsupplies of the precious metals — from the abundanceof silver and gold coin to be seen in everypart of the empire — from the preference givento it in all smaller transactions — it may be inferredthat the paper money now circulating atpar does not exceed one half the whole currency,or does not amount to more than one hundredmillion florins, or ten millions sterling.Prussia had no paper money in circulation in1810, for its Tremor ScJieine were of the natureof our exchequer bills; but of late its bank hasrisen in credit. Though its bills are received ascash in the payment of all taxes and public contributions,the circulation is not extensive, andsupposed not to exceed twelve million Thalers, ortwo millions sterling.In Holland, where in 1810 there was nonebut metallic currency, a bank was established in1814, with a capital of four hundred thousandpounds sterling, which was doubled in 1819; butits circulating notes are not supposed to exceedone million sterling.In the smaller states of Germany, in Italy, exceptas regards that part of it which is under thedominion of Austria, in Spain, and in Switzerland,the currency has been invariably metallic.In Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, a paperCHAP. XXX.PAPER MONEY. SGQcurrency existed in 1810, and still circulates; butthe whole amount, as well as the variations in thosecountries, has been so small that they affect in avery trilling degree the view here taken. The sameis the case with Portugal, where, in 1810, papercrusades to the amount of about two millions circulatedwith a degree of depreciation varyingfrom twenty-five to thirty-one per cent, of theirnominal value.We come now to consider the amount of thepaper money in France at the two periods whenwe have viewed that of the other countries. Afterthe banishment of the assignats, the mandats, andthe other paper which had inundated France duringthe revolution ; in 1803, the bank of Paris reestablished.It became involved in difficulties in 1805,which were removed in 1806, when a new systemfor its management was introduced, and a prolongationof its charter granted. In 1810, thedegree of confidence it had obtained enabled it tocirculate its notes to the amount of somewhatmore than two millions sterling. Notwithstandingthe early events of 1814^, it had increased its circulationup to July, 1830, when it is reported tohave amounted to about nine millions.If we look at the paper money which circulatedin the British islands between the years 1810 and1830, though we shall see much variation in itsnominal amount, we shall find that its whole value,VOL. II. B B370 PAPER Money IN cHAP. XXX.as applicable to the purchase of gold, varied butlittle during the course of the term.Although we have accurate knowledge of theamount of bank of England notes in circulation,yet we must depend on estimation as far as regardsthe notes of private bankers in England, ofthe corporate and joint-stock companies of Scotland,and of the paper circulation of Ireland. Weshall therefore assume that the bank of Englandnotes were equal in amount to the notes of all theother descriptions which circulated in the unitedkingdom. In the year 1810, the bank of Englandnotes were about twenty-four millions, and theother paper monies being equal, the whole may betakenat forty-eight millions. The price of goldat that time was four pounds ten shillings theounce. The whole paper money would then havepurchased ten million six hundred and sixty-sixthousand six hundred and sixty-six ounces ofgold. In the year 1814, the bank notes amountedto thirty millions, and that of the other kindsbeing supposed to be equal, the whole would besixty millions. The price of gold was five poundsten shillings, and the paper money would have purchasedten million nine hundred and nine thousandand ninety ounces of gold. In the year18*29, the average circulation of the bank wasnineteen million nine hundred and forty-eightthousand pounds, or twenty millions ; and, takingCHAP. XXX. GREAT BRITAIN AND UNITED STATES. 371the Other circulating paper at the same amount, theforty millions would have purchased ten millionone hundred and sixty-nine thousand two hundredounces of gold at seventy-seven shillings and sentencehalfpenny per ounce, the price of the day.In the United States of America the paper notesof the numerous banks of that country were allpayable on demand in specie, in the year 1810.During the war with England, which was terminatedbefore extensive hostilities had commenced,almost all the banks of America suspended theirpayments in metallic money. They have now,however, returned to payment in specie, andthough their establishments have regained fullcredit, the whole circulation cannot much exceedthat of 1810. From very accurate accounts, ascommunicated in a publication of a distinguishedstatesman of that country, Mr. Albert Gelatin,it appears that the paper circulation of the UnitedStates amounted at the end of 1820 to sixty-twomillion and a half of dollars, or in sterling moneyto somewhat more than thirteen millions.From this review it is seen, that there has beenno such alteration of the paper money in thetwenty years we have been considering as couldaffect the value of commodities when measured bythe precious metals. The paper money has fluctuatedin its nominal value, but the whole quantityof it has been able to exchange for nearly thesame weight of gold or silver, whatever thoseB B'237^ PAPER MONEY.CHAP. XXX.fluctuations may have been. Thus our bank andother bills in 1810 would buy a little morethan ten million ounces of gold when theyamounted to forty-eight millions nominally; theywould purchase nearly the same weight in sh',when they had reached sixty millions; and almostas much when, in 1829, they had sunk to fortymillions ; and the same effect may be traced in theother countries where paper money was issued.The paper money which thus acted the part ofan auxiliary to the metallic money amounted inmetallic value to about one hundred and twentymillions during the whole period ; but the wholeof it cannot be viewed as coming in aid of thecoined money. A reserve of coin must have beenretained in deposit as a resource to meet unforeseendemands, or as a preparation for that which waslooked forward to, with different degrees of intensityat different periods, namely, a return to cashpayments. It may perhaps be allowable to assumethat coin of the value of one-third of the papermoney was withheld from circulation, and thatonly two-thirds or eighty millions of paper moneywere available to the currency for the general purposeof the interchange of commodities. We shouldthus have had a circulating medium in 1810 of fourhundred and sixty millions, and in 1830 of fourhundred millions.If the prices of commodities were regulatedsolely by the quantity of the circulating medium,CHAP. XXX.iwr-Eu AroNEY, 373as tile hitter in the twenty years had declined atthe rate of thirteen per cent., we might calculatethat the fall on the former would be at the sameratio. If, as we know to be the fact, the mass ofcommodities had been greatly increased in theperiod, whilst the circulating medium had diminished,we should find an additional decline in theprices of commodities. But that decline would beliable to counteraction from several causes whichmight give additional power to the circulating medium,and enable a less portion of it to performthe same office as in other circumstances wouldrequire a larger portion.In 1810, from the state of the whole of Europebeing engaged in war, both the treasuries of theseveral states and the military chests of the variousarmies must have caused a large quantity of theexisting money to have been in a state of inactivity.The difficulty of conveying money fromplace to place was great, and the internal negotiationof bills of exchange in most parts of the continentwas suspended. Each man who had moneykept it by him, instead of lodging it in the handsof banks or bankers, because none of them enjoyedsecurity or possessed credit. In 1830 the casewas altered. The conveyance of money was easy,secure, and especially rapid. If gold was morevaluable in one place than in others, a few hourscould convey it by steam vessels to the spot whereit was wanted. Banks were established every374 ON PRICES CHAP. XXX.where, which furnished inland bills to the parts ofthe same country, and foreign bills to other countries,which in many cases made the removal ofspecie unnecessary. The exchequers of statescould rely on their credit to supply the place ofmoney till it could be collected from the regularsources, and as no armies were on foot, there wasno money kept in a state of inactivity in the militarychests.From these altered circumstances, whose influenceit is difficult to calculate, the depression ofprices, which would be the natural result of a diminutionof money, and an increase of exchangeablegoods, has been either prevented or lessened.If it should be Thought that the increase of themass of material wealth in Europe and Americahas kept pace with what we know to have been theincrease in the population of those divisions ; itmay be stated at about thirty-two per cent, in thetwenty years, which, added to thirteen per cent,diminished in the mass of money, would cause anatural decline in prices at the rate of forty-fiveper cent.This rate of decline would be retarded by theincreased power given to money from the severalcauses which have been alluded to. It is difficultto determine, in such a complex system of exchangesof material wealth as is established in allhighly civilised countries, how far a decliningquantity of money is counteracted by the addi-CHAP. XXX.OF COMMODITIES. 375tibial power given to it. It is much more difficultto calculate the additional power than it is to estimatethe decline in quantity.It was intended to have been shown from theprices of a numerous list of articles in the year1810, and of the same in 1830, what had been thedegree of decline on the metallic value of commodities;but it was found impossible to frameany list in which the alteration of prices had notevidently been affected by other causes than thediminished quantity of the circulating medium.Thus, the article of corn, which is of the greatestamount, has been subject to such restrictions thatit is impossible to determine what its pricewould have been in any country at any time, if aperfectly free trade in it had been allowed. Wecannot calculate the influence of those restrictionsmore than we can the effect of the calamitousharvest of 1816, or of the return to general peacein 1815. Cither commodities, as iron, may havehad their relative value to gold and silver disturbedby improvements in mechanical means ofdispensing with human or other animal labour.some articles, as lead, may have had their relationsaffected by the opening of more productivemines. Monopolies, such as exist in some branchesof the trade in coal, and as during the waroperated on alum, may tend to deviations fromthe natural price of the articles. Speculationsalso may have a great temporary effect, as has376 ON PRICESCHAP. XXX.been seen in the prices of cotton, of wool, andof tobacco within a few late years.As it is not possible to frame a satisfactorycatalogue of commodities that can be viewed as acriterion by which to try the value of gold andsilver, we may venture to have recourse to classesof society in the different countries.The cultivators of the soil are the most numerouspart of the community. Their productsare the least complicated in their origin, and themost simple in their distribution, and thereforeare likely to be first affected by any increase inthe value of the precious metals. They would bethefirst to experience the difficulty of obtainingthe usual weight of gold and silver, if those metalsbecame more rare, for the usual measure of corn,of meat, of cotton, of wool, of sugar, or otheragricultural products. In this country, wherethe cultivators are a class of capitalists distinctfrom the proprietors, their capitals have generallybeen diminishing, whilst the decline of the mineshas been proceeding, and the application of theirproduce to other purposes than that of coin hasbeen increasing. It certainly does not followfrom these two courses having been in simultaneousprogression that one is the cause of theother. The same has been the condition of thecultivators of the soil in every other country, asfar as it is accurately known. In every part ofthe continent of Europe the same complaints areCHAP. XXX. OF COMMODITIES. 377heard, however various may be the tenures bywhich hind is held. Such complaints are notbounded by the limits of Europe. The cultivatorsin North America assert that the prices of theirproductions yield them no profit, especially thoseof corn, cotton, tobacco, and rice. The same isthe case in the West India Islands, and accordingto the common reports, in South America, and inIndia. There must be some general cause producingsuch extensive effects, which are thus feltalike where taxation is high or low, under despoticand free governments; and whether theland is cultivated by slaves, by serfs, by hiredlabourers, or by proprietors.It would lead into a field far too extensive tospeculate on what would be the effect in anothertwenty or forty years, if the same differenceshould continue between the production and theconsumption of the precious metals, as appears tohave been in operation during the past twentyyears. It may, however, be observed that theworld is very little really richer or poorer fromthe portion of metallic wealth that may be distributedover its surface ; that the whole mass ofmaterial wealth is neither diminished nor increasedby any change in the relative weight of gold andsilver to the usual measures of other commodities.The only benefit to the world in general fromthe increase of those metals is, that it acts as astimulus to industry by that gradual rise of money378 INFLUENCE OF THE METALS. chap. XXX.prices which it exhibits to the view. The onlyevil from the diminution of these metals isthe discouragement it may present to industryby the apparent loss, or lessened profit, when theresult of labour is reckoned in gold and silverand not in other commodities. It matters littleto him who raises a bushel of wheat whether itis exchanged for a pennyweight or for an ounceof silver, provided it will procure for him thesame quantity of cloth, shoes, liquors, furniture,or other necessaries which may be desirable tohim. The relations of the different classes ofsociety to each other, but still more those ofdifferent individuals to each other, will be changed,but the change will be made very slowly, and bescarcely perceptible in one or two years, and evenat the end of a generation only noticed by thosewho look back with the means of comparing therange of prices at different periods.In the twentieth chapter of this inquiry a viewhas been taken of the effect produced by an advanceof the prices of commodities, in general, atthe rate of five to one in the course of a century.The reflecting reader will easily perceive that anoperation of an opposite kind may take place,which may no more derange the general economyof states, and no more disturb the relations ofclasses of society to each other, than was experiencedbetween 1490 and 159.0.A Appendix.APPENDIX.CHAP XXX.No.INIlNUTE, 16thExperiment made ott a given number of each denomination of gold andloss by wear i?iThe officers of the Mint being desirous of ascertaining the wear on theexperiment was made on a given numberDenomination and date of Coin.Numberof piecestried.Computed weight.Reduction forpix report.Reduced weight.Sovereigns .-?1821(1825ri8i7lbsozdots.grs.grs.3-681G241-931lbs.oz.dots.16*1-5G8= 1-5Half-sovereigns-X -6 pixfl816?1817^7 1 n3-39Half-crowns1820 f1 1821 1H3-211824 I1 1825 3ri8ic^1817 S6i3-39Shillings1820?3-211824 IL1825^'18I«)1817 SC3-39Sixpencesj 1820 1f 1821 f1 1824 I11825^CHAP. XXX.APPENDIX.1, A.December, 1826.silver moneys coined since 1816, ivilh a view to ascertain the amount ofthe said coins-goldand silver coins in circulation since the year 1816, the followingof pieces of each denomination of coin.Weight before washing.Dirtmonth.coin.Weight after wishing.Loss ofweight.Equal per 100/.charge of coinageper 100/.lbs.oz.dots.grs.gis.filbs.oz.dotssrs.IGgis.97-540-5;. *. (I.4 6-2323 111121 3-7G9I"3-7495 7-47G5 4-328-1610-247IG2 9-73819 10-33215 3-700I 449-871 4-8652 5 11-8321 12 1-915-564 10-6563 15 3-832"]2 7 8► 657-878••7 2-165-(Signed)JOHN BARTON, Comptroller.38^APPENDIX..-S 6>»-e £5>.r!P31-H.^3CiC3COCcooa>O12^^J~>.()t*-ooCO•Sccr?.<Uoola5fiJ^t-.O 3Pico"18 1112 2OZ. dwt. gr.2 111 12 18Standard weightof 1000 guineasat 5 dwt. 9*4 gr.11). oz. dwt. gr.22 5 13 GCurrent weight at5 dwt. 8 gr.22 4 15Lightnumber ofpieces underthe currentweight(if 5 dwt.grin1000pieces.Heavynuinlier ofpieces ofthe currentweight of5 dwt. 8 gr.C8Gin 1000pieces.<n>. oz. dwt. gr.22 3 2 G2 2 13 92 2 14 122 2 14 122 2 14 182 2 13 182 2 14 212 2 14 92 2 142 2 14 152 2 13 15o 3.aZ-S.Sooocsosooooooceooooo^ ^ ,., rt „ rt rt — rt -H -HZ 1 1 1 1 1 1 I 1 1(guineas.1st experiment on1000 guineas a banker's.2d experiment, thesame 1000 guineasweighed in separatehundreds.APPENDIX.oIM-*COt^©nt-^COC^fO»CI»>•t^©*— *I— '^^•-^o©-^©CI-©©CIC5~~.^^MeoCOCIr-1.-5•^C)t—m(NtM■"^(Nr^T^(M'^"«"MOc^w■*<M©-^ClO©©-©©©»=■weighincas!) 7To1^5: sci"0CJCI—"p^tjc^^^• ^-<^^^Ig"^•S^'3IM^(N^CI'S^^ClCic^CccCcr3 «U)"O<auin o1"1^NSMCio5 CI©©© .© .O "*.QQa© s01 -. a^l-HCO CO Sot— 1 s?s -^M oJ-V^»>«eo «r- S.£ "^P'ac 'S,.£ "s-® J,©^case©^ S® S-*u(N IM "*M -H §5^ -. gIfl©1 rt Cst!NCO u.£ '5-ca.3 'Ele'S<■"'"©~^Mo~■*tel— t>»r~■*1—ei©1•(N C^l f 1<MN<M(M<M ?1 MCICJ© © ©© © ©(M <N (N©©©©1 1 1CICQ-«->^^^^^C 55 08■5"c bctic =«33'S•S n^§*cx> ^iC3"3Ces ^II©BbCc2 g5*^= i'3©©>X aJ xM <uIt ^ E2384 APPENDIX.No. 1, C.1798.In the course of this year the officers of the Mint repeatedthe experiments which they had made in the year 1787respecting the actual wear of the silver coins, from which itappeared that a considerable loss had been occasioned by thewear of eleven years only, for it was found that12 1^ crowns ^ were requisite f 1 21 & crowns ~) . ,27Hlialf crowns ( to make up ) 24^^ half-crowns ff^^^'^^'^82^% shillings r a pound troy, 1 62 shillings i m" t200ji sixpences ) instead of (^124 sixpences y 'The deficiency amounted in theCrowns to ^ifi per cent.Half-crowns to O^^otShillings to 24i-9|iSixpences to 38|^4iAnd the increased deficiency in the course of eleven years,in the Crowns to 4^^ per cent.Half-crowns to l^f-fShillings to ^^^^Sixpences to 3^^|^No. 2.A return of the amount of gold moneys coined at his majesty'sJNIint in each year, from the 31st of December, 1809, tothe 31st of December, 1820, and continued to the 31st ofDecember, 1829.Amount of gold coined.1809 £298,946 111810 316,935 11 61811 312,263 3 61812 Nil.1813 519,722 3 61814 Nil1815 Nil.1816 Nil.APPENDIX.Amount of gold coined,4,275,337 102,862,373 103,574 10949,516 109,520,758 13 105,356,787 12759,748 104,065,0754,580,9195,896,461 72,512,636 171,008,559 22,446,754 1238.5£9,538,669 136,147,700 16 4£45,686,369 17Mint-Office, Iste December, 1830.A return of the amount of silver moneys coined at hismajesty's Mint in each year, from the 31st of December,1809, to the 31st of December, 1820, and thence continuedto the 31st of December, 1829.Silver moneys coined£114 14120 18Nil.52 1489 18161 4Nil.1,805,2412,436,297 12576,279sol. ir.c c386 APPENDIX.Silver moneys coined.1819 1,267,272 121820 847,717 4£6,933,346 16433,68631,430 7285,271 16282,070 16417,535 16608,605 1633,019 1616,288 3108,259 162,216,168 6 1£9,149,515 2 1Mint-Office, Isti December, 1830.APPENDIX.No. 3, A.An account of the several denominations of silver moneyscoined since the commencement of the silver coinage in 1816,to the 31st December, 1829.Date.1829.Crowns.Half-crowns.Shillings.Sixpences.Maundy.Total.To the31stDec,s. d.462,476 7 1s. d.3,500,936 7s. d.4,183,146s. d.1,000,692s. d. £ s. d.1,735 16 9,148,986 10 1Mint-Office, 29lh January, 1830.No. 3, B.An account of the several denominations of gold moneyscoined since the commencement of the new gold coinage in1817, to the 31st December, 1829.Date.Five-pound Pieces.Double Sovereigns.Sovereigns.Half-sovereigns.Total.To the31stDec.1829.s. d.Nil.s. d.32,240 5s. d.40,672,456 2 11s. d.3,519,794 5s. d.44,224,490 12 11Mint-Office, 29tk January, 1830.c c 2AI Pending.No. kAn account of the prices of wheat and malt per quarterat Oxford in each year, from 1583 to 1829, by the Winchesterbushel of eight gallons, being formed from an averageof the highest and lowest prices of each year, taken at Lady-dayand Michaelmas.Year.Wheat.Malt. 1Year.Wheat.Malt.s.d.s.d.5.d.s. d.23 108^25 8Oi21 112'21 11I6I717 7H18 1017 715 813 121 7H0'19 918 624 917 713 214 1128 531 421 424 927 1022 723 1032 724 220 821 423 2APPENDIX.3ii9Year.Wheat.Malt.Year.Wheat.salt.J.d.s.d.s.d..s. d.18 1021 224 625 923 825 120 822 718 1017 315 414 519 527 1028 121 1125 824 828 1034 825 422 717 522 717 1017O618 1020 517O824 529 528 324 619 7]]25 121 4APPENDIX.Year.Wheat.Malt.\'ear.Wheat.Malt.s.d.s.d.s.d.s. d-21 8Iris20 820 930 128 221 719 1016 1120 829 124 1126 426 427 329 227 223 124 630 134 833 1133 1126 447 1024 626 424 622 7J78122 728 235 938 1030 128 328 3APPENDIX.Year.M'hcat.Malt.Year. wheat.Malt.n.(/.s.d.s. d.». d.1828 82 31829 82The prices of malt includesthe duty, which hasfrequently varied, thus697 per bushel37 10I76O additionalQ■I X1779 15 per cent, onthree-pence1 HI78O 6d, and 5 per cent.thereon, making thewhole additional duty-1 6f1792 the last 3d repealed-1 3f1802 additional duty1 Oi-2 41803 war duty-4 4I8I71816 war duty ceased-2 41819 additional duty1 2-3 61822 duty repealed-2 6asor two shillings andsentenceper imperial bushel.APPENDIX.No. 5.Gross produce of the duty on gold and silver plate in GreatBritain, from 1st August, 1784, to 5th January, 1800.Year ended 1st Aug, 17851st August 1799to5th January 1800}s.d.5,30022,824lO-i25,617n28,39725,54526,6815i29,085H31,37634,049Cannot be given.32,4232i40,0525i44,079 1527,659 6 8AAPPENDIX.OJ3KP5^ £-^ .2,£3~8 ^ Tin » ; I>.0 c: O O . .05 o^000 o o o c o ^■^1— iTf<iOt>»XOSOO^oCO— |X5?|-«'~:I-* — :i■^-Hcoeco-vCtooo'O(NSIac:'i C « CO ui M^CM=*;^ooooeooo©1— 1— ic; rr|-* ^^^•t-ici■^-^eococootcoo^(MiJOCOOTfi'^CMCC'Or— 1^oocooooo-H-«■ .^'*c?rco'<iB''o'co"oOl=iOC;CC;rOCO(MCC^1—1^oooooooo©^H^> . .^^a Si s ^ -^;.TS0^-^-a 5i S^9S5j | O-U C« C ^ uSo«*;c3*j*i«f^£«>3S<yc3r3«cicQpQoca^Oo^ccAPPENDIX.No. 7.An account showing the quantity of money coined in eachyear in Mexico between 1810 and 1829, including bothsold and silver.Year.City ofMexico.Guadalajara.Durango.Zaccatecas.I8I7Dollars.19,046,18810,041,7964,409,2666,133,9837,520,5506,941,2639,276,0098,849,89311,386,28812,030,51510,406,1545,903,5265,543,2543,567,8213,503,8806,036,878Dollars.901,949192,749219,449255,174931,645734,355957,365676,073Dollars.247^436808,792784,240438,050336,987314,193139,800260,830244,298136,793209,229608,666818,430753,345816,5586,917,647Dollars.1,154,9024,776,9712,455,0004,273,2811,026,775764,0111,326,7003,610,4553,965,0004,093,0623,213,356130,597,2644,868,75930,659,5136,917,6474,868,759130,597,264173,043,18311,500,00011,500,00012,000,00012,000,000220,043,183APPENDIX.No. 8.Qtiintos of Brazil.Product of the tax Quinto or the fifth of the gold fromMinas Geras in Brazil, for each year, from 1752 to 17^^^, inperiods of six years.Years.Arobas.Marcs.Ounces.Ottawa.Grains.tototototototoIn the Portuguese numeration, 72 grains make 1 ottava,8 ottawa 1 ounce 8 ounces 1 marc, and 64 marks 1 aroba.The Portuguese grain is to the English grain as 83 to 108.The Portuguese aroba is 39f^g-^, or nearly 39^ pounds troy,and the value of it in sterling money is <€1821 I's. Ad.See Appendix, No. 22, to the report of the Bullion Committeeof 1810.APPENDIX.No. 9.Lavas in Minas Geras.An account showing the number of lavas (washings),miners, and labourers in the province of JNIinas Geras ; andalso the product of gold in that province on the average ofthe two years 1812 and 1813.•-3rsshireen.thes.ID'O r-Districts.llo Ss»ntureilree3 Os ?ZCogfe>Amon;procmiVilla Rica67 233,45740,722Santa Mariana1,88650,056St. Joys del Rei .6,272St. Jose5,760Barbacena4,343Sahara35,355Villa Nova da .1,81386,986Peracatu .7,866Villa do Principe8.394Serra do Frio .12,741Campania daring23,693Minas NovasPilangui26,91010,6033,2912,148310,084The value of the millers, which was formerly between sixand seven shillings, has gradually declined since the introductionof a paper currency in Brazil, till at present it canonly be estimated at about two-thirds ; but as the effect ofthe paper system had only begun to show itself in 1813, themitres may be valued then at five shillings.APPENDIX. 397No. 10.Russian Gold and Silver.The produce of gold in Russia seems to have taken its firstgreat step in the path of improvement in the year 1823 ; sincewhich the increase appears to have been regular.One official account states the amount of silver and gold tohave been as follows : —Gold.Silver.Years.goods.goods.1704 to 18101,72661,8591811 to 18222,91012,1043,0011825 to 18281,03711,904According to another account from the department offinance, inserted in the Journal de Commerce of 4-10 April,1831, the quantity of gold and platina produced from theUral mountains has been.Gold.Platina.Year.goods.lbs.poods, lbs.1 3511 2013 2025 3093 3378 31105 1The following statement is taken from the journals of themines, commencing 1st July, 1825, and ending at the middleof the year 1829, showing the proportion between the goldextracted bv individuals, and that by the government : —1825 First six monthsSecond six months1826 First six monthsSecond six months1827 First six monthsSecond six months1828 First six monthsSecond six months1829 First six monthsThe following statement from the Journal de Commerceshows the contrast between the products of 1829 and 1830 : —1829. 1830.poods, lbs. poods, lbs.Gold from the mines of the crown 108 9 150 22Gold from the mines of individuals 187 21 204 17The Russian pood is divided into forty pounds, and thepound into ninety-six zolotnicks. The Russian pood isequal to thirty-six pounds avoirdupois, or forty-five poundstroy.APPENDIX.Private persons.Government.poods, lbs. zolot.poods.lbs.zolot88 18 6683 8 6682 33 8078 29 1092 24 7399 25 72111 10 6792 5 4795 34 46No. 11.Exh-act of a Letter from M. de C .Geneva, 14th Nov, 1830.MY DEAR SIR,Since my return to Switzerland, 1 have not forgotten thequestions you put to me about the quantity of gold andsilver used in our manufactures. I have tried to collect somepositive information on the subject, and my answer has beendelayed merely because 1 met with more considerable difficultiesthan I had expected. These arise partly from differencesin the regulations respecting the stamp, in the three cantonsAPPENDIX. 899(Geneva, Neufcbatel, and Berne), where precious metals areworked, and partly from the manner in Which these regulationsare enforced. Government's stamp or mark, where it isrequired, is not considered as a taxation, but as a security forpurchasers ; and in our town, for instance, it is not a compulsorymeasure, but every watchmaker or goldsmith is allowedto sell his work stamped or not as he likes. A very largenumber of watches or goldsmith's ware, which are smuggledinto France, England, or other countries, are not marked.Official returns of these stamps are therefore of no use, andlead only to errors.However, being particularly desirous of collecting some factsthat may be acceptable to you, I consulted at Geneva a gentlemanwho is known to have paid, for many years, considerableattention to our commerce and manufactures ; and atNeufchatel, another gentleman, a merchant, whom I know tobe a very sensible and well-informed man. They have madesome calculations for me which I consider as near the truth,particularly as I see how well they agree with the numbersgiven in Picot's Statistique de la Suisse, 2d edit. 1830. Thefollowing are the accounts given to me : —1. — Consumption of Gold.Gold watches and jewellery are made chiefly at Geneva.From official returns, we know the total number of workshopsand workmen. We know also from private inquiries thequantity of gold required every day for three of the largestmanufactories, and combining these two documents, we supposethat the yearly consumption of gold at Geneva Ounces ' .is about . 75,000A very small number of gold watches are manufacturedat Neufchatel, but it cannot exceed . 1,000Total consumption in Switzerland, not below 76,000This is for the years 1829 and 1830.grams.One ounce=30-T-59 French metric system.400 APPENDIX.2. — Consumption of Silver.Silver watches are manufactured chiefly in the mountainsof Neufchatel, and in a neighbouring part of the canton ofBerne, called Val St. Junior. They export now every year130,000 watches, the mean Weight of the silvercase being 18 deniers ' ; the total consumption of Ounces,silver is . 97,500The consumption at Geneva is said by Picot to be 40,000In the last few years a great many silver plates andforks, which were formerly exported from Geneva,have been made at Berne. No mark is establishedby government in that town, and we have no meanswhatever of ascertaining the extent of this newtrade ; I suppose they melt as much silver as inGeneva, and perhaps much more, say . 40,000Total consumption not under . . 1 77^500I believe that the first account (respecting gold) is more precisethan this, because there must be in other towns, as Basle,Zurich, and Lausanne, some few goldsmiths, who make commonworks (forks, spoons, &c. &c.) for the consumption ofthose towns and not for exportation. I suspect the totalconsumption is not far from . 200,000 ounces.I will add some few observations which may perhaps be ofuse to you.During the 16th century large manufactures of gold galloonsand laces existed at Geneva, but this branch was graduallytransferred to Lyons. At the same time watchmakersbegan to work at Geneva. The first was established in 1587,and the first regulations for that trade were made in 1600.Since this period, the consumption of gold has increased untilthe year 1 789 ; it then decreased rapidly in consequence ofthe French revolution, and of our forced union to France. Itwas gradually decaying, till our watchmakers began to makesmall watches for ladies. This gave an impulse to their trade,which, however, does not yield the same profit as in 1789.The jeweller's trade has increased since that time ; taking24 deniers in one ounce-appendix.401all together, the consumption of gold must be now not fur fromwhat it was in 1 789, because if the number of watches andjewels is now inferior to what it was, they are also not soheavy as they were formerly.At Neufchatel they only began to make watches at the endof the 17th century. In the year 1780 they exported 40,000watches, while they export now 130,000, and have morechance of a regular increase than we at Geneva,Our gold is supplied partly by ingots, and partly by coinsof different countries. Silver is more generally taken fromcoin, I believe. Hardly any money is coined in Switzerland,where foreign monies circulate widely. We have only a veryconsiderable quantity of low coin (inferior to the shilling)composed of mixed copper and silver. Comparing the populationwith that of England, I suppose we have about threetimes more of this little coin than in England. You areaware, I suppose, that a large quantity of Swiss watches andjewellery is smuggled into France, and they are there stampedand sold as French products, so that you can give no creditto the French official returns of the watches manufactured atBesangon or Paris.No. 12, A.Silver Allies at Birmingham.Silver watch-cases assayed and marked at the BirminghamAssay Office (not charged with duty) from 26th March, 1798,to 14th April, 1831.From 25th March, 1 798, to Julv, 179807S.2,549June, 179810,.30511,09413,61716,30320,61723,25430,199180(541,40842,128VOL. II.D Dsus: APPENDIX.From 25th March, 1807to July,47,54541,03251,42857,72845,84244,50353,65058,54756,71226,21833,22548,04226,56925,79433,40134,26845,08456,02654,08449,63356,64155,87242,2471830 toApril 14,39,135No12, B.Gold Watches at Birmingham.Gold watch-cases assayed and marked at the BirminghamAssay Office (not charged with duty) up to the 14th April,1831.OZa.Prom June, 1824to July,1830 tApril 151831APPENDIX.No. 13.All account of the number of ounces of gold plate and ofsilver plate for which duty was paid in each year from 5thJanuary, J 799, to 5th January, 1830, and also an accountshowing the number of ounces for which the drawback wasallowed in each of those years.Drawbacks on.Not distinguished.Years ended5th JanEngland.Ireland.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.Duty on | Drawbacks onGold & Silver.lGold & Silver.Duty.Gold & Silver.TownCountry . , .Scotland . . .IrelandOzs.Ozs.Ozs.Ozs.£. s.23550 6GIO 16d.£. s.3102 46 1d.Ozs.••241G1 21308 61801.TownCountry . . .Scotland. . .Ireland. . . .8G494290296G4780 19H23 144780 19"423 141802.TownCountry. .Scotland.Ireland4G0588845G40G50G6 19G4C19U432350GG 19GG1803.TownCountry .Scotland . . .IrelandGG12G783"'955437 975 1151.S75437 975 111804.TownCountry . . .Scotland .Ireland6371 131 62 4U)488G910 992956371 13162 4APl'EN'DIX.Duty paid on.Drawbacks on.Not distinguished.Years endedEngland.Ireland.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.Gold SilverPlate. Plate.Duty onGold & Silver.Drawbacks onGold & Silver.Duty.Gold & Silver.1805.TownCountry , . .Scotland • . .IrelandOzs.Ozs.Ozs.Ozs.of. s. d.4469 10 01£. s. d.49 3Ozs.114829 1 4469 10 Oi49 31806.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland2G6674*15 840 9 9105G6936674 15 840 9 91807.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland7205" 14 1139 2 943 : 1216087205 14 lA39 2 91808.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland fromAug. 11,1807C018}■■7228* 19 H20 5 6i7228 19 1^20 5 6^1809.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland*397419 11 Uf12" 17 67419 11 llf12 17 61810.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland. .'37'3538573" 6 A\12 2 68573 6 4^12 2 6APPENDIX.Duty paid on.DrawGoldPlate.)acts on.SilverPlate.Not distinguished.England.Ireland.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.Duty on Drawbacks onGold & Silver. Gold & Silver.Duty.Gold & Silver.1811.TownCountry , . .Scotland . . .IrelandOzs.Ozs.Ozs.Ozs.£. s.9893* ' 5d.£. s.34 19d.Ozs.1.34102486896 j 9893 534 19■^1812.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .IrelandC1G28423 13H••(.'2128423 13H1813.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland57«707740 ' 3^7"77740 3H7 71814.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .IrelandCogsGilt7375 11H23 1023 107375 11H1815.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Irelandfi73l*3678544 105^28 '28544 105>28 2sw;.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland"en10701G1*1589643 76|••9643 76ii 90650APPENDIX.Duty paid on.Drawbacks on.Not distinguishedYears endedEngland.Ireland.5th Jan.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.Duty onGold & SeverDrawbacks onGold & Silver.Duty.Gold & Silver.I8I7.TownCountry. .Scotland . . .Ireland. . . .Ozs.C923*79Ozs.Ozs.Ozs.i487£. s. d.8118*5£. s. d.09 1Ozs.8118 569 11818.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland. . . .115C93••1819.TownCountry . . .Scotland .Ireland. . . .9G191••I29358G•■1820.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland. . . .I6O7••G037I6O71821.TownCountry . . .Scotland.Ireland. . .,••••1822.TownCountry .Scotland .Ireland. . . .••12060)APPENDIX.Duty paid on.Drawbacks on.Not distinguished.Years endedEngland. Ireland.5th Jan.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.Duty onGold & Silver.Drawbacks onGold & Silver.Duty.Gold & Silver.1823.TownCountry . . .Scotland. . .Ireland. . . .Ozs.Ozs.Ozs.Ozs.£. s. d.£. s. d.Ozs.••1824.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland••.•1825.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland••••••182G.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland, "^from ili JJuly, 1825 3,••••1827.TownCountry. . .Scotland . . .Ireland. .••••1828.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland920.3974U8APPENDIX.Duty paid on.Drawbacks on.Not distinguished.Years endedEngland.Ireland.GoldPlate.SilverPlate.GoldPlate.Silver IPlate. 1Duty on | Drawbacks onGold & Silver Gold & Silver.■Duty.Gold & Silver.1829.TownCountry . . .Scotland . . .Ireland. . . .Ozs.Ozs.1214U513G1332Ozs.Ozs.£. s. d.£. s. d.Ozs.C61571830.TownCountry . . .Scotland. . .Ireland . .5949;;••Note. — The number of ounces of gold plate and of silver plate on whichduty was paid in Great Britain for the year ending the 5th of Januarj'^ 1800^cannot be given no distinction of gold and silver plate having been made inthe office books; neither has there been any distinction made of the duties ongold and silver plate for the country till the year ending the 5th of January,1818, the country assay offices not having rendered in their accounts (tf thetotal quantity of gold and silver assayed separately. The product of the dutyon plate has, therefore, in these instances been given.With respect to Ireland the Comptroller of Accounts there has attachedthe following notes to his account : —The duties on plate from the 5th of January, 1799:> to the 11th of August,1807, were under the management of the Commissioners of Excise, and werecollected by an officer of that branch of the revenue. From the 1 th of August,1807, to the 5th of July, 18"2."), the duties on plate were collected by an officerof the corporation of goldsmiths, from whose books the account for that periodis prepared ; but the number of ounces of gold and silver can only be separatelyset forth from the 5th of July, 1825, at which time the duties were transferredto the management of the Commissioners of Stamps.No drawbacks are allowed by law on plate wrought in Ireland."Accompt. and Coinpt.- General's Office, S. R. BARKER,Stamps, Pro. A. and C. G.91 h September, 1830.Appendix.40<jNo. 14.Imports and Exports of Treasure — India and China.An account showing the amount of bullion imported intoBengal, Amadis, and Bombay, from the United Kingdom,Foreign Europe, and North and South America, includingthe amount imported into China on account of the East Indiacompany, and the Americans ; together with the amount exportedfrom Bengal, madras, and Bombay, to the UnitedKingdom, &c , in the following years..amount bullionimportedinto India andChina.Amount bullionexportedfrom India andChina.ExcessImports.ExcessExports.1810-111811-121812-131813-141814-151815-161816-171817-181818-191819-201820-211821-221822-231823-241824-251825-26182(5-271827-281828-29Rupees.1 50,60,84488,65,26440,01,2422,99,69679,36,4222,37,52,2403,09,85,6763,52,37,6286,42,52,9983,82,42,3861,09,91, Oil2,43,38,4392,36,91,3081,43,53,1361,96,51,5911,78,34,79472,19,98898,24,71938,91,618Rupees.11,54,20098,44.70167,44,27897 39,48132,62,20414,61329,1636,63011,25081,8063,42,7221,63,35,18617.98,0221,09,14,67594 04811,15,80219,92,88496,62,218Rupees.1,39,06,64446,74,2182,37.37,6273,09,56.5133,52,37,6286,42.46,3683,82,31,1361,09,09,2052,39,95,71773.56,1221,25,55,11487.36,9161,77,40,74661,04,18678,31,835Rupees.9,79,43727,43,03691,39,78557,70,60036,24,31,000 7,31,43,883The American imports into China are not included in this sum, thevalue of the American trade for this year not being staled in the accountsreceived from China.410 APPENDIX.No. 15.Russian Trade with Asiatic Rationis.Extract translated from the Journal du Commerce of St.Petersburg of the 10th of April, 1831.Operations of the commerce which passed through thecustom-houses of the circle of Astrachan during the year1830. — The position of Astrachan, near the Caspian Sea andnot far from the mouth of the Volga, the greatest river inRussia, which forms a communication between the two capitals,as Avell as with the most fertile provinces of the empire andwith the fair of Nijny-Xovgord, has made it for a long timethe central point of the commerce with the neighbouringnations of Asia.Persia, Khiva, and Bulgaria supply us With raw materialswhich are absolutely necessary for the fabrication of the goodswhich find a ready sale in those countries. In the course ofthe last year the operations through the custom-houses of thecircle of Astrachan were less extensive than in 1829, on accountof the prevalence of cholera morbus, which had ravagedthe countries where that commerce is most considerable, andopposed obstacles as well to the importation as to the exportation,at that time of the year when both are usually themost brisk.Exportations.1830.1829.The custom-house at Astrachan3,.560,6394,422,340at Bayou38t),5271,028,660at Kizlar793,599756,944roubles 4,740,765 6,207,944Importations.The custom-house at Astrachan2,804,3683,337,790at Bayou1,997,1132,184,668at Kizlar10,6118,635The barrier at Kouba1,61825,960at Derbent1,58426,856roubles 4,815,294 5,583,909APPENDIX. 411Operations of the commerce which passed through thecustom-houses of the circle of Siberia in 1830. — The tradeon the Siberian frontier fills an important space in the wholefield of our exterior commercial relations, and its progress isdeserving of attention on account of its great influence on ourdomestic industry'. Notwithstanding the small number ofRussian merchants that are engaged in it, and the thinnessof the population near the frontier, with the vicinity of theThirghises who separate us from the states of Asia and preventa rapid development, there has been annually, on thewhole, an increase. Our woollen goods, our cottons, our silks,and our wrought metals of different kinds, find advantageoussales on that side. The skins of the cattle which the Asiaticssupply to us are converted into leather, and returned again witha profit. In exchange for our various commodities we receiveChinese silver, cattle, furs, which are sent into China, cotton,wool, camel's hair, down of rabbits, as well as some articles ofcotton and silk of Asiatic fabrication. The operations at thecustom-houses have been as follow : —Importations.Custom-house at Petropaulouskat SemipalatinskExportation s.Custom-house at Petropaulouskat Semijialatinsk1829,Roubles.972,556430,3441830.Roubles.1,453,624343,9011,402,900967,822570,8031,807.5251,150,254505,2331,537.625 1,655,487Besides this there was imported at Petropaulousk, in 1829,4 poods 25^ pounds of China silver; and in 1830, 6 poods29 pounds; and at Semipalatinsk, 155 poods in 1829, and166 poods in 1830.Moscow, March 31, 1831.The fair of Irbit ' this year is said by the traders Whohave returned from thence to have been more beneficial thanIrbit is a town on the river ot" the saiiitr name, in the Russian government41^ APPENDIX.in former years, and that goods in general have been sold onbetter terms than was expected. Some articles, such as tea,white cottons, cloth of all kinds, printed calicoes of Moscow,nankeen, furs, and silks of a medium quality, have beendisposed of readily, and at profitable prices.The Barbarians and the Taschkenes brought to Irbitabout 175 poods of silver in ingots, of which about 100 poodshave been received in payment by the traders of Moscow. Itis asserted that so many goods have never been brought tothis fair." — Gaz. du Commerce.Commerce of Testis. — " In the course of the year 1830, theamount of the transactions on which duties have been paid atthe custom-house of this place was, importation, 6,794,648roubles ; and exportation, 1,659,852. In the preceding yearthe importations had amounted to 5,133,990 roubles, and theexportations to 2,525,659 roubles." — Journal du Commerce.of Perm, on the frontiers of Siberia, where a fair is held in January (theseason for travelling on the ice), which is frequented, not only by theRussians and Siberians, but by Tartars, Armenians, and others. It is innorth latitude 57° 35', longitude C2° 50' east.Appendix. 413No. 16, A.An account showing the number of silver and gold watch-casesassayed at Goldsmith's Hall, London.Year.Silver.Gold.152,58717,257130,24612,579124,08812,921113,17713,974133,77613,943121,72512,54491,34610,76679,12314,457117,99418,31788,73115,16180,14412,94077,72712,10270,86912,67069,54213,21081,11214,776102,64517,76986,19710,61182,20713,19688,74114,77983,48413,706414 APPENDIX.No. 16, B.Gold and silver watches assayed in Dublin.Year.Sever.Gold,APPENDIX. 415No. 16, C.An account showing the weight of watch-cases assayed atChester, from 1814 to 1829, inclusive.Silver.Gold.Year.ozs.ozs.174U2477"The account at Chester was not kept with regularity beforethe year 1814. At Sheffield the whole number of silverwatches assayed did not in the ten years exceed one hundredand ten, and none of gold were assayed. At Exeteronly seven silver watches were assayed ; none at York orNewcastle ; and at Glasgow and Edinburgh no accounts arekept.THE END.1^^^By the same Author,TractsSUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH THE CORNTRADE AND CORN LAWS.One vol. octavo.LONDON :Printed BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.