ANHISTORICAL INQUIRYINTO THEPRECIOUS METALS.LONDON :PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, AV'HXTEFIVIARS.EcFANHISTORICAL INQUIRYINTO THEPRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTIONPRECIOUS METALSBY WILLIAM JACOB, ESQ., F.R.S.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.PREFACE.The following sheets owe their composition tothe friendship with which, during more thantwenty-five years, I had been honoured by the lateMr. Huskisson. It will be readily believed thathis penetrating mind and assiduous habits wouldlead him to accurate views of the influence of theprecious metals on the industry of mankind. Hesaw that an increase in the production of the minesmight act as a stimulus to excite industry, invention,and energy ; whilst a decline in their producemight have the contrary tendency. Helooked with attention to other consequences whichmiffht arise from the failure or defalcation of themines, and considered the effect of gold and silveron the production of wealth to be of less importancethan the influence it would exercise onthe distribution of it in the complex situation ofthe several classes of which modern society inEurope is composed. Whether any and to whatextent a diminution in the supply from the minesVI PREFACE.had already taken place, seemed to Mr. Huskissonan interesting subject for investigation.My own attention had been early directed to thetransatlantic possessions of Spain. By the desire ofMr. Pitt, during the short administration whichpreceded the death of that eminent statesman, andduring the administrations which followed till thetime when Spain was at peace with England, Ihad means furnished to me of acquiring someknowledge of those countries. My correspondenceand conversation with Mr. Huskisson thusnaturally and frequently fell into that channel, andnourished the feelings of interest on the subjectwhich had been created twenty years before.About ten years ago the expected return tospecie payments by the bank made the collectionof any information respecting the produce of themines a consideration of some importance. Anintimation, from one to whose friendship I feltmost highly indebted, had the force of a command;and I then, at Mr. Huskisson's suggestion, frameda comparison between the actual produce of themines of Spanish America from the years 1800 to1810, and from 1810 to 1820. It was deliveredto Lord Liverpool, and also communicated toMr. (now Sir Robert) Peel, and to Mr. Davidricardo.PREFACE. VllIn subsequent and frequent conversations withMr. Huskisson, he suggested the utility of takinga more comprehensive view of the subject, and ofexamining into the sources of those large accumulationsof gold and silver which are represented tohave existed in the early ages of the world —of their gradual decrease in quantity — and thecauses of the disappearance of a large portionof them. These subjects he thought might becombined with the state of the prices of commodities,and connected with the renewed increasewhich has arisen from the discovery of Americaand the mining operations. The present workmust be considered as an attempt to follow out thesuggestions in the several quarters of the world.I had made some progress in the collection offacts from the sacred and profane writers of antiquity,and on some other later parts of the inquiry,when the dreadful accident occurred bywhich his country and the world were deprived ofthe services of that eminent and estimable man ;but in the last conversation I had with him, a fewweeks before his death, he expressed much interestin the advance I had made, and assistedme by his advice in that mode of arranging thematerials which has been adopted in this inquiry.Vlll PREFACE.In the earlier part of this labour, I have derivedmuch assistance from the valuable work ofHeeren, professor of history in the university ofGottingen, on the commerce of the ancients. Heis not referred to in the body of the book, because,though I found his work of great use in pointingout some of the ancient authors to whom I hadrecourse have not translated any whole passage ;but it would be ungrateful not to acknowledgethe obligation which I owe to his learning andaccuracy *.In the accounts of the application of gold andsilver to other purposes than coin, I have, at least,used much diligence, and can lay claim to noother praise. If in that or any other part ofthis subject I have been led into errors, I shallrejoice to have them detected and rectified, havingno object to seek, or to assist others in seeking for,but the truth, on a subject of importance. If thiseffort should induce others to investigate thewhole of the history of the precious metals,or any one of the various branches of it, withmore learning, more assiduity, and more success,The work is entitled " Ideen weber die Politic, denVerger und den Handel der vornehmsten Volker der alterWelt' being the vols, ten to fifteen of the " HistoricalWere." 4th edition, Gottingen, 1824.PREFACE. IXI shall feel and cheerfully acknowledge the merit,and reserve no other claim to the approbation ofthe public, than that of having been the first toattempt to trace through several obscure and widebranching paths a subject in which mankind inall ages have felt a very intense degree of curiosityand interest.The reader who shall cast his eye over thetable of contents at the beginning of each volumewill be put in sufficient possession of theplan over, in the more remote ages, was notonly commonly, but in some, if not in all, exclusivelyused for money; and at those periodsThe author was much gratified, in 1827? by the inspectionof the Museum, and by the clear and familiar illustrationsof I\Ir Thompson, who has had the arrangement of the severalarticles.B 2EARLIEST KNOWLEDGEmay be viewed as one of the precious metals ;yet the changes that have since taken place haverendered gold and silver more especially entitledto that name, and will be so considered in thefarther progress of this inquiry.Some of the earliest notices which have reachedthe present day of the estimation of gold andsilver, are in the account of the condition ofAbraham, the progenitor of the Hebrew people,supposed to have lived two thousand years beforeour Christian era. We read " that he wasrich in cattle, and in silver, and in gold" Onthe death of his wife, he purchased a field for aburying-place, the payment for which was madewith four hundred shekels of silver, which hedelivered not in coin, but *' by weight accordingto the currency of the merchants-joseph,the great grandson of Abraham, wassold by his brethren to a caravan of Arabs travellingtowards Egypt with the productions oftheir country, for twenty pieces of silver \Afterwards, when established in Egypt as ministerof the king of that country, his brothersbrought " silver in their sacks' mouth," to purchasecorn during a season of scarcity in theirnative land. In the interesting sequel of thehistory of Joseph, when making himself knownGenesis cap. xii. v. 2.Genesis, cap. xxiii. v. 14, 15, and 16.Genesis, cap. xxxviii. v. 29.OF GOLD AND SILVER.to his family, he presented to his younger andfavourite brother three hundred pieces ofsilver \Though gold was known at that early periodand its value highly estimated, we find no intimationwhich can lead to the inference that itperformed the function of money, either by beingused as the common measure of value for othercommodities, or by being employed as the mediumfor exchanging one kind of goods foranother.The author of the book of Job, whether, assome have supposed, a contemporary of Abraham,or, as others have thought, of a date some hundredyears later, is one of the oldest writerswhose works have been transmitted entire tothe present day. He was not only acquaintedwith gold and silver, but was accurately informedof the manner in which they were procured." Surely," says he, " there is a vein forthe silver and a place for the gold where theyfine it." He farther adds, *' that the earth hathdust of gold." Though living in a countrywhich yields none of the precious metals, he wasthus familiarly acquainted with the fact, thatsilver was found in veins, and gold commonlyin small particles.1 Genesis cap. xlv. v. 22.2 Job, cap. xxiii. v. 1 and 6, also 15. 17, 18, 19, 20.EARLIEST KNOWLEDGE, &C.Among the people with whom Job was connected,silver seems to have passed from hand tohand by weight, as money; whilst gold wasappropriated like the onyx, the sapphire, crystal,pearls, topazes, rubies, and other jewels,as ornaments for the person. At the conclusionof that beautiful poem, the restoredwealth of Job is reckoned up in cattle, not inmoney; and though his visitors brought eacha piece of money, probably silver, yet each ofthem brought also an ear-ring of gold \Job, cap. xlii. v, 11 and 12.CHAP, I. ACCUMULATION OF GOLD AND SILVER.CHAPTER I.Of the accumulations of the precious metals from the mostremote ages to the establishment of the imperial governmentin Rome,There are no intimations in the sacred Hebrews.writings which afford any means of forming anestimate of the whole quantity of the preciousmetals which had been collected in the patriarchaldays. We must, therefore, rest satisfiedwith the scanty accounts they furnish, and proceedto later periods, when the relations of theseveral accumulations are more frequent, thoughnot marked with any such precision as can inspireimplicit confidence.In the history of the reign of Solomon, asrecorded in the book of Kings and in theChronicles, we find statements of the quantitiesof the precious metals used in the royal palaceand the holy temple erected by that monarch.We read, that *' he overlaid the house withinwith pure gold, and made a partition by thechains of gold before the oracle, and he overlaidthe oracle with gold ; and the whole house heoverlaid with gold till he had finished the wholeACCUMULATION CHAP. T.house ; also the whole altar that was by theoracle he overlaid with gold"The quantity of gold which Solomon collectedin a single year is stated to be (1 Kings, c. x.V. 14.) six hundred three score and six talents,or, perhaps, about three hundred thousandpounds in value in our present money. Thatwith which he covered the sanctum sanatorium,at the same rate, would amount to about twohundred and thirty thousand pounds. We learnfrom the book of Kings ", that the king broughtby his ships from Ophir four hundred and twentytalents of gold, or about one hundred andninety thousand eight hundred pounds. Thebook of Chronicles represents the amountgreater, as four hundred and fifty talents, or twohundred and three thousand pounds, a differenceof no great moment, and one which, perhaps,a collation of manuscripts might reconcile.Without attempting to calculate the quantityof metallic treasure heaped up by Solomon, wemay best describe it in the language of his day.We read that " his throne was of ivory overlaidwith the best gold — that all the drinking vesselswere of gold — that all the vessels of the houseof the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold;1 Kings, c. iii. v. 20—22. « 1 Kings, c, x. v. 28.^ 2 Chronicles, c. viii. v. 18.CHAP. I. WITH THE HEBREW NATION.none were of silver, for that metal was nothingaccounted of in the days of Solomon," and inshort, " the King made silver to be as stones inJerusalem \"After this short intimation of the store of silverand gold accumulated by the Hebrew nation, itmay be more proper to defer to another branchof the subject the consideration of the way inwhich such a store of the precious metals mayprobably have been collected under the reign ofSolomon.In proceeding from the sacred to the profanewriters of antiquity, the reader is naturally insome degree surprised at the credulity, or atleast apparent credulity, with which the mostextraordinary and improbable tales are narrated.This is most remarkable in Herodotus and Diodorus,who are yet far from unworthy of confidence,where nothing supernatural is concerned.The Greek and Roman writers relate prodigieswhich at this day we know not whether to attributeto their own credulity, or to that of thecommunity for which they composed their works.In either case it does not render them utterlyunworthy of credit, nor destroy their testimonyin matters of history, of geography, of manners,of laws, or of government.The history of all ancient nations is filled with^ 1 Kings, c. X.10 ■ ACCUMULATIONS IN cHAP. I.prodigies which are no longer believed ; but if,on that account, their authority on other subjectsbe discarded, it will become impossible totrace the progress of mankind through the severalstages of society, from the most rude to themost civilized state. It is scarcely two centuriessince in every part of Europe, with all the knowledgeand civilization it had imbibed, the beliefin demoniacal possessions, in the power ofwitches and fairies, and in spectral appearances,universally prevailed. It would be unjust to thememory of the historians and chroniclers of thatand the preceding ages, to reject their testimony,because they believed in supernaturalevents and appearances, which have lost all holdupon the present race, except among the mostignorant of the vulgar.If in extracting from the writings of antiquitywhat relates more immediately to the subject ofour inquiry, it should occasionally appear thatincredible events are related, the sound judgmentof the reader will enable him to separatethe facts from the fictions in which they may beenveloped ; and he may find amusement, if notinstruction, in observing the great credulity ofthe eminent men of antiquity, and in comparingtheir habits of investigation and discriminationwith those of the ablest writers of their own ageand country.Persia ''"'^ ^^ appears from the relations of Diodorus, thatCHAP. I. SYRIA AND PERSIA. 11large masses of gold and silver had been collectedtogether by Ninus, the founder of Nineveh,•' who possessed himself of all the treasures ofBactrianana, among which was abundance of goldand silver \" From the same writer we learnthat Semiramis, the wife of Bells, and the successorto his dominion, who built the city ofBabylon, among other stupendous and almostincredibly magnificent works erected in that city,a temple to Jupiter or Bells ; " upon whichwere placed the statues of Jupiter, of Juno, andof Rhea, all of beaten gold. That of Jupiterwas standing upright, was forty feet in height,and weighed a thousand Babylonian talents. —That of Rhea was of the same height, sitting ona throne of gold, having a lion on each side ofher, and one at her knees, and near them twovastly large serpents of silver, weighing thirtytalents. The statue of Juno was in an erectposture, and weighed eight hundred talents. Analtar was erected for these deities of beaten gold,forty feet long and fifteen broad, weighing fivehundred talents, upon which were two cups, eachof them weighing thirty talents, and near tothem as many censers weighing three hundredtalents. There were also three drinking vasesof gold, the largest of which was dedicated toDiodorus, book ii. cap. 1.V12 ACCUMULATIONS IN CHAP. I.Jupiter, weighing twelve hundred talents, andthe other two six hundred talents each"As Diodorus wrote in the Greek language,it is probable he adopted the weights of thatcountry, according to which the value of thismass of gold, as calculated by the Abbe Bar-thereby,would amount in our money to abouteleven millions sterling, whilst others estimate itat somewhat less ; a difference, however, scarcelyworth investigating. It is impossible not to suspectthe statement here given of some exaggeration,though we may be induced to believethat a large quantity of the precious metals hadbeen collected at that early period ; but the exactnessof the quantity must be a subject of doubtwhen it is considered that Diodorus wrote neartwo thousand years after the events he relates,and in an age when written records must havebeen both rare and of doubtful authenticity.The probability of an accumulation of gold toa great extent in Babylon, is strengthened bythe narrative in the book of Daniel, of the greatsize of the image of gold erected by Nebuchadnezzar,on the plain of Dura, near that city.There is an appearance of authenticity and ofaccuracy in the account given by Herodotus ofthe tribute of gold and silver which Darius HysDiodorus, book ii. cap. 1.CHAP. I. SYRIA AND PERSIA. 13states, king of Persia, about 480 years beforeChrist, drew from the several provinces, intowhich, after completing his conquests, he dividedhis extensive dominions.The amount supplied by each province isstated, and whether paid in silver or in gold.*' The aggregate sum," he says, " will be foundto be nine thousand eight hundred and eightytalents in silver, and, estimating the gold atthirteen times the value of the silver, there willbe found, according to the Euboic talent, fourthousand six hundred and eighty of these talents.The whole being estimated together, it willappear that the annual tribute paid to Dariuswas fourteen thousand five hundred and sixtytalents."This treasure is estimated by Gibbon and byKennel to be equivalent to about three millionsand a quarter sterling. According to the inferenceof the former writer, drawn from the sameauthority, in book 1, cap. 192, this revenue wasthe surplus, after the expenses of the maintenanceof the army and of the provincial administrationhad been discharged. This quantity ofgold and silver was probably that which becamethe property of the monarch, forming a kind ofreserved stock to meet unforeseen contingencies.We find, in another passage in Herodotus, aHerodotus, book iii. cap. 95.14 ACCUMULATIONS IN chap. i.description of the manner in which the treasureso collected was preserved in the royal residence.The gold and silver were melted and pouredinto earthen vessels, and these when filled wereremoved, leaving the metal in a solid mass ;when any was wanted, a piece was broken off,of the capacity which the occasion required'*It seemed, as far as regarded Darius, to be thepractice to coin no more gold and silver thanwas needed to conduct the commerce and todefray the expenses of the state", which at thatperiod could not be of any large amount, fromthe paucity of commodities which were the subjectsof exchange, and from the low prices whichall the necessaries and conveniences of life bore.It is not improbable that this reserve fund wascarefully kept from circulation by hoarding, as apreparation for the grand campaign against theGreeks, which must have formed a part of thewarlike operations projected by the Persian monarchand his ministers. We learn that Xerxestook with him into the field so much money andvaluable effects as formed loading for twelvehundred camels % and upon the disastrous eventswhich attended his invasion was under the necessityof distributing large sums to the mercenarytroops who had accompanied him to the1 Herodotus, book iii. cap. 96.2 Strabo book xv. p. 505.3 Demostb. de Sym.CHAP. I.SYRIA AND PERSIA. 15field, and that Sparta alone received from himfive thousand talents \"Darius coined pieces of gold of great purity,which obtained the name of darics. They wereabout the value of twenty-five shillings of ourpresent money. The name daric was at subsequentperiods, however, given generally to allgold coins which contained but little alloy, andthus indicated the purity of the metal, ratherthan the weight of the piece. The darics of thiscoinage were few in number and contracted incirculation, or more of them would have beenhanded down to posterity. It is said, there arebut two now known to exist, one of which is inthe collection of Lord Pembroke. The figureof an archer is stamped on it, which gave rise toan ancient witticism that may be worth relating.Agesilaus, king of Sparta, received from Dariusa bribe of thirty thousand darics to withdrawfrom the other Grecian states with whom hewas in alliance. Being reproached for his treachery,he defended himself, by asserting that hisoperations had been suspended, owing to hishaving been defeated by thirty thousand archers.The wealth of Croesus, king of Lydia, who Greece.lived about 5 iO years before Christ, has becomeproverbial; and, though no precise communicationof the extent of it has been handed down,Isocrates. 2v/i/uax. 32.ACCUMULATIONS OFwe may form some estimate of it, by the munificentpresents he made to the temple ofDelphi, as related by Herodotus ^ and Diodorus-, amounting to four thousand talents ofsilver and two hundred and seventy talents ofgold, or near three millions in value of ourmoney.We find in Herodotus a story illustrative bothof the wealth of this king and of the manners ofhis time. When Croesus sent his Lydian fromilixh^yf^ Sardis to consult the oracle at Delphi, they» were received with hospitality by the family ofthe Alcmaeonidae at Athens, and, on their return,acquainted their master with the kindnessthey had experienced. A member of that familyreceived an invitation to visit Croesus, and onhis arrival was presented with as much gold ashewas able to carry ^. " To improve the valueof the gift, Actaeon made use of the followingartifice. Providing himself with a large tunic,in which were many folds, and with the mostcapacious buskins he could procure, he followedhis guide to the royal treasury; there, rollinghimself among the golden ingots, he first stuffedhis buskins as full of gold as he possibly could ;he then filled all the folds of his robes, his hair,and even his mouth with gold dust. This done.1 Herodotus, b. i. c. 50. " Diodorus, b. xvi. c. 56.^ Herodotus, b. vi. c. 105.CHAP. I. GOLD AND SILVER IN GREECE. 17with extreme difficulty he staggered from theplace; from his swelling mouth, and projectionsall around him, resembling any thing ratherthan a man. When Croesus saw him he burst intolaughter, and not only suffered him to carry awayall he had got, but added to it other presentsequally valuable. The family from this circumstancebecame exceedingly affluent, and Alcma^onwas enabled to procure and maintain those horseswhich gained him the victory in the Olympicgames."Whatever may have been the real wealth ofCroesus, it would appear that gold must havebeen of very high value in Athens, when such aload as an individual could carry about his personin the way here described could be sufficientto form the foundation of the fortunes ofone of the aristocratical families of that state.Pytheus, king of the petty territory of Cela Miain Phrygia, has been celebrated for his greatwealth. According to Herodotus, he was a nativeof Lydia ; but according to Pliny, of Bithynia ;and it does not appear in what manner he becamepossessed of the rich territory he ruled.It is related of this man by Herodotus, thatwhen Xerxes invaded Greece (about 47O yearsbefore Christ), he entertained that monarch andhis whole army with great magnificence ; andbeing asked the amount of his wealth, replied toXerxes, ' I conceal nothing from you, and willVOL. F. c18 ACCUMULATIONS OF cHAP. I.not affect ignorance, but fairly tell you thewhole. As soon as I heard of your approach tothe Grecian sea, I was desirous of giving youmoney for the war. On examining into the stateof my affairs, I found I was possessed of twothousand talents of silver, and four millions,wanting only seven thousand, states of gold ofDarius : all this I give to you ; my slaves andmy farms will be sufficient to maintain me'"According to the estimate of Archer, an ableFrench critic, the metallic treasures of this man,the ruler of a small territory, but the proprietorof rich mines of silver and gold, amounted tothree millions six hundred thousand pounds ofour present money.A long account of this man has been collectedby Archer, chiefly from the work of Plutarch*' De Virtutis Mulier." It narrates the measurestaken by his wife to cure him of that passionfor seeking gold to which the lives of hissubjects were sacrificed, and by which a want ofsufficient food for subsistence was caused. Asthe story has been frequently told, and must befamiliar to most readers, we may dispense withthe relation of it.The application of the labour of all the inhabitantsto the searching for and purifying goldHerodotus, book iii. cap. 26, 27-- Lurcher's notes on Herodotus, vol. ii. p. 356.CHAP. I. GOLD AND SILVER IN GREECE. 19caused such distress for food, that at lengthPytheus was induced to direct that only one-fifthinstead of the whole of the citizens should infuture be compelled to devote themselves tothose operations.The story of Pytheus is important to one ofthe objects of the present inquiry, inasmuch asit shows, as far as regards the particular case,that the acquisition of gold and silver was onlyto be obtained, in that remote period, by themines being in the hands of severe as well asarbitrary despots, who spared neither the enjoyments,the labour, nor even the lives of theirsubjects in the eager pursuit after the metallicriches of their dominions.It does not appear that the free states ofGreece possessed a store of gold and silver equalto that acquired by these absolute rulers ofsmaller portions of territory. When ^ Pericles,in order to animate the Athenians in their defenceagainst the Peloponnesian, about the year431 before Christ, addressed them, he stated theamount of the money then in the citadel to beone million one hundred sixty-two thousandtwo hundred and fifty pounds; and in additionto that the gold in the statue of Minerva, whichmust be replaced if appropriated to the publicservice, to amount to one hundred twenty-fourThucydides' Peloponnesian War, book ii.C Q20 ACCUMULATIONS OF CHAP. 1.thousand eight hundred pounds. The revenuesderived from the tributary states amounted annuallyto the sum of one hundred sixteen thousandtwo hundred and fifty pounds, and morethan seven hundred thousand pounds had beenexpended in improving the public works \The mass of the precious metals brought fromthe eastern to the western world by Alexandermust have been enormous, though much of thatcaptured was expended in the subjugated countries,and in those which were between themand Greece The accounts of historians areprobably exaggerated ; but whatever allowancemay be made for such a practice, which was toocommon with the ancients, we must be convincedfrom the numerous authorities" whichbear testimony to the facts, and corroborateeach other, that the accumulation in the handsof individual monarchs and states was muchgreater about the time of the establishment ofthe full power of the Roman empire than at anysubsequent period.The treasures acquired by Alexander in Susaand Persia, exclusive of those which were found inthe Persian camp and in Babylon, are stated by theauthors above referred to and others, by some atThe sums here stated are taken according to the calculationof Dean Smith, the learned translator of Thucydides.Strabo, 615, p. 502. — Arran, lii. 3. — Justin, xi. 14. —And Plutarch, Vit. Alex. 36.CHAP. I. GOLD AND SILVER IN GREECE. 21forty, by others at fifty thousand talents. Thetreasure of Persepolis is rated at one hundredand twenty thousand talents ; that of Pasagardaat six thousand ; and upon the capture of Ecbatana,according to the account preserved inStrabo, one hundred and eighty thousand talentsare said to have been collected from thence,besides six thousand talents which Darius hadwith him, which were taken by his murderers.Alexander's profuse expenditure, which hisflatterers called generosity, was in accordancewith the vast sums he seems to have acquired.He gave great rewards to his soldiers, and paidtheir debts, amounting to nine thousand eighthundred talents. He presented to the thessalonianstwo thousand talents. The funeral ofExhaustion is said to have cost twelve thousandtalents, and the researches in natural history, forthe works of Aristotle, eight hundred talents.The wealth of his satraps was also enormous.Harpalus, one of them, is said to have amassedfifty thousand talents, although, when at Athens,he denied the possession of more than nine hundredand fifty ^ The successors of Alexander,also, collected large sums ; though, by theirextensive and fierce wars, the greater part wasdissipated.In Polybius is found a description of Ecba-Diodorus, xvii. 108. Lives of the Ten Orators.22 ACCUMULATION IN THE DOMINIONS chap. I.tana, at a period subsequent to the capture ofthat place by Alexander; and, afterwards, in thereigns of Antigonus and Seleucus.•* The magnificence of the palace," he says,was such in every part, as to give a high ideaof the power and wealth of those by whom ithad been erected ; for, though the wood of itwas all cypress or cedar, no part of it was leftnaked; yet the beams, the roofs, and the pillarsthat supported the porticos and perishes, wereall covered with plates, some of silver and someof gold. The tiles, likewise, were all of silver.Though the place had been three times plunderedby those we have named, before Antiochusarrived, there was still remaining, in the templeof Ena, some pillars cased with gold, and a largequantity of silver tiles, laid together in a heap.There where also some few wedges of gold, anda much greater number of silver. These werecoined into money, and amounted to the sum ofabout five thousand talents \"I Ptolemy Philadelphus, the second king of"ilXX^-egypt after Alexander, is stated by Appian2 upon the authority of official documents, to have'^^^ ^ '^ ' possessed treasure to the enormous amount ofseven hundred and forty thousand talents : eitherRoman talents or the small Ptolemaic talent. Ifthe former, which were about equal to the AtticPolybius, book v. cap. 9.• Hist. Rom. proem. 10.CHAP. I. OF THE SUCCESSORS OF ALEXANDER. ^3talent, be rendered into money of the presentday, it will give the amount as one hundred andseventy-eight millions. If the smaller talent,which seems most correct, be taken, it willamount to at least one quarter of that sum.Though an account of this kind may appearexaggerated, yet there seems no reason to doubtits general veracity. The revenues of the Polemicswere excessively large, and the countriesover which their dominions extended were, bythe collections, completely drained of all theirwrought gold and silver ; and the tributes werecollected by the farmers of the revenue withthe assistance of an armed force, composed, notof regular soldiers, but of organized bands ofrobbers.Some idea of the degree of rapacity in extractingrevenue under Ptolemy may be formedby comparing the tribute drawn from the provincesof Ccelesyria, Palestine, and Samaria,under Cyrus, as given by Herodotus, and thatextorted by the successor of Alexander, asgiven by Josephus. At the time of Cyrus, theisland of Cyprus was included in the provinceof Ccelesyria, but in the time of Ptolemy wasseparated from it. In the first instance, thetribute paid was three hundred and fifty talents \In the latter instance, it was farmed to EuergetesHerodotus, book iii. cap. 89.accumulation IN CHAP. I.for eight thousand talents; but, if the taxes werefarmed by a Jew, he was to pay double thatamount, and moreover supply to the royal treasurythe money required to redeem the confiscatedgoods of such persons as had not paid theirtaxes \During the period of the Macedonian empire,the precious metals were spread in great abundanceover the whole eastern shores of theMediterranean ; and if there had not been avery large portion of them hoarded up in theroyal treasury, their value must have fallen muchlower, in comparison with other commodities,than was actually the case.TheRo- The extension of the Roman empire, until itcomprehended almost the whole of the knownworld, if it tended to diminish the productionof the precious metals, powerfully attractedthem, from Asia and Africa, to its own metropolis.It is thus that the enormous fortunesof individuals which are related by the historiansare to be accounted for. The descriptions ofsuch fortunes, it is true, are not confined totheir mere metallic wealth, but include theirlands, houses, slaves, and furniture, and also1 Josephus Antic. Jut. xii. 4.See, on this subject, the valuable German work of ProfessorBoecl<h, entitled " Staatshausholtung der Athcner," anexcellent translation of which was published in 1828, underthe title of " Public Economy of Athens."mansCHAP. r. THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. ^5money lent at interest on mortgages, or othersecurities. But unless the metallic wealth hadincreased in a prodigious degree, that remarkablerise in the prices of other commodities couldnot have been experienced which is noticed byall writers. As one among other instances, weknow that the house of Marius S at Museum,was purchased by Cornelia for seventy-five thousanddrachmas -, and a few years after sold toLucullus for five hundred thousand two hundreddrachmas ^.The fortunes of private individuals may bejudged of by a few select notices to be found incontemporary authors. Crassus is said to havepossessed in lands bis millies*, besides money,slaves, and household furniture, estimated at asmuch more Seneca is related to have posPlutarch, in Mario. 2 £2421. 17*. Qd. sterling.3 £16,152. 5*. \0d. sterling.£1,614,583. Qs. 8rf. sterling.Though Crassus had several silver mines and estates ofgreat value, which were profitably managed, yet his revenuesfrom those sources are represented as inconsiderable, Ashencompared with those he derived from his slaves. He had alarge number of them, whom he educated, who were taught tobecome readers, amanuenses, book-keepers, stewards, andcooks. Besides this he made interest of his money, at a highrate, receiving for the use of it one per cent, at the end ofeach month. It is recorded as a saying of his, " that no mancould be accounted rich who was not able to maintain an armyout of his own revenues." It should seem that when he wasdesirous to form a powerful party in the state, he could beoccasionally as profuse as he was habitually avaricious ; for on26 ACCUMULATION IN cHAP. i.sessed ter millies ^ Pallas, the freedman ofClaudius, an equal sum. Lentulus, the augur,quater millies". C. C. Claudius Isidore, althoughhe had lost a great part of his fortune inthe civil wars, left by his will four thousand onehundred and sixteen slaves, three thousand sixhundred yoke of oxen, two hundred and fifty-seventhousand head of other cattle, and inready money HS. sexcenties^.The emperors were possessed of wealth in aproportion commensurate with their superiorrank and power. Augustus obtained, by the testamentarydispositions of his friends, <7wr//^r deniesmillies'^. Tiberius left at his death vigesies acseries millies ^, which Caligula lavished away inasingle year.The expenses of the government, and thedebts and credits of the most eminent individuals,seem to have been on the same colossalscale. Vespasian, at his accession, estimatedthe money which the maintenance of the commonwealthrequired at three hundred andtwenty-two millions nine hundred sixteen thousandsix hundred and sixty pounds.one occasion he gave an entertainment to the populace, whowere seated at ten thousand tables, and at another time gavethem a supply of bread-corn for three months. — Plutarch,Life of M. Crassus."' of 2,421,875 sterling. - £3,229,166 sterling.3 ^484,375 sterling. * o£'32,291, 666 sterling.^ .£21,796,875 sterling.CHAP. I. THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 27The debts of Milo amounted to US. septemJulius Caesar, before he held anyoffice, owed thirteen hundred talents ; when,after his editorship, he set out for Spain, he isreported to have said, Sis millies et quingentiessibi dresses ut fiihil habere ; that is, that he wastwo millions and eighteen thousand poundsworse than nothing. When he first enteredRome, at the beginning of the civil war, he tookout of the treasury to the amount of one millionand ninety-five thousand pounds sterling, andbrought into it, at the end of that war, fourmillions eight hundred and forty-three thousandpounds. He is reported to have purchased thefriendship of Curio, at the commencement ofthe civil contests, by a bribe of four hundredeighty-four thousand three hundred and seventypounds; and that of the consul L. Paulus, thecolleague of Marcellus, by one of two hundredseventy-nine thousand five hundred pounds -.Anthony, on the ides of March, when Caesarwas killed, owed three hundred and twentythousand pounds, which he paid before thekalends of April, and squandered of the public> 0^565 J 04 sterling.It is remarked by Pliny (book xxxiii. cap. 3.), that the cityof Rome never possessed so much money as at the beginningof the war between Caesar and Pompey.28 ACCUMULATION IN THE ROMAN, &C. chap. I.money more than five millions six hundredthousand pounds \Many other instances might be found of vastmasses of wealth being collected, of large debtsbeing contracted, and of prodigious sums beingexpended, either on public occasions, or inprivate indulgences of the dress, the tables, orthe furniture of the Romans, just after theacquisition of universal empire. At that periodthe treasure, which had been acquired by conquest,had not been generally diffused in thehands of numerous individuals, nor had much ofit been consumed by the friction which thepractice, soon after extended, of convertinglarge quantities of it into coined money, necessarilyoccasioned.See Adam's Roman Antiquities, 9th edit. p. 461, fromwhence, as far as regards Rome, the facts are selected, andwhere the evidence on which each of them rests is pointedout.CHAP. II.ANCIENT MINES. ^9CHAPTER II.On the mines of the ancients in the several parts of theworld.Having taken a survey of the great accumu- Asia east ofnation of the precious metals which had beenformed in the early ages of the world, we mayattempt to trace out the various sources fromwhich they had been collected, as well as themeans used for obtaining and adapting them tothe purposes of human life.Herodotus has given, in his third book, cap,89 — 97» an account of the satrapies or provincesinto which Darius, after the conquest of Babylon,divided his vast dominions. The division wasmade for the purposes of taxation, and theaccount shows the amount of the tribute imposedon the several portions of his empire.This may serve as a guide to the various countrieswhich were believed to be capable of furnishingto the royal treasury supplies of gold andsilver. It does not, however, enable us to ascertainwhat portion of those metals was the productof the country from which it was required, orwhat part of it was obtained in such country by30 MINES OF ASIACHAP. II.means of the commerce of the inhabitants withthose of other divisions of the world. ThusPhoenicia, and Palestine, and the land to thefrontier of Egypt were taxed at three hundredand fifty talents of silver, though neither goldnor silver, nor any metal, except some copperfrom Sarephta, was produced in the country.It seems probable that the precious metalswere first known to mankind in the eastern partsof Asia and in Egypt, but which of those countriesis entitled to a priority in the discovery itis now almost impossible to determine. Thetribute imposed by the law of Darius shows theirwealth in general, as compared with the otherdivisions of his dominions. Thus, in easternAsia, " Babylon and the other parts of Assyria,which formed the ninth satrapy, paid a thousandtalents of silver. Ecbatana, the rest of Media,with the Parycanii and Orthocorybantes, whichwas the tenth satrapy, furnished four hundredand fifty talents. The Caspian, the Darts,and some others, composing the eleventh satrapy,contributed two hundred talents. The countryof the Bactria, or twelfth satrapy, furnishedthree hundred and sixty talents ; to which maybeadded Susa, and the rest of the Hessians,who supplied three hundred talents." Thus theeastern part of Asia, exclusive of India, which'* supplied six hundred talents in golden ingots,"afforded nearly one half of the whole metallicCHAP. II. TO THE EAST OF PERSIA. 31tribute imposed by Darius. These satrapiescomprehended the whole of that part of Asiawhich is to the eastward of the Tigris, and, extendingalong the border of the Caspian sea,contains within its boundaries Persia, Siberia,Tartary, and whatever was known to the Persiansin the days of Darius of Tibet, China, andIndia beyond the Ganges. They are now knownto contain veins of the precious metals, some fewof which still yield gold and silver, but whichwere worked to a greater extent in former ages.Herodotus particularly notices those people asemployed in searching for gold who live in thecountry of Pactijica, near the sources of theIndus, and who are said by him to resemble theBactria. This district, fertile in gold, is onthe eastern border of Great Bactrianana, where thechain of the Taurus mountains divides into tworanges, which almost surround Little Bactriananaand the desert steppes of Cobb. The riverswhich descend from these mountains give sufficientevidence by their washings that gold wasabundant, some of which was procured partlyfrom washing the sand, more by digging, butmost by a fabulous mode of procuring it, whichmay at least be amusing to relate", though itmay not obtain much credit, even when sanc-^ Herodot. b. iii. cap. 102, and Abulgasi, Hist, des Tartarean,p. 388.- Herodot. b. iii. cap. 106.32 MINES OF ASIA chap. it.toned by the testimony of Pliny \ "In thevicinity of the Bactria, who are distinguishedfor their bravery, and are employed in searchingfor gold, there are vast deserts of sand, in whicha species of ants is produced, not so large as adog, but bigger than a fox. Some of these, takenby hunting, are preserved in the palace of thePersian monarch. Like the ants common inGreece, which in form also they nearly resemble,they make themselves habitations in theground, by digging under the sand. The sandthus thrown up is mixed with gold dust, to collectwhich the Indians are despatched into thedeserts. They proceed on this expedition withthree camels fastened together; a female beingsecured between two males, and upon her theIndian is seated, taking care to select one thathas recently foaled. The females of this descriptionare quite as swift as horses, and capableof bearing much heavier burdens. Having thusconnected their camels, the Indians proceed insearch of the gold, choosing the hottest time ofthe day as most proper for their purpose, forthen it is that the ants conceal themselves underthe earth. As soon as they arrive at thespot, the Indians precipitately fill their bagswith sand, and return as expeditiously as possible.The Persians say that these ants knowPliny, b. xxxiii. cap. 1.Chap. ir. TO THE EAST OF Persia. 33and pursue the Indians by their smell with incredibleswiftness. They affirm, that if theIndians did not make considerable progresswhilst the ants were collecting themselves together,it would be impossible for any of them toescape. For this reason, at different intervals,they separate one of the male camels from thefemale, which are always letter than the males,and are at this time additionally incited by theremembrance of their young whom they had left.It is thus, according to the Persians, the Indiansobtain their greatest quantity of gold ; what theyprocure by digging is of much inferior importance."— Below's Herodotus, vol. ii. p. 281 — "287.Though the father of history may have beentoo credulous in receiving these tales of ants —in size between a dog and a fox — of their labourin digging up heaps of gold — and their swift pursuitofthe plunderers of their hoards — his relationconfirms the general view every inquirer musttake, that the produce of gold from mines is veryfar inferior in quantity to that procured in theform of dust, which, in spite of both Herodotusand Pliny, seems to be chiefly, but not exclusively,gained by washing the sand brought downby mountain torrents.It is more than probable that the countries tothe north of Persia, though unknown except byrumour to the more refined inhabitants of centralAsia, contributed in some degree to increaseVOL. I. D34 MINES OF ASIACHAP. IT.the supply of gold. The knowledge of theGreeks in the time of Herodotus was comprisedin an acquaintance with those peoplewho lived to the south of the Altar mountains,which the discoveries of the Russians haveproved to be the barrier between Bactrianana andSiberia. Now it is stated, respecting several ofthe Nomadic tribes to the north of those mountains,that they had gold in abundance. It is notwith a design to show the credulity of our author,but to account for the apparent discrepancieswhich represent gold as an abundant article in thePersian dominions, and yet describe the sources ofit so few and feeble, that reference is here madeto Herodotus. That writer says, that " in thenorth there is a prodigious quantity of gold, buthow it is produced I am not able to tell withcertainty. It is affirmed indeed that the ,a people who have but one eye, take thegold away by violence from the griffins ; but Ican never persuade myself that there are anymen who, having but one eye, enjoy in all otherrespects the nature and qualities of all otherhuman beings \" A modern would scarcelygive more credit to the story of griffins beingthe guardians of gold than to that of their plunderers,the nation of the Arimaspi, having butone eye ! The researches of travellers fromHerodotus, b. iii. cap. 116.CHAP. 11. TO THE EAST OF PERSIA. 35Russia have within the last century thrown somelight on the mining operations of the ancients inthis part of Asia, and deserve attention. Weareunacquainted with even the names of theNomadic tribes by whom the mines in Siberiawere worked, but it may be safely inferred fromthe discoveries that have been made, that theiroperations were carried on before the conquestof Siberia by the Tartars \ We know that theTartars were acquainted with the use of iron,that they had weapons and implements of thatmetal ; but the tribes who excavated the minesof Siberia had no iron, and used implements ofno other metal than copper or brass. The conquestof this part of Asia by the Tartars waseffected about 150 years before our era, and itseems to be hence inflexible that the mines musthave been worked prior to that period. It isremarkable that the mines which the late travellershave discovered are in districts aboundingwith iron ore, though none of it appearedto have been worked.The remains of the mines have been traced byGmelin, Lepechin, and Pallas, on the southernand eastern borders of the Ural mountains.Histoire geiiealogique des Tartares de Abulgasi, as quotedby Johann Bernard Fischer, in his work printed at Peters-burgh,in I76B, entitled " Sibirische Geschichtc von der ent-decking Sibiriens bis auf die eroberung dieses Landes dutchdie Russische waffen "D '236 MINES OF ASIA CHAP. IJ,That they were the work of a Nomadic people,probably the Scythian, is conjectured from therebeing no remains of buildings of masonry nearthem. The extent of the works show that theworkmen must have been numerous, whilst aninspection of them proves that only the first rudimentsof the science of mining could have beenknown to them.Besides some implements the use of which isunknown, there were wedges and hammers, allof copper S that had been smelted, but withoutany particles of gold in them. Instead of sledges,they seem to have used large stones of a longshape, on which are to be seen marks whichshow that handles had been fastened to them ".They seem to have scraped out the gold withthe fangs of the boars, and collected it in leatherbags or pockets, some of which have beenfound. With such imperfect implements, thework of excavation must have required thelabour of a great number of hands for a longtime,and in some cases must have exhaustedtheir patience.In one instance, after having proceeded tosome depth, and reached a bed of hard stones,the work, after penetrating a little way, had beenabandoned. Some of the pits are twenty fathomsin depth, shaped like a well, and are about seven1 Pallas Rise, vol. 2. sect. 608.- Lepechin, part 2. sect. 89.chap. II. TO THE EAST OF Pi^KSlA. 37feet in diameter. The passages and props are wellexecuted, but the former so narrow and low that itmust have been difficult to have worked in them.The natural pillars left to support the roofs arein some instances still effectual for that purpose,and in these are still found small portions ofcopper ore, containing particles of gold ; in otherinstances, the supports have given way, and inthem are found some human bones, probably ofthose who had been buried in the ruins. Thata great number of people were employed is inferredfrom the numerous fragments of earthenwarewhich are found scattered to a great distancearound.It appears that only the richest ores whereworked, and some of them must have beensmelted in the mines; for in the rubbish of oneof the supports which had fallen in, there hasbeen found melted copper, and the implement forsmelting-it : some of these implements also havebeen found on the surface near the pits. Theoperation of crushing as well as washing the oreswas performed in the rivulets, and, as is supposed,the latter was omitted in the rich ores, which werefound on elevated spots. The smelting, whetherin the mines or on the surface, was performed insmall furnaces, of which Gmelin observed neara thousand in the eastern parts of Siberia. Theywere made of red bricks, and in them pieces ofmelted copper, from two to three pounds in38 MINES OF CHAP. II.weight, have been found. The height andbreadth of these furnaces were about two feet,and the length three feet. There were holes onboth the front and back sides, but which of themwas appropriated for the bellows could not bediscovered by any marks. In the neighbourhoodof these furnaces there are large heapsof scoriae ; but no one has had the curiosity toascertain what metals, if any, they contain.It may be presumed that a long period musthave elapsed since the works were in activity,for the roots of large fir trees have spread themselvesamong the stones that are heaped againstthe sides of the furnaces.It appears strange that the ancient inhabitantsof this country, with their imperfect means,should have been able to melt so hard a metalas copper, and should have acquired the art ofseparating the gold from it. It is now impossibleto form any judgment of the portion of goldwhich the copper contained; but the fact of somebeing found is sufficiently proved, and it mayhave given rise to the puerile tales that havebeen noticed, and which Herodotus nas transmittedto the ages that have succeeded to his.Gmelin found in the eastern parts of Siberiaremains of works which had belonged tosilver mines, and remarked that the lead with1 Gmelin, vol. 3. sect. 299.CHAP. II. PERSIA AND INDIA. 39which it had existed in the ore was all left,whilst the silver had been taken, and only smallparticles suffered to remain mingled with thescoriae \The silver and gold collected as tribute in the Persia andcapital of the Persian empire, if hoarded there, asseems probable, will serve to account for the vaststore found by Alexander in that city and in thesurrounding countries. The tribute of India alonewould in a few years be almost sufficient to furnisha stock of gold, which, when dispersed, wouldhave an effect on the whole of the then knownworld. We have but few notices of the placesfrom which the gold and silver of India were obtained.They are mentioned by Pliny, but notin a way to communicate any precise informationof the quantity of their produce ; and the namesgiven to the places in which those metals werefound are such as make their situation doubtful.The Dardanelles," he says, " inhabit a countrythe richest of all India in gold mines, and theSultans have the most abundant mines of silver."" In the country of the Caravans, onthe other side the mountain Capital, there areavery great number of mines both of gold andsilver, in which the Indians work very extensivelyV "Just without the mouth of the river• Gmelin, vol. 3. p. 300 and 304.- Pliny, b. vi. cap. 19.^ Idem, b. vi. cap. 20.Nubia.40 MINES OF CHAP. II.Indus, there are two islands named Chryse andArgyle, so called, as I think, from the mines ofgold and silver which are found there ; for I cannotbelieve what some have asserted, that thesoil on them consists wholly of those metals ^"We know both from Strabo and Pliny, thata trade by caravans was carried on in remoteages between Babylon and India, and though weknow not what commodities the former suppliedto the latter, yet we may safely presume thatgold, if not silver, formed a part of the articleswhich the Indians gave in exchange.Egypt and Neither any of the relations of ancient history,nor any of the more recent examinations of thatcountry, afford ground to believe that Egypt belowthe cataracts contained mines of gold or silver,although we know from the most authentic accounts,that at an early period the Tyrians andother Phoenicians, and at a later period the Persians,after the conquest oft hat country by Cambyses,drew from thence large quantities of boththose metals.In the provincial division of his dominions byDarius, it was denominated the sixth satrapy;and we are informed that *' seven hundred talentswere annually required from Egypt and theAfrican ; which border on Egypt, which arecomprehended in the Egyptian district." ThePliny, b, vi, cap. 21.CHAP. II.EGYPT AND NUBIA. . 41produce of the lake Morris was not included inthis sum, neither was the corn to the amount ofseven thousand talents more ; one hundred andtwenty thousand measures of which were appliedto the maintenance of the Persians, and theirauxiliary troops garrisoned within the castle ofMemphis \ The mineral wealth which existedin Egypt in its most flourishing times must havebeen partly transferred thither by means of commercefrom other territories. Egypt was thena manufacturing and an agricultural country,and furnished from both descriptions of theirproducts the means of attracting to it themetallic wealth of other districts. Egypt wasespecially productive of flax and of cotton,and at an early period supplied to the Phoeniciansthe raw materials for their extensive manufactoriesof both those kinds of goods. It alsoabounded with corn ; and when the Hebrewswho usually supplied the Phoenicians with thatnecessary had an insufficient quantity, a supplywas drawn from the banks of the Nile. WeHerodotus, b. iii. cap. 91.^ See Exodus, chap. ix. v. 31, where the destruction of thecrop of flax by a storm of hail is noticed.Pliny:, b. xix. c. 2. Superior pars egypt, in Arabianverges, gignit fruticem, quern alii gossiping vacant, plumesxylina, et ideo line facta xylina ; nee ulla sunt candor moUi-sieve preference. Vestes inde sacerdotibus egypt gratissimac.42 MINES OFCHAP. II.know too from the history of Joseph, that hisfather sent from Arabia for food for his family.It is also well ascertained that cotton, silk,and linen cloth was made by the Egyptians.This is asserted by ancient history, and confirmedby recent proofs ; for cloth of those substanceshas been found in the mummies taken from theroyal sepulchres by Belong and others.The chief sources of the wealth of the Pharaohs,however, were the mines of the neighbouringcountries of Nubia and Ethiopia,which were productive of copper or brass ingreat abundance, before iron was known inAfrica. According to the testimony of of Cnidus, who wrote about I70 or180 years before our era, the abundance of brasswas such, that it formed the chief parts of thedomestic furniture, as well as of the chariots,the swords, the bows, and the arrows, in use inaprior age. The mines which produced thecopper yielded also gold, which the Africansseparated from the less valuable metal. There'^ an exact and almost technical description ofthose mines by an eyewitness, who visited themin the reign of the fourth Ptolemy "Theyare," he says, *' near the mountain Alkali, notfar from the ancient Terence Panchrysos, inAgatliarchidas de Rubro Mari, in Diodorus, b. iii. c. 12 — 15,CHAP. II.EGYPT AND NUBIA. 43latitude 22° norths They were worked bya numerous body of people, including men,women, and children, to each of whom a portionof labour was assigned, correspondent to theirstrength and skill. The discovery of them wasmade by the kings of the ancient race. Theoperations in the mines of Nubia were interruptedby the invasion of the Ethiopians, whotook possession of them", and afterwards by theModes and Persians. In the passages of themines were found many tools of brass, ironbeing then unknown, and vast masses of humanbones, of people who had been buried in theruins. The extent of the subterraneous galleriesis so great that they must almost have reachedto the sea."Some recent communications have thrown lighton the subject of these mines. They are said tobe at Alaki, fifteen days' journey from the Nile.The nearest city to them is Assuan The inquiriesof Belong have also led him to discovermines in the range of the Sahara mountains, onlysix hours' journey from the Red Sea, in latitude24° 30'. They are represented as very extensive,and as having been worked during a long spaceThe exactness of this position has been since proved byDanville, in Memoire sur I'Egypte, p. 274.2 The Ethiopians overran Egypt between 700 and 800 yearsbefore Christ.3 Quatremere^ Memoires sur I'Egypte, vol. ii. j). 175;, &c.44 MINES OF CHAP. II.of time; the remains of ancient Egyptian buildingson the road to the spot show that the periodof their working must have been very remote.It is highly probable they were productiveuntil the end of the sovereignty of the Pharaohsj and, according to Theophrastus theproduce was the property of the monarchs, asthey will be of the present pacha of Egypt,if the attempts he is reported to be making toopen these mines anew should be attended withsuccess. An Arabian author, Massed, quotedby Quatremere, calls the place Herbal, and says,it is in a mountainous desert, eight days' journeyfrom the Nile ; and that some mines wereworked near that place till the fourteenth or fifteenthcentury. If this last assertion be correct,it may not be too much to suppose that the discoveryof the mines of America might have extendedtheir influence so far as to make the workingof these Nubian mines an unprofitable operation.It is however probable, that if these mineswere continued to the late period noticed by theArabian writer, the operations must have beencarried on upon a very contracted scale.We may find in the history of that countrysufficient causes, in the sufferings inflicted on itby civil dissensions and by foreign invasions, toaccount for the abandonment of a pursuit so littleTheophrastus do Lapidibus.CHAP. TI.EGYPT AND NUBIA. 45profitable and so highly hazardous as that ofsearching for the precious metals.The civil dissensions began soon after the repulseof the Ethiopians, which has been alreadynoticed. The causes of these may be traced totheir theocratic constitution, under which thekings received from the priests the supposedcommands of the Divinity. The people were dividedinto hereditary castes. Next to the priesthoodthe warriors were the most powerful ; butthese latter, being discontented with the conductof Seton, who had united in himself the royal andsacerdotal character, refused their services, whenSennacherib, king of Assyria, invaded the country.The confusion which prevailed in Egypt at thisinvasion is thus described by Isaiah, chap. xix. :** I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians :and they shall fight every one against his brother,and every one against his neighbour ; city againstcity, and kingdom against kingdom. And the spiritof Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof, and I willdestroy the counsel thereof; and they shall seekto the idols, and to the charmers, and to themthat have familiar spirits, and to the wizards.And I will give the Egyptians over to the handof a cruel lord ; and a fierce king shall rule overthem," V. 2 — 5. This confusion caused the depositionof Manette, and the establishment oftwelve princes as chiefs, till Psammetichus, one of46 MINES OFCHAP. II.them, by the help of some Greeks, gained thesole command about 630 years before our era.As the usurpation of Psammetichus had beenattained by the aid of the mercenaries, whosenumbers were increased by additions from Phoeniciaand from Caria, who became regular settlersand citizens \ the natives were dissatisfied, butmore especially those of the military caste ; andat length the greater part of the national troops,in spite of the endeavours of Psammetichus, abandonedtheir country, and, with their families,wandered into Ethiopia, where they establishedthemselves.Under the impulse given by the newly settledwarriors, the Egyptian monarchs, who succeededto the throne of Psammetichus, changed theirpolicy, and, from being the defenders of their owndominionsjbecametheassailantsof the neighbouringstates. Psammetichus himself attacked Syria,and after a long siege and many repulses capturedat last the city of Azotus ". His successor,Necho, met with more rapid success at first. Hetook Jerusalem after a battle, in which the kingJosiah fell \ imposed on his successor a heavyHerodotus, book ii. cap. 152 and 154. Diod. i. c. 77-^ Herodotus, book ii. c. 157.3 2 Kings, chap, xxiii. v. 29. ; also Herodotus (book ii.c. 159,), who notices the capture of Jerusalem, to which hegives the name Capitis.CHAP. II. EGYPT AND NUBIA. 1.7tribute of a hundred talents of silver and onetalent of gold, and extended his conquest overthe whole of Syria, and even to the banks of theEuphrates.At this time a new power, whose existencehowever was transient, had arisen in Babylon,out of the ruins of the Assyrian monarchy, andhad reached its highest grandeur under Nebuchadnezzar.That king, at the head of his victorioustroops, advanced to meet Necho. Atremendous battle was fought ; the Egyptianswere compelled to abandon their conquests, andwere in their turn invaded by the Babylonianarmies'. The erection of a naval power inEgypt was the consequence of the loss of thisbattle. Necho built ships on the Red Sea andon the shores of the Mediterranean, and soughtto enable both to join in repelling invasion, andfor that purpose undertook to construct a canalfrom one sea to the other. This project did notsucceed at that time, though it was afterwardsexecuted by the Persians under Darius. Nebuchadnezzaroverran and plundered Egypt ; buton his return to his kingdom, a revolt once moreestablished the throne of that country underAries, who, with his Mediterranean fleet, invadedPhoenicia, and captured Sidon-ariesThe description of this battle is most poetically given bythe prophet Jeremiah, chap. xlvi.2 Herodotus, book ii. c. 161.48 MINES OF CHAP'. It.was succeeded by Amass, who was raised topower in the course of a civil war, in which thenative Egyptians subdued the mercenary troops,among whom Aries fell \ Amass preferred peaceto conquest, and died just before the attack ofCambyses, by which Egypt" at length fell underthe dominion of the Persians, who had previouslysubdued the Babylonian kingdom. The Persiansretained the sovereignty in Egypt till the conquestof it by the Macedonians under Alexanderthe Great, about the year 380 before Christ.Nearly a hundred and fifty years later, Egypt,with the greater part of the other conquests ofAlexander, became a province of the all-conqueringRoman republic.After this digressive historical sketch of thecauses of the abandonment of those fertile sourcesof metallic wealth in Nubia and Ethiopia, whichfurnished a large share of the gold and silveraccumulated before the Christian era, and whichmust have taken place in a great degree beforethe time of Alexander, we may advert to theprogress of the arts of mining, and of preparingthe metals.It is sufficiently obvious, from scattered fragmentsin the writings of the ancients, that inremote periods only that ore which was foundHerodotus, book ii. c. 169.2 About the year 530 B. C. "CHAP. II. EGYPT AND NUBIA. 49on or near the surface was attempted to be separatedinto the two parts of metal and scoria?.At first, sharpened flint-stones were used forexcavating ; and till harder tools could be found,the search for ore must have been a most laboriousemployment; for what was found on thesurface in a pure state would be soon expended.An improvement in the tools commenced as earlyas the art of giving hardness to copper, by mixingwith it some other metal, had been discovered.The hammers and chisels found in Nubia in thetime of Agatharchidas were of this hardenedcopper \ In the course of time iron was discovered,and found to be the most applicableto the purpose of the miners. As early as thetime of Moses, the Egyptians were not onlyacquainted with iron stone, but knew how toseparate the metal and apply it to the variouspurposes of mankind -. Its discovery is carriedback by the heathens to the fabulous ages, whentheir gods were supposed to have lived with andto have instructed mortals. Agatharchidas attributesto Vulcan the instruction of the Egyptiansin the art of working the metals '. By whateverAgatharchidas, apud Pretium, p. 1341.2 The chief passages which give information respecting iron,in the early parts of the Old Testament, are, Job, xx. 34,xxviii. 2, and xli. 27; Leviticus, xxvi. 19; Deuteronomy,xxviii. 23 and 48.■' Agatharchidas, apud Pretium, p. 1341.VOL. I. E50 MINES OF CHAP. II.process the importance of iron tools becameknown and the use of them adopted, the workperformed was still slow and excessively laborious,till, at length, according to Diodorus \ theaid of fire was introduced, which made the workthrough the rocks much less difficult. Afterbeing thus enabled to reach the ores, the workmenhad still to contend with the obstacles of subterraneanwater, of unwholesome air, of the fillingthe pits and passages by the earth giving way,and the darkness of the mines. We know notwhat precautions were adopted against the evilarising from the air and water ; but the roofs ofthe mines were supported by large pillars beingleft of the natural rock, and in some parts theloose stones were prevented from filling up thepassage by masonry. At first the only lightin the mines was obtained by burning chipsof fir-wood ; but at length lamps were invented,which are described by a later writer,Clemens Alexandrine. Oil was burnt in them.Each man had one fixed on his forehead, whichturned on a moveable axis, in the manner of oursea compasses. The galleries were entered notperpendicularly, but by the sides of the mountains; and the ore was brought out on the backsof the men, a practice which is attributed to theimperfect knowledge of mechanics in some de-did.book c.CHAP. n. EGYPT AND NUBIA. .'51- »gree, but more to the universal employment ofslaves alone in the mines. With all their impediments,the mining of the Egyptians was carriedto a great extent, but, as Diodorus asserts, wasas laborious and as costly as it was extensive \The separation of the metals from the substanceswith which they are combined in theveins must have slowly and gradually advancedwith a rude people. At first ores found in thepurest state would be alone made use of; but asthey became scarce, other oi'es, of a descriptionthat before had been neglected, would presentthemselves, and necessity would lead to meansof rendering them useful. The inhabitants ofNubia were undoubtedly self-taught miners andrefiners ; and though the steps that led to theirpractice are unknown at present, we cannot errin supposing them to be nearly the same as thoseof other nations in the same stage of civilization,among whom the progress has been traced withmore accuracy. Thus the ancient Britons formedtheir establishments for purifying their ores ingullies, which were washed by rapid streams ofwater; and the Peruvians, by placing theirs. in afire produced from wood, coal, dung, and salineplants. The Egyptians seem, by indicationsstill visible, to have chiefly availed themselves ofthe aid of fire in the first part of the process, andDiod. book iii. c. life252 MINES OFCHAP, ir.thus cleared the ores of a large portion of theforeign particles. After that, the ores werecrushed or ground in mills preparatory to theirsmelting. The use of mills for grinding cornwas known in Egypt at an early period, and theadaptation of them to the crushing of ores wasa natural step. Corn had been at first rubbedto meal by mortars, then between stones, tillby the next step mills were introduced, whichhad become common in Egypt in the time ofMoses \ When the ore had been ground to amoderate degree of fineness, the metallic particles,being the heaviest, were separated fromthe earthy by washing them in a current ofwater, when the heavier would sink down andthe lighter be carried away by the force of thestream ^.After the preparation of the ores in this manner,the metallic parts were dried and cleansed.As there are no proofs that the Egyptianswere acquainted with the art of quickening theores, it is presumed that the smelting followedimmediately. That operation was performed incrucibles or earthen pots, whose covers were lutedon with some kind of cement. These vessels werethen placed in the furnaces, and, probably bythe help of bellows, a strong fire kept up duringExodus, cap. ii. v. 5. and Deuteronomy, cap. xxiv. v. 6.Geschiclite des Borgbaues und Huttcnwesens bey den alter^'^olkern. von I. F. Rcitmcir.CHAP. ir.EGYPT AND NUBIA. 53five days. For separating and fining the gold,alloys were employed, consisting of lead, tin,salt, and barley bran \ By these applications,during five days' continuance, after cooling, amass of clear and purified gold was obtained.The Egyptians are shown by the Mosaic history "to have been acquainted with the art of purifyinggold. The Hebrew lawgiver was skilledin all the learning of the Egyptians ; and as it isnot related as a display of miraculous power,we may venture to presume that his grindingthe golden calf to powder was effected by theapplication of some substances, perhaps of nitre,which abounded in Egypt, with the knowledgeof which he had become acquainted in thecourse of the education he had received in theroyal palace.It is probable, though we have now no noticeson the subject, that the Egyptians managedtheir silver ores in the smelting-houses in thesame manner as the gold. After the conquestof Egypt by Cambyses, about 540 years beforeChrist, and whilst under the government of hislieutenant, Aryan des \ a great improvementseems to have been made in the purification ofsilver ; for that which was produced under thatDiodor. iii. 14. Mi^aprec fj.o\iftcov jjioXor, ciXujp, Kaaairepovl3paj(y, Rai Kpidivov iciTvpov,^ Exodus, cap. xxv. v. 31 — 36^ and cap. xxxii. v. 4.Herodot. Pollux, iii. s. 87-54 MINES OF CHAP. II.vicegerent was celebrated tliroiigli the worldfor its purity and fineness, and was commonlyknown by his name, even after his unjust execution.At a later period, according to Pliny Sa mixture of the brass of Cyprus combined withsulphur was applied to silver, by which thatmetal was greatly adulterated in Egypt.It is not possible now to ascertain what was theamount of the gold and silver which the minesof Egypt afforded. Without giving full creditto the relations diodorus, it would be improperto omit all notice of them. In his descriptionof the city of Thebes, he says -, " Thefabric of the ancient temple has continued toour time, but the silver and the gold, with theornaments of ivory and precious stones, werecarried away by the Persians when Cambysesburnt the temples of Egypt. The palaces ofPersepolis and Susa, and others in Media, werebuilt with those treasures by workmen sent fromEgypt for that purpose. It is reported that theriches of those palaces were then so great, that inthe rubbish and cinders there were found andgathered up three hundred talents of gold, and noless than two thousand three hundred talents ofsilver." In his description of the palace of theancient Egyptian monarchs, he says \ " Near toPliny, XXX. 9.^ Diodorus, book i. cap. 4.Idem, book iv.CHAP. II.EGYPT AND NUBIA. 55the gallery is an apartment in which is representedthe king himself, curiously carved andpainted in glorious colours, offering to the godsgold and silver as much as he received yearlyout of the gold and silver mines. The sum wasinscribed there, and amounted to thirty-two millionsof minas, according to the rate of silver."If the mina here stated means a weight of thesame value as the Attic mina, viz., £3. Q,s. 6d.,the annual product of the mines must haveamounted to the enormous sum of nearly sixmillions sterling.Whether this exaggeration is to be ascribedto the vanity of the Egyptian monarch whocaused the inscription to be made, or to thecredulity which is too obvious to mislead inmany parts of the works of Diodorus, who visitedEgypt fifty years before Christ, there can be nodoubt but the produce of the mines of thatcountry, and of the others whose gold and silverwere deposited there, far exceeded the quantitywhich was drawn from all the mines of the thenknown world in subsequent ages, down to thediscovery of America.This view of the great produce of the Africanmines is strengthened by other considerations,such as the numbers and the treatment of thepersons who were employed in the mines ofthose countries. Diodorus informs his readers56 Wines OFCHAP, II.that " ^ on the confines of Egypt and the neighbouringcountries there are parts full of goldmines, from whence, with the cost and pains ofmany labourers, much gold is dug. The soil isnaturally black, but in the body of the earththere are many veins, shining with white marble,and glittering with all sorts of bright metals,out of which those appointed to be overseerscause the gold to be dug by the labour of a vastmultitude of people. For the kings of Egyptcondemn to these mines not only notoriouscriminals, captives taken in war, persons falselyaccused, and those with whom the king isoffended, but also all their kindred and relations.These are sent to this work either as a punishment,or that the profit and gain of the kingmay be increased by their labours. There arethus infinite numbers thrust into these mines,all bound in fetters, kept at work night and day,and so strictly guarded that there is no possibilityof their effecting an escape. They areguarded by mercenary soldiers of various barbarousnations, whose language is foreign tothem and to each other, so that there are nomeans either of forming conspiracies or of corruptingthose who are set to watch them : theyare kept to incessant work by the nod of theDiodorus, book iii. cap. 1., from Agatharchidas de RubroMari -CHAP. II.EGYPT AND NUBIA. 57overseer, who, besides, lashes them severely.Not the least care is taken of the bodies of thesepoor creatures ; they have not a rag to covertheir nakedness ; and whoever sees them mustcompassionate their melancholy and deplorablecondition, for though they may be sick, ormaimed, or lame, no rest nor any intermission oflabour is allowed them. Neither the weaknessof old age nor the infirmities of females excuseany from that work to which all are driven byblows and cudgels, till at length, borne down bythe intolerable weight of their misery, many falldead in the midst of their insufferable labours.Thus these miserable creatures, being destituteof all hope, expect their future days to be worsethan the present, and long for death as moredesirable than life." The concluding remark ofour author on the whole subject of these minesmay be worth inserting: "Nature teaches usthat gold is obtained by labour and toil, is retainedwith difficulty, creates every where thegreatest anxiety, and in its use produces bothpleasure and grief."Another writer gives a description of theworking of mines, which, though relating toSamos, may be very obviously applied to thoseof Egypt and Nubia. " Those who dig in themines cannot stand upright at their work, butare obliged to lie down either on their back or58 GOLD IN CHAP. II.on their sides ; for the vein of the earth theydig runs lengthwise, and is only of thedepth of two feet, though considerably more inbreadth, and it is enclosed on every side withhard stones, from which the ore is drawnforth \"Southern Having til US taken a view of the state ofAfrica. ^ n i • ■mining and the productions of the mines mEgypt and Nubia, we may have recourse to theintimations of ancient authors respecting theprecious metals extracted from the interior ofthe more southern parts of eastern Africa. —Their representations of the barbarous state ofsociety in which the inhabitants of those countrieslived lead to the conclusion, that they hadnot sufficient intelligence or industry to excavatethe earth, and separate the metals from theores, and that, therefore, the gold they procuredwas obtained, as in the present day,from the streams that descended from the loftymountains.Among these tribes, one is especially noticedby Herodotus. When Cambyses had overrunEgypt, he wished to extend his influence stillfarther by means of negotiations with the peopleof the south. Among these, the Macedonians• Theophrastus de Lapidibus, cap. xix.2 Herodot. book iii. cap. 20 — 26.CHAP. II.SOUTHERN AFRICA. ,59appeared the most desirable to be conciliated;and some ambassadors were sent to them fromamong the Ichthyophagi, an intervening people,who were acquainted with their language. Thenegotiations are related minutely, but seem tohave terminated unsuccessfully; as the presentsCambyses sent were rejected with disdain, anda kind of defiance was returned to the conquerorof Egypt, by sending a bow which nonebut the Macrobians had sufficient strength tobend, and a recommendation to him to bethankful to the gods that the Ethiopians had notbeen inspired with the same ambitious views ofextending their dominions as himself TheseMacrobians are celebrated by Herodotus on accountof their stature, their strength, and theirlongevity, and are probably " the Ethiopians,men of stature," mentioned in the Sacred Writings.The warlike expedition of Cambyses wasas unsuccessful as his attempt at negotiation.Cosmos, a Greek writer, who certainly visitedEthiopia, and probably India, about the year535 Ad., has given an account of the tradecarried on with the Macrobians in his day ^ : —The country which produces incense is atthe farther end of Ethiopia, fifty days' journeyfrom Axum, not far from the ocean, though notThe best edition of the Topography Christiana of Cos-masis in MontfaucoHj Coll. Nova Parum, torn. ii. p. 113, &c.60 GOLD INCHAP. 11.quite close to it \ The people of Barbara, inthe neighbouring country of Sash, fetch theincense and other valuable spices, which theyconvey by water to India and to Arabia. Thecountry of Sash is very rich in gold mines, andthe kings of Axum " send people there everyyear for the sake of the trade in gold. Otherswho are merchants join them, and thus a caravanis formed of more than 500 persons. Theycarry with them oxen, and salt, and iron. Assoon as they reach the boundary they fix on anencampment, which they surround with a thornhedged Within this enclosure the cattle areslaughtered and cut up, and the pieces of meat,as well as the salt and the iron, are laid upon thefence. The people of the country come andplace on the wares one or more pieces of gold,and wait outside till the bargain is concluded.The owners of the wares, if they are satisfied,take the gold, and the others their articles. Ifthe gold is not thought sufficient, those withouteither add more to it or take away what theyhave offered. This traffic is generally continuedduring five days, or till the whole of the wares1 This is probably the country noticed in Salt's map ofAbyssinia as the land of the Somaulis.2 Axuni was at that period the capital of Abyssinia.We may conclude these were the kantufFa-trees, noticedby Salt and by Bruce, which seem peculiarly appropriate forthe purpose of such fortification.CHAP. II.SOUTHERN AFRICA. 6 1which are brought have been exchanged, and isconducted in the manner here described becausethey have no interpreters, and do not understandthe language of each other."The same mode of conducting trade wasadopted by the western Moors, who exchangedgoods with some of the barbarous nations on thebanks of the Niger, as described by Shaw ^ andconfirmed by Wadstrom ", as well as by CommodoreStewart in his account of his embassy toMequinez in 1721.We certainly can form no idea respectingthe quantity of gold which these Macrobiansfurnished to commerce. The fact of theiryielding it even as early as the time of Cambyses,500 years B. C, is sufficiently proved bythe contempt which they manifested at the insignificantpresent of gold chains which thenation of the Ichthyophagi, who acted the partof ambassadors on behalf of the Persian monarch,brought to them from him.This tribe was only one among many in thesouthern part of Africa who obtained gold fromthe rapid streams, and conveyed it by ways ofwhich we can only form conjecture from knowingsomewhat of the present practice of thosepeople. There can be no doubt, however, that1 Shaw's Travels, p. 239.- Wadstrom's Colonization, p. 24.^2 MINES OF CHAP. II.whatever was collected was chiefly conveyed toNubia and Egypt, where a great part of it remainedtill advantageous occasions offered ofexchanging it for the tempting productions ofPhoenicia and Carthage on one side, and forthose of India and Arabia on the other. Bothsacred and profane writers unite in their testimonyof the riches which were collected at aremote period on the eastern part of Africa. —Ezekiel \ when speaking of the commerce ofTyre, enumerates the places in Africa whichsupplied the Phoenician marts, and names thecommodities and the districts from whence theycame, in a way which shows they were in hisdays familiar to the Hebrew people.As soon as the Greeks obtained some knowledgeof the wealth of those countries, they seemto have been wonderfully impressed with the immenseriches they contained. Agatharchidas -,who wrote about I70 years before our era, says,The Sabaeans excel not only the neighbouringbarbarians, but all other people, in their wealthand splendour, for they receive a higher pricefor the same quantity of their wares than anyother traders. As their remote situation protectsthem from the plunder of enemies, theyhave heaped together immense masses of the• Ezekiel, cap. xxvii. v. 21 — 24.^ Agatharchidas de Rubro ]\Iari, p. 65, in Geog. Min. Ludo,vol. i.CHAP. II. EUROPE AND GREEK COLONIES. 63precious metals, and especially in their chiefcity. Exquisite gold and silver articles of everyform, drinking vessels of pure gold, seats andtripods with silver feet, and especially valuableornaments in abundance, are to be seen there.The columns and the colonnades are rich in gold,and have capitals ornamented with silver carvedwork. The fronts and doors of the houses aredecorated with golden ornaments, in which preciousstones are set. Thus their houses are madesplendid with silver, gold, precious stones, andivory, and with whatever is most costly. Thepeople have enjoyed this good fortune from primevaltime, because they have been sufficientlydistant from such as are prompted by avariceto enrich themselves at the expense of others."Whilst the sources of gold and silver in Egypt Europe,had been either stopped or suspended by the bendingforeign evasions or the domestic hostilities to ionics ofwhich that country had been exposed, the westernGreeks and their colonists began to producethose and the other metals, though in muchsmaller portions. The inhabitants of Europecontinued in the savage state some ages afterthe people of eastern Asia and of Egypt hadmade considerable progress in civilized life. —Those of the south-east parts of Europe beingnearer to the more civilized countries of Egyptand Asia, and receiving from them some refugeeswho brought the arts and discoveries ofG4 MINES OF CHAP. ii.their own countries with them, were naturallythe first to imbibe the improvements of moreadvanced stages of society. From that distanttime, about fifteen centuries before our christianera, or perhaps six centuries before the time ofHomer, the knowledge of metals in Europecommenced. It is possible that even at earlierperiods some might have been found on or nearthe surface, but it is highly improbable that inthat untaught state of society any mines had beenexplored.The Phoenicians, who gave to Europeans theirsimpulse towards social life, were also the firstintroducers of the practice of mining. Accordinglywe learn from Strabo that Cadmus, aPhoenician, one of the emigrants who arrived inGreece, opened the first mine of copper and goldin the mountain Pangseus in Thrace, thoughHerodotus " speaks of those mountains as containingmines of silver and gold It is not,however, improbable that the activity of thePhoenicians may have set to work some of themines in the islands of the Mediterranean Sea,and perhaps in the remote country of Spain,before the arrival of Cadmus. The thirst for> Strabo, xiv. p. 998.- Herodot. book vii. c. 12.3 The arrival of Cadmus in Greece is estimated by theAbbe Barthelemy, in Anabasis, to have occurred in the year1594 before Christ, but by others 1493 before that era.CHAP. n. EUROPE AND GREEK COLONIES. 65gain, by which that people were distinguished,may have led to the discovery of the Europeanores, without its producing any benefit to thenatives of Europe, who were robbed of theirmetallic treasures before they were acquaintedwith their value ; for they were equally ignorantof the modes of extracting them fromthe earth, and of purifying them from theirgrosser particles. If the Phoenicians were thefirst who carried on mining operations in Europe,they were by no means the universal teachers ofthat art. In most cases, other refugees, whocame from the more eastern parts of Asia, werethe first instructors of the Europeans, and thefirst explorers of their mines.The most civilized of the people of Europewere found in the early ages along the shores ofthe Mediterranean sea ; and it is among themwe discover the first steps in mining. Theearliest of those tribes were the Greeks, whoseprogress in this branch of industry it will beproper in the first place to examine. Then followedthe Romans ; and after them, but at agreat distance, both in time and in skill, thosecalled by the two former people the barbarians,in the neighbourhood of the Danube.The Greeks explored beneath the surface in Theories.various districts in thrown country, as well asin their eastern and western colonial establishments.This searching for ore, when it hadVOL I. FMINES OFCHAP. II.begun, was continued during a succession ofcenturies ; but the progressive improvements introducedwere not so much the effect of any foreignteaching, as the result of their diligent andenergetic investigations of the best systems ofoperating.It is impossible, whilst looking at this subject,not to lament the loss of the works of Theophrastus,who besides the treatise De Lapidibus,which has come down to us, is said to havewritten many other valuable works, especiallyon minerals, about 300 years before the christianera ; scattered fragments of which are to befound in the writings of those who succeededhim during the following three or four centuries.It is to these extracts and to other passages alsoincidentally inserted in works on subjects of adifferent nature, that we must have our chiefrecourse in our inquiries into the mining progressof the Greeks, though traces of the existenceof the art may be found in Homer andother authors of a date anterior to Theophrastus.Although the chief object in this inquiry isinto the production of the precious metals, yetit is scarcely possible to separate wholly the progressmade in raising and purifying them fromthat of the discovery and application of themetals of inferior value. They are so mingledtogether in the writings of the early ages, andthe operations in them were conducted in aCHAP. II.GREECE. (J7manner so similar, that the introduction of casualremarks on them can scarcely be deemed a uselessor a wholly uninstructive deviation from ourchief purpose.It may be convenient to divide the accountof the Grecian mining into three distinct periods.In the first of them, the chief mines were in theislands of the Mediterranean sea, and the operationsin them were carried on principally byPhoenician workmen. In the second period, themines were discovered and worked in the Greciancontinental territory, and chiefly in Attica. Inthe last term, new and productive mines wereworked in the dominions of Philip, king of Macedon,which ultimately, with the mines of theother Greeks, fell into the hands of the Romanrepublic.In the first period, the writings of Homer areour chief and almost exclusive guides. Hisworks, after making due allowance for poeticexaggeration, give, however, but little informationas to the first discovery of metals, or of theuse of them at the time he wrote. When Hellas,or the sun, is represented as the discoverer ofgold, and Ericthonius as that of silver, we arejustified, without giving credit to the tales, inascribing to these metals a very high antiquity.The same is the case with copper, the knowledgeof which, according to tradition, was communicatedimmediately by their gods. The discoveryF 268 MINING IN CHAP. II.of iron was probably of a later date, and is describedin a variety of ways \ If the Oxfordmarbles be authentic evidence, it was knownabout the year 1431 before Christ. .Tin was furnished to the Greeks by the Phoeniciantraders, and it is probable they were suppliedwith lead from the same source. There isno passage in Homer from which it can be inferredthat at the period in question the Greekson the continent of Europe worked many mines,though perhaps some of the precious metals mayhave been found upon the surface, or so near itas to be easily made useful. On the other hand,on the islands the mines were numerous, if nothighly productive. In Crete and in Thasusmines were explored, which had been opened bythe Phoenicians before those islands fell to theGreek possession. Those in Crete were of iron,but in Thasus they are represented as productivein gold". "From their gold mines ofScapte-style," says Herodotus, " they obtained on anaverage eighty talents. Thasus itself did notproduce so much, but they were so affluent, that,being generally exempt from taxation, the wholeof their annual revenue was two hundred andCasaubon in Rerum inventor Oaomastico, a. Ferrum.- Herodotus, book vi. c. 46, 47-^ This revenue appears by a passage in Thucydides, lib. i.cap. 100, to have been derived from the lands as well as themines, which reconciles an apparent contradiction in the textof Herodotus.CHAP. II.GREECE. 69in times of great abundance three hundred,talents. These mines I have myself seen ; themost valuable are those discovered by the Phoenicians,who, under the conduct of Thasus, firstmade a settlement in this island, and named itafter their leader."Euboea produced the best of iron and copper,but the mines of both metals had been exhaustedin the time of Strabo. The island of Cyprusyielded gold, silver, and copper, and the minescontinued to be worked even till the times ofthe Romans, though no traces of them were tobe found when that island vas explored by latertravellers \ The copper was so fine that theRomans used it for their coin, and for the higherclass of domestic utensils. Siphanto, the ancientSiphon, contained extensive mines of gold andsilver, whose antiquity may be inferred, becausea tenth of the produce was annually sent as apresent to the temple of Delphi. When at alater period this tribute to the image of Apolloat that place was withheld, the exhaustion of themines, which probably arose from their excessiveworking, was attributed by superstition tothe anger of the offended deity ^. Tournefortexamined these mines about the year I69O or1700, and found the entrances, but could notMariti Viaggi^ t. i. p. 22, and Meursius de Cyprus lib. ii.c. 2.^ Pausanias book x. cap. 11.70 MINES OF CHAP. H.explore them satisfactorily. The same travellerremarked on the island ores of lead resemblingtin, which the rain had discovered to view, butwhich were not dug up, because the inhabitantsfelt a disinclination to work in mines \ Thesame author found on the island of Milo, whichin former times, under the name of Melos, hadbeen celebrated for its alum and sulphur, thelatter substance, and also iron, which was takenout of the millstone quarries ". The division ofthe island in which the iron is found bears fromit the name l.ih]ponovyr]Q.In all probability the mines here noticed, orat least a great part of them, were worked at anearlier period than those in the western islands,in the vicinity of Italy, although some of thelatter must have been in operation in a remoteage ; for the Greeks in the time of Homer obtainedcopper from Temesa, an island nearUpper Italy. Some, from other parts of thatpoets works, have been led to the opinion thatthe Temesa he mentions was a city in the islandof Cyprus. In the time of Strabo, however, themines on the Italian island of the same nameare spoken of as having been formerly productiveof that metal. The island Pithecusa, oppo-1 Tournefort, Voyage au Levant, t. i. p. 67-2 Idem, t. i. p. 100.3 " where I go to purchase copper." Odyss. book i.verse 184.CHAP. ir.GREECE. 71site the city of Cum, was at one time rich ingold, and continued to yield some when theNeapolitans took possession of it and of Cum.Sicily and the Lipari Islands were celebrated inantiquity for the brass they afforded.In all probability the reigning princes in theseveral islands were the chief, if not the exclusive,possessors of the mines which have beenmentioned. In conformity to the state of societyin those ages, the operations of mining andsmelting could not have been easily performedby any other hands than those of their slaves,whose numbers were the scale by which thewealth of the several chiefs was estimated. Thewhole work must have been simply and un-scientificallyconducted, and if we were fullyacquainted with it would probably exhibit nothingvery remarkable.We come now to the second period, in whichthe operations of the Greeks in mining are muchbetter known to us than in that we have beenoccupied in examining ; as we find abundantnotices of the proceedings on the continent ofancient Greece. In the Peloponnesian, the lacedaemonian,from their political principles andinstitutions, showed such indifference to theacquisition of the precious metals, that no extensivemining operations are to be expectedamong them. The Athenians, however, zealouslypursued such operations, as well in the72 MINES OF CHAP. IIrich silver mines of Attica, as in the productivegold mines in their foreign possessions, in Thrace,and in the island of Thasus. Thessaly producedores that were rich in gold, whilst Boeotia furnishediron from its mines. Epirus also hadsilver mines, which were continued to be workedin the time of Strabo.The whole of these mines make their appearanceeither a little before or soon after the Persianwar ; for shortly before the victory of theGreeks over the Persians, gold and silver weremuch more scarce among the former than theycould have been if the rich mines of both thosemetals had been diligently laboured before thattime. According to the report of Xenophon \the Athenians worked the silver mines of theirown country from an unknown distant age ; butit appears probable that for a long time the onlyore that was used was that found near the surface,and that the imperfect application of laboureven to that met with frequent interruptions.Capital and scientific knowledge were on muchtoo low a scale to admit of decided perseverancein mining pursuits.A classification, by which Solon had arrangedthe citizens according to their incomes a shorttime before the Persian war, shows how verysmall was the amount of wealth then in exist-xenophondc Redit.CHAP. II.GREECE. J3once. Yet at that time the mining in Atticamakes some figure ; and at the beginning of thewar the income of the state, derived from themines, amounted to about £8,000 sterling. Thatincome, in a subsequent period, appears to haverisen higher, from the facilities afforded by anincreased capital, and from greater ardour inthe several undertakings. The augmentation ofriches from the mines, with the wealth of thecitizens, acquired by their industry, and theadditional aid afforded by the rich gold mines ofThrace, and of the silver mines in the island ofThasus, all conspired, after the foreign acquisitionsobtained by conquest, to raise the state ofAthens to the splendour and fame which it ultimatelyreached. The various streams continuedto flow copiously till the war of the Athenianswith their rivals and enemies in the Peloponnesianbroke out; a war which put an end tothe power of the republic, and presented manyimpediments to all mining operations.Although the state was in some measure againelevated in the succeeding years, yet the mineswere too much depressed to be restored to theirformer condition. Xenophon's encouragementto their restoration was more patriotic than successful;for, besides the injury to the property ofthe citizens, which ensued from the impulse heXenophon de Redit.74 MINING IN CHAP. II.gave, the complete exhaustion of the mines soonbecame manifest, and put to shame that propheticspirit by which he had predicted themost brilliant success. The injurious effects ofthe stoppage of the mines in Attica, with thecontemporaneous loss of the foreign gold mines,were seen in the contrast between the formerprosperity of the state, and the depressing povertywhich followed speedily afterwards \The manner of working the mines in thesmall and democratic state of Athens, may bepresumed to have been different from that whichwas pursued under the despotic monarchs ofEgypt ; and that presumption is confirmed bymany passages in the writings of the Grecians.The mines appear always to havebeen the property of the community, althoughthey were not at all periods worked by thestate. Before the Persian war, an annual divisionof the profits was made among all thecitizens ; which shows, that they were eitherworked by the state or let out to farm. Afterthat important war, in consequence of the suggestionof Themistocles, the distribution of theproduce ceased ; though the profit was collectedand employed by the government for publicpurposes. From that period it becomes clearerthat the mines were chiefly worked by privateMeursii Fortuna Attica, p. 56.CHAP. II. GREECE. 75individuals or by companies. It seems veryprobable that the state had some ancient mineswhich were let to farm, whilst some of the othershad been originally opened by private individuals,with the consent of the community, whohad farmed them, and, instead of a fixed rent,received a twenty-fourth part of the proceeds ^By such and other regulations the object ofincreasing the mineral treasures of the state wasattained, and in process of time the whole of theoperations in the mines were carried on by privatepersons.The numbers who possessed mines at theperiod in which those operations were most extendedwere very considerable, and even in thetime of Demosthenes, though a decline hadtaken place in that branch of industry, theyappear to have been numerous ; for that oratorclasses the miners in equal ranks with the agriculturistsand the merchants". These personsdo not, however, appear to be all actual miners ;but individuals, who by their capitals were enabledto commence and prosecute such undertakings,were included in their number. Theprofit of the mines flowed into a variety of channels,because, as the farmers of them carried onthe works by means of slaves hired from the• Xenophon de Redit.^ Demosth. adv. Aristocratic, t. ii. p. 309, edit. Taylor.76 MINING INCHAP. II.slave owners, much of the advantage gainedmust have passed into their hands. Whole families,consisting of hundreds of individuals, werehired for these purposes, and worked under thesupervision of others, who were possessed ofknowledge and experience in mining operations,but who were, notwithstanding, in like mannerhired slaves. In some cases these overseers,though slaves, were the farmers of the mines ;for it was not unusual in Athens for the proprietorsof manufactories, of workshops, and ofcultivated land, to farm them out to their ownslaves, or to the slaves of other owners.The common condition of such letting was,that the overseer who hired the property withthe slaves was to pay daily a given sum foreach ; and this condition seems to have been thesame, whether the object let to farm was of anagricultural, a manufacturing, or a mining nature.The general rate of payment for slavesin the mines was an obolus a day, or, in ourmoney, about three shillings a month ; besidesproviding them with food and clothing. Thefarmer also was bound to replace such slaves asmade their escape, and always to keep up thenumber originally let to him. In order to preventtheir running away, the slaves were constantlykept in companies and under rigid inspection.No work beyond what fear inducedthem to perform was to be expected from la-chap.11. GREECE. 77borders under such circumstances. The operatorsin mining, whether proprietors or renters,were thus compelled to keep vast bodies ofslaves, whose united numbers amounted to manythousands, or, according to Athenaeum, to myriads.These great numbers of people, excitedby the oppression under which they lived, frequentlybroke out into such insurrections aswere found highly dangerous to the republic.History relates some of these insurrections, andespecially one, when the slaves in Attica tookpossession of Cape Sunium, and from thencecarried on for a long time most desolating excursionsthrough the territory of the Athenians\We are ignorant of what laws or measureswere established to suppress these insurrections,nor is it clear that any regulations were framedto restrict the numbers of slaves in the severalmines ; but we know that the government exercisedsome superintendence over them, andthat certain laws prescribed the places where theworkings were to begin, the directions theyshould take, and the extent to which they shouldbe carried ; for all of which purposes a chiefdirector was appointed by the state -.Athenaeum vi. p. 272. edit. Reiske.It would have been easy to have translated from thelearned work of Professor Bceckh^ or easier to have transcribedfrom the admirable translation of it under the title of the78 MINING INCHAP. II.The third period of Grecian mining may benoticed without extending the subject to anygreat length. PhiHp of Macedon, the father ofAlexander, concluded an alliance with theOlynthus, and proceeded to possess himself ofthe gold mines of Thrace, which had been workedfrom a distant period by some emigrants fromThasus.By the attention he turned to the improvementof those mines, he appears to have succeededin rendering them far more productivethan before. The expense incurred in thecourse of his improvements appears to be chieflythat arising from the great influx of water, asthe shafts were continued to a greater depth.From the general ignorance in mechanics, thiswater could only be removed by the employmentof a much greater number of men than hadpreviously been occupied in that part of thelabour. By perseverance, however, Philip wasenabled to increase the produce of the mines ;but it is doubtful if the actual net proceeds wereequal to or at least exceeded what had been expendedin acquiring them.Public Economy of Athens' more accounts of the mines ofCaution in Attica thanliave been here communicated. It would,however, have extended this branch of the subject beyond itsdue proportion, and if it prevented any inquirer from a referenceto that valuable work, it would have been deprivinghim of a high gratification.CHAP. II.GREECE. 79We learn from Diodorus ^ that Philip havingconquered Crevices on the confines of Thrace(about 358 years before Christ), enlarged it,and called it after his name Philippi ; a placeafterwards remarkable for the battle of Brutusand Cassius. The gold mines in that neighbourhoodhad been so ill explored, that theyproduced but little, till at length by his improvementsthey yielded yearly one thousandtalents.With the treasure thus obtained from hisThracian mines Philip was enabled to bribeDecades, and the other orators of his party, toobtain the preponderance in Athens, and finallyto subdue the other Grecian states ; and thuslay the foundation of that force by which hisson and successor Alexander was at length sufficientlypowerful to become the master of theeastern world.We have no accounts of these Grecian minesduring the succeeding two centuries, at the endof which they, with most of the other mines ofthe known world, were transferred to the powerof the Roman republic.The Greeks, at least in the latter period oftheir mining, must have made a progress beyondthe practices of the Egyptians. The ores seemto have been sifted after they had been poundedDiodorus, book xvi, cap. 8.80 MINES OFCHAP. ir.in the mortars; for a passage in Pollux expresslynotices the sieve (<raXa^) among the toolsof the miners. Neither the form of the furnacesnor of the bellows is described ; but thelatter is noticed by Theophrastus", and representedas of small size. Charcoal was introduced; the traders in it being mentioned by thesame author \The gold was melted by a gentle fire, with theaddition of a mixture of salt, nitre, and alum(^0TV7r77?pia), by which substances the silver alsowas purified ^ It is not improbable that leadwas also added, to promote the flux of the metals.The Colophonians were the most celebratedamong the Greeks for their skill in smeltinggold : but none of them were equally skilful inpurifying silver ; for the work was so imperfectlyperformed, as we learn from Strabo thattheir successors were enabled to separate thesilver from the earths with a profit ; althougheven they were far inferior to the operators onmetals in more modern times. Though theGreeks were acquainted with quicksilver, andhad much cinnabar, which they used as paint,they were ignorant of its property, or of its applicationto the ]purpose of quickening the pro-pollux,X. s. 149. '- Theol. de Laid. p. 393.3 Idem. ■* Hippocrates de Diaeta, p 193.^ Strabo, ix. p. 613.CHAP. II.GREECE. 81cess of separating the precious metals from thesubstances with which they were mostly found.It is not extraordinary that the value of quicksilvershould not be early known to the miners ;for Calls \ one of the most extensive workersof silver mines in Attica, found cinnabar in hisore, without knowing its value, as the Peruvianssought for silver in the mine of Guancavelica-long before they discovered the mercury or cinnabar.The gold and silver obtained by miningamong the Greeks have alone been hithertonoticed ; but of the former metal sorte musthave been procured by washing from the sandsof the more rapid torrents that descended fromthe mountains. From the nature of this the insulated and small bodiesby which it is carried on — from the facility withwhich the smallest portions of its produce maybedisposed of — and from the privacy which intimesof turbulence its possession requires — wecannot expect to find in ancient history, or evenin ancient poetry, many relations on this branch ofthe subject. Herodotus ^ describes the river Pace"which, in itsdescentfromthe mountain Tmolus, brings down a quantity ofgold dust." The fable of Midas, who, by washingin that river, had acquired the power ofPliny, xxxiii. J., and Theophrastus de Laid. p. 400.Schneider Zusiitzen zii Alloa, part ii. sec. 241.^ Herodot. book v c 101.VOL. I. G<S2 MINES IN CHAP. II.converting into gold whatever he touched, iswell known. Like most other streams whosesands yield gold, it became exhausted of its treasures; for in the time of Strabo, according tothat author, it yielded none'.There were other mines in Asia either in operationat the time when Strabo wrote his extensivework, or that had been productive in formerperiods, which merit some notice.In Armenia," he says", " in the provinceof Hisperatis, near Cable, mines of gold werefound, which induced Alexander to send Memnonthere with his forces ; but they were all cut ofFbythe inhabitants of the country. We may judgeof the power of the kingdom of Armenia, by seeingthat Pompey required of Migrates, the fatherof Artavasdes (95 years B. C), six thousand talentsof silver, which he instantly distributedamong the Roman troops ; each soldier receivingone hundred and fifty drachmas, each centurionone thousand, and each parch or chiliarch onetalent." It appears by a subsequent passagein the same chapter, that this large sum was tobe paid by fourteen annual instalments, duringwhich the revenues of Syria, and of several otherStrabo, book xviii. ^ Strabo, book xi. cap. 19.3 The French editors of Strabo suggest that this name designatesthe commanders of the legionary cavalry, though confessingthat in this they differ from all the manuscripts existingin the present day.CHAP. II.ASIA. 83provinces, were to be allowed to Migrates to enablehim to pay the contribution.In Chaldea or Chalices," Strabo says, " theremust have been mines of silver formerly, althoughthere are none at present ; but thecountry is now only renowned for its iron.Homer notices those of silver, and he was likelyto be as well acquainted with them as with themines of brass at Temesa in Italy, or with thevast riches at Thebes in Egypt, which were attwice the distance \"The same author informs us that, " in theRoad, beyond the territory of Abydos, the cityof Astyra once stood ; the land of which nowbelongs to Abydos, though in ancient times itwas governed by its own laws. It had mines ofgold, which yield little or none at present, havingbeen exhausted, like those of mount Tmolus, nearthe Pactolus -."A more diligent research among the writingsof antiquity would doubtless bring to our knowledgesome mines which were formerly productiveof the precious metals in a greater or lessdegree, but which have been closed, from theexhaustion of their treasures; and the numbermight probably be much increased, if the numenbook xii. cap. 2.-' Idem, book xiii. cap 1G ^84 MINES INCHAP. II.rous authorities from which Herodotus, Diodorus,Strabo, and Pliny derived their informationwere now accessible to our inquiries.It seems, however, highly probable, that thegreater portion of the gold which had been collectedby the Greeks in the most remote ageshad been acquired by washing the sands. Itwas the most natural and the only easy mannerin which the rude inhabitants could obtain it ;and though the quantity procured by the wholenumber that worked at it may have been verysmall, yet the chance of great success must havebeen seductive to many in the savage state ; asit has been remarked that in that stage of societythere is always a strong propensity to all gamesof hazard. The far greater part, however collected,would be carefully preserved and transmittedto posterity; and though the product ofeach year might appear insignificant, yet in thecourse of many successive centuries, when allwas ultimately collected on one point, as in afocus, at Rome, it renders the account of thevast metallic wealth in that seat of empire byno means improbable.Italy. It is remarked by Pliny, " that Italy yields tono country in abundance of mines of all theseveral kinds of metals ; but it is forbidden todig any of them by an ancient law of the senate,which expressly commands that the mines ofCHAP. II.ITALY. H5Italy shall be spared \" Long before the powerof the Roman senate was extended over thewhole of Italy, some of the nations which inhabitedthat peninsula had not only exploredmines, but had made such progress in the mechanicarts, and in works of taste and utility,that they may in fact be looked upon as themasters and instructors of the Romans.The Etruriansns had certainly made some advancesin the arts before Rome was founded.Whatever may have been their origin, it seemsclear that they had gone before the other nationsthat then inhabited Italy. The Etruriansnshad brought painting and design, with someother arts, to great perfection, earlier than thetime of Romulus ; and the colours and figureson many of their vases are highly valued, evenin the present age, and have preserved their originalfreshness and distinctness. These arts hadbeen introduced from Greece by an accidentalcircumstance ; for we learn that " a certain Corinthiannamed Demaratus, of the family of theBacchanal, being engaged in commerce, sailedto Italy with a vessel and cargo of his own, andhad returned with great wealth ; but a seditionhaving broken out at Corinth, and his family,which had been of the oligarchy, being oppressed,Demaratus did not deem himself in security underPliny, book iii. cap. 6.Si) MINKS IN CHAP. II.the new government. He therefore embarkedwith all his property for Etruria, where, by hisgreat wealth, he acquired the government of thecity; and, having married a woman of the country,had a son, who, at length, under the nameof Lucius Arminius Priscus, became the kingof Rome \"The Etruriansns, by their knowledge in mining,first obtained copper, and afterwards iron. Whenthe boundaries of their city were marked out, itwas done with a ploughshare copper or bronze";and it was the custom of the priests to have theirhair cut with knives, or perhaps razors, made ofcopper ; though it does not appear that, likesome other of the ancient tribes, they had acquiredthe art of hardening it by a mixture oftin.After the discovery and the working of thecopper mines on the continent, the Etruriansns exploredmines of iron in the island of Elba, then apart of their dominions, by which operationthey are said to have gained very great profits.It is not known that these people producedeither silver or gold, but they supplied Romewith the copper from which was coined all themoney which circulated in Rome through severalsucceeding centuries.Dionys. Halicarn. Autiquit. Rom. lib. iii. sect. 46.'^JMacrob. Saturn, v. 19. ^ Idem.CHAP. ir. ITALY. 87In Upper Italy, the Salads, a people who inhabitedwhat is now the province of Aosta inPiedmont S produced iron, gold, and othermetals. Their gold was very pure. It wascollected by washing the sands of the riverPo, whose streams were divided into variousbranches ; and, after that tribe was conqueredby the Romans, the several rivulets were let ata yearly rent by the imperial farmer-general ofthe finances. The valleys still produce muchcopper and iron, but no gold has been yieldedby them since their total subjugation to theRoman power under Augustus.The conqueror sold the inhabitants, to thenumber of thirty-six thousand, as slaves, exceptingonly nine thousand capable of bearing arms,who probably served to augment the forces ofthe victor.The country round Aquileia, and the wholedistrict of rhetoric Alps (now Illyria), was richin gold, which was found partly in large grainson the surface, and partly in mines so pure, thatan eighth part only was lost in the processes ofsmelting and refining. At one period, this goldwas laboured so extensively, that its great quantitycaused a decrease of one third in the pricethrough all Italy, and induced the proprietorsto employ fewer workmen in order to raise thePiedmont diriso in quatre department. Milan, 1802.88 MINES IN CHAP. 11.value \ The mines there were also celebratedfor the quality of their iron. It was used formaking the best weapons, and hence, '* Noricummensis," among the Romans, was as much synonymousfor a good sword as a Toledo or AndreaFerrara blade in other times. In this sense it isused by Horace, book i. ode xvi. v. 9. Gaul wasscarcely productive of metallic wealth before thereign of Augustus. The Tarbelli, a people atthe foot of the Pyrenees, are noticed by Strabo",as working mines of gold, silver, brass, and iron.The gold was found near the surface, and in sopure a state as scarcely to require smelting.Some of it was also procured by washing thesand of the rivers, but was less pure. The othermetals were found in their respective ores.There seems no reason to believe that themines in Hungary were worked at any periodbefore the christian era ^. The earliest accountsof them do not go higher than the years between745 and 770 from the birth of Christ, except anassertion of Agricola,aGerman physician of greatcelebrity for his knowledge of metals, who wroteabout 1050, and says, the mines of Kremnitz^ Strabo, iv. cap. 6.2 Idem, book iv. p. 290. ; also Caesar de Bello Gallo,iii. 21.3 Ferber uber die Gebirge uud Bergwerke in Ungarn.Berlin, 1781.CHAP. II.SPAIN. 89and Chemnitz had been worked near one thousandyears.If the mines of Sweden and of Norway yieldedany silver or gold at that remote period, whichmay perhaps be presumed from what has beenfound by opening tumuli, as before related, wehave no knowledge of the nature or the quantityof the products.There will occur in a future stage of this inquiryan opportunity of entering more particularlyinto the state of the mines of Gaul, Hungary,and the northern kingdoms. As they werelittle productive before the time of Augustus,the accounts of them will be more appropriateat a later period.The country most productive of the precious Spain,metals, but especially of silver, in very remoteages, was the Spanish peninsula. It had beenvisited and colonized both by the Phoeniciansand by the refugees of that people, who hadfounded establishments at Utica and at Carthageon the shores of Africa, and both had earlydrawn supplies of silver from it. The oldest noticesof it are to be found in the sacred writings.Solomon sent a commercial expedition there.Isaiah, who is supposed to have written about600 years before Christ, asks the question —** Who are they that fly as a cloud, and as thedoves to their windows?" and replies, "Theships of Tarshish, to bring thy sons from afar,90 MINES IN CHAP. n.their gold and their silver with them \'*Ezekiel also, when speaking of Tyre, says,Tarshish was thy merchant, by reason of themultitude of all kinds of riches. With silver,iron, tin, and lead they traded in thy fairs."And afterwards we find the following assertionon this subject: *' The ships of Tarshish didsing of thee in thy market ; and thou wast replenishedand made very glorious in the midstof the seas \" We have thus, from the most ancientof all written records, two facts on whichwe can rely, viz. that the ships which arrived inTyre from Tarshish were very numerous, andthat their cargoes, to a considerable extent, consistedof gold and silver.It has been suggested that the Tarshish ofSolomon must have been some port on theeastern shores of Africa, or in the East Indies.Without entering into the discussion, we mayobserve that the place at which Jonah is relatedto have embarked for Tarshish, Joppa, nowJaffa, being on the Mediterranean sea, it seemsclear that the place of his destination must havebeen on the shores of the same sea.It is necessary, however, to have recourse tothe ancient profane writers to arrive at certainty;and the examination of them has led, with mostIsaiah, cap. Ix. v. 8 and 9.- Ezekiel, cap. xxvii. v. 12.Idem, cap. xxvii. v. 25.CHAP. II.SPAIN. 91persons, to the conclusion, that the Tarshish ofthe Jews and the TaprtfcrauQ of the Greeks was acountry in the southernmost part of EuropeWe read in the ancient writers of the riverTartessus — of the island Tartessus — of a cityTartessus — and of a province Tartessus. Fromthese various objects to which the name is applied,as well as from the uncertainty of thenames given by ancient geography, we may, perhaps,safely infer the little dependence which canbe placed on the name of the precise place. Itmay not be unnatural to suppose that the firstvisitors gave a general name to a large country,in the same manner as the discoverers of Americagave to that continent, and the islands collectively,the name of the Western Indies. Tarshish,which was in the westernmost part ofEurope, according to the Greeks, may thencomprehend the whole of the division of Spainand Portugal, from the mouth of the river Broto Cape St. Vincent, or it may have includedthe whole of both the modern kingdoms of thepeninsula, as far as they were known to thePhoenicians and Carthaginian.It is more difficult to fix the precise date ofthe first intercourse between Phoenicia andSpain, though the commerce must have beenSee particularly Strabo book xii. cap. 3.92 MINES INCHAP. II.considerable as early as the age of Solomon. Itis said by Diodorus that the Tyrians first visitedSpain as traders ; and, when they had becomeacquainted with the natives, introduced manycolonists, in order to lay a more sure foundationfor their commerce. The building of Gates(now Cadi) must have followed soon after thediscovery of the country. Velleius Paterculus^states the foundation of that city to have beenabout the same as that of Utica in Africa, in thetime of Crus, 1100 years before Christ, as thedate of the building of the latter city is fixed byAristotle ^ who adds, as is to be found iyraieAt first the Phoenicians established themselveson the defensible island of Gates, but speedilyerected other cities, especially Cartes, betweenx\lgesiras and Gibraltar, Malacca, now Malaga,and Hispania, now Seville. Though, tor greatersecurity, they first settled themselves in strongpositions, the whole country was in a few generationscovered with smaller Phoe-iijian towns, tothe number of more than two hundred. By theconstant immigration of five centuries and thenatural increase, their power was sufficient togain them unlimited authority over the amorisDiodorus, book v. cap. 2. " Velleius, book i. cap. 2.Arise. de Mirabilis. cap. 146.CHAP. II.SPAIN. 93gives, who were at length either mixed up withthem or brought into subjection.According to the description of Diodorusthe inhabitants of Spain were in almost the loweststage of society when the first Phoenicians visitedit. The relations of that author may not beliterally true, but rested on some facts possiblymistake or exaggerated in the hands throughwhich they had passed before they were committedto written records.We are informed by the author last mentioned,that the Pyrenean mountains were covered withthick woods, that those were set on fire eitherby the shepherds or by lightning, and continuedburning a long time, and that the effect of suchfire caused the melting of the minerals ; in consequenceof which the pure silver ran down intothe valleys like a stream of water.As the inhabitants were unacquainted withits value, they readily exchanged it with somePhoenician traders, who accidentally visited theirshores, for such trifling ornamental articles asthey had brought. The traders are said to haveloaded their vessels with the precious metal tillthey could carry no more, and then to have cutthe leaden anchors from the bows and replacedthem with others of silver.Such a store of silver as was on or near the^ Diodorus, book v. cap. 2.94 MINES IN CHAP. II.surface, however it may have been formed, couldnot be so large but it must be soon exhaustedafter it became known to people so activeand enterprising as the Tyrians, the Sicilians,and the Carthaginians were in that day. Theestablishment of the colonies already mentionedwould naturally follow, and at first wouldprincipally be made use of to form garrisons fortroops to protect the stores which contained thegoods brought to exchange for the preciousmetal, as well as the metal itself when once obtained.The new settlers, by means of theirtroops and their superior weapons, speedily compelledthe aborigines to explore the bowels ofthe earth for silver, and thus inflicted on thoseuncivilized people a series of calamities which exhaustedtheir strength and thinned their numbers.*' These people," says Diodorus, "though bytheir labour they enriched their masters to analmost incredible extent, did it by toiling nightand day in their golden prisons. They werecompelled by the lash to work so incessantlythat they died of the hardships in the cavernsthemselves had dug. Such as by great vigour ofbody continued in life were in a state of misery,which made death a preferable fate."This oppression and exhaustion of the nativelabourers led to the trade in human beings,which was carried on by the Carthaginians withthe interior of Africa, and supplied to AndalusiaCHAP. ir.SPAIN. 95the place of those native workmen who had beendestroyed by the excessive toil imposed on themby their Asiatic intruders. This horrid trafficwas extended and continued, and it augmentedthe produce of the mines of Spain in such adecree as to have an influence on the wholecommerce of the world at that period. Thatinfluence was continued till the government ofthe Romans, who succeeded the Carthaginiansin the mastery of Spain, had fallen into the handsof the Gothic monarchs.The first mines excavated by the Phoenicianswere probably confined to Andalusia. Thechief of them were at the foot of the SierraMorea, near the frontier of Jaen, and not farfrom the river Guadalquiver, by which the producecould be conveyed by water to Hispania,now Seville, one of the chief garrisons andmarts ; and where even at the present day standsthe magazine called the Torre del Oro, said tohave been built before the christian era.Silver was the chief mineral wealth ; but besidesthat metal, gold, iron, and lead were procuredin the south, and some tin in the north ofSpain. The gold was probably inconsiderable.It is not mentioned by Ezekiel in his curiouscatalogue of the wares which formed the tradeof Tyre in the chapter before referred to, and itis but slightly noticed by the profane writers.The commerce of Spain was not however coneMINES INCHAP. II,fined to the precious metals, for in process oftime, as the colonists became amalgamated withthe aborigines, and a new race of people had beenthereby formed, the soil was brought into a stateof productive cultivation. Other substanceswere raised, and contributed to increase the valueof the intercourse, at first to the Phoenicians, andat length to the Romans. These productionsare recounted by Strabo, and consisted of corn,wine, oil, wax, fine wool, and salted fish. Atthat period the wool of Spain had attained sucha high value that a ram of the best flock, whenwanted to improve the Roman breed, accordingto that author, was valued at a talent \The early commerce of the Phoenicians, aswell as of the Carthaginians, with Spain, had beenconducted by mere barter. They exchangedthe commodities they carried to Spain for thoseof that country, which were in most request inthe several other parts of the world with whichthey traded. Tyre was however the centre towhich all kinds of goods were conveyed, andfrom which they were again distributed in thedistricts where each was demanded. The vastgain thus acquired must have left a constantlyincreasing surplus of wealth, and especially ofthe most compendious kind of wealth, the preciousmetals, in that metropolis of the ancientcommercial world.Strabo, book iii. ca). 1.CHAP. II.SPAIN. 07If we may give credit to a fragment still remainingof that ancient historian Agatharchidas»there was a time when the value of silver inArabia was tenfold that of gold, owing to theabundance of the latter and the scarcity of theformer metal. How far this may be accurate itis impossible to say, though, from the direct intercourseof Arabia with India, and from theArabians knowing nothing of Spain but throughthe Tyrians, it is highly probable that the relativevalue of the two metals might have beenwidely different in that age from what exists atpresent. The Tyrians, however, certainly conveyedmuch of the silver they procured in Spainto Arabia, and there exchanged it for gold togreat advantage ; and there seems traces of anintercourse between Tyre and the countries beyondthe Straits of Babelmandel, if not withIndia itself. This view of the relative value ofgold to silver in different parts of the world invery ancient times, may serve to account insome degree for the curious spectacle whichthe extensive trade and the vast wealth of thatnaturally poor country, Phoenicia, exhibited inthe early period of the history of mankind.We return from these matters of trade inremote ages to the mines of Spain. They areby all ancient authors represented as highlyproductive, but none of the accounts they havetransmitted to us are sufficiently statistical toVOL. I. H98 MINES IN CHAP. II.enable us to form accurate ideas of the quantityof the precious metals they yielded, or of comparingtheir produce with that of the other mineswhich fell into the hands of the all-conqueringRomans.The accounts that seem to approach thenearest to precision are those given by Pliny;but it is to be recollected that he wrote threehundred years after the time when the mineshad been wrested from the Carthaginians by theRomans, and when their produce had greatlydeclined from what he represents it to have formerlybeen.We find in that author the following generalview: " Some have related that Asturias, Gal-lucia,and Lusitania furnish two thousand poundsof gold annually; but Asturias supplies themost; nor in any other part of the world, duringso many ages, has so great a quantity been obtained.In every species of gold there is a proportionof silver ; in some, one tenth part, inothers a ninth, and in others an eighth. In onekind of gold alone, called Albicavense ^, there isonly one thirty-sixth part of silver, on which accountit is more valued than any other "."In another chapter he says, " Silver is found^ Albicavensis is not to be found in Spain. The Albiciare noticed by Julius Caesar as a people in Gallia Aquitain(Bell. Civ. i. cap. 34.), but not as producing gold or silver.2 Pliny, book xxxiii. cap. 4.CHAP. 11.SPAIN. 99in all the Roman provinces, but the best inSpain, and that in a barren soil, and even in themountains. Wherever one vein is discovered,another is found not far from it. It is verysingular that the mines begun by Hannibal stillexist, and retain the original names given by thepersons who first explored them. One is stillcalled Bebulo, from the discoverer, which formerlysupplied Hannibal with three hundred poundsweight of silver daily \" This the same authorinforms us was effected by means of passagesunder the mountain a mile and a half in length,in which the labourers, standing in water, workednight and day by lamp-light to turn off the water,which at length formed a large river.Polybius, as quoted by Strabo, informs usthat " The silver mines near to New Carthagein Spain were very productive. They weredistant from the city about twenty furlongs, andembraced a circle of forty furlongs, wherein fortythousand workmen were constantly employed,who at that time procured for the Romanpeople twenty-four thousand drachmas daily-themine of Bebulo, which is said to haveyielded to Hannibal three hundred poundsweight of silver daily, does not appear to haveproduced that quantity when Pliny composedPHny^ book xxxiii. cap. 6.Polybius Fragmenta, torn. iii. p. 220. edit. Ernest.100 MINES IN CHAP. IX.his great work ; nor, as far as we can see in thatauthor, does it appear to have been then productive.The situation of that mine is at present wellknown to have been at Guadalcanal, in the modernprovince of Cordova, at the foot of theSierra Morea ; and, judging from what hasbeen surveyed of it in more recent times, thewater, which was imperfectly drained by thecostly subterranean tunnel noticed by Pliny, hasIons: since overflowed the whole of the interiorof the mine ; but whether it was exhausted ofits treasure and abandoned on that account, orwhether it was destroyed by the influx of thewater, cannot now be ascertained.Near Cartagena, the New Carthage of theRomans, there are no traces of any mines, norin that part of Murcia any indications of orecontaining the precious metals. There maypossibly have been some other place bearingthe same name. If, however, we give full creditto the extract from Polybius, we shall beled to the conclusion, that the mines were moreproductive than profitable. If the drachma betakenat seven-pence halfpenny of our money,the value of the produce of the mines would beabout seven hundred and eighty pounds daily.This distributed among forty thousand labourerswould be four-pence halfpenny a day for each.The pay of a foot soldier at that time was twopencehalfpenny per day, besides an allowanceCHAP. II.SPAIN. 101of bread, corn, and other food, which must havebeen of nearly equal value; so that, supposingthe pay of a miner to be no higher than thatof a foot soldier, that there was no variation inthe produce of the mines, and that no capitalhad been expended in the various works, whichin all cases precede the products and usuallyamount to a large sum, it would appear that thesilver procured must have cost more than itscurrent worth.The produce of the mines then exceeded thenatural quantity, that is, the quantity whichwould have been extracted if mere pecuniaryprofit had been the sole object of the undertakings; it exceeded that quantity, owing to theexertions which the Carthaginians made with aview to the invasion contemplated by Hannibalof the Roman territory, and owing to the presenceand personal inspection of that distinguishedand energetic commander.As the inferior kind of work in the mines wasperformed in part by convicts and by slaves, anofficer, like the Carthaginian general, with anobject before him of such magnitude as scalingthe Alps, and exterminating the vast power andthe appalling name of the Roman people, wouldthink little of the cost of that metal which hemust have contemplated as one of the indispensablemeans of his ultimate success.102 MINES IN THE CHAP. II.Islands in It does riot appear that either the CarthageMedia i , i • • i? o • • iterranean. iiians, wheii they Were in possession oi sicily,Corsica, Majorca, Minorca, or Malta, or theirsuccessors in the dominion over them, the Romans,extracted either gold or silver from the soilof those islands; nor have any indications ofthose minerals been found in them.Some silver and some gold pyrites have beenoccasionally discovered in Sicily; so that it isbarely possible that mines may have been atsome remote period worked there, no indicationsof which are now to be met with.We read, indeed, of great sums of moneybeing coined and circulated in Sicily ; but thosemay be attributed, in some measure, to the vastproduction of corn, of wine, and other commoditieswhich the island exported, and for whichmoney must have been the principal return ; asSicily had scarcely any wants beyond those whichher own territory supplied.The continued wars of which Sicily was thetheatre must have greatly contributed to increasethe quantity of gold and silver within theisland, and have furnished the means for coiningthe money which circulated there. The Athenians,when they equipped an army to assist theLeonine against the Lacedaemonian in Sicily,are said to have taken with them in ready moneyten thousand talents ; and, afterwards, theirCHAP. II. MEDITERRANEAN ISLANDS. 103commander, Nicias, received a remittance of threehundred talents more. The Carthaginian also,who carried such large armies into Sicily, musthave furnished some store of gold and silver.Some of the precious metals were placedunder the guardianship of the popular superstitions,but they were found feeble securitiesagainst the rapacity of a tyrant. It is related ofDionysius the Elder, that he rifled the temple ofJupiter, and stripped the image of that deity ofthe golden robe which Hiero had presented toit,saying, that " a robe of gold was too heavyin the summer, and too cold in the winter, andtherefore he would supply its place with a cloakof wool." He ordered the golden beard ofaesculapius to be taken from him, saying, " Itwas a shame for the son to have a beard whenthe father had none." He also robbed the statuesof the other gods of their ornaments, andsold the spoils by public auction ; and, the nextday, pretending to repent of his impiety, commandedall who had any thing in their possessionbelonging to the immortal gods to restore itwithin a stipulated time, but did not himselfrepay to the purchasers of the effects the moneyhe had received for the sale of them.If the soil of Sicily contributed nothing tothe general stock of the precious metals in ancienttimes, it was otherwise with the largeisland of Sardinia. When the Carthaginians104 MINES IN CHAP, II.obtained possession of it, about five hundred andtwenty years before Christ, it yielded some goldand much silver, though the operations were impededby the rudeness and fierceness of the inhabitants,who retired to the fastnesses of themountainous districts to secure their independence,and from which they could convenientlyissue forth to harass the intruders.Captain W. H. Smith of the royal navy, whohas visited Sardinia within the few last years, andhas given the best account of that island, says,The mineral riches of Sardinia were wellknown to the ancients ; and vast excavations,with the remains of nine founders still to betraced, afford ample testimony of the extent oftheir operations. Tradition asserts, that goldwas formerly extracted. There is no doubt butsilver was found in considerable quantities, asit is even now produced in assaying lead. Avein of lead near Rio de Cano yielded six ouncesof pure silver in a quintal of ore \"Great Bii- Although but Small quantities of the preciousmetals were obtained in this island in the remoteages of antiquity, yet the whole subject of theextracting and refining the several minerals is toointeresting to ourselves to allow of the omissionof any of the few notices respecting those operationsthat have come down to the present day.1 Smith's Sardinia, 1828.tainCHAP. II. BRITAIN. 105The inhabitants of this island had carried onmining operations, solely by their own discoveriesand inventions, several centuries beforethe Romans had acquired dominion over thecountry. The existence of gold may be presumed,from money of it being found amongstthe inhabitants when the Romans first gaineda knowledge of them. Strabo informs us thatsilver mines were worked \ There was no wantof copper, though probably the Britons had madeno progress in the art either of refining or ofconverting it to useful purposes, for their coppertools and utensils were supplied to them fromforeign countries". Although in the time ofJulius Caesar iron was so scarce that pieces of itcirculated in the place of gold, yet in the timeof Strabo, one century later, it had so increasedas to become an article of exportsThe most celebrated metal of Britain was tin.This the Phoenicians had brought to Cadi, andenjoyed a monopoly of it; but the secret of thedistrict from whence it was extracted was atlength discovered by some Romans whose shipsfollowed those of the Phoenicians to the beforeunknown country of Cornwall in Britain. public,the Roman proconsul in Spain, after severalunsuccessful attempts, opened to his country-strabo,iv. p. 305. - Caesar and Strabo.Caesar. Strabo iv. p. 805. * Strabo, iii. p. 265.106 MINES INCHAP. II.men the access to the long-celebrated but previouslyhidden treasures of the Cassiterides orTin Islands Until the Romans had completedthe conquest of the island, the Britons workedthe mines of tin and lead in a mode they hadthemselves discovered. We are not so wellacquainted with the manner in which they wereexplored, as with the subsequent operations ofsmelting and refining the metal. The businessof smelting was conducted with great simplicity.The ore was broken and placed in a pit dugin the ground, with wood between it and on thesides of the heap ; the wood was set on fire, andby this the ore containing tin and lead wasbrought to a flux. The separation of the metalfrom the scoriae was effected by passing the fluidmetal out of the pit in which it had been melted,through a narrow canal or gutter, into anotherby the side of it. Such places have been examinedin several parts of the island by Pennant,who found in them both charged wood and scoriae.Though this process was simple, it seems to havebeen effectual ; for so little metal was left in thescoriae, that it would not pay in modern timesthe expense of extracting it ^. Polybius promisesin a passage of his history * to give a circumstantialdescription of the process of prepareiii. p. 2(35. - Strabo, i. p. c.3 Penchant, vol. i. p. 58, * Polybius, iii. chap.II. BRITAIN. 107ing the tin in Britain ; but that must have beenincluded, if he performed his promise, among theother variable works of that author which havebeen lost : but perhaps the process here pointedout may be the same, or nearly the same, asPolybius intended to communicate.We are informed by Diodorus \ " that thepeople of Barium (Cornwall), from their intercoursewith merchants, were more civilized andcourteous to strangers than the other inhabitantsof Britain. These people dig the tin out of theground with much care and labour ; but themetal is mixed with earth, out of which theydraw it by melting. They beat it into foursquarepieces like a die, and carry it to a Britishisland near at hand called Ictis. Then themerchants transport the tin they buy of the inhabitantsto France, and during a journey of thirtydays carry it in packs on the backs of horsesthrough that country to the mouth of the riverRhone."Diod. book v. cap. 2.108 TRANSFER OF THECHAI', III.CHAPTER III.On the transfer of the precious metals from some parts of theworld to others, as indicated by the sacred and profaneWriters.Having taken a view of the narrations containedin ancient writers of the stock of goldand silver accumulated in particular spots, andof the mining sources from which those stockswere extracted, it may be desirable to tracethe causes which led to their transfer from onecountry to another, and the channels by whichthey may have been conveyed, and thus to establishthe veracity of the records, whether sacredor profane, from which we derive all our knowledgeof those remote transactions.The oldest account we have of any large accumulationof gold and silver, as we have alreadyseen, is that in the possession of one of the earliestkings of the Hebrew nation. It may appearextraordinary that Solomon should have beenable to collect so large a portion of those metalsat a period when the other nations of Asia andEurope were so scantily supplied with them.The Greeks of that day were nearly destitute ofCHAP. III. PRECIOUS METALS. [09them ; for at the siege of Troy, about one hundredyears later than Solomon, though some ofthe chiefs had ornaments about their arms andpersonal decorations of those metals, the use ofthem was beyond the reach of their followers.Neither Homer nor Hesiod speak of gold orsilver as money, but express the value of commoditiesby a certain number of sheep or oxen.Both these poets indicate the wealth of an individualby the number of his flocks and herds,and that of a country by the abundance of pastureand the quantity of brass and of iron itcontained.In the camp before Troy trade was carriedon, not by money, but by exchanges in kind;and the wines of Lemnos were purchased withbrass, iron, skins, oxen, slaves, and other commodities\It seems to have been a much later periodbefore even a moderate stock of gold and silverhad been accumulated in Greece. Till the timeof Gyges, king of Lydia, J'^O years before Christ,And now the fleets arrived from Lemnos' strands.With Bacchus' blessings cheer'd the generous bands.Of fragrant wines the rich Sunsets sentA thousand measures to the royal tent :The rest they purchased at the proper cost.And with the plenteous freight supplied the host :Each, in exchange, proportion'd treasures gave —Some brass or iron, some an ox or slave.Pope's Iliad, book vii. v. 560 — 5G8.110 TRANSFER OF THE CIIAP. ill.or about 300 after Solomon, no other metal wasto be seen in the temple of Delphi but brass,and that only in the tripods. One hundred andfifty years later still, the Lacedaemonian wereobliged to have recourse to Croesus to procurethe gold of which they formed the statue ofApollo on Mount Thorax \ Subsequently byfifty years, Hiero, king of Syracuse, soughteverywhere for a long time to obtain goldwherewith to form a statue of Victory, and atripod for the temple of Delphi, and at lengthfound some at Corinth, in the house of oneArchimedes, who had collected it by purchases insmall quantities. That person supplied the kingwith the weight he required, and, besides, gavehim a handful, which Hiero repaid by sendingin return a vessel laden with corn. Athenaeumquotes a passage from Anaximenes of Lampsacus,the tutor of Alexander the Great, dio wroteabout 350 years before Christ, which relates thatthe golden necklace of Eriphyle, which had beengiven to her by Polynices, and had formerlybelonged to Venus, was chiefly celebrated becausegold was so scarce in Greece. The sameauthor says, that Philip, king of Macedon, inthe early part of his reign, before he had procuredgold from the mines of Thrace, wheneverhe retired to rest, placed under his pillow theHerodot. book i. sec. 19. - Theseus, book vi. cap. 5.CHAP. in.PRECIOUS METALS. Illsmall and only cup of gold he possessed, whichhe prized highly on account of the great rarityof that metal.This picture of the scarcity of the preciousmetals in Greece, from the earliest history ofthat people down to the beginning of the reignof Philip, forms a most striking contrast withthe representations given by historians of theirabundance in Egypt and in Judea in the contemporaryages, as well as of that which is relatedof the riches of Alexander when he hadachieved his Asiatic conquests. Though thecontrast may be great, it involves no contradiction; and the condition of the several peoplemay be sufficient to account for any apparentdiscrepancy which the different relations mayexhibit.Greece in its early stages of society appearsto have been inhabited by a race of wild andignorant savages, living upon such herbs androots as were spontaneously produced, and takingshelter from inclemency of weather in dens,clefts, or hollow trees. The first improvementin their condition is attributed to Pegasus, whois calculated to have been a contemporary ofAbraham ; and his chief merit appears to havebeen his inducing the people to gather acornsfor food, to build huts, and to clothe themselveswith the skins of animals — a merit for which hewas long venerated, if not worshipped. They112 TRANSFER OF THE chap. hi.were unacquainted with agriculture, and ignorantof laws to secure the possession of property.Their associations were too slight to afford protectionto the weak against the strong ; andthose only were safe from invasion who inhabitedthe most rocky and barren spots of ground, suchas Attica, where the inhabitants, from havingremained undisturbed for a long time, took thename Autothones, or indigenous people. Theancient governments of Greece were most rudeand barbarous ; every city and almost everysmall town and village being a petty tyranny,governed by a chief, to whom the title of kingwas given. If some improvements had beenmade in the several countries or kingdoms intowhich Greece became progressively divided, betweenthe time of Pegasus or of Abraham, andthat of the epoch of the Olympiad, or of Uzziah,king of Judah, the progress was not such as tocreate any doubts of the great superiority of theHebrew people over the Greeks, in civilization,in government, in the arts of life, as well as inreligious feelings and opinions. That some ofthe Greek nations, and especially the Athenians,at a period subsequent to the reign of Solomon,advanced at a rapid pace, whilst the Hebrewsremained stationary or retrograded, can be noobjection to the general veracity of the view,now under consideration, of the quantity of theprecious metals accumulated at the given periodCHAP. nr. PRECIOUS METALS. 11^of about 1000 years before Christ. The Greeksare scarcely noticed in the historical books ofthe Old Testament. Some have thought theydiscovered allusions to that people in passagesin the prophetic writings ; but the different namesgiven to the places make it very doubtful. Theknowledge which the Hebrews had acquired ofthe other parts of the world seems to have beenconfined to Egypt, Arabia, and that part ofcentral Asia which they comprehended underthe general names of Chaldea or Assyria. Thosewere the countries most advanced in civilization,and they consequently attracted most attention ;whilst Europe in general, not excepting their nearneighbours in Greece, must have been overlookedas barbarians, if their name had ever reached theIsraelites.Having thus endeavoured to account for thescarcity of the precious metals in Greece at anearly age, we may proceed to consider how itcould have happened, that at a correspondentperiod so large a quantity of them should havebeen collected, as the sacred writers representto have been possessed by the Israelites whenthey became settled in Palestine. The institutionof archons in Athens, under which the firststeps towards improvement were made, nearlycorresponds with the period in which Saul, thefirst king of the Israelites, was installed in thatVOL. [. I114 TRANSFER OF THE chap. hi.dignity ; but that institution had not had time todevelop itself at the period of the erection ofthe costly edifices of Solomon in Jerusalem.The laws of Solon, to which Athens was mainlyindebted for its subsequent prosperity and its ultimatefame, were not introduced till four hundredyears after the time we are now reviewing.Lycurgus, the lawgiver of Sparta, was born onehundred years after Solomon ; and his system oflaws was by no means favourable to, nor productiveof, national improvement in the arts ofpeace, or to the increase of the wealth of thecommunity which adopted it.The other countries of Greece, Boeotia,Thebes,stolid, Locris, Doris, and Achaia present intheir brief history but few notices, and nonewhich can lead us to consider their progress incivilization to have been earlier than that ofAthens and Sparta ; and though Macedonia ultimatelybecame master of the whole of Greece,it had only attained the rank of a kingdom, anda state of regular but rude society, two centuriesafter the reign of Solomon.It is clear from history, that Abraham, the progenitorof the Hebrew nation, nine hundred yearsbefore the erection of the sacerdotal and royaledifices of Solomon in Jerusalem, had advancedtowards the civilized state more than ten centuriesbefore any part of Europe had emergedCHAP. III.PRECIOUS METALS. 115from the lowest state of barbarism. We' readthat he had not only flocks and herds, and maleand female slaves, and camels and asses, but alsosilver and gold *. He purchased a field as a for four hundred shekels of silver;and when he sent his servant to procure a wifefor his son, he furnished him with vessels ofsilver and of gold to make presents to, or to purchaseher from, the family of the female withwhom he sought the ilion. The possession ofthese precious metals in their uncoined state —for it seems clear that they passed as money byweight, and not by tale — is a strong indicationthat the family of the Arabian patriarch wasvery far removed from that savage state in whichthe Greeks were existing several centuries later ;and a farther proof is given by the knowledge ofthe fact of their practising agriculture, and thushaving advanced from the shepherd stage ofsociety to that of the husbandman. We* readthat Isaac, who succeeded to the possessions ofhis father, " sowed the land, and received in thesame year an hundred-fold." We also learn thatlie digged a well and built an altar, which leadsto the conclusion, when connected with the cultivationof the soil, that the wandering life of thisGenesis, cap. xxiv. v. 35.- Idem, cap. xxiv. v. 53.^ Idem, cap. xxiii. v. 15.Idem, cap. xxvi v. 12.1 '2116 TRANSFER OF THE chap. hi.family bad begun to change for a stationaryresidence, wbicb is one step towards civil andsocial life.In the next generation of this family, we findJacob, tbechiefof it, was in possession of sufficientof the precious metals to send to Egypt, and tomake purchases of corn for bis famishing household; and when they emigrated to that country,it is highly probable that, besides their flocks andherds, they carried with them also an accumulatedstock of that compendious wealth, theirgold and silver.Notwithstanding the darkness in which thehistory of Egypt is involved, we are enabled toobtain some glimpses of the state of society inthat country at the time when the Hebrewswere residents in it. It seems clear that theinstitution of castes, similar to that which existsin India, prevailed there ; an institution which,though it tends to advance mankind to a certainstage of civilization, acts as an impediment toany considerable farther progress. The cultivatorsof the soil were the lowest of the castes.The sons of the husbandman were bound tofollow the profession of the father ; and this,combined with a fertility which depended on thecasual elevation of the river, more than on thescience or skill of the workmen, prevented theEgyptians from making much progress in agriculture.The Israelites, when settled amongCHAP. III.PRECIOUS METALS. 117them, enjoyed a greater degree of freedom ; andbeing more skilful in the management of flocksand herds, increased both in numbers and inwealth with a rapidity much beyond the natives.Even when their prosperity had excited the animosityof the government, and had drawn uponthem oppression and exactions, we learn thatstill " they multiplied and waxed very mighty'*We have already seen that the gold and silvermines of Egypt, Nubia, and the countries intheir vicinity were in full activity at that time,and that those metals were in great abundance.It is then highly probable that an industriousand frugal people like the Hebrews, whose propertykept pace with the increase of their numbers,would condense their savings, and keep inthe more compendious substances some portionof their wealth. In the three centuries whichthe nation passed in Egypt, an annual small accumulationwould amount to a large sum, to saynothing of the jewels of silver and of gold whichbefore their departure they borrowed of theEgyptians. Accordingly we find that soon afterthe commencement of their wanderings the goldear-rings of the females were sufficient to formthe golden calf, and that contributions levied onall the males above twenty years of age, for thepurpose of decorating the temporary tabernaclein the wilderness, amounted to twenty-nine talentsand seven hundred and thirty shekels of118 Transfer OF THE CHAP. III.gold, and one hundred talents and one thousandseven hundred and seventy-five shekels of silver,or, in our money, to nearly two hundred thousandpounds.In their way to Canaan, the Israelites plunderedthe people who opposed them ; and thetribes who were exterminated in that countrymust have possessed some gold and silver ;and though in most instances the inhabitants,and in some their cattle, were destroyed, yetthe precious metals found among them wouldbe carefully preserved. From the nature ofthe society which existed among those peoplewhom the Jews overcame, their gold and silverwould be for the most part in the hands of theirchiefs, and be easily discovered and appropriatedby the invaders.We find that at Jericho ' the gold and silver,as well as the vessels of brass and iron, were putinto the public treasury ; and though the wedgeof gold, with the addition of the silver whichAchan - had concealed, was but of small value,yet the circumstance of one of the private menhaving appropriated to his individual use thesemetals, to the amount of five hundred pounds ofour money, creates a fair presumption that theywere to be found in some quantities among thisand the other tribes who were subdued. OnJoshua, cap. vi. v. 19.2 Idem, cap. vii. v. 21.CHAP. III. PRECIOUS METALS. Reenteringinto the possession of their conqueredterritory \ we find one half tribe of the Hebrewswas dismissed to their allotment " with muchcattle and silver and gold, with brass and ironand much raiment ;" and there can be no reasonto suppose them more wealthy than the rest oftheir brethren.In the period which succeeded to the governmentof Joshua, whilst the Israelites were ruledby judges, though they were often oppressed,and, according to the custom of the age, plunderedby those who defeated them, yet theyfinally came out of each conquest successfully,and made those who held a temporary dominionover them more than repay the precious metalsthey had extorted. Thus Gideon -, when he haddefeated the Midianites, collected the goldenear-rings of the vanquished, which amounted toone thousand seven hundred shekels of gold,perhaps worth in our money five thousandpounds. In that period, too, we find some intimationof the precious metals in the possessionof private individuals. Thus ^ Abimelech, withseventy shekels of silver, hired " vain and lightpersons" to commit a massacre on his brethren ;and* Micah took from his mother eleven hun-joshuacap. xxii. v. 9.■^ Judges, cap. viii. v. 26.Idem, cap. ix. v. 4.Idem, cap. xvii. v. 2.120 TRANSFER OF THECHAP. Ill-diedshekels of silver, of vvliich two hundredwere converted into an image for idolatrousworship.Under these two first monarchs the Israeliteswere engaged in constant hostilities ; and thoughthey occasionally met with reverses, they weregenerally, especially under David, successful ;and it is obvious, from scattered notices, that bythese operations the mass of the precious metalswas increased : — thus the spoil of Ahab was ofthe weight of a talent of gold ; and near the closeof the same reign, when Moab and Zobah andthe Syrians of Damascus were defeated, the goldand silver and brass of these nations were broughttogether, and dedicated to the public service".It seems then clear, that when the peacefulreign of Solomon commenced, the accumulatedmass of gold and silver must have been thecollection of more than eight hundred years,reckoning from Abraham, or of near five hundredyears since the Israelites, on their removalfrom Egypt, had become an independent and,on the whole, a flourishing nation. The spoil ofthe several tribes which was taken during thetheocracy was carefully preserved in the publictreasury, and was protected by the solemn sanctionof the religion of the Hebrews, which kept itin the tabernacle under the title of the Treasure2 Samuel, cap. xii. v. 3.2 1 Chronicles cap. xviii. v. 8 — IJ.CHAP. III. PRECIOUS METALS. 121of Jehovah. None of it could be destined toprofane purposes without incurring the guilt oftreason against that great Being who was atonce their spiritual and their temporal sovereign.The metallic wealth which was collected atthe time of Solomon's greatness had not arisensolely from the spoil of the nations which theHebrews had subdued, or the profits arisingfrom their agricultural pursuits. We find thatthey had already entered into commercial operationsin the reign of David; and the extensionof them seems to have opened channels by whichgold and silver flowed in more copious streams,or at least at a more rapid pace, than they couldhave done by the rude operations of war, or thecalm pursuits of agriculture.At first the Hebrew nation was simply anagricultural people ; all the institutions of theirlegislator, Moses, were calculated to preservethem in that state. They had none but domesticmanufactures. Little or no 'division of labour,such as manufactures and commerce require,could take place where each family was fixed ona small portion of land, which was entailed onthem, and could not be so alienated as not toreturn to the original holders at the end of aterm of fifty years. It was a productive soil,poetically described as a land flowing with milkand honey. As the whole population was devotedto the labours of the field, the cultivation12^ TRANSFER OF THECHAP. III.must have been well executed, and in such circumstancesmuch more of corn, wine, and oil musthave been produced than the inhabitants couldconsume. Though in their progress from Egypt,and at their first settlement in Palestine, theyhad been a warlike and even an exterminatingpeople, yet they had become at the accession ofSolomon a settled nation, and formed thosesocial ties with the surrounding kingdoms whichled both to commercial intercourse and conjugalunions. The king himself married a daughterof an Egyptian monarch, and formed alliancesof a commercial nature with Tyre and the otherneighbouring states of Phoenicia.The states of Phoenicia were then at theirhighest point of prosperity. They were thegreat manufacturers, navigators, and traders ofthe ancient world. The luxuries they fabricatedof every kind were disseminated by their ownvessels to every part of the known world, andbrought back to their storehouses the metallicand other productions of the several nations withwhom they traded. Their colonies in Spain, inAfrica, and in the islands of the Mediterraneanmade returns of much silver, some gold, andconsiderable numbers of slaves. Their trade withEgypt, Arabia, and India brought to them muchgold, together with precious stones, spices, incense,ivory, and other valuable products. Inthat period the situation of Tyre which is de-chap.iir. PRECIOUS METALS. 123scribed in the poetic language of Ezekiel ' maybeapplied to the whole of Phoenicia — as *' havingby its great wisdom gotten gold and silver intoits treasuries, and great riches," but as being protectedby hired troops against foreign nations.Phoenicia was, however, naturally an unproductivecountry. A great part of its narrow territorywas then covered with the forests of Lebanon,and yielded only those trees which furnishedtimber for constructing their dwellings and theirships. The more level parts on the sea-shorewere too contracted for the dense population ;and the chief pursuits of that population hadno tendency towards agricultural improvement.They were thus the natural allies of the Hebrews,who, amidst their offensive wars on all the othersurrounding nations, do not appear to have exercisedany hostile acts towards the Phoenicians,though they were as grossly idolatrous as theother tribes who were exterminated.We have no accounts of the intercourse betweenindividuals of Phoenicia and Judea, though,from the character and circumstances of the twopeople, much must have subsisted : but we learnthat the governments exchanged productions ;that Solomon sent yearly to Tyre - " twenty thou-ezekiel,cap. xxvii. This chapter contains an accurateand general view of the state of the trade of Tyre before itsconquest.• 1 Kings, cap. v. v. 11.124- TRANSFER OF THE chap. 111.sand measures of wheat and twenty measures ofpure oil for food for the household of the king ;"A and that the king, on one occasion, sent himsix score talents of gold S" or about six hundredthousand pounds.This view of the intercourse between Phoeniciaand Judea may enable us to account for acircumstance otherwise so strange, as that Solomon,the monarch of a country which affordedno articles for distant foreign trade, who hadneither ships nor sailors in his dominions, andonly the port of Zion-geber, on the easternbranch of the northern part of the Red Sea,which had been conquered by his father, and theinhabitants destroyed, should have undertakendistant commercial expeditions. As the shipshe sent on such expeditions were manned withPhoenician sailors, so it is probable they wereloaded with the goods which he had receivedfrom those people in exchange for the cattle,the corn, the wine, the oil, and the other productionsof the soil which he furnished to them.We are informed of the amount of the preciousmetals which the fleets brought back toSolomon at the termination of a voyage of threeyears' duration, but whether it far exceeded thevalue of what they carried with them appears atleast doubtful; and if we may judge from the1 Kings, cap. x. v, 14.CHAP. III. PRECIOUS METALS. 125circumstance of the trade ceasing with the reignof him who began it, and that long before hisdeath, we shall perhaps conclude that it was notfound beneficial, or in so small a degree as notto induce the continuance of it. It was neverresumed, though one attempt at it was plannedabout a hundred years later, in the reign ofJehoshaphat who built the ships for it at thesame port of Zion-geber ; though, from causeswhich do not appear, the voyages were neverundertaken, but the ships that had been builtwere broken up.This extended discussion on the stores ofmetallic wealth in Judea can scarcely appearimproper, though it has perhaps exceeded thelimits which the importance of the Hebrew nationmight entitle it to receive. It was, however,desirable to remove any doubts on thegeneral credibility of the most ancient of records ;and it seemed to form a point from whence theprobability of the veracity of the profane authorsupon the subject of ancient accumulationsof gold and silver might be advantageouslysurveyed.If we look at the state of society during thefive centuries which passed between the reignof Solomon in Jerusalem and that of DariusHystaspes in Babylon, we shall find that the2 Chronicles cap. xx. v. 36 and 37.1^2i) TRANSFER OF THECHAP. III.parts of the world most advanced in civilizationwere divided into small kingdoms ruled by pettytyrants, whose subjects had neither rights norprotection to oppose to the claims of their chiefs.Their labour was directed to such purposes asbest suited his views. Hence there was no classof subjects possessing property which the chief,if he had occasion for it, could not claim andsecure for his own use. This is shown by therelations already given of the kingdom of Lydiaunder Croesus, and of Intense under Pytheus,both of whom drew to themselves the whole ofthat metallic wealth which the labour of theirsubjects could extract from the bowels of theearth. The precious metals would then for themost part be found in the hands of the kings,as we see was the case with the two who werethe largest or at least the most prominent sovereignsof mining districts. These monarchs,though called kings, were, however, in point offact, only feudatories of those greater monarchswho successively ruled in the eastern empiresof Assyria and of Persia. The precious metalsthus collected in the power of these minor kingswas ready to be seized upon by, or to be presentedto, the greater monarchs whenever occasionmight call for the delivery of them. Itwas retained in smaller portions, ready to begiven up to form large masses ; and being infew hands could be easily collected and trans-chap.III. PRECIOUS METALS. Inferredto Babylon or Ecbatana, as the demandsof the great sovereign might require. Had goldand silver been diffused in that as in subsequentages, and especially as in modern times, amongthe whole of the subjects of the smaller kingdoms,in the form of common current money —had it formed the universal medium for the exchangeof all commodities, and the universalstandard by which their relative value towardseach other was measured — there would havebeen a difficulty in collecting and amassing itwhich would have prevented the easy transferthat seems to have been made from one part ofthe world to another after each victory.Before gold and silver were used as coin —when it was deemed exclusively either a royalor a sacerdotal privilege to possess it — whenthe chief depositaries of it were the palaces ofSolomon, of Croesus, of Pytheus, or Darius, orthe temples of Jerusalem or of Delphi — thoseplaces would form reservoirs which would beeasily moved with the course of conquests inthe direction the conquerors might appoint.During the short existence of the Babylonianempire, between the period when the Assyrianmonarchy was absorbed in it, and that in whichit was subdued by the Modes and Persians, themass of metallic wealth had been prodigiouslyincreased in that capital. That which existed inthe more eastern parts of Asia had been long collectedthere. Commerce had brought additions128 TRANSFER OF THE ciiAPiir.from India by Ormuz on the Persian Gulf, andby the traffic of caravans, which arrived fromvarious countries at that emporium. The treasuresof the palace of Solomon, the magnificenttemple he had erected, and the accumulatedsavings of five centuries, were transferred with itsenslaved inhabitants to the capital of Nebuchadnezzar.About the same period the successes ofCambyses lead enabled that monarch to collectand transmit to Babylon the vast treasures ofEgypt that have been already noticed'; andthese, whatever allowances may be made for theexaggerated statements of the ancients, musthave amounted to a most enormous quantity.Under the reign of Darius, the great impostslevied by that monarch must have augmentedhis treasures; and if the grand expedition ofXerxes scattered a portion, and even a verylarge portion, of them over the surface of thecountries between Babylon and Europe, therewas more than sufficient time to collect themagain at the seat of the government in the hundredyears which passed between the conclusionof that disastrous expedition and the periodwhen Alexander the Great swallowed up thePersian state in his universal but ephemeralmonarchy. If the actual amount of the revenueof the Persian empire, as stated by Herodotus,be but tolerably correct — if the account of theSee page 13.CHAP. III.PRECIOUS METALS. 1^9treasure collected and expended by Solomon betrue — if the mines of Egypt produced but onequarter of the gold and silver which, according toDiodorus, was inscribed in the palace of Thebesand if the treasure affirmed to be in the possessionof Croesus and Pytheus approached nearto the amount at which Herodotus represents it,there seems good grounds to conclude that thewhole spoil of Persia might amount to the sumat which Appian has stated it, or more thanseven hundred thousand Ptolemaic talents, orupwards of forty millions sterling. The goldand silver which was in existence, at least thegreater part of it, appear in that age and state ofsociety to have followed in the train of the conquerors.Persia had conquered all that part ofthe world in which the greater portion of thosemetals were in use ; for with the Romans littlewas to be found in that age ; and it can scarcelybe thought that forty or fifty millions, or evena larger amount, is an extravagant estimate ofthe coined and uncoined precious metals thatcould be collected in the Asiatic part of theworld.Without presuming such a quantity to haveexisted, perhaps without a much higher estimate,it will be impossible to account for the quantityat later periods, when the more clear and veraciousstatements of the Roman writers representVOL. I. K130 TRANSFER OF THE CHAP. iii.the accumulations of the state and of individualcitizens at a correspondent degree of magnitude.Though Alexander might have carried withhim to Europe a large portion of the preciousmetals seized in Persia, yet much of it wouldremain in that country after its conquest. Therewards given to his soldiers, and the paymentsto his allies, the funeral of Exhaustion, the gratuitiesto Harpalus and others of his satraps,would dissipate a third of his spoil ; the expenseof maintaining his court and his army till hisreturn would absorb a large portion of the remainder; and hence we can see no difficulty inreconciling the accounts of the vast mass of treasurecollected in Persia, with the comparativesmall amount of that wealth which Alexanderleft behind him at his death. As the treasuredistributed among his followers would, accordingto the practice of soldiers in all ages, be expendedwhere it was received, and would remainin that country, there seems no difficulty — increditing the account in Arran of the treasureextracted by Ptolemy Euergetes from the provincesleft to the successors of Alexander about240 years after Christ, — in believing in the truthof the terms which the Romans extorted fromthe same people, — or in yielding faith to the reportsof the treasure which Paulus amplius ex-chap.III.PRECIOUS METALS. 131habited in his triumph at Rome ^ on his returnfrom Macedonia after his victory over Perseus,another of the successors of Alexander.Ptolemy is related to have returned to Egyptwith immense booty, containing, among otherarticles, forty thousand talents of silver, manygold and silver vessels, and two thousand fivehundred statues, many of them of the Egyptiangods.When the Romans, after the conquest of Carthage,first entered Asia, and defeated Antiochus,one of the Seleucia, the successors ofAlexander, about 190 years before our era, apeace was granted on condition of paying a tributeof fifteen thousand Euboic talents, of whichfive hundred were to be instantly delivered, twothousand five hundred when the Roman senateshould ratify the treaty, and the remainder intwelve successive annual payments.All the mines of gold and silver, with theproduce they had yielded in the long series ofpreceding centuries, were gradually deliveredover to the dominion of Rome by the successAccording to Plutarch the money carried in this triumphamounted to two thousand two hundred and fifty talents ofsilver and two hundred and thirteen talents of gold coin, besidesmany vessels of both metals. Livy, however, deems thisestimate too high ; but Velleius Patroclus makes it amountto double as much. The last opinion is probably right, sincethe money thus brought from Macedonia is said to have freedthe Romans from taxation during fifteen years.K 2132 SILVER AND GOLD IN ROME. chap. hi.sive conquests of the countries in which theywere found. Carthage, Spain, Germany, Greece,Asia, and Egypt, within Httle more than onehundred and forty years after the Romans hadpassed the Hellespont, became subject to theirpower. The mineral wealth of the world wasthus in a great degree, by the time Augustushad attained the imperial dignity, concentratedin his dominions ; and his capital, which hadbecome the metropolis of the civilized world,was the focal point to which the gold and silverwere attracted, and from whence they were distributedagain to the several extremities of theempire, in that due proportion with which theirpowers of production enabled them to supply thenecessities or the luxuries of imperial Rome.CHAP. IV.ROMAN MINING. 133CHAPTER IV.On the financial management of their mines by the Romans.It has been before mentioned that the Romanshad but few mines in Italy, and, according to theobservation of Pliny, they were very sparing oftheir contents. They certainly wrought no minesof gold or silver in any part of Italy before thecommencement of the first Punic war, about490 years from the foundation of their city, or260 before our christian era. There is no informationto be gained respecting the mode inwhich the few copper and iron mines they thenpossessed were administered. Our knowledgeof the financial administration of the mines ofthe precious metals must be therefore drawnfrom later sources.The Romans, till the time of their Carthaginianwars, were much too rude and warlike apeople to pay great attention to the mechanicalarts, or to their economical departments, till theywere attracted to the consideration by having obtainedby conquest possession of the sources ofthe wealth of the vanquished. The rapid ROMAN mining. CHAP. IV.cess of the Romans in their wars at Iiome, a littlebefore their first contest with Cartilage, had putthem in possession of the scanty mines of centraland upper Italy; and the booty extorted fromthe subdued owners of them furnished the meansof proceeding to other and more distant undertakings.The success of the two Carthaginian warsdelivered into their hands the most valuable oftheir enemies' mines in the western part of theAfrican continent, in Sicily, Sardinia, and thesouth of Spain. A few years later, by theirconquests in the east, the mines of Greece andAsia Minor came into their possession ; and thevictory over Perseus, or Perses, at the battle ofPydna (about 168 years before Christ), renderedthem masters of the productive mines of Macedoniaand Thrace. The other mines in the east,in Asia and Egypt, were transferred to the Romansby the successful campaigns of Pompeyand Augustus ; and the remainder of those inwestern Europe, in Gaul and northern Spain,by the victorious arms of Julius Caesar and ofAugustus. Thus the period of nearly three hundredyears, between the first Punic war and thereign of the first emperor, had witnessed theaggregation of the whole mines in the power ofone supreme and uncontrollable state.By the laws of antiquity, as exercised amongall the ancient nations, and at a subsequentCHAP. IV. ROMAN MINING. 135period adopted into the civil law, all mines andmineral deposits of gold or silver ore, or of preciousstones, belonged, if on the public lands,to the sovereign, and formed a part of his patrimony; but if they were on private property,they belonged to the owner of the land, subjectto the condition that, if worked by him, a tenthpart of the produce was to be delivered to theprince ; but if worked by any other person, withthe consent of the owner, two tenths were to bepaid by the operator, one to the sovereign, andone to the proprietor of the landAs the Romans acquired the dominion in thecountries by conquest, they naturally assumed totheir government all the rights and possessionswhich had appertained to the former sovereigns,and, among them, the administration and advantagesderived from the mining departments ofthose countries.The Romans were unskilled in mining, as inall those arts which were not connected withthe practice of war. The mines in the conqueredterritories differed according to their locality,their depth, the nature of the earth beneathwhich they were to be explored, and thepractices by which they had been renderedSee Gambia's Commentaries on the Mining Ordinancesof Spain, translated by Hatfield, vol. i. p. 15. This workcontains much curious learning on a subject but little elsewherediscussed.136 SLAVES EMPLOYED CHAP. iv.productive. The new masters in each countrywere therefore compelled to become the pupilsof the people over whom they ruled, and tofollow blindly the practices they found alreadyestablished.The mere manual labour in the mines of theconquered countries, as in upper Italy, had beenexercised by slaves, and the Romans had beentoo long habituated to the practice of domesticand agricultural slavery to feel any repugnanceto the continuance of it. The practice of slaveryseems, by all the records of antiquity, to haveat first originated, in some degree, from an improvementin the moral feelings of mankind, as,before it, captives taken in war had been commonlyput to death ; and cruel as slavery maybe,it is certainly less so than indiscriminateslaughter.Whatever may have been its origin, the extensionof it arose from and strengthened the basestand most degrading feelings. It soon becameconnected with commerce, and was perhapsgenerally attendant on the earliest maritime expeditionsamong the Greeks, who first practisednavigation. It appears from Homer in the interestingstory of Emaeus^ that the Greeks, whilstthey carried on trade in distant countries, entrappedthe inhabitants and sold them for slaves.See Odyss. book xiii. v. 403, b. xiv. v. 15;, and b. xv. v. 288.CHAP. IV. IN THE MINES. 137We find in Strabo ^ some account of thesekind of transactions, which convey an idea oftheir extent, and of the systematic manner inwhich they were conducted. *'Trypon," hesays, " who possessed a fortified place in Cilicia,first organized a company of pirates, and wasquickly followed by others ; but the chief inducementwas the profit derived from the sale ofpersons reduced to slavery. Independently ofthe facility for making slaves, the pirates had inthe island of Delos, which was a large and richcommercial place, a depot capable of receivingand despatching a great number of the slaves inthe same day."The Romans contributed largely to this kindof piracy. Having become rich after the destructionof Carthage and Corinth, they made use ofa great number of slaves, which induced piratesto issue forth on all sides to furnish that luxuryby depriving of their liberty all the persons theycould seize upon."The kings of Egypt and of Cyprus alsocontributed to encourage this kind of piracy."In eastern Asia, in Egypt, and in Spain, it isprobable, from the accounts we have, that theslaves employed in the mines were not collectedby piracy, but by a kind of conscriptionfrom the neighbouring countries, under circum-strabo,book xiv. cap. 5.138 OPERATIONS IN THE MINES. cHAP. IV.stances scarcely if at all less distressing to themthan those inflicted by the slavery derived frompiracy. The condition of such persons wouldresemble in some measure that of the agriculturalvillains under the feudal system of a succeedingperiod, or that of the serfs of the crownin the Russian empire. This too appears tohave been the manner in which the mines inMacedonia were worked when that country wasconquered by the Romans ; for we learn fromLivy S that after their general, Paulus amplius,had obtained possession of the province, he releasedthe peasants from the obligations theywere previously under of labouring in the minesat the command of the farmer of the finances.The working of mines either by serfs or byslaves could neither be the most appropriatenor the most beneficial mode of operating. Bythe first method a great degree of oppressionmust be practised, and by the latter a great expensein purchasing slaves must be incurred,and by both only so much labour, and of theworst kind, would be performed as could beextorted by terror.The Romans, where they gained a province,wished speedily to simplify, or, to use a modernphrase, to generalise their administration ; andhence were induced to let the mines to farm,• Livy, lib. xlv. cap. 18.CHAP. IV. FARMING THE MINES. 130instead of working them on their own account,and for their own immediate benefit, as theformer sovereign had done. This farming of themines, when adopted, was in practice found injuriousto the property so let. Leases for onlyshort terms were granted to the farmers generalof the imposts, who, with the shrewdness naturalto such situations, looked only to the interestsof the present moment. The labour, whetherof serfs or of slaves, was conceded to them withthe mines, and the power over them was exercisedwith no deficient degree of rigour. Thefarmers took out only the best ores, and neglectedthose of inferior quality ; leaving themiu the pits, where they soon became buried inthe rubbish with which they were surrounded.Their object being to enrich themselves duringthe term for which they held the mines, theynaturally neglected the interest of future workers,and suffered them to go to ruin.Whilst exhausting the mines of the richestores, they only cut the passages and propped theroofs in so slight a manner that if they lastedduring the current leases they would all requireto be reconstructed in a short period after ;which, when the best ores had been extracted,would be at an expense that could not be replacedby any product of the inferior ores whichhad been left behind.The various contrivances for keeping out the140 GOVERNMENT WORKINGCHAP. IV.water from the mines, and the machines and implementsfor extracting what could not be keptout, were all contrived to answer temporary purposescommensurate with the length of the periodfor which they were let to farm. To preventthis premature exhaustion, in some instancesthe censor limited the number of slaves to beemployed, and shortened the term of the leases ;but these regulations seem either to have beenevaded or at least ineffectual.During the continuance of the republic, asthe mines did not improve in productiveness,they gradually deteriorated, but so slowly thattheir retrocession was not very striking tillRome fell under a despotism, and a new stateof things with new institutions roused attention,and directed it to the declining state of that department.It is not clear under which of the emperorsthe alterations were made ; but soon after theabolition of the republic, the mines were alltaken from the farmers, and the administrationof them intrusted to officers of different ranks,who, upon a regular system, conducted theworking of them for the sole benefit of the emperor.By this change the subterraneous workswere more substantially and durably executed,and the exhaustion of the mines did not advanceat so rapid a pace as before. But the expenditurewas increased without a correspondent in-CHAP. IV. THE MINES. 141crease of the proceeds. In this state they werefeebly continued till the troubles which sprangup in all the frontiers and in the distant provincesbrought the search for gold and silver toits termination. The decline of the mines whichthe Romans had acquired by their extensiveconquests will fall more appropriately underconsideration in a future part of this inquiry.142 CONSUMPTION OFCHAPTER V.On the consumption of the precious metals before the accessionof Augustus to the imperial dignity in Rome.When considering the consumption of goldand silver in the earlier ages of the world, it isnecessary to bear in mind the great differencebetween the state which society then displayed,and that which it has since assumed. Thegovernments at first were strictly patriarchal.The head of each family provided for the protectionof the whole against hostile aggressionsfrom the neighbouring tribes ; and it thus becamenecessary that he should have the meansof providing such weapons as the defence of thecommunity required. The metals of whichweapons were formed, at first brass and afterwardsiron, were scarce, and, as compared withthe common food and clothing then used, excessivelycostly ; and though coined money ofthe precious metals was scarcely known, yet goldand silver had acquired the faculty of beingmore easily and conveniently exchanged for theother metals, than such commodities as corn andcattle. The gold and silver then would mostCHAP. V. THE PRECIOUS METALS. 1 13probably be preserved in the stores of the chiefof the tribe or family as stock in reserve, to beretained as a sacred deposit, and to be appliedonly on an emergency sofa pressing nature, suchas the obtaining arms on occasion of an attackfrom an enemy, or to present as an offering totheir deities to avert or to remove some generalcalamity. Whilst thus chiefly wanted for waror for superstition, it would be found necessaryby all means to add to the stores. By one ofthe oldest laws of Athens, it was ordained thata thousand talents should be set apart yearly fordefence against foreign invasion, and whoeverproposed to apply it to any other purpose renderedhimself liable to the punishment of death.The hoarding of treasure for purposes ofgeneral defence, which began in the patriarchalstate of mankind, was continued when largercommunities were formed, and was perhapsuniversally practised by all who governed statesor kingdoms, whether under the monarchicalform, or under any of the several varieties ofaristocracy which prevailed in the ancientworld.As it is probable that the far largest portionof the gold and silver of the ancient world wasthus kept from circulating through many hands,there would be none of that consumption ofthem by friction by which coined money is now144 CONSUMPTION OF THE chap. v.constantly suffering a loss. Such loss, as willin a future stage of this inquiry be particularlyexamined, would be almost wholly avoided inthe period of the world which we are now considering.The coining of money upon a small scale hadbeen commenced at an early period, and hadbeen considerably extended in Rome after thegreat influx of gold and silver which followedthe conquests of the three centuries before thereign of Augustus ; but except after that accessionit is not probable that coins were foundin large quantities ; for though they were currentat fixed rates for small transactions, yet in largepayments they always passed by weight, thusmaking the ascertainment of their country ortale a matter of little importance.Pliny says, " In ancient time it was the practiceto weigh out brass by the as or pound, w whichwas thence called as libt^alis, and now liheUa,as the weight of two pounds is called dipond'ms.Hence a fine is called ceres grams, that is, brassin mass. Hence what is stated in an account aslaid out is called expense — because all paymentswere made by weight. The paymasters in thearmy were called Uhripendes, because theyweighed out the pay to the soldiers ; and thepay itself was called stipendiary for the samereason. All buying and selling at this day areCHAP. y. PRECIOUS METALS. 145usually performed by means of the balance,which alone serves to verify the bargain orcontract ^"The earliest gold, the darics of Persia, havebeen already noticed (page 15.) The next tothem were of some of the reigns of the tyrantsin the island of Sicily ; ofGelo, 491 years beforeChrist J of Herons, and dionysius 404years before that era. Some of them circulatedin Rome before any had been coined in thatcity; specimens of those ofGelo and Hiero arestill preserved in modern cabinets ; but none ofDionysius that are free from suspicion".There was no gold coin in Greece till Philipof Macedon had put the mines of Thrace in fulloperation, about 360 years before Christ. Theyare said by Diodorus to have yielded gold to thevalue of a thousand talents yearly, which wascoined into pieces called Philippi, and becamethe common name for coins of the same sizeThe most ancient silver coins of Greece arethose with an indented mark on one side, andthe figure of a tortoise on the other. The earliestof all have no letters on them ; but thoseof a later period have anti, which Pinkertonthinks means ^gina, but which other medalistsPliny, book xxxiii. cap. 3.2 Delia Rarity delle Medaglie Article, da VincenzioNatale Scott, Firenze, 1809.^ Pinkerton, vol. i. p. 105.VOL. I. L116 CONSUMPTION OF THE chap. v.have supposed means ^^^gium in Attica, andthat the tortoise is the sign for the Peloponnesian^Silver is said to have been first coined in Romein the year of its building 485, or 266 years beforeour era, which seems to be confirmed byno coins having been found of an earlier date;though, according to Pompous, a mint hadexisted there which twenty-three years beforehad been placed under the direction of thequestor. That establishment was most probablyonly used at its earliest erection for coining brassmoney. The first gold coin of Rome followedthat of silver, but not till after an interval ofsixty-two years. Thus silver coin in Rome hadexisted about two hundred years, and gold coinabout one hundred and fifty years, at the time ofthe accession of Augustus. We can hardly supposethat, at the commencement of the operationof coining, with the imperfect engines theyhad invented to perform it, any very large proportionof the whole mass of the precious metalshad been converted into coin, or that the frictionwhich occurs by wear in passing from onehand to another could have occasioned such aconsumption as considerably to affect the wholeamount in existence. There would too be thePinkerton, vol. i. p. 67.^ Pliny, book xv.CHAP. V. PRECIOUS METALS. 147less loss by friction on the gold coin at that thanat subsequent periods, on account of the greatpurity of the metal.It is well known now, and seems to have beenascertained at an early period, that the purerthe gold is, the less consumption of it from frictionarises in use. Without examining the chemicalreasons for this, the fact is undoubted, andthe ancients seem to have been acquainted withit. They had early acquired the art of refiningit. We learn from Pliny \ that in his time goldwas refined by mercury, which mingled with it,but rejected all alloy; and the gold was afterwardsfreed from the mercury by squeezing bothin skins ; in which operation the mercury ranthrough, and left the gold in a pure state.In the time of Philip of Macedon, the art ofrefining had arrived at great perfection, for hiscoins are found of the utmost purity; and theyare rivalled by those of his son Alexander, andof the other princes and cities which immediatelyfollowed. The purest gold coin now circulatingin Europe is that which issues from theEnglish mint. Our standard gold consists oftwenty-two carats of pure gold, and two carats ofalloy. That of all the other kingdoms of Europecontains more alloy in different proportions ;but except the Dutch ducats, which are few inPliny, book xxxiii. 6,L 2148 CONSUMPTION OF Tie clap. V.number, all are worse than ours. The moreancient coins at some periods were far purer.Those of the successors of Alexander in Egyptcontain twenty-three carats three grains of goldand only one grain of alloy. Boding, as quotedby Pinkerton \ informs us that the goldsmithsin Paris, in assaying some gold coins of Vespasian,found in them no more than a seven hundredand eighty-eighth part of alloy. Consideringthen the purity of the metal and the shortduration and the limited circulation of gold, inthe form of coin, we cannot estimate the consumptionof it by abrasion to have borne anygreat proportion to the whole quantity in existenceat the age of Augustus.It does not appear that the same degree ofpurity was preserved in the silver coined by theancients. The silver coins of the Greeks areinferior to our standard. Those of the Romansof the earliest period are also inferior to ours,though very slightly so ; but from the reign ofSeverus very bad silver appears, and continuesto the time of Diocletian. From ClaudiusGothic to Diocletian, that is, from 270 to284 A. D., during which eight emperors reigned,the silver coins are very scarce ; but they seemall to have degenerated gradually. Usurpersarose in Spain, from whence most of the silverPinkerton, a^oI. i.CHAP. V. PRECIOUS METALS. 149came, who greatly adulterated the metal. Plinysays ', *' biscuit denarii triumvir Antonius ferrum;" and Pinkerton asserts, *' I have tried adenarius of Anthony Leg. vi. which flies to amagnet like iron."The Egyptian coins struck under the Romanemperors were at first of tolerable silver, but bydegrees they degenerated into a metal called bythe French metallic writers potiriy being a mixtureof copper and tin with a very little silver.The greatest loss by wear in our money falls onthe smaller pieces. Thus our half sovereigns andsixpenny pieces lose more than double their proportionof weight in the same space of time asour sovereigns and shillings. This may be attributedto their more rapid circulation; to theirpassing more frequently through various hands.In ancient times, when all necessaries couldbe purchased with copper or with iron money,on account of their very small metallic value,when the precious metals were hoarded byprinces, and when there were scarcely any middleclasses of society, the daily purchases of themore numerous body of the people would bemade with money of the inferior metals, inwhich they received their wages. There couldbe little of what may properly be called circulationof any other than copper and iron, andBook xxxiii. cap. 9.- See Appendix, No. 1.150 Consumption OF THE CHAP. V.the gold and silver would suffer, comparativelywith the present time, little or no loss by frictionin the use of it. Many of those applicationsof gold and silver, which in the presentday contribute to its greatest waste, were utterlyunknown to the ancients. Some of themhave only been introduced into practice invery modern times, and what had in somemeasure been known to the ancients had onlybecome so less than one hundred years beforethe reign of Augustus. The Romans were notquite ignorant of the art of gilding, though theyhad not brought it to the degree of perfection,nor carried it on to the extent, which it hasattained in modern times. We are informed byPliny that the first gilding was seen in Romeduring the censorship of Lucius Mummies,soon after the destruction of Carthage.The art of spreading out gold over a largesurface, as practised in the time of Pliny, seemsto have been plating rather than gilding. Itis shown by that author \ that by the hammergold could be so extended, that an ounce of itwould make seven hundredandiifty leaves, eachof them four fingers in breadth and in length.When it is considered that our modern gold-beatershave so much farther availed themselvesof the malleabihty of that metal as to make each"^ Pliny, lib. xxxiii. cap. 3.CiiAV. V, PRECIOUS METALS. 151grain cover a surface of fifty-seven inches, wemay safely assume that in the time of Pliny,though gilding had been discovered, it had madebut little progress j and we are warranted inaffirming that what was then called gilding wasonly a kind of imperfect plating, which, as Plinysays, was fixed on wood by a kind of glue ; andit will appear probable that the shields of theSamnites were (auro ccelata) covered with goldin that manner, as well as the statue of Apolloat Delphi.The Romans about the time of Augustusbegan to gild the ceilings of their temples andtheir palaces, the capitol being the first of thebuildings on which this kind of embellishmentwas bestowed ; and the cost of which amountedto twelve thousand talents according to Plutarch^, from whence it is denominated aurea byVirgil -, 20i\^fulgens by Horace.By gradual steps this kind of ornamental decorationextended itself from public edifices toprivate dwellings. The ceilings of the roomsbetween the beams were covered with gold, towhich Horace refers. Lib. ii. Od. xviii.,neque aureusMea render in domo lunar ;and also Virgil in the ^neid, 1. i. 726.Plutarch in Publicly.2 ^neid, 1. viii. 348.152 CONSUMPTION OF THE CIIAP. V.Such applications of gold as the ancients usedin this way, as it exposed a surface less in proportionto its weight than our modern mannerof extending it, woidd evidently cause a muchless loss to arise from exposure and friction.The other methods of gilding now practisedon metals and on our china-ware were unknownto the ancients ; and thus that mode of consuminggold, which is next to the loss by frictionon coin the greatest in the present day, had noinfluence in more remote periods.There are no indications of the ancients havingattained the art of drawing wire of gold andsilver so as to apply it, like the moderns, to thefabrication of gold and silver lace, though it hasbeen thought they had some means of using itfor the purposes of embroidering. This is inferredfrom a passage in Propertius ', where hespeaks of interweaving gold (aurum intexere)^and where he calls the garments made with itVestes AttaliccE^ from Attalicus, or Attains, whohas been supposed to have invented them.As the luxuries of the east Were introducedinto Rome, the practice of using gold for someornaments and for domestic purposes accompaniedor followed them. Thus the hecticor chair which was brought from Asia, andwas composed, according to Curtis ', of solid• propertius, lib. iii. s. 18. ' Curtis, viii. I).CHAP. V. PRECIOUS METALS. 153gold, was imitated in Rome in wood ; but, asAthenaeum says, had feet of gold. These lecticae,or sedan chairs became at length so common,that Caesar prohibited the use of them except topersons of a certain age or rank, and on certaindays -. The bits of the horses' bridles and thecollars on their necks were of gold ; and thecovering for their backs (strata) were adornedwith gold and purpled Their carriages wereornamented with decorations of precious stonesas well as of gold and silver.The art of enamelling, though it was knownin the time of Pliny, seems to have made butlittle progress *. The operation is described bythat writer in the following words. " The ancientscontrived to paint silver, that in drinkingthey might be more devout from seeing theirdeities painted in their cups. This fashion isbecome so prevalent that even the statues whichare carried in the triumphs are scarcely valuedunless they are enamelled and painted black ;and it is really surprising to think how muchmore valuable they are considered when thenatural brilliancy of the metal is hidden andextinguished by such painting." From thedescription given by our author of the mode ofpreparing the enamel, it seems clear that noAtlienseus, v, 10. - Suetonius Cases. 43. cl. 28,3 Virgil, ^neid vii. 279, * Pliny, xxxiii. c. 3.^ Idem, lib. xxxiii cap. 4.1.34 CONSUMPTION OF THE clap. V.other colour but black was adopted, and that itwas used only for ornamenting drinking vessels,statues, vases, urns, and other large articles offurniture. At the present day, one of the greatestcauses of the consumption of gold is the use ofit in the smaller personal ornaments, and in avariety of trinkets, whose basis is gold, but whosechief value is the enamelling, which is wroughtby skilful artists upon it. These, when thefashion changes, or the work of the artist becomesobliterated, the gold being in very minuteportions, are lost or destroyed, or at least thesame care is not taken to preserve such fragmentsas is applied to the larger pieces of ornamentalfurniture. In the present day it is supposedboth in England and in France, that thequantity of the precious metals applied to theseminor purposes by far exceeds that which isconverted into larger objects, and that the lossin them is increased in some degree in proportionto the small size of the articles.The consumption of silver in our age andcountry has been vastly increased by the applicationof the mechanical powers to the constructionof flatting mills. By these machines awedge of copper or tin and another of silvermay be converted into a substance, homogeneousto every sense but the sight, exhibiting on oneside the most brilliant silver, and on the otheran appearance of a different metal. This platedCHAP. V.PRECIOUS METALS. 155matter when rolled into sheets is converted intothose beautiful pieces of domestic furniturewhich ornament the tables and sideboards ofthe middle classes of society, and enable them torival in brilliancy those of the richest families,at a cost more proportionate to their means.There are no traces in any of the writings ofantiquity of such an application of silver ; andnow, owing to the great surface which is exposedto friction, and our neat and decent habits,which require frequent cleaning and polishing,an enormous consumption of silver is producedin this way.From the difference in these several modes ofconsumption, which have arisen in part from ourincreased knowledge in the working of metals,and from the diffusion of wealth into smaller,but not minutely small, portions, which have hada vast influence on the fashions of mankind, adegree of destruction of gold and silver whichwas scarcely felt in the ancient world has inmodern times been steadily, but of late rapidly,advancing, and by its continuance must at lengthproduce a sensible effect on the value of allcommodities when measured by these metals.156 rUICES IN GREECE.CHAP. VI,CHAPTER VI.On the effect of the increased quantity of the precious metalson prices from the earliest period of history till the establishmentof the Roman Empire under Augustus.If the two precious metals be in fact commoditieslike all others, except in possessing thefaculty of being used as the measure of the valueof all property, they must like the others beaffected by their scarcity or abundance, thoughtheir denomination or their value with respectto each other may remain unchanged. If goldand silver are rare, they will exchange for alarger portion of food, clothing, or other necessaries;if the supply of them be large, they willexchange for smaller quantities of those articles.It is not then that other articles are dearer orcheaper, but that gold and silver are scarcer ormore plentiful.There are some difficulties in the way of markingwith precision these variations in the valueof the precious metals, by ascertaining the pricesof other commodities. Such commodities aresubject to variations, arising from their ownscarcity or abundance, which may be caused byCHAP. VI.PRICES IN GREECE. 157propitious or unpropitious seasons, by the interruptionof intercourse by war, by such desolatingfamines as the ancients were more subjectto than the moderns, and by a variety of otherinnumerable but minor causes. There are alsoother difficulties in estimating the rise or fall ofthe precious metals in remote ages, arising fromthe uncertainty and variation in the weight andpurity of the metallic money which circulated,and in fixing the exact measures of length or ofcapacity, and of the weights which were usedin dispensing the several kinds of property.In the earliest stages of society the chief trademust have been in the necessaries of life ; andas soon as agriculture had been practised, cornwould appear to be the best standard by whichto measure the value of gold and silver ; butthis would be flu* from a sure criterion. Insome ages and countries the soil, climate, orfashion of living made one kind of food cheapand another dear, whilst in other times andcountries exactly the reverse is to be seen : thusin Athens, in the time of Solon, a sheep wasworth but a bushel and a half of corn ; and a fewcenturies ago a given weight of corn was equalin value to the same weight of meat in England;and at a later period, in the Highlands of Scotland,according to Hume, a pound of oatmealwas worth a pound of beef.In the relative value of one kind of corn to158 PRICES IN GREECE. chap. ti.another there has been a great difference indifferenttimes and kingdoms. At one periodwheat, at another barley, and at another oatshave been the chief food ; and in the early ages,in thinly peopled countries, the spontaneousfruits, such as chestnuts and acorns, must haveformed a portion of the food.These considerations are not of sufficient forceto prevent an examination of the increase of theprice of corn in Greece simultaneously with theincrease in quantity of the precious metals. Allthat can be extracted from ancient authors isutterly incompetent to inspire confidence inthe precision or accuracy of the comparison. Itwould be folly to pretend to exactness in a casewhich will merely admit of an approximationto it.The historians of Greece were too much occupiedwith the great events of war, or with,to them, their more interesting political discussionsand intrigues, to take much notice ofthe prices of the commodities."^ ^ ** In the time of Solon (550 years beforeChrist) an ox in Athens cost five drachmas, ornearly three shillings ; a sheep, one drachma, orseven^pence three farthings; and a medius ofcorn, or one bushel and three gallons, the sameas a sheep : but prices rose gradually to fivetimes, in many cases to ten or twenty times,their former amount, which after the exampleCHAP. VI.PRICES IN GREECE. 159of more recent times does not seem surprising.The quantity of money was not only increased,but through a rising population and extendedintercourse its circulation was accelerated \"From the time of Solon to that of Demosthenes,a period of about two hundred andtwenty years, prices were continually rising;and though they fluctuated with the productivenessof seasons, they never were so low again asin the time of Solon -. It was during this periodthat the gold and silver of Persia had beenbrought into Greece by the hostile invasions ofthat power, and the subsidies of the Persians totheir Grecian allies, and soon after the extensionof the mines of Thrace by Philip had enabledthat prince to corrupt the orators of Athenswith it.From a passage in one of the plays of Aristophanesit is inferred that the medius ofmaize was sold for three drachmas, or near twoshillings, in the 97th Olympiad, 390 years beforeChrist ; but in the time of Demosthenes, aboutseventy or eighty years later, and especially afterthe expedition of Alexander against Thebes, itwas commonly sold as high as five drachmas, orabout three shillings ^. It is thus seen that thecorn, which at one period was at one drachma,rose in two centuries to treble that price, and inBceckh., vol. i. p. 84. - Idem, vol. i. p. 127.'Idem, vol. i. p. 128.l60 PRICES IN GREECE. chap. vi.one century more to five times as much as at thefirst.In very remote ages wars were undertakenchiefly for the sake of plunder. Individualswere engaged, too, perhaps, partly from a spanishspirit, and partly from the authority of elders orsuperiors. Under those circumstances militarypay was unknown. The Athenians first paidtheir troops in the time of Pericles, about 450years before our era From Athens the practicewas extended to the other Grecian states,and within one hundred years was adopted bythe whole of them.At first, the pay of the foot-soldiers was twooboli a day", or a little more than twopence hah-penny,but within less than two centuries, whenthe mines of Caution had been rendered moreproductive, we find the pay of the same descriptionof troops had advanced to double that sum,or four oboli ^ At the earlier period the soldierswere taken from a better class of inhabitantsthan in the later, when a description ofpersons had been admitted into the army whohad before been excluded. At the first periodthe soldiers must have been considered a superiorclass to the labourers in the mines, whowere paid but an obolus a day. It is not improbablethat from the inferior relative rank ofUlpian in Orate. de Syntax!. * Deist. Philip. 1.Thucydides, lib. iii. ">CHAP. VI. PRICES IN GREECE.the private soldiers in the later times, theymight be deemed entitled to less comparativeremuneration, and did not receive an augmentationin their pay correspondent to the decrease ofvalue which the metallic money had suffered.There is another circumstance which, thoughnot conclusive, seems to show the diminishedvalue of money in Greece. That sum whichwas deemed a sufficiency for the support of afamily continued to be rated higher in the courseof years, in a manner somewhat similar to theincrease in the price of corn. At an early period,about 550 years before Christ, the possessorof a talent was considered in moderate circumstances,and was enabled to live on the income derivedfrom it by interest at the rate of twelve percent,per annum, aeschines, a celebrated orator,who lived about two hundred years later, hadinherited a property of five talents, to whichhe added two, accumulated by his professionallabours, and was deemed a man in easy circumstances.Demosthenes, who died about sixtyyears after, when the Thracian mines had beenextended, died possessed of fourteen talents,besides his female slaves, and is remarked asmoderately affluent. Canon, another Athenian,noted in the year 240 before Christ, left behindhim forty talents, which is not spoken of as anythingremarkable \See Boeckhj vol. ii. p. 235.VOL. I. :m.1()1162 RISE OF PRICES IN ROME. CHAP. VI.Although it may' be fairly assumed that thevalue of gold and silver had diminished betweenthe time of Solon and the absorption of Greeceinto the Roman republic, yet it is only to beinferred from such vague testimony as can becollected from incidental assertions scatteredthrough various authors as have been here quoted.Abbe Barthelemy, who paid so much attention toevery thing relating to Greece, and especially toAthens, gave up in disgust his examination intothe prices of commodities in the several stagesof the history of those countries, concluding itthus : " J'ai trouve tant de variations dans cellesd'Athenes, et si pen de secours dans les auteursanciens, que j'ai abandonne ce travail."In Rome, the circumstances under which theinhabitants were supplied with bread corn makesthe exact value of it, or of the money with whichthat value is to be measured, a case of great andconstant doubt. The corn was sometimes extractedas tribute from conquered or subjectcountries. It was sometimes furnished to thepublic magazines by contract, and sold to thepopulace at lower prices than it had cost. Itwas at other times given to them gratuitously.These various circumstances do not, however,affect the view we must now take of it. Theymight have a temporary and even a great effect,but it would not be greatly operative on the differencesbetween the cheapest and the dearestCHAP. VI. RISE OF PRICES IN ROME. l63periods, which are some centuries apart. Thus,if when wheat was at three shillings the quarterthe adventitious circumstances lowered it, to thepopulace, to two shillings the quarter ; and whenit was at three pounds the quarter, the same orsome other circumstances lowered it to twopounds ; the difference between the two periodswould be nearly the same.Now we find, from Pliny, that the price ofwheat was brought down by Marius Marcus,one of the exiles of the people, about 350 yearsbefore Christ, to the price of an as the medius,or three farthings the peck, being equal to twoshillings of our money the quarter ; and at the-|Ctime of Pliny it had reached three pounds thequarter. The few notices we have of prices inthe intermediate times seem to show that theadvance accompanied the increase in the preciousmetals; that like that increase it was at firstslow, but peculiarly rapid after the concentrationof the contents of the chief mines in the handsof the Roman government. Thus the tribuneClaudius made a law that corn should be givento the people gratis, though it had before beensold at a rate equivalent to sixteen shillings andthree-pence the quarter of our money. A littlelater, Cicero informs us, that two kinds of wheatwere brought from Sicily ; one, the decumanum^or tithe-corn, was sold at fifteen shillings andthree-pence, and the other, C3i\\ei\j'rumentum im2OfAfijitXjJ>/\"SStf164> RISE OF PRICES IN ROME. cHAP. Vi.j}eratum, at twenty shillings and four-pence thequarter. Cicero's charge against Verres was forexacting duodenum desertion in modis singidos,which would make the medius or peck cost oneshilling and ten-pence three farthings, and consequentlythe quarter three pounds one shilling.*' By the great access of riches and increaseof money that happened afterwards, especiallyin the reign of Augustus, the price of cornas well as of every thing else was raised inRome \" We learn from Suetonius, that " theroyal treasures of Egypt being brought to Romeat the triumph after the war of Alexandria, therewas such an abundance of money that, the rateof interest being lowered, a very great increasetook place in the price of land. After this, whenmoney flowed in from the confiscations, Augustusallowed the gratuitous use of it, for afixed time, to those who could give security todouble the amount." Tacitus relates thatafter the burning of Rome by Nero, it was agreat consolation to the people to have corn reducedto three nummi the medius, or to aboutsixteen shillings the quarter, which had beenthe ancient price. It does not appear how longthis comparatively cheap rate was continued ;but it could not be of long duration, for whenPliny wrote, the prices had again risen, andArbuthnot, p. 122. " Sueton. de August, c. 41.Tacitus Annal. xv.CHAP. VI. RISE OF PRICES IN ROME. l65were somewhat higher than in the time of Augustus,namely, three pounds three shillings andsixpence the quarter.The price of bread in Rome when Pliny livedseems to have been nearly the same or a littlelower than it usually is in our day in London.The Romans made bread of very different qualitiesand prices. Pliny enumerates four descriptionsof them, viz. Ostrearii, or loaves bakedwith oysters ; Artolagani, which correspondwith our cakes, or rather rolls ; Speustici, fromthe quick mode of the preparation ; and Arto-pticiiy or those baked in ovens, so called fromthe kind of furnace in which they were prepared.This last must have been of nearly the same qualityas our middle sort of wheaten bread, andwas sold, according to the calculation of Arbuthnot,at the rate of three shillings and two-pencethe peck loaf.The prices of cattle kept pace in their increasewith those of corn. At an early period of thehistory of Rome, in the time of Epidermis, aboutfour hundred years before our era, the price of acalf was one shilling and seven-pence, of a sheepseven-pence three farthings, and of an ox asmuch as ten sheep. This is inferred from thefines inflicted for offences, which were originallypaid in cattle ; having been commuted for moneyat the value which cattle bore when the penaltieswere enacted. The prices at a later periodloi() RISE IN PAY OF THE CHAP. VI.are drawn from those works of Varro which arestill extant (for the greater part of his writingsare lost), who lived about the time of the birthr. of our Saviour. According to that author, as(j){vv*^^^A^ ' deduced by Arbuthnot, the price of a sheep was^i twenty-five shillings, of a calf three pounds two'^^'^ I shillings and sixpence, and of an ox twelve^^UxA^-^l pounds ten shillings \^-WV^ Although the pay of the troops may not be avery accurate criterion of the value of the preciousmetals, it is a subject which cannot beentirely overlooked.The Roman soldiers, like the Greeks, at anearly period received no pay. It was first givento the infantry four hundred and seven yearsbefore our era, and to the cavalry three yearslater, during the siege of Veil ^. At first thestipend was three asses, or two-pence farthing,to the foot ; and double that sum to the centurion; whilst treble was paid to the horsemen ^About the year 150 before Christ, though thepay had not been augmented, the soldiers wereallowed, in addition to it, a certain portion ofcorn ; most generally four pecks a month. About1 In the greater part of what relates to the prices of cornand of cattle at the several periods, the authority of Arbuthnothas been chiefly relied on, and the 2d and 4th chapters ofhis second dissertation have been followed. See pages 120 and126, edition 1727.Livy, b. iv, 59. and b. v. 7. ^ Polybius, vi. 37.CHAP. vr. TROOPS IN ROME. 1 67eighty years later Julius Caesar doubled the pay,making it six ^ asses, or four-pence halfpenny ;and Augustus "^ about sixty years after increasedit to ten asses, or seven-pence halfpenny ; besidesthis that emperor gave a large pension duringthe remainder of their lives to those who hadserved twenty years \ This formed a temptinginducement to enter into the army, and to continuein the service till the period was arrivedwhen the soldier would be entitled to his pension.It may perhaps be rash to assume that theseadvances on the pay of the soldiers were owingexclusively to the increased quantity of gold andsilver which had poured into Rome. The favourof the troops was too important to the aspirantsfor predominance not to have contributed somewhatto the advance of pay. It is now impossibleto determine what proportion of these advanceswas prompted by the desire of ingratiatingthe commanders with the troops, and whatto the increased price of all commodities whichthe influx of the precious metals had created.Suetonius, Jul. 26. ^ Suetonius, August. 49.^ Gronovius de Pecunia Peter. lib. iii. p. 120.168 GOLD AND SILVER IN ROMECHAP. VH.CHAPTER VII.On the produce of gold and silver from the accession ofAugustus to the division of the Roman empire at the endof the fifth century.The secure occupation of the imperial dignityby Augustus was followed by a period of tranquillity,little interrupted by the few and slighthostilities which occurred either on the frontiersor in the internal provinces of the empire. Themilitary legions were sufficient to repel theformer, and to suppress the latter.In his early career, Julius Caesar had foundin the public treasury a large mass of gold andsilver, which he seized and applied to the purposesof his ambition. It had been long accumulating,and owed its amount to a series ofconquests, a length of years, and a course ofparsimony, which have been delineated by Lucanin his Pharsalia, where he describes that resolutewarrior bursting into the temple of Saturn,where it was deposited, after his first returnfrom his wars in Gaul.Tunc rules Tarpeian sonata magnoque reclusesTestator stride fores : tunc conduits imoSequitur temple, multi non tuctis ab annisjCHAP. VII. FROM THE TIME OP AUGUSTUS. l69Romani census populi, quern Punic bella.Quern desert Perses, quern victim graeca Philippi,Quod tibi Roma, fuga Pyrrhus trepidante reliques ;Quod te Fabricius regi non vendidit auro ;Quicquid variorum mores servants avorum ;Quod dites Aside populi misery tribute,Victorious dedit Minorca Creta Mello ;Quod Cato longinus exit super equora Cypro.Tunc Oriental opes, captorumque ultima rerum.Quae Pomerania prelate est, gaza, triumphs,Egeritur : triste splinter temple rapine ;Pauperiorque fuit tunc primum Caesar Roma.The treasure which Caesar had thus rudely seizedwas speedily returned to the treasury, as hasbeen already noticed in this inquiry, and withvery large additions. The events which followedhis death, though at first partaking of the natureof civil war, do not appear to have diminishedthe store; and it was amply replenished by hissuccessor Augustus, in part by conquest, but inagreat degree by the systematic regularitywhich he gradually introduced into every departmentof his extended government, but moreespecially into the finances.A succession of favourable events had broughtto Rome the accumulated fruits of the laboursof mankind during a course of thousands ofyears. There had been a constant production,and but little consumption, of gold and silver.Although those metals had flowed to Rome asto the centre of the world, yet the arts and industryof the provinces had regularly receivedlyO TRIBUTE COLLECTED cHAP. vil.back a portion of them in return for those luxuriesand necessaries which the wants of an extendedand populous metropolis required. Theprovinces were thus enabled to continue theircontributions to the wealth and voluptuousnessof the imperial city, though with gradually diminishingforce, during the reigns of the severalmonarchs who succeeded to the throne of Augustus.The tributes from the several provinces havebeen estimated by Gibbon to amount to a sumequivalent to between fifteen and twenty millionsof our money, which, though a vast amount,was unequal to the expenditure of the imperialgovernment, which required the imposition oftaxes of various descriptions. These may beclassed under a name familiar to us by the titleof customs and excise, the first of which variedfrom ten to twelve and a half per cent, on thevarious goods imported either by land or seafrom foreign countries. The excise was animpost on all sales of property made either byauction or in public markets, comprehending thelargest sales of houses and estates, as well asthose which derive a value only from theirinfinite variety and their daily consumption.Though the tax was no more than one in thehundred on the amount of the sales, it must haveproduced a vast sum, notwithstanding the expenseand difficulty of the collection, and thoughCHAP. VII. FROM THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 171it was the occasion of murmurs even in thepopular reign of Augustus, and of still greatercomplaints and opposition in the reign of hissuccessor, Tiberius.A further tax also imposed by Augustus wasthat on legacies and inheritances ; a tax whichthat emperor fixed at a twentieth part of the propertyof the defunct, and from which there wasno exemption, except as regarded the smallestfortunes and the nearest of kin on the side ofthe father. From the habits of the Roman peoplethis tax was never the occasion of complaint.Gibbon ^ accounts for this acquiescence by saying," From various causes, the partiality of paternalaffection often lost its interest over thestern patriots of the commonwealth and the dissolutenobles of the empire ; and if the fatherbequeathed to his son the fourth part of hisestate, he removed all ground of legal complaint."The tax, even at the lower rate at which it wasimposed by Augustus, must in process of timehave brought the greater portion of the individualwealth of the community into the publictreasury ; but when doubled in the reign ofSeverus, a few generations must have been sufficientto have transferred it from the hands ofprivate persons to the imperial exchequer.When we consider the sums of money broughtSee Gibbon's Decline and Fall, book vi.17^ WEALTH OF INDIVIDUALS. CHAP. vri.into Rome from the conquered and plunderedterritories, the amount of tributes extorted fromthe provinces as long as their powers of furnishingthem remained, and the vast sums whichthe taxes we have noticed must have heaped togetherin the metropolis, we shall find less difficultyin giving credit to what is related of themoney collected, expended, and bequeathed, inthe age of Augustus, and even up to the timeof Constantine. Several of these large sums havebeen already noticed ; to which may be added,that Augustus received in various legacies fromdeceased friends, according to the recital ofSuetonius, £32,291,666 sterling; that Cicero receivedas presents from his clients and admirers£170,000 ; and a private person, distinguishedby nothing but his wealth, Caius Caecilius Diodorus,who died a few years before Augustus,though he had lost a large part of his propertyin the civil war, left behind him 4116 slaves,3600 yoke of oxen, 230,057 head of other cattle,and a sum of coin equal to near three millions ofour money ^.Without, however, noticing farther the actualquantity of the precious metals which was collectedtogether in Rome, and from thence dispersedand again collected through the severalprovinces ; it is proper to advance to the subjectPliny, book xxxiii. c. 10.CHAP. VII. NEW WORKING OF MINES. 173of the sources of that subsequent supply of thosemetals, on which the increase, the stationarycontinuance, or the diminution of them mainlydepended.In the former part of this inquiry it has beenstated that, under the reigns of the earlier Romanemperors, a new system of working the mines inthe imperial dominions had been introduced.Instead of farming out the mines to avariciousor negligent renters, the government took theworking of them into its own hands, and carriedon the several operations under the superintendenceof its own officers. If by this first stepthere was no great gain to the newly installedproprietors, it at least put a stop to that ruinoussystem by which the best ores alone had beentaken away, and those of inferior quality left toimpede the operations of the succeeding explorers.It appears also to have introducedmore economical practices in the application ofthe labour of the workmen. This was, however,but a step which was soon followed by another.It was found no longer possible to conductthe various operations in the mines and in thebuildings above ground, by which the roasting,washing, and separating the minerals from theore were carried on by means of slaves. Thegovernment was in possession of the mines, aswell as the land above and around them ; theoccupiers of the soil were a kind of adscriptiIll NEW WORKING OF MINES. chap. vii.glehcB^ and cultivated it, as in later periods wasdone in France, under the name o^ corners, or asis still practised in a few parts of Germany, underthe name oi frolincUensten. These persons werecompelled to extend their own services and thoseof their offspring to the mines, and received thenew denomination o^ glehce et metallic descriptioThe labour imposed upon them was found oppressiveand exhausting, and drove many tomake their escape, and seek freedom in othercountries. In the reign of the Emperor Valensnumbers of the miners of Dacia joined the forcesof the victorious and invading Goths", and it isprobable that similar oppression induced othersto follow their example. The mining districtssuffered in their population by the exactionsthat were required from them. At first, onehalf the inhabitants only were compelled to labourin the operations connected with the mines ;but as the numbers decreased, a law was madeby which all the children of these hereditaryminers were required to devote their labour tothe mines '\ Such of them as had gone to themines in other parts of the empire were orderedto return to their domiciles ; and none of themwere allowed to go to Sardinia, because it wasthought the mines there presented attractionsCodex Theod. de Metals, lib. vi. sec. 9.^ Ammianus, xxxi. 1. 5, (5, 7.^ Codex Theod. de Metallic, lib. xv.CHAP. VII. NEW WORKING OF MINES. 175which might prove detrimental to the workingof those in the continental dominions of theempire. Notwithstanding the severe regulationsunder which these persons held their lands, theywere not strictly speaking slaves. They wereallowed to dispose of their property if they couldfind purchasers ; but as the new possessors wereto be bound to the same services, and were to bepaced under the same restrictions, as the formerholders, it does not seem probable that it couldhave been easy to meet with such purchasers.Besides these, who were a kind of feudal tenants,slaves were employed in the imperial mines.They were not indeed foreigners, who had beenstolen by piracy and sold, but criminals, whohad been condemned by the laws to slavery.From the earliest period of Roman history,under the consuls and the dictators, labourin the mines had been adopted and practisedas a punishment in many cases ; but underthe emperors it was so much extended, that itbecame as universally the penalty inflicted onoffenders against the laws as under the ancientkings of Egypt. This mode of providing forthe working of the mines seems to have beenscarcely adequate to the providing of labourersfor such of them as were already in operation,and utterly insufficient for opening the newmines which had been acquired by conquest onthe banks of the Danube. Hence the emperors176 NEW WORKING OF MINES. chap. vir.appear to have been induced again to allow ofmines being worked by private individuals \ Itwas in this way that, under Trajan, the goldmines of Dacia were worked, stimulated anddirected as they were by his collegium variorum.Valentinian the First proceeded stillfarther"; and allowed to any person who wasdisposed to undertake such operations to digfor gold and silver, on condition of paying afixed proportion of the metal so obtained. Thus,Count Felix appears to have had some extensiveworks in the Pyrenees, the traces of which, aswill be hereafter noticed, display an almost royalexpenditure ^ By the last edict the Romanswere enabled to open new mines, or to maintainthose already in operation with more facility andto a greater extent ; and from that, combinedwith other institutions, some new gold mineswere opened in Dalmatia, Istria, and Dacia, inthe first centuries after the establishment of theemperors in their despotic power.As the mines, both belonging to the emperorsand to private individuals, required appropriatelaws and regulations, as well for the protectionof the several persons interested in them, as forIt appears by Strabo, lib. xii., that some traces of theworking of mines by private persons were to be seen in theearly periods of the republic.Gebhardi. Hunger. Geschichte, p. i. sec 7-Essai sur la INIineralogie des Monts Pyrenees, p. 243.CHAP. VII. NEW WORKING OF MINES. 177the collection of the revenue belonging to thecrown, various officers were established, of whosepeculiar powers and duties we have no veryaccurate information. They were distinguishedby the names of comes metallornm^ comes rerumlargitionum, and comes oriental ; besides which,there were the vicar and the rationales whowere probably the receivers of that part of theproduce to which the emperors were entitled.In general, at the later periods, that indifferencewhich the Romans had displayed at formertimes regarding the application of science tomining is very apparent, and the operationswere left in the hands of men destitute of alltheoretic knowledge, and who had learned whatlittle they knew of the art more by following thepractices of their predecessors than by any deepinvestigations or new experiments \ The fewimprovements that were introduced were insufficientto support the mining establishments; andthey had to contend with events and circumstanceswhich in process of time completedtheir extinction. The greater productivenessof the transalpine and Spanish mines, even asearly as the time of Strabo, had diminished theextent of workings in the mines of Upper Italy.But the greatest injury, at a later period, wasreceived from the disturbed state of the frontiers,Reitemeier Geschichte des Bergbaus der Alter, p. 103.2 Strabo, book 3.VOL. I. N17^ DECLINE OF THECHAP. surprisingfrom the irruption of the barbarous tribeswhich surrounded the empire. The new minesalong the borders of the Danube in Dacia, thoseof Illyria, Dahiiatia, and Thrace, were the firstto suffer from this cause, which the emperors,either from the weakness of their forces, or theexhausted state of their treasuries, were unableto prevent. The workmen in the mines eitherfell as captives into the hands of the invaders,and were thus removed from the districts, orthey were induced by the sufferings they enduredto enlist with the Barbarians, and to augmenttheir means of annoyance to the empire.By these events some of the mining provincesbecame gradually depopulated, and in othersthe workings were by degrees abandoned, as theexhaustion of the products of the more preciousminerals had caused the expense of separatingthem far to exceed the value that could beextracted. This exhaustion of the more valuablecontents of the mines had produced theabandonment of those in the east and in Spain;where other nations had gathered the first-fruits,and left to the Romans neither the first, thesecond, nor the third harvests. From these well-knowncircumstances, and from the silence ofall the writers of a later period concerning the^ See Gibbon's Decline and Fall, cap. xxvi. p. 393, wherehe describes the miners of Thrace conducting the Barbariansto secret magazines of corn and cattle.CHAP. VII. ROMAN MINES. 179operations of the mines, we may safely concludethat, after the third or fourth century, the labourof extracting the precious metals had graduallydiminished within the limits of the Roman empire; and that from the liftli century, after themore afflicting irruptions of the Barbarians intothe weak and tottering western empire, it had altogetherceased. Almost the latest intimation thatis to be found on the subject is the appointmentof a comes metallurgy over the mines of westernlyra in the year 413^; but of the extent of hispower, or of the revenue derived from the officeto himself or his master, we have no information.In the eastern division of the Roman empiresome small remains of ancient mining were continued;but the veins had been nearly exhausted,though the workings had not been wholly abandoned,when they fell in the seventh centuryinto the hands of the conquering followers ofthe new Arabian prophet. The mines in AsiaMinor, in Thrace, and in Greece, were the lastthat the Byzantines possessed. The gold minesof Thrace were in operation in the reign ofValens ; but they, as well as those of Illyria, hadaltogether ceased to be worked with the succeedingtwo centuries.The gradual diminution of slavery must havehad a great effect on the productiveness of mining1 Cod. Theod., lib, 7.N H180 DECLINE OF THECHAP. VII.operations. From the earliest history of theworld, as soon as mankind had been so far civilisedas to spare the lives of prisoners of warby converting them into slaves, the system ofslavery had formed a part of the usages of allnations. As navigation extended, slavery hadgrown with it ; and for a long time, especiallywith the early Greeks, the profits arising frommaritime intercourse may be attributed as muchto the stealing of human beings, as to the interchangeof the productions which the severalcountries of the world exchanged with each other.The wars which had immediately precededthe accession of Augustus, and those carried onin the earlier years of his reign, were domestichostilities in which Romans contended againstRomans ; and, whatever miseries might be inflictedon the sufferers, it was not the custom totreat the citizens of Rome as slaves to those whohad defeated them. The legions of Pompey,when beaten by Julius Caesar, did not becomeslaves, neither were those who fought underBrutus and Cassius at Philippi, nor those whocontended under Marc Antony against Octaves,when dispersed as an army, sold for slaves totheir fellow-citizens.The Romans were at no time attached tonaval occupations, and the commerce they pursuedby sea was far from extensive, assiduous,or enterprising. The vessels of war were chieflyCHAP. vir.ROMAN MINES. 181manned by soldiers, and did not, like the fleetsof modern times, rear up numbers of men accustomedto the water, who sought for employmentat the end of each war in the pursuits of commerce.It does not appear that, like the Greeksand other early navigators, they combined inthe same operations the dealing in the luxuriesof India, Arabia, and Egypt, with " trading inthe persons of men."In the tranquil reign of Augustus, and underhis successors in the imperial dignity, Rome wasonly anxious to defend her frontiers against theirruptions of the barbarous nations by which shewas surrounded. She had no need of a fleet todefend her coasts from maritime invasion, andno distant country over which to extend herconquests that could induce her to maintain aforce, so averse to the habits of her people, andso exhausting to her treasury, as a numerousand well equipped naval armament.We find accordingly that on the accession ofAugustus, he kept up but an inconsiderablenaval force, consisting of a few small galleys, atRavenna in the Adriatic, at Museum in the bayof Naples, and at Frejus in Gaul. These werefound sufficient to maintain tranquillity, and tosuppress piracy over the whole extent of theMediterranean sea; whilst a squadron of fortyboats on the Euxine were deemed sufficient forprotection, and one not larger served to keep182 DECLINE OF THE cHAP. Vll.open the communication with, and to conveyrecruits to, the legions quartered in the Britishislands.This contraction of naval intercourse naturallytended to diminish the numbers of that classof slaves which war and commerce had beforebrought to Rome from Arabia, from Egypt, fromCarthage, and other parts of the African continent,as well as from the islands in the Mediterraneansea. Slaves thus became scarce in Rome.They naturally increased in value. They becamean object for luxurious gratification, andmuch too costly to be employed in offices so degradingand so unprofitable as those of removingvast masses of earth and rocks to discover afew scattered particles of gold and silver. Asthe importation of slaves was checked, it becameprofitable to breed, rear, and educate them; andthe speculation of training up an expeditiousand correct amanuensis, a bookkeeper skilled inaccounts, a cook capable of producing luxuriousdelicacies, or a learned tutor for the rising generation,must have presented more powerfulinducements than could be offered by any importationof rude and uncultivated savages, who,though possessed of the form and the strengthof human beings, were but little better in adroitness,in docility, or in disposition to labour, thanthe domestic animals.The inducement to rear and educate slavesCHAP. VII.ROMAN MINES. 183rather than to import them may be inferredfrom the high price sometimes paid for the purchaseof slaves of extraordinary endowments.We find in Pliny ^ that Marcus Scares paid forone slave, Daphne, a grammarian, sestercessejitigentis, or about five thousand six hundredand fifty pounds. We are informed that Roscius,the celebrated Roman actor, who was aslave, and who had been the instructor of Ciceroin rhetoric and oratory, gained annually morethan four thousand pounds sterling. These aresolitary instances, and no doubt extraordinaryones J but the chance of producing a single slaveof such value, or nearly approaching to it, amonghundreds, must have been a powerful reason forrearing rather than importing slaves.At the most prosperous periods of the Romanempire, though numerous slaves were employedin all the offices of domestic life, in trades, infabrics, and in agriculture, from whence thelatter, when emancipated, gradually rose to thestation of rescript! glebe, there are no instancesin the time of the emperors, or in the ages thatfollowed, of their being employed in the degradingand unproductive labour of the mines.This diminution in the number of slaves, towhose labour the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Carthaginianss,and Greeks, were chiefly indebtedBook vii. cap. 39.184 DECLINE OF THECHAP. VII.for what they obtained of the precious metals,must have contributed with the wars whichafflicted the whole Roman empire to that extinction,or decrease nearly approaching to extinction,of the supply of gold and silver, whichappears after a long and gradual decay to havetaken place towards the end of the fifth century.CHAP VIII,ROMAN MINES. 185CHAPTER VIII.On the circulation of the precious metals between the reignof Augustus and the dissolution of the Western empire.Augustus attained supreme and durablepower at a period when much of the treasuresextorted by the various wars in which the re-public had been successful had arrived in hiscapital. The metallic wealth, which was thefruit of the campaigns of Paulus ^^milius, ofCato, of Pompey, of Julius, of Antony, and ofAugustus himself, vast as it may have been,would however have gradually diminished till itdisappeared, had no additional supplies beenattracted to Rome, to replace what was consumedby the waste of revolving years. Suchsupplies were required from those various anddistant provinces which had first been subduedby and afterwards incorporated with the Romanempire. Their conquerors had stripped thecapitals, the temples, the palaces of the monarchsand their treasuries, with the other public edifices,whatever metallic wealth could be found;but much must have been concealed, and thereforebeen left in the hands of individuals, whicha transient victory and a slight knowledge of186 ACCUMULATED TREASURE chap. viii.the country could not enable the military toextort, or at least not with the same facility asit might be extracted by the slower but sureroperations of the fiscal commissioners in theseveral provinces, when they became subject tothe imperial government. Tributes, as we haveseen, were demanded and enforced with severityon all the provinces : many of them were richas well in the precious metals as in those productionsof the soil which form the real wealthof a country. Julius C^sar describes in hisBello Gallic the flourishing condition and eventhe opulence of Gaul at the time he invadedthat kingdom. The copious stores of metallicwealth may be inferred from the vast treasuresamassed at Toulouse, which, according toPossidonius, on whom Strabo ^ chiefly relies,amounted to fifteen thousand talents in gold andsilver bullion. The proportion of one of thesemetals to the other does not appear j but if ithad consisted wholly of silver, it would haveamounted to two millions and a half of ourmoney. If it had consisted altogether of gold,it would have amounted, at the proportion whichone metal bore to the other at that period, tothe enormous sum of thirty millions. It is alsostated, that besides the gold and silver collectedin Toulouse, there were in several of the otherStrabo lib, iv.CHAP. VIII.TN ROME. 187cities large accumulations of sacred treasurestored up ; probably in the temples. Duringthe long reign of Augustus, regular tribute insilver continued to be drawn to Rome fromGaul ; nor do the slight insurrections whichoccasionally broke out in that country seem tohave suspended the transmission of it. Spain,notwithstanding the disturbances which occurredamong the Canadians and Asturias in theearly period of his reign, paid a tribute toAugustus, which was stored up in the twocities he founded — Caesar Augusta, and AugustaMerit, now known to us by the more modernnames of Saragossa and Merit. Africa, inch usingEgypt, and even Carthage, which had begunto revive since its last fatal struggle with theRoman power, furnished a proportion of itswealth in the form of tribute. That mighthave been diminished in some degree by theexpenses of the wild expedition undertaken bythe orders of Augustus, and conducted bytenus Gallus against the southern Africans.Their country was reported to the emperor tobe rich in gold and silver, and he resolved toacquire possession of the treasures either byhostilities or by treaties of amity. With thisview, an expedition consisting of ten thousandmen was equipped. They were joined by fivehundred of the body guard of Herod, king ofJudea, and further augmented by one thousand188 ACCUMULATED TREASURE chap. vile.of the troops of Obodas, king of the NabathseanArabs. The latter were commanded by Syllabus,the chief minister of that king, who undertookto act as guide to the expedition. Either fromtreachery or from ignorance, he led the wholea march of six months to the south, where,under a scorching sun and amidst oceans ofshifting sands, almost the whole body perishedmiserably from hunger, thirst, and disease.The provinces of Asia added their tribute tothe wealth of the capital of Augustus. Theterritories of Asia Minor, Armenia, Syria, andJudea, with a part of Mesopotamia and Media,were at that time rich and populous ; their soilwas fertile, the climate genial, and their prosperityhad increased by the tranquillity theyhad recently enjoyed. Their supplies, therefore,could augment the general tribute of the empire,of which they formed a part, withoutgreatly oppressing or degrading the inhabitants.When the description given of Asia by Gibbonis contemplated, we cease to wonder at the removalof the seat of empire to Byzantium byConstantine, as it was natural to found it in thevicinity of those parts of the dominions whichcould most easily administer to the demands ofthe treasury."The provinces of the east," says Gibbon,present the contrast of Roman magnificencewith Turkish barbarism. The ruins of antiquityCHAP. VIII.IN ROME. 189scattered over uncultivated fields, and ascribedby ignorance to the power of magic, scarcelyafford a shelter to the oppressed peasant or wanderingArab. Under the reign of the Caesar,the proper Asia alone contained five hundredpopulous cities, enriched with all the gifts ofnature and adorned with all the refinements ofart. Eleven cities of Asia had once disputedthe honour of dedicating a temple to Tiberius,and their respective merits were examined bythe senate. Four of them were immediatelyrejected as unequal to the burden ; and amongthese was Laodicea, whose splendour is stilldisplayed in its ruins. Laodicea collected avery considerable revenue from its flocks ofsheep, celebrated for the fineness of their wool,and had received, a little before the contest, alegacy of above foi' hundred thousand poundsby the testament of a generous citizen. If suchwas the poverty of Laodicea, what must havebeen the wealth of those cities, whose claimappeared preferable, and particularly of Pegasus,of Smyrna, and of Ephesus, who so longdisputed with each other the titular primacy ofAsia ? The capitals of Syria and Egypt held astill superior rank in the empire : Antioch andAlexandria looked down with disdain on a crowdof dependent cities, and yielded with reluctanceto the majesty of Rome itself."In the time of Augustus, and in the three190 ACCUMULATED TREASURE chap. viii.succeeding centuries, those were distant provinces,to which must be added such as werethen in nearer connexion with the imperialcapital. Greece, illyricum, Dacia, and Pannonia,all contributed, with the islands in the Mediterraneanand the Archipelago, to add theirtribute to that collected within Italy itself, which,according to the relations of history, containedno less than eleven hundred and ninety-sevencities within its limits.The revenue extracted from these extensivedominions cannot be accurately defined. It hasoccupied the labours of learned men, but fromthe paucity of statistical documents in ancienttimes and especially before the introductionof the Arabian numerals, the subject must bedoubtful ; and the result of all inquiries be littlebetter than the conjectures of acuteness.It has been estimated by several diligent in-^ quires that the whole revenues of the Romanempire in the time of Augustus amounted to asum equivalent to forty millions of our money,supposing the Roman pound weight to be equalto the English troy pound of twelve ounces,each ounce being worth five shillings, or theRoman pound of silver being equal in value tothree pounds of our present sterling money.With such a revenue, it does not appear to beimprobable that Augustus should have left sufficientmoney to pay the legacy of two poundsCHAP. VIII.IN ROME. 191eight shillings and sixpence, which he is saidto have bequeathed to each of the common people,though it might have amounted to fourmillions five hundred thousand pounds ; or thatTiberius should have left in the treasury at hisdeath, as we have already related, twenty-onemillions seven hundred and ninety thousandpounds.It does not appear that under the emperors,the expenditure, denominated in modern timethe civil list, or expenses of the court, was accountedfor distinct from the general expensesof the government, including the military operations.There was no control on the amount ofrevenue or of disbursements, except the restrictionin the first, on the power of the governmentto enforce, or of the people to discharge thedemands ; nor on the last but such as arosefrom the parsimony or the profusion of the individualwho exercised the supreme authority.Accumulation was therefore within the powerof those monarchs, if such was their predominantdisposition ; and the sums before mentionedseem no more disproportionate to this extent ofdominion, and to the quantity of the precious ,metals then in circulation, than what is relatedof our Henry the seventh, who, in 1507, leftin secret places about his palace at Richmondno less than two millions seven hundred thousandpounds in silver money.19'2 ACCUMULATED TREASURE chap. Vii.Governments which chiefly depend on a militaryforce are compelled to store up large sumsof ready money to meet emergencies that maysuddenly occur. This was the case with themore provident of the Roman emperors, someof whom owed their elevation, and most of whomwere indebted for the retention of it, to havingalways at command the means of gratifying orpreventing the clamours of their troops for payor for donations. The same necessity existedamong the several princes of India, till the overwhelmingpower of our East India companyreleased the greater part of them from the fearof attacks and incursions, so sudden as to leaveno time for defensive preparations being collected.Even in recent times, Buonaparte issaid to have kept a great mass of treasure inreserve ; and it is commonly believed that uptothe present day the military monarch ofPrussia, the only one of the European sovereignssupposed to be exposed to sudden attacks,has deemed it necessary to keep in his treasurya large sum in ready money, amounting, accordingto some accounts, to near two millionssterling ^ .These reports from various quarters, which corroborateeach other, though none are strictly official, yet are entitledto credit. It has been said that a part of this treasure hasbeen lately drawn forth to buy up some of the funded debt,and thereby to raise its prices, and enable the government toreduce the interest on the remainder of the debts.CHAP. Vir. IN THE EMPIRE. 193Whether the revenue of Rome amounted tomore or less than forty millions, or how nearlyit approximated to that sum, is of less importanceto this part of the subject of our inquiry,than the mode in which it was brought to thecapital, and the means by which it was distributedand put into circulation in the severalprovinces which were connected with that extendedempire.It is well known that the orders of Augustuswere that the tribute should be collected insilver money, and transmitted to the imperialtreasury; but it is not credible that such a sumas forty millions annually coidd have been conveyedfrom the distant provinces. The roadswere indeed extended to the limits of the empire,but they were not calculated for wheelcarriages, and rarely used but by horsemen orby the military. The silver must be broughton the backs of horses, and the conveyance ofsuch a quantity of money would make thearrival of horses loaded with silver alone amountto one hundred thousand in each year. Muchof the money circulating in the provinces wasdebased, and the money issued from some ofthe provincial mints did not contain as much ofsilver as of baser metal. This circumstancewould increase the weight of the sum to beremitted, and consequently require an additionalnumber of horses. The provinces most remoteVOL. I. o194 CONVEYANCE OF iNIONEY CHAP. VIII.from the capital, such as Lusitania and Astoriaon the one hand, and of Media on the other,are so distant, that a space of one hundred dayswould be required for a horse to accomplish ajourney from them to Rome. Other provincesare certainly much nearer; but even from Thraceor Illyricum the treasure would not arrive inless than thirty days. If the average number ofdays requisite be estimated at forty, the horsesemployed in this single labour of transmittingsilver money to the seat of government musthave reached a number very far exceeding thewhole cavalry force of the empire !We may then safely conclude that the moneycollected as tribute in the provinces was notremitted to Rome; but whatever the amount ofit might be, the greater part was expended inthe several provincial governments, and was thusdispersed in the possession of individuals, creatinga capital in money, increased by reproduction,so as to form a source from which futureimposts, or, as it would be called, tribute, mightbe regularly extracted. A constant drain uponthe provinces would naturally destroy their productiveness; but we know that under the firstRoman emperors many of the provinces hadadvanced to a flourishing condition. Africa withCarthage had so far retrieved their circumstancesas to present almost the picture of theirpristine power and magnificence. Gaul andCHAP. VIII.TO THE CAPITAL. 195Spain, notwithstanding the large sums which atan early period had been drawn from them, continuedto increase in wealth and prosperity uptothe final close of the Roman dominion overthose countries.It appears thus fair to conclude that the onlymetallic tribute transmitted to the capital fromthe provinces, under the reign of Augustus andof his immediate successors, was that surpluswhich remained after discharging the expensesof the civil and military departments of theseveral districts, and such sums as the prefectsand other officers nominated by the emperorfrom among the nobility of. the capital couldextort by their oppressions, or save by theirparsimony.Whatever the annual amount may have been,in the course of three centuries it would rise toan enormous sum, and furnish sufficient to account— for the plunder found in Rome when itwas captured by Alaric and by the African Vandals— for the great expenditure which must havebeen occasioned by the erection of Byzantium,and — for the sums which were necessary to supportthose armies which were so feebly opposedto the invading hordes of the barbarous nationsthat assailed the empire on every frontier.o 2196 CONSUMPTION OFCHAP. IX.CHAPTER IX.On the consumption of gold and silver from the death of Augustus,in the year 14, to the dissolution of the WesternEmpire, about the year 476 AD.At the commencement of this period, theconversion of the precious metals into coin hadbeen extended, and almost universally prevailed ;and, though in large payments, there is reasonto believe that the coin was still weighed. Thatmight be done, as is done by our modern Europeanbankers, because the operation of determiningthe amount by weight is easier than bytale, and is besides less exposed to the mistakeswhich will sometimes occur in counting largenumbers of pieces of money, especially whenthose pieces are of different weights and values;or like the merchants in Spain, who commonlyin their transactions weigh a thousand dollarsat once, it might be found an economy of time.It is difficult to fix accurately or even to approximateto that portion of the metal of coinwhich is destroyed by friction or abrasion. —There will be a great difference in the loss onthe respective pieces according to their greaterCHAP. IX. GOLD AND SILVER. 197or less rapid circulation ; and any experimentsthat may be made to ascertain this loss can onlylead to doubtful results, unless made upon avery large number of pieces of money. In moderntimes the practice of issuing bills to representmoney causes a large portion of coin torest inactive in deposit, ready to meet the demandthat may be made. In ancient times themoney was mostly in the hands of the severalgovernments, who only drew it forth in somepressing emergencies. If it be difficult to calculatethe portion now existing in the coffers ofour banks and bankers, it is still more difficultto estimate what portion of ancient coin was inasimilar state of inactivity in the treasuries ofthe several ancient governments.It is found that the loss by friction is very fargreater on the small than on the large pieces ofcoin ^ ; thus the loss on our present sixpennypieces in the same space of time is found to bemore than three times as great as that on thehalf crowns, and nearly double as great as on theshillings. With regard to the ancients, we arein utter ignorance of the proportion which thelarger and smaller coins bore to each other. Theloss by abrasion too is found to be much greateron silver than on gold coins ; and of the proportionof the latter which was circulated inSee Appendix, No. 1.198 CONSUMPTION OF clap. IX.ancient times to that of the former, we have nomeans of judging; for their relative value variedfrequently in the space of time we arecontemplating ; gold being sometimes of notmore than nine times the value of silver, and atother times twelve or thirteen times that value.If the relative values of the two metals had remainedconstantly the same, supposing that ofgold to have been ten times the value of silver,it would by no means be a fair inference that therewas ten times the weight of silver in the formof circulating coin that there was of gold. Thetwo metals may be demanded for other purposesthan that of coin, and the superior adaptabilityof one for such purposes may have determinedthe relative value of one to the other, in as greator a greater degree than the demand of it for coin.The gold and silver coins circulating underthe reigns of the successive Roman emperorswere thicker in proportion to their weightthan our modern coin, and, consequently, presentinga less portion of surface to abrasion,were liable to less loss in the wear ; but, on theother hand, we know that, in the course of thefour or five centuries we are considering, thesmaller coins were constantly gaining in theproportion which they bore to the larger ones inthe time of Augustus. This alteration mayhave more than counterbalanced the less lossoccasioned by the greater thickness of the pieces.CHAP. IX GOLD AND SILVER. 199During the period between the years twenty-fiveand four hundred and seventy-six from ourera, whilst the declension of the mines was proceeding,and the produce from them annuallydiminishing, till it became quite extinct, it ishighly probable that some addition to the coinedgold and silver was made from that portion ofthose metals which had been appropriated topomp, magnificence, or convenience.There seems no reason for estimating the goldand silver in the possession of private individuals,in the form of utensils and ornaments, tohave been large, or at least to have borne nearlythe same proportion to that which was stampedinto money, as exists in modern times in Europebetween the two kinds of metallic wealth. TheRomans seem to have lived much in public, andto have had very imperfect notions of the enjoymentsof domestic life. The object of thosewho enjoyed great wealth was to attain celebrityand power by means of the populace: the displayof magnificence in their dwellings and furniturewould not have been effective for their chiefpursuit. Hence, whilst profuse in that expenditurewhich could be seen by the public, theywere parsimonious in all their private, personal,and domestic arrangements. At an early periodtheir houses were of wood, and even in the timeof Augustus covered with shingles. They hadneither chimneys to convey away the smoke, nor200 DOMESTIC ACCOMMODATIONS chap. ix.glass Windows to admit the light and excludethe cold. An open place in the centre of theroof of the house admitted the rain that fell intoa place called impluvium or compendium, andthe light was admitted by the same opening.Even in the villas, where the opulent Romansdisplayed their greatest domestic luxuries, thebarns, stables, wine and oil storehouses, granaries,and fruit rooms, with the sleeping places forthe agricultural slaves, formed a part of thebuilding in which the proprietor resided, and onthe top of which was his supping apartment,where he could enjoy the prospect of the surroundingcountry, without feeling the annoyanceswhich must have affected his senses ofsmelling and hearing from his stores and hisslaves and working cattle.The clothing of even the best families wasfabricated in their own houses. The mistressof a family with the female servants were employedin spinning and weaving, and conductedthe operations in the chief apartment (in mediocedium)^ according to Livy, book i. cap. 57.This kind of industry was thought to be so necessary,that to inculcate it most securely, onepart of every marriage procession consisted offemales carrying a distaff, a spindle, and wool,to intimate to the bride what was to be herfuture duty. Augustus himself is said by Suetoniusto have worn nothing for his domesticCHAP. IX.OF THE ROMANS. 201dress but what was manufactured by his wife,his sister, his daughter, and his nieces. Theclothing was chiefly of wool ; for though linenwas made, and a robe of it (vests linea) wasmuch valued, it was by no means commonlyworn. The only furniture, exclusive of thedishes and vessels for drinking, was a kind ofextended couch, which served the purpose bothof sitting and sleeping on.With this domestic plainness and frugality maybecontrasted the extravagance which was displayedin the public appearance of the moreeminent Romans. Their carriages, a kind ofsedan chair, had feet sometimes of silver or ofgold, on which to stand when the slaves restedfrom carrying them. The carriages drawn byhorses in some of their religious processionswere splendidly ornamented with gold, silver,and ivory, and on some occasions the horseswere slid with silver, and the bits and ornamentsof the bridle were of silver or gold enrichedwith precious stones. The temples, thealtars, and the places of public assembly wereexpensively ornamented ; but we can find but fewtraces, and those confined to a small number ofpersons, of any accumulation of valuable domesticfurniture or ornaments in the hands ofprivate individuals. Besides, the structure ofsociety in Rome was such as to exclude fromprobability the expectation that any large portion202 STATE OF SOCIETY.CHAP. IX.of gold and silver could be possessed by privatefamilies. There were none of those gradationsof rank and property in Rome which are to befound at this time commonly in Europe, buteminently in Great Britain. There was scarcelyany middle class of society, such as with us arethe possessors of the chief portion of the stockof accumulated wealth. The public was composedof a few patrician families, who, thoughsome of them were poor, held the greater portionboth of land and money. The great massof the inhabitants were either labourers on theirown contracted spots of land, or that rentedeither for money or produce from the great proprietors.With these were mingled many slaves,collected from various and often distant nations,who were as transferable and commonly as destituteof property as the flocks they tended orthe soil they tilled.The higher classes who were aiming at powerthrough popularity, at first with the mob, and ata later period with the soldiers, where inducedby the circumstances in which they foundthemselves to attend more to public display thanto private comfort. From their situation it becamenecessary to their success, as public men,that they should have a reserve stock ready tobe distributed whenever the distribution of itmight serve the purposes of ambition. Domesticutensils or personal ornaments would be lessCHAP. IX. BRIBERY IN ROME. 203suitable to occasions of this kind than coinedmoney, which could, from the minute divisionof which it is susceptible, be distributed withfacility and equality.These bribes, under the name of contraria,were dispersed with no parsimonious handduring the reign of Augustus, by his will at hisdeath, and by the intriguers for power and popularityin the ages that succeeded his. A fewnotices collected from various authorities willshow to what an extent this kind of bribery wascarried among the Romans and will also tendto prove, that instead of hoarding the preciousmetals in the shape of statues, vases, cups,dishes, and personal ornaments, the great possessorsof them must have had the strongestinducements to prefer keeping them in theshape of coined money.We are informed, that Augustus frequentlygave contraria sometimes of 30 nummi^ or4*. lOf^/., sometimes of 40 nummi^ or 6^. 6c?.,and sometimes of 250 nummi, or 2/. 2*. Id., tothe whole population, not omitting the children; though on former occasions it had notbeen customary to include any under elevenyears of age \ The same emperor left by hiswill 2/. 8,?. 5d. to each of the common men".Sueton. in August, cap. 41.Dion Cassius, lib. 56.Q04f DONATIONSCHAP. IX.Another author affirms, that he left to thepeople of Rome 322,916/., and to the tribes28,255/. ^ It is, however, possible these two accountsmay refer to the same legacy. Tiberiuswas notorious for his parsimony, and yet on oneoccasion he gave to the people a cow^-/«/7?<wi of 300jmmmif or 2l. 8s. 6d., each - ; and on another,after an extensive fire, relieved the sufferersby gifts amounting to 807,291/. 13*.^ Thecovetous habit of this emperor was so great,that he commonly allowed to his attendantsonly their food ; but on one occasion he dividedthem into three classes, and presented to eachof the first 4843/. 15*., to each of the second3229/. Ss. 4f/., and to each of the third1614/. 11*. 8^. as gratuities*.In the succession of the emperors we findcontinued instances of these donations. Caligula,who attained imperial power about theyear thirty-eight of our era, gave to each Roman1/. 18*. 9(1', and paid also a legacy left to themby his predecessor Tiberius of one thousand onehundred and twenty-five myriads of drachmas,or 363,281/. 5s. ^ Nero, about twelve yearslater, presented a co?igiarim?i of 400 nummi, orSueton. in Aug. cap. 41.2 Sueton. in Siberia, cap. 20.3 Ibid. cap. 20.Ibid. cap. 20.Dio, lib. 51).CHAP, IX. TO THE CITIZENS. 20531. 4'S. 7^' ^ Nerva, about the year ninety-six,gave a donation to the distressed citizens, butinland, which is valued at 484,375/., of ourmoney". Adrian, twenty-one years later, onhis succeeding to the throne of Trajan, gavea consilium of double that of any formeremperor; and he asserted that he had given tothe people and soldiers the enormous sum of8,229,1^6/. to procure the nomination of commodusas his successor on the throne, all ofwhich had been lost by Commodus dying beforeAdrian \ Antoninus, who was nominatedemperor in 138, gave a still larger donation ofeight aurea, or 6/. Qs. 2r/., to each person * ; butinthe subsequent part of his tranquil and beneficentreign seems to have had no necessityfor extraordinary donations to secure the confidenceand obedience of the people. Commodus,who succeeded to the throne in 179,gave a donation of 725 denarii, or 23/. Ss. 9,d. ^ ;and Severus, who became emperor in 194, gavesuch a consilium as amounted to 1,614,583/. Qs.in our money ^.Sueton. in Nerone^ cnp. 10.2 Dio in Nerva.Spartan in Adrian.Dio in Antonio.Lampridius in Commodo.^ Dio in Severe.g06 BRIBERY CHAP. IX.Similar specimens of enormous expenditurein procuring votes for different public offices, aswell as for acting as spies on public bodies orindividuals, are to be found in the ancientauthors. Thus Milo, who proposed himself forconsul, gave to each of the voters SQ.I. Ss. \Ocl.^Sabines Nymphidius promised to each soldierof the provincial legions who would support thechoice of Galba as emperor 40/. 7*. ^d. ^ Claudiuspromised to each soldier 113/. for his voteand Julian 201/. \6s. * Otho promised to theassassins of Galba a reward of 403/. 12*. each,and paid them in advance 80/. 14.y. ^ ; and bribedone of his servants with SOJQl. 18s. ^ Thebribes given in the courts of law to influencethe decisions were enormous, and there is reasonto believe of frequent and usual occurrence.This large expenditure, and the power ofAscanius Pedants. ® Plutarch in Galba.Philippe, lib. iii. •* Dio.Sueton. in Othone.Sallust. In stating the amount of the sums in the text theestimation of Arbuthnot in his tables of ancient coins hasbeen implicitly adopted. If subsequent writers have shownthat all of them are not minutely accurate, yet nothing hastended to prove any such deviation from exactness as canaffect the view intended to be exhibited here, of the largemasses of coin which must have been accumulated in thehands of a few of the most wealthy families.CHAP. IX. ONLY RICH AND POOR. 207making it, was confined to a very few families.According to Cicero, there were not two thousandpersons who possessed property ^ in his day,when the city and its immediate suburbs is estimatedto have contained one million two hundredthousand inhabitants. In that age all thepatricians must be considered as citizens, thoughsome were despatched to govern the provincesor to command the armies, and by those appointmentsincrease the mass of wealth in the handsof their own peculiar and exclusive caste.The great body of the citizens could retainneither gold nor silver, either in the form of coinor in that of utensils or ornaments. Their situation,as admirably described by Gibbon, forbidsthe adoption of the opinion that any quantity ofthe precious metals could be accumulated intheir hands. " In populous cities, which are theseat of commerce and manufactures, the middleranks of inhabitants, who derive their subsistencefrom the dexterity or labour of their hands,are commonly the most public, the most useful,and, in that sense, the most respectable part ofthe community. But the plebeians of Rome,who disdained such sedentary and servile arts,had been oppressed from the earliest times bythe weight of debt and usury ; and the husband-nonesse in civitates duo millia hominem qui rem habere.Cicero Office. ii. 21.208 INFLUENCE OF THE chap. ix.man during the term of his military service, wasobliged to abandon the cultivation of his farm.The lands of Italy, which had been originallydivided among the families of free and indigentproprietors, were insensibly purchased orusurped by the avarice of the nobles ; and inthe age which preceded the fall of the republic,it was computed that only two thousand werepossessed of any independent substance. Yet aslong as the people bestowed by their suffrages,the honours of the state, the command of legions,and the administration of wealthy provinces,their conscious pride alleviated in some measurethe hardships of poverty ; and their wants wereseasonably supplied by the ambitious liberalityof the candidates who aspired to secure a venalmajority in the thirty-five tribes, or the hundredand ninety-three centuries, of Rome. But whenthe prodigal commons had imprudently alienatednot only the rise, but the inheritance of power,they sank, under the reign of the Caesar, intoa vile and wretched populace, which must, inafew generations, have been totally extinguished,if it had not been continually recruitedby the manumission of slaves and the influx ofstrangers."It does not fall immediately into the designof this inquiry to examine further than is heredone the structure of society, such as it existedin the ancient world, whether under the form ofCHAP. IX. STATE OF SOCIETY. 209a monarchy or of a democracy. It would beeasy to show that the rate of interest, commonlyone per cent, per month, and frequently muchhigher, must have drawn the greater part of theproperty of the community into the hands ofthe few, who were sufficiently dexterous to obtainthe command of armies and the governmentof provinces, and thereby to amass a large shareof wealth. This high rate of the interest ofmoney, with the care taken to supply the necessariesof life to the idle and heedless citizens ofRome, may account for the riches of a few individuals,and also serve to show that the mass ofgold and silver in the time of Augustus was notso large as not to be dispersed or consumed inthe period which followed ; which, in the viewhere taken, is extended to the falling to piecesof the western empire, at the latter end of thefifth century.We may, then, venture to conclude that whilstthe coined money in the Roman empire wascontinually wearing away by friction, and nosupplies of the precious metals to replace itwere to be drawn from the exhausted or dilapidatedmines, there could be very little additionmade to its current money, by converting theornaments and utensils of the few wealthy familiesinto gold or silver coin.It has been supposed that in the present day,in this country, the quantity of gold and silverVOL. I. p210 RARITY OF GOLD AND SILVER chap. IX.in actual existence, including utensils, ornaments,jewelry, trinkets and watches, is three or four timesas great as the value of those metals which existsin the form of money. In case circumstances.^^^,^ (\)JJL should arise to induce the conversion of plateinto money, there would be a resource which^J^'V'^'^ — could furnish a supply : but in the Roman empire,the plate and jewels of two thousand wealthyfamilies would have been but a feeble aid to themoney circulating in that powerful empire,which comprehended within its limits the mostpopulous and extensive parts of the knownworld.The cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii wereburied by an irruption of Vesuvius about theyear 79, when the Roman power and prosperityhad shown no visible tokens of that declinewhich began a few years afterwards. The latterwas one of the most industrious and populouscities on the coast of Italy. Within the last centurytheir ruins have been examined. Pompeiiwas covered with ashes and cinders, rather thanwith lava, and the investigators have been moresuccessful in their examinations there than atHerculaneum. In some of the houses skeletonsof the inhabitants have been discovered, in all,domestic utensils and personal ornaments. Butamong the utensils none have been found eitherof gold or of silver ; but those for which in ourday silver is almost exclusively adopted by theCHAP. IX.AMONG INDIVIDUALS. "^Hmiddle class of persons, are composed of iron orbrass. These antiquities give a correct idea ofthe domestic arrangements of the people, suchas they were at the period when the catastropheoccurred, and they show most clearly that goldand silver were not to be found in the dwellingsof the inhabitants ; though the size of the houses,the paintings, the statues, the books, and otherobjects, sufficiently prove that the proprietorsof them were persons at least in easy circumstances.From their durable nature, if gold andsilver had been in these houses at the time ofthe calamity, they would have been found there,as the iron and bronze have been, of which theirspoons and forks were made ; and which retaintheir original shape after a lapse of more thanseventeen hundred years.Had the same calamity visited one of thericher provincial cities of any part of Europe,but especially of England, Holland, or France,every house, whatever length of time might haveelapsed, would, at being opened, have displayeda greater or less quantity of the precious metals.An examination of this kind is a more convincingtestimony than any of the numerous and vaguerelations which historians have handed down ;and we may safely infer from it, what has beenbefore remarked, that among the Romans thoseprecious metals which form a portion of everyfamily's stock of furniture were so rarely in usep 2212 - GOLD AND SILVERCHAP. IX,among them as to afford but insufficient resourcesfrom whence to replace that part of the coinedmoney which was annually consumed.The irruptions of the barbarous nations, who,during the latter part of this period, broke intothe boundaries of the Roman empire, wouldnaturally lead them to seize on the precious metalswherever they could discover them. Thetemples and other public edifices would be deprivedof their most costly ornaments. Suchornaments would be valued by the barbariansonly for the means they afforded to voluptuousgratifications. The gold and silver when inmasses would be useless to those rude people jthey would soon be converted into the moretransferable shape of coin. It is impossible nowto form any estimate of the addition that wouldarise from this source to the quantity of moneythen in circulation. The circumstances of theworld in that period would not lead us to estimatethis addition very high.The paganism of the Roman empire had givenway to Christianity. Those who had adoptedthe new religion would treat with no respectthe objects of the devotion of those they hadsupplanted; but as soon as they possessed powerthey became, though by gradual steps, as eagerto amass the precious metals to decorate theirreligious services as the pagans themselves.The churches were as profusely supplied withCHAP. IX. IN SACRED EDIFICES. 213images, crosses, chalices and flagons, as thetemples in the preceding age. The barbarianswJio at first brought with them a kind of paganism,but differing from that which the Romanshad derived from the Greeks, were induced toembrace the christian faith. Though on somemysterious points they differed from the prevailingor orthodox church, who branded them withthe epithet of heretics, they were quite as deeplyimbued with that reverence for Christ, for hismother and the saints, which led them to veneratewith-superstitious awe the images that representedthem, and the gold and silver utensilswhich were dedicated to their worship.Alaric, the Gothic monarch, when he invadedItaly, encouraged his troops boldly to seize therewards of valour, and to enrich themselves withthe spoils of a rich but effeminate people, buthe ordered them to respect the churches of St.Peter and St. Paul, and to treat them as holyand inviolable sanctuaries.When the Franks took from the Goths thepalace of Narbonne, many curious and costlyornaments of pure gold were found, enrichedwith jewels. Sixty cups or chalices, fifteen patternsor plates, for the use of the communion ;twenty boxes or cases to hold the books of thegospels : this consecrated wealth was distributedby the son of Clovis among the churches of hisdominions. The Goths before were in possess.EFFECT OF THE FOUNDING chap. ix.sion of the famous missorium, or great dish, forthe service of the table, of massy gold, of theweight of five hundred pounds, and of far superiorvalue, from the precious stones, the exquisiteworkmanship, and the tradition that it had beenpresented by a Roman patrician to Torsion,one of their former kings. This celebrated pieceof furniture was found in Spain by the Arabs,who destroyed the Gothic monarchy in thatcountry, and, with other treasures of greatervalue, was probably converted into coin by theMahometan chiefs v»'ho had established theirdominion in the peninsula ^One event in the period under considerationmust have had a great effect, if not on the quantity,yet on the locality of the circulation of thegold and silver cour. The founding of the cityof Byzantium, the modern Constantinople, andmaking it the central point of the Roman empire,would naturally attract thither the metallic aswell as the other treasures of the world. It wasnearer to Egypt, which, up to the time of theinvasion of Africa by the Vandals, and the existenceof their transitory kingdom, had been oneof the chief sources of the revenue of the empire.It was nearer to the rich and then populousprovinces of Asia, and well situated towatch the movements of the Persians, the onlySee Gibbon cap. xxxi. vul. 5^ page 337^ edit. 1807-CHAP. IX.OF BYZANTIUM. 215regular power which created any great anxietyin the mind of Constantine; for the Goths, theVandals, the Alan, the Alemanni, the Heruli,the Suevi, and other of those denominated barbarousnations, were considered by him as tooinsignificant to create much uneasiness, thoughin a few centuries they grew sufficiently powerfulto threaten and to occupy both Rome andConstantinople, and to divide among them themost extensive provinces of the magnificent butdeclining empire. Though the founding ofConstantinople may have tended to draw thegold and silver of the world to the eastern sideof Europe, and though it thereby weakenedthe industry and productive power of Italy,it left Gaul, Spain, and the other countries ofwestern Europe less liable to that drain ofthe precious metals, which the greater accessibilityof Rome had, as long as her uncheckedpower continued, operated to their disadvantage.This removal of the seat of empire, whateverother effect it may have produced, does not appearto have had any on the increase or decreaseof the precious metals. It neitheropened new mines in Africa or Asia, nor keptthose in operation which in Thrace and Illyriahad yielded copious supplies. Constantine, weareinformed by Gibbon ^ but on authority whichDecline and Fall, cap. xvii. p. 18.2lG COST OF BYZANTIUM. chap. IX.may be admitted with hesitation, appropriatedsixty thousand pounds' weight of gold, or twomillions five hundred thousand pounds of ourmoney, to the construction of the walls, the porticos,and the aqueducts of his new imperialcapital, and drew to it some of the patricianfamilies of Rome by extensive grants of land inthe Asiatic provinces, on the easy condition ofmaintaining in the city the splendid palaceswhich he constructed for their residence. Bysuch and correspondent measures the new citybecame rich and populous, and the surroundingdistrict cultivated and productive, but it wasat the expense of Rome and of Italy. Montesquieuremarks, " Although Rome itself wasnot nearly so large as it is at the present day,its suburbs were prodigiously extended. Italy,full of houses of enjoyment, was, properlyspeaking, the garden only of the city : thelabourers of Rome were in Sicily, in Egypt, inAfrica, and her gardeners in Italy. The landswere cultivated not by the Roman citizens butby their slaves; but when the seat of empire wasestablished in the east, Rome may be said tohave been transplanted to Byzantium. Thegrandees carried with them their slaves, or inother words, almost the whole population, andItaly was thus left destitute of inhabitants. Inorder that the new city might be inferior in nopoint to the ancient capital, the wheat of EgyptCHAP. IX. TAXATION. 217was counselled to be conveyed to Constantinople,and that of the rest of Africa to Rome ^"The tribute of the provinces which in thetime of Pliny had been directed to be transmittedin silver, was ordered to be collected andforwarded in gold, or only in such silver moneyas was of the imperial coinage.It has been seen that the treasure whichRome by her conquests had drawn from Macedoniahad been so great, as to make the levyingof taxes unnecessary during several generations,and that the treasures of the Polemics, and thecontinued supplies of the precious metals whichfor some time after had continued to flow intoRome from Egypt, had increased the quantityof money, and had raised the price of all othercommodities. But in the three or four centuriesbetween the reign of Augustus and theestablishing of Constantinople, money had becomescarcer, and the emperor, instead of loweringthe taxes as the prices of commodities declined,or, which is the same, as the value ofmoney had increased, raised them to a heightvery far beyond the point they had ever reachedbefore. In addition to the taxes on articles ofconsumption which had been before levied, anotherwas imposed which partook of the natureof a tax upon property and a capitation tax. ThisMontesquieu, Grandeur et Decadence des Contains, cap.xvii.218 AMOUNT OF CHAP. IX.was not a fixed impost, but varied in amount accordingto the wants or the will of the reigningemperor. The general estimate of the supplieswas proportioned to the real and imaginary demandsof the state ; but as often as the expenseexceeded the revenue, or the revenue fell shortof the computation, an additional tax was imposedon the people. A regular survey wasmade of the value of the property every fifteenyears. The lands were measured by surveyors,who were sent into the provinces ; their nature,whether arable or pasture, or vineyards orwoods, was distinctly reported, and an estimatemade of their common value from the averageI produce of five years. The numbers of slavesand cattle constituted an essential part of thereport. An oath was administered to the proprietors,which bound them to disclose the truestate of their affairs ; and their attempts to prevaricate,or elude the intention of the legislator,were severely watched, and punished as a capitaloffence, which included the double crimeof treason and sacrilege.The amount of this tax cannot now be known,except as regarded the province of Gaul ; butit was such as tended to devastate and depopulatemany parts of the empire. According toGibbon (cap. xxvii), " The rapacious ministersof Constantine had exhausted the wealth ofCHAP. IX. TAXATION. 219Gaul by exacting twenty-five pieces of gold ^ forthe annual tribute of every head. The humane Jj A ^ qLLpolicy of his successor reduced the capitation toseven pieces. A moderate proportion betweenthese opposite extremes of extravagant oppressionand of transient indulgence may thereforebe fixed at sixteen pieces of gold, or about £9sterling, the common standard, perhaps, of theimpositions of Gaul."Though this task was imposed according tothe number of inhabitants, it seems only to havecomprehended the heads of families, and didnot include the slaves or feudal tenants, which,as the land was chiefly cultivated by them, musthave formed a great majority of the inhabitantsof each province. The exactions of Constantineupon the province of Gaul have been estimatedby Gibbon, who adopted his data from the Abbedu Bos, at *' seven millions sterling, which werereduced to two millions by the humanity orthe wisdom of Julian."The aureus, or piece of gold, as calculated by Graves, r^-*^ f*^/^JL^ kjpjand sanctioned by Gibbon, was equal in value to the fifthpart of a pound of silver. The pound of gold, which hadbeen originally coined into forty pieces, was, in the time ofConstantine and his successors, formed into seventy-twopieces. The Roman pound of gold contained 5256 grains;the English pound contains 5760 grains. If the Romanpound of gold be estimated to be worth forty pounds of our J >i *i '\ Itmoney, the arcus may be taken as somcAvhat more than ^ ^ w 'eleven shillings. — See Gibbon, cap. xxvii. p. 89.2*^0 WEIGHT OF CHAP. IX."Whatever may have been the amount oftaxes imposed on the several divisions of theRoman Empire, whether they were more or lessgrievous than those extracted from Gaul, theyat length evidently produced a general and increasingdistress in every province of the dominion.The agriculture of the Roman provinceswas insensibly ruined, and, in the progressof despotism, which tends to disappointits own purpose, the emperors were obliged toderive some merit from the forgiveness of debts,or the remission of tributes, which their subjectswere utterly incapable of paying. The fertileand happy province of Campania, the scene ofthe early victories and of the delicious retirementsof the citizens of Rome, extended betweenthe sea and the Apennine, from the Tyberto the Silas. Within sixty years after thedeath of Constantine, and on the evidence of anactual survey, an exemption was granted infavour of three hundred and thirty thousandEnglish acres of desert and uncultivated land,which amounted to one-eighth of the whole surfaceof the province. As the footsteps of theBarbarians had not yet been seen in Italy, thecause of this amazing desolation, which is recordedin the laws, can be ascribed only to theadministration of the Roman emperors." P. 87.The conclusion to which Gibbon and otherwriters have arrived ought not to be receivedCHAP. IX. TAXATION. 221without some limitation, or at least some examination.The administration of the Roman emperorsmay have been one cause of the amazingdesolation which had become so obvious beforethe footsteps of the Barbarians had been seen inItaly ; but another cause had been operating,which, from its secrecy, or its almost imperceptibleprogress, may have equally escaped theobservation of the government, and the noticeof the historians of their deeds. While the productionof the precious metals from the mineshad ceased, and the countries near to the mineshad poured the whole, or the greatest part, of :their ancient and long accumulation into theuniversal empire, there would be a consumption,a decay of the quantity of gold and silver inconstantprogress, which, by lowering the metallicprice of all other commodities, would check thatindustry by which alone a country can continueto prosper.This cause it is indeed difficult to weigh, andyet in the period now under our review, it musthave operated with prodigious force. It maynot therefore be improper to attempt an estimationof the effect that must have been producedby it.If we could obtain any certain data, the difficultywould be much diminished. If we couldascertain the quantity of gold and silver coin incirculation, at any precise period, we might WEIGHT OF GOLD COINS. CHAP. IX.culate the gradual wear of it, and thus see theefFect produced on the mass in a long period.But as this cannot be obtained, it may be permittedto have recourse to an assumption ofsuch quantity, and calculating from that thewear by friction, try to approximate to the differencebetween the current coin in the age ofAugustus : the period of the greatest prosperityof the Roman dominions, and that of the dissolutionof the western empire ; — a time whichhad been preceded and was followed by thedeepest distress and degradation. •The gradual diminution in the weight of thechief gold coin, the aureus, most probably arosefrom some sensible decrease in the quantity ofthe metal of which it consisted. In the time ofAugustus, as has been before remarked, it wasthe fortieth part of a pound of gold, and consequentlywas equivalent to twenty shillings ofour present money. In the reign of Nero,about seventy or eighty years later, it was onlythe forty-fifth part of a pound, and consequentlyequivalent to seventeen shillings and sentence ;but in the reign of Constantine, two hundred andseventy or eighty years after, it had diminishedto a seventy-second part of the pound, and consequentlywas worth no more than betweeneleven and twelve shillings ; whether this declensionin the intrinsic value of the piecearose from a diminution in the whole weight ofCHAP. IX. AMOUNT OF MONEY. 223it, or from the deficient weight being made upfrom a greater proportion of alloy, is a matter ofdoubt, though the latter seems the most probablesupposition.We find in Suetonius, that Vespasian, whenhe succeeded to the imperial dignity, assertedthat a sum equivalent to £322,916,600^ wasnecessary to support the commonwealth. Thisamount could not have reference either to theannual revenue or to the accumulation in thepublic treasury; for the produce of neither of ^those departments at any period could haveyielded so large a sum. It is not, however,unreasonable to suppose that it bore a referenceto the whole mass of Coined money atthat time known, or believed, or supposed to bein circulation within the boundaries of the republic.Assuming, then, that tins sum wasnearly the amount of the whole stock of currentmoney, we may, without relying on its preciseaccuracy, venture to make use of it as thefoundation of an estimate of the loss created byabrasion in the course of the period we havebrought under consideration. Vespasian beganhis reign and uttered the opinion we have stated" Quadrlngenties millies (scilicet H. S. Vespasian)statim initio sui principals opus esse professes est ut republicastare posset." — Sueton. in Vespasian, cap. xvi.224 AMOUNT OF MONEY. CHAP. IX.l\about two years after the death of Nero. Inthe time of Nero, the aureus had declined invalue, from the reign of Augustus, at the rateof somewhat more than ten per cent., and wenow assume that the coined money, in thisperiod, had decreased in nearly the same proportion.With these views, we should calculatethe quantity of money in the time of Augustusto have been about ot358,000,000.From the far greater proportion of the moneyof a country which was constantly accumulatedin hoards in ancient than in the present times,we must calculate the loss much less than experimentsmade in the present day would showto be sustained in modern European gold andsilver coins.We will estimate, then, the loss from wear,on the whole quantity of money, to be at therate of one part in three hundred and sixtyannually. Thus a piece of gold or silver coinweighing three hundred and sixty grains, wouldlose in a single year one grain, or a thirty-sixthpart in ten years. *The following table will show what, uponsuch supposition, would be the decrease in thequantity of gold and silver money in the Romanempire, between the death of Augustus in theyear 14, and the termination of the westernempire in the years between 47O and 490.CHAP. IX.CONSUMED BY WEAR.We suppose that, in the year 14, thegold and silver amounted to . £ 358,000,000Deducting 10 per cent for wear, there would be.In the year 50 . . . 322,200,00086 . . . 287,980,000122 . . . 259,182,000158 . . . 233,263,800194 . , , 209,937,420230 . . . 181,943,678266 . . . 163,749,311302 . 147,374,380338 . . . 132,636,942374 . . . 119,373,248410 . . . 107,435,924446 . . . 96,692,332482 , . . 87,033,099^^lu.^ jYIt has before been shown that the whole suppliesfrom the mines of gold and silver had not ceasedin the reign of Augustus. Some few of them continuedto be worked later, though they yieldedbut trifling products. Those products would,however, in the earlier years of the period comprehendedin the table, have the effect of lesseningthe decrease, though, when added to thegeneral mass of metallic money, they would becomesubject to the same rate of decrease.The fluctuation in the value of the aureus,which is before noticed, will in some degree beillustrated by this table, though that fluctuationmay not exactly correspond with the scale ofthe decrease of the quantity of money in circulation.That piece of money in the reign of Augustus,when the whole quantity of money is sup-vol.r. Q2^6 DEBASEMENTCHAP. IX.posed to have amounted to near £358,000,000,was worth twenty of our shillings ; but in thetime of Nero, when the whole quantity of moneywas reduced to about £300,000,000, it wasworth about seventeen shillings and ten-pence.The quantity of coin had thus diminished " A^ seventh, and the value of the aureus only descreased a little more than a tenth ; but if we^ Ca**-"'-*'*^ suppose in that period some produce to have//Si-fcCSs^^ been extracted from the mines which had consu I tinned in operation, it may tend to bring nearer'^ "^ / together the proportion of money and the value> {k^.*ei- €4?Mjf the aureus.^ ite* Qxaaaa^ Constantine began his reign about the year304, when by the table the decrease of coin had^Q ^%Mx^ reached nearly three-fifths. The aureus had not*> 1 4^. J^'k .diminished in equal value, having scarcely fallenone-half. We are by no means disposed to deem1^ \/Mr^-^^«, this any certain criterion, nor should we deem"^j *| 1 C^ it a fair one if the coincidence were still moreI striking than it appears. That coincidence toomust have been affected by other circumstances.The mines continued to produce some of theprecious metals even below the reign of Constantine.The tribute too from Egypt andCarthage, both in corn and gold, was considerableup to the time that the Vandals establishedtheir dominion in Africa.During the greater part of the period, thepractice of debasing the coin had been extending.CHAP. IX. OF COINS. 22%In the cabinets of medals are to be seen manycased with a thin coat of silver over copper orbrass \ If this practice did not begin withCommodus, which has been asserted, it prevailedwhilst Dictus Julian, who bought the imperialdignity at an auction a few years after him, retainedhis transient power. The money of Caracallais found to have more than half of it ofbase metal, that of Alexander Severus containstwo-thirds of copper, and that coined underFallen exhibits only brass washed with silver.The debasing of the coin seems indeed to havebeen most extensively adopted as a resource bythe worst of the monarch s, but may still be consideredas evidence of a decrease of the preciousmetals. This debasement of the coin serves insome measure to account for the increase of payto the soldiers whilst the consumption of theprecious metals was proceeding. Thus Acreswrote to the senate, that the augmentationof the pay to the troops made by Caracallaamounted to seventy millions of drachmae, orabout one million eight hundred thousandpounds ^.The zeal of M. Vaescovali and of Mr. "Wm.See la science des medailles du Pere Robert. Paris, 1750.Page 59.® Savotte, part 2, cap. 12, and Journal des Savant du 28Juillet, 168J, sur une decouverte de 5000 medailles.3 Montesquieu Grandeur et Decadence des Romains, c. 16.Q 22^8 EFFECT OF Debasement CHAP. IX.Banks has recently furnished the world withan edict containing a very copious tariff ofprices which have been discovered at two distantparts of the Roman empire. These the learnedColonel Leake has ascertained to have beenof the reign of the Emperor Diocletian in theyear 302, which followed a few years afterthe great debasement of the coin under thereigns of Caracalla, Alexander Severus, andFallen.The year 301 had been one of remarkabledearth, and probably that circumstance mighthave combined with the debasement of the cointo create the tariff, and to raise the prices of allcommodities to the enormous height at whichthe edict has fixed the maximum. How farthe prices were caused by the dearth, or how farby the debasement, it is now impossible todetermine.The nominal prices — taking the denarius atthe original value of that coin when it containedsixty-five grains or the seventh part of an ounceof pure silver, or seven-pence three farthings ofour money, if our shillings were, as they oughtto be, the sixty-second part of a pound, and not,as they are, the sixty-sixth part of that weightwe find to be as follows.Oil of the first quality (^o/ej/of J . ^ pint £0 17 6Oil of the second quality . . .0106Oil of coalesced . . . .036CHAP. IX. ON PRICES.Honey, the bestWpint £0 17Ditto, second quality•Pork^ Italian ftBeefGoats' flesh or mutton••A fattened cock pheasantW head7 19A wild cock pheasantA fat goose•A goose not fattened••Wild-boars' flesh¥" Roman ftStags' fleshFlesh of the buck, doe, or roeButter••Sea-fish of the best quality, fromdeep waterW lbSecond-rate fishBest river-fishSecond-rate river-fishDry cheese•Artichokes of the larger sortfive forLettuces, the bestfive forDitto, second qualityten forCauliflowers, the bestfive forDitto, second-rateten forGreen onions, the besttwenty-five:forDitto, second-ratefifty forCucumbers, the bestten forDitto, second qualitytwenty forMelons, largetwo forDitto, second-ratefour forApplesforty forPomegranates, the largestten forDitto, the smallertwenty forA citron of the largest sizeOne of a second rater2ivEFFECT OF DEBASEMENTDried figs . . twenty-five for £0 2 5Plums from the mountains of Damascus, eight for 2 5Quinces . . ten for .025Ditto, second-rate . twenty for .025Agricultural labourers . . ■^ day 15 10Stone-masonLabourer of inside work in housesWorker in marble or mosaicWaU-painterFigure-painter . .Shipwright in sea vesselsDitto in river-vesselsThe driver of a mule, with foodBrazier, for his work in brassDitto, for his work in copperFor a hooded cloakFor breechesFor hose or stockingsFor the master appointed to teach letters, for eachboy . . . ^ monthFor the arithmetician, for each boyFor the Greek and Latin grammarian, for eachpupil . . . . .To the advocate or lawyer, for an application tothe court Cin expostulationsAt hearing the cause fit cognitionsAn ox hide, prepared for soling boots and shoes,and for making straps and harnessA beaver's skinA leopard's or lion's skinThe same made up . .Boots (malice) for muleteers or labourers of thebest kind, without nailsMilitary calibre, without nails1 111 111 182 54 161 181 1115lb 5313132:hth 1 112 76 8 8ON PRICES. 231£26 6•!*■ Englishpeck18 618 6•19 9V' Englishpint6 83 41 8^Caliban for the equestrian order"Women's calibanmillet AvholeDitto, bruisedBeans, wholeDitto, bruisedLentilsPeasCj wholeDitto, bruisedOatsOld wine of the best qualityDitto of secondary qualityRustic wineBeer called CamusZythus, Egyptian beerThe above catalogue of articles is selected froma list of near four hundred commodities, withthe highest price at which it was lawful to sellthem. If it does not throw much light on theproduction and consumption of gold and silver,the intelligent reader may be gratified in contrastingthe relative prices of one class of commoditieswith those of another, and the rate of humanlabour to them respectively. The whole of thisvaluable document, as collected by M. Vascovaliand Mr. Banks, and corrected by Col. Leake,has been with great propriety preserved in thefirst volume of the Transactions of the RoyalSociety of Literature, and has been translatedinto English by the colonel, and appended tohis "Journal of a Tour in Asia Minor, &c."232 DECREASE OF THE chap. ix.Two events occurred towards the conclusionof the period we have been considering, whichshow in a striking manner how vastly the stockof the precious metals must have decreased inthe capitals of the eastern and of the westernempires, when compared with what Rome herselfalone possessed in the time of her highest prosperityand grandeur.Alaric, the Gothic king, at the head of a numerousbody, burst upon Italy in the reign ofHonoris, in the year 408, and, carrying alarmand devastation in his rapid progress, laid siegeto Imperial Rome, and at length was inducedto abandon his purpose on the immediate paymentof five thousand pounds of gold, of thirtythousand pounds of silver, of four thousandrobes of silk, of three thousand pieces of scarletcloth, and of three thousand pounds weight ofpepper.Thus for the sum of two hundred and ninetythousand pounds was rescued from destructiona city which under the first of its emperorscould have numbered among its citizens severalindividuals possessed of ten times that amount.Within less than forty years from this ransomof Rome, the more recently founded capitalwas likewise assailed. Theodosius, the Emperorof Constantinople, was forced to solicit theclemency of Attila, the leader of the Huns, whoimperiously dictated harsh and humiliatingCHAP. IX.PRECIOUS METALS. ^233conditions of peace. " The emperor of the eastresigned, by an express or tacit convention,an extensive and important territory, whichstretched along the southern banks of the Danube,from Singidunum, or Belgrade, as far asNovae, in the diocess of Thrace. The King ofthe Huns required and obtained that his tributeor subsidy should be augmented from sevenhundred pounds of gold (^£28,000) to the annualsum of two thousand one hundred (£84,000) ;and he stipulated the immediate payment of sixthousand pounds of gold (c£240,000) to defraythe expenses or to expiate the guilt of thewar.'* One might imagine that such a demand,which scarcely equalled the measure of privatewealth, would have been readily discharged bythe opulent empire of the east; and the publicdistress affords a remarkable proof of the impoverishedor at least of the disorderly state ofthe finances. The immediate supplies had beenexhausted by the unforeseen necessity of militarypreparations. A personal contribution, rigorouslybut capriciously imposed on the membersof the senatorian order, was the only expedientthat could disarm, without loss of time, the impatientavarice of Attila ; and the poverty ofthe nobles compelled them to adopt the scandalousresource of exposing to public auction281. STOCK OF NOBLE FAMILIES. chap. ix.the jewels of their wives and the hereditaryornaments of their palaces \"An account is given by Chrysostom, as quotedby Gibbon, of the gold and silver furniture ofwhat was reckoned a wealthy senator : " thateach wealthy house possessed a semicirculartable of massy silver, such as two men couldscarcely lift, a vase of solid gold of the weightof forty pounds, besides cups and dishes." Thiscould not be worth more, if so much, as twothousand five hundred pounds of our money;an amount which is exceeded by that of somethousand families in England, when their plate,watches, and personal ornaments are included !■ Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, chap.xxxiv.CHAP. X. Rise OF MAHOMETAN POWER. ^35CHAPTER X.On the production of the precious metals from the dissolutionof the western Roman empire to the discovery of America.The century which passed over betweenthe dissolution of the western empire and theappearance of Mahomet was one of agitationand confusion. The eastern empire was rapidlydeclining: the tribes who afterwards formed thekingdoms of western Europe were yet unsettledin the territories they had acquired, and hadassumed no form of civil policy. No possessionswere secure to individuals ; and in sucha state of society, if mining was carried on, itmust have been to obtain the inferior metalsrather than gold and silver. The compendiousvalue of the precious metals would presenttemptations to violence which must have beenirresistible to hordes of undisciplined and ferociouswarriors.When the Mahometan power arose, its aspectwas sufficiently terrific to continue the suspensionof the mines. The precious metals weresought not by exploring the bowels of the earth,but by the more summary process of conquest,tribute, and plunder.236 STATE OF SOCIETY. CHAP. X.In the two centuries which had passed betweenthe termination of the Roman empireand the propagation of the Mahometan religion,the various tribes who had gained possession ofthe several countries before subject to Romehad settled down, not into peaceful, though intoorganized communities.The unconquered Germans, united with orallied to the Huns, the Vandals, the Suevi, andothers, had formed the duchies of Bohemia, ofBavaria, of Swabia, of Saxony, and severalsmaller independent states. The Goths, theAlemanni, and the Burgundian formed thenation of the Franks, under the successors ofClovis ; whilst a large portion of Gaul or Francewas possessed by the Visigoths, who, jointlywith the Suevi, occupied nearly the whole ofSpain. The Ostrogoths, in possession of almostthe whole of Italy, had formed in it the kingdomof the Lombards. The Saxon heptarchy ruledin England. The Roman empire in Africa,though it had swallowed up the temporarykingdom of the Vandals, was in such a state ofweakness as to become an easy prey to the followersof the new Arabian prophet. In thisperiod, from about 480 to 67O or 680, thegreatest diligence has been able to discoverno trace, in any author, of the operations ofmining having been carried on. It is true thatthe documents of the period are rare, and thoseCHAP. X. DECREASE OF METALS. 237of the succeeding age, or of the reign of Charlemagne,afford no intelligence on the subject.We must therefore have recourse to such informationas can be gleaned by groping throughthe obscure writings of the middle ages.If the calculation we have hypothetically beforemade, and brought down to the year 482,be continued through the deplorable periodwhen it seems probable the consumption of theprecious metals was proceeding, we may calculate,as before, by periods of thirty-six years,and estimate that about 7'34 the actual quantityof them was reduced thus (as shown by theprevious calculation in page 225): —'n the year 518£78.229,700554 .70,406,73063,364,057626 .57,027,65251,324,887698 .46,192,39941,573,160770 .37,415,84033,674,256Supposing the quantity of the precious metals incirculation to have been reduced in quantityfrom the time of Augustus to the beginning ofthe ninth century in the proportion that is herepresumed, we might expect to have found aproportionate reduction in the money prices ofall the commodities, which in the operations ofexchanging them with each other are reduced1 I238 MINING IN THE chap. x.to a metallic value ; but in the period underconsideration, though diligence has not beenrestricted to a slight search, no such notices ofprices have been found as can be entitled toany confidence. In that respect those centuriesmay be emphatically denominated the dark ages.It may however be inferred, and that without\ I! any great presumption, that the decline in priceshad been gradual during the whole course ofcenturies, because in the following ages, whennotices of prices do occur, as will be hereaftershown, they had fallen so excessively that nothingbut a very slow and gradual depression, andthat of universal extent, could have preventedtheir being remarked as a most extraordinaryphenomenon.Before we proceed to take a view of the miningoperations at the period when, after a long cessation,they were again resumed in several ofthe countries of Europe, we must premise thatthe information which can be obtained is neitherprecise nor statistical. Diligence may inquirewithout obtaining satisfactory answers, and itmust suffice to produce such answers to thepublic as can be obtained, which, even whencondensed into a narrow compass, may, at leastit is so apprehended in the present case, appearto the readers to be prolix and perhaps tiresome.Turkey. Bcforc examining the state of the mining inthe other parts of Europe, we may properly ad-chap,X. MIDDLE AGES. 239vert to those which now form a part of theTurkish dominions. The celebrity of the minesof Macedonia in the early ages has been alreadyspoken of, and we now revert to them at a laterperiod. Dr. Belon of Paris, physician to Francisthe first, visited those mines by order of thatmonarch between the years 1546 and 1549. Hefound the mines in the village of Siderocapso,not far from Thessalonians or Japonica. " Theyare," he says, "on the side of a mountain, and thesituation very much resembles that of Poachingin Bohemia."The working of the mines and the trade theyoccasioned had drawn together a great numberof people, so that the place had more the appearanceof a city than a village. The inhabitantswere of various nations — Sclavonians,Bulgarians,Greeks, Albanians. Besides them were manyJews, who conversed with each other in theSpanish language. These latter people wereaccused of corrupting the gold by mixing withit various alloys. They divided the gold soalloyed into several classes, denominating each,according to their purity, ducat-gold, pistole-gold,crown-gold, or maille-gold.The manner of working both the mines andthe metal had been introduced by Germans, asthe names of all their implements and of all theoperations which were performed were expressedin that language ; but the mode of separating240 MINING IN THE CHAP. x.the gold from the silver and from the lead bymeans of aquafortis had been taught to theminers by an Armenian.*' These mines," he says, " yield so muchgold and silver, that the Emperor of Turkeydraws from them eighteen thousand ducats amonth, and in some months it has amountedto thirty thousand ducats. Within the last fifteenyears the produce has declined, and theduties to the emperor have not exceeded fourteenthousand ducats. The persons who carriedon the operations had formerly enriched themselvesmore than they were thought to do atpresent ^"Austria. It is highly probable that the mines of Hungarywere those which were first worked inwhat are now the dominions of the house ofAustria, though at that time it was an independentkingdom, extending over the ancientDacia, now Transylvania, and Walachia — overUpper Moesia, now Servia — and over the two^ See Les Anciens INIineralogistes du Royaume de France,par M. Gobet, vol. i. p. 53.If the remarking on mines in recent times seems to be inconsistentwith the title of this chapter, it must be pleadedas an apology, that M. Gobet expresses an opinion that thesemines had been formerly worked by the first Mahometaninvaders, though the ground of that opinion does not appear.The author felt unwilling to omit any notice that came in hisway respecting mines in Turkey, concerning which so littlehas been made known by any European authors.CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 241Pannonia; the Upper containing the present provincesof Carniola, Carinthia, and the greaterpart of Austria, and the Lower comprehendingBosnia, Slavonic, and that part of modernHungary which lies beyond the Danube.There are different opinions respecting thecommencement of mining operations at Chemnitzand Kremnitz. Ferber, in his work on themines of Hungary, dates the opening of Chemnitzin 7^<5, and that of Kremnitz in 770 ;whereas George Agricola, who was himself chiefdirector of the mines, as well as burgomaster ofChemnitz, and eminently skilled in mineralogy,in his work entitled ■' De Re metallic," publishedin 1561, carries the renewal of theseworks back to a date nearly one hundred yearsearlier. Though the simple fact of these minesbeing opened at an early period is related, thereare no records that can lead to a judgment ofthe extent of the operations, or of the portionof' metallic wealth they yielded. Ferber, himselfa Saxon, says they were probably workedby natives of Saxony. They were, however,obstructed, and the works destroyed, in 144^2,by the Bishop of Erlau, M'ho, at the head offour thousand Poles, took possession of them -.See Ferber iibei* die Gebirge und Bergwerke in Ungarn.Berlin, 1730.2 There are no statistical accounts till the year 1690, whena great increase is said to have taken place in the quantity ofVOL. I. R<242 MINING IN THE CHAP. X.The silver in these mines was chiefly foundin lead, in a proportion varying from two totwenty-two ounces of silver in a hundred poundsof lead. There has always been a great difficulty,and regular heavy expense, in keepingout the water from these mines. Formerlyducats were coined at Kremnitz from the goldfound there, which are distinguished by theletters K.B., the initials of the Hungarian wordsKernels Bamja, signifying Kremnitz Mines ;but of late years the gold and silver producedfrom Hungary have been coined in Vienna.Dr. Edward Brown, an English physician,who visited the Hungarian mines about theyear I67O, and published his Travels in 1685,says that the mines of Chemnitz had beenworked nearly nine hundred and fifty years, andare the richest in gold of all in the kingdom. Healso speaks of a mine at Glass-bitten, aboutseven miles from Chemnitz, which was formerlyworked, "but is now lost, no man knowingwhere the entrance was, since the time thatBethlehem Gabor overran that country, and thegold and silver that was extracted amounting, in the threefollowing years, to 132,425 ducats of gold, and 2,851,815gulden of silver, or in English money to about £340,000. In1729, the produce was 557 marks of gold and 13,192 marksof silver, or about £40,000. In 1730, the quantity was 756marks of gold and 8846 of silver, or about £35,800 ; and in1732 only 677 marks of gold and 1279 of silver, or about£18,806.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 243inhabitants fled away." From the representationhe gives, it can scarcely be inferred thatthe mines were either productively or beneficiallyworked, " though occasionally," he says,there have been pieces of pure virgin goldfound, some of which I have seen in the electorof Saxony's repository ; one piece as broad asthe palm of my hand, and others less ; but suchare very rare \"M. Jars, who visited the mines of Hungaryabout eighty years ago, says that in ancienttimes they were managed by companies, whowere successively compelled to abandon them,on account of the wars, pestilence, and faminewith which they were afflicted, by which theywere prevented from advancing the necessarysupplies of money. As these companies actedunder grants from the crown, when they couldno longer continue the working, the grants wereresumed; but as the government determined toconduct the works, they allowed to the formergrantees five shares out of each hundred andtwenty-eight, upon which plan they were carriedon when M. Jars inspected the mines.Some of these mines he represents as rich inauriferous ore, each quintal of it yielding onehundred ounces of silver, and some gold, andalso mercury, in the form of cinnabar.Brown's Travels through Hungarian, Servia, Bulgaria,Macedonia, &c. &c.R 2^44* MINING IN THECHAP. X.The enormous expense of raising the waterinduced the parties interested to form an aditfor draining the district of the mines, to whichprivate individuals and other companies besidesthe crown contributed. An Englishman, whosename is not mentioned, constructed some enginesto complete the draining of these mines,on condition of receiving, during ten years, whatshould be saved in the expense of labour, andis said to have erected five engines, and to havegained a large sum of money by the undertaking\Baron Born, in the employment of theAustrian government, in his survey of Hungary,found in Siebengebirgen a mine from whichpure gold was obtained. " The lord of themine," he says, " Count Stephen von Gyulai,for some reason with which I am not acquainted,rarely allows any one in the service of the emperorto visit his mine; but the whole operation,under the management of his Wallachia overseer,was conducted in so miserable a manner,that a man must be a Wallachia to venture hislife by descending the shaft \"The baron remarks that, in Hungary, andeven at Chemnitz, he found, in the ancientworkings, that none but the richest ores hadSee Voyages Metallurgiques, par feu M, Jars de AcademicRoyal des Sciences de Paris, 1774.2 Horn's Briefs tiber mineralogical Gegenstande.CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 24)5been taken out, whilst those of inferior qualityhad been left behind. In speaking of the gold-washingsin the Temeswarer Bannat, he says,the operations were performed exclusively bythe gipsies, who display great skill in finding it.They dig chiefly on the banks of the river Nere,where more gold is found than in the bottom ofthe stream. There are many remains of ancientworkings, which are deemed by the baron to bethesources from which the small particles whichwere brought down by the stream were deposited.He found also, in the vicinity of Boschowitz,other gipsies washing the sands for gold. Ineach spot he made his calculations, and theysatisfied him that the produce did not pay forthe labour that was employed on it \In the Facebajer mountains also, the baronsays, he found many evidences of ancient workings,which he judges must have been executedwhen slaves and convicts were employed in themines. He infers this from the great labourwhich the work must have required before theuse of gunpowder was known ; for the passages,which are three hundred fathoms in length,and six feet in height and breadth, are carriedthrough a bed of bernstein by the help of thepickaxe, chisel, and mallet alone. He infersfrom the accurate direction of the galleries, thatBern's Brief tiber Gold waschereyen in Bannat.246 MINING IN THE CHAP. X.the planners of them must have had some knowledgeof subterranean geometry.Of the more early working of these mines noinformation could be obtained ; but, in morerecent times, they were discovered and opened,in the fifteenth century, by King Sigismund,who is said to have extracted from them treasuresof gold to an incredible amountsIn the Bohemian dominions of Austria therewere formerly gold washings. Those were inthe southern range of the mountains on theriver Wiser, in the circles of Bedschow andTurnau, before that river falls into the Elbe ".Joachimsthal, in the circle of Saatz in Bohemia,contains mines of silver ; but at whatperiod the workings in them commenced, orhow far they had yielded treasure, does not appearfrom any records now to be found. Thegalleries have been carried to the prodigiousextent of five thousand six hundred fathoms,and some of the shafts are three hundred andfifty fathoms in perpendicular depth \1 Brief uber mineralogical Gegenstande.^ Whatever may have been formerly the case, the sand doesnot now yield more than one grain of gold in a hundredweight;and though chemists of skill have found nearly thatquantity, it is supposed that so much is not regularly to beobtained. There are at present no people searching for gold,nor have there been any for several centuries. — See Reus MineralogicalBeschreibung des Buntzlauer Reis in Bowmen,3 The silver ores which are found in this and the adjoiningdistrict of Cathariuaberg are native silver, which is attachedCHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 247The vicinity of Salzburg, comprehending agreat part of the Doric Alps, afforded in ancienttimes considerable quantities of gold and somesilver ; and though but little has been producedof late years, there are sufficient records inexistenceto attest their productiveness down tothe middle of the fourteenth century. Howmuch earlier they may have been worked thereare now no means of ascertaining.At Altenberg the metals were found in bedsof gneiss, in which was mingled some feldsparand abundance of granite. In the year 1287,Archbishop Rudolph granted them to thecanons of his cathedral, to whom they probablyyielded but little profit. In 1357, they seem tohave been conducted by Boasted, who was burgraveof the district; but their greatest productivenesswas after 1442, when they werefarmed out to Friedrich von Emerberg, ErhardWendelstein, and the two brothers, Sigmundand Christoph Gossamer, whose partnershipwas prosperous to themselves, and beneficial tothe surrounding district. The profit gainedto different vein stones and assume different forms, to whichthe names of vitreous silver ore, of red silver ore, and rvhitesilver ore, are given.These mines, however, as well as those of the circle ofTabor at Berestadt, are at present much more explored, forthe sake of the cobalt and other minerals which they afford,than on account of the gold and silver they ever yield. — SeeFerber tiber die Gebirge und Bergwerke in Ungarn undBowmen. Berlin, 1780.248 MINING IN THE chap. X.was such as to excite the avarice of a succeedingprelate, who was dissatisfied with his rent, andthe tenth of the silver and gold, and by varioussteps endeavoured to obtain possession of whathad been leased ; and, at length, in the beginningof the sixteenth century, upon the groundthat protestantism had been taught among theminers by a missionary, named Kranzeifer, hesucceeded in avoiding the lease. The best ofthe workmen forsook the district, the mineswere first contracted and then abandoned, andthe prelate lost the income he had derived fromthe property. Fallen buildings, heaps of scoriae,open shafts, and choked galleries still attest theformer prosperity of the mining operations ofthe district \The mines of Schellgadin are at present themost important. The earliest records respectingthem is in the year 1378, when ArchbishopPile-rim the second leased them to farmers forthree hundred and twenty pounds rent. InVierthaler. Wandering dutch Salzburg, Berchtesga-den und Osterreich^ vol. i. p. 141.® They are said to have been nearly exhausted, so that,being worked by the government, a loss was incurred between1775 and Iso of about 7iine thousand pounds. By introducinggreater economy, they have been kept at work,, andfor the first time, in 17S0, produced a profit of £250. Itappears that the gold is in grains, from the size of a grain oflinseed to an almost invisible speck, and from 12 to 14ounces are extracted from fifty tons of ore. — Vierthaler, vol. i.p. 145.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES, 249Rothhausberg, three centuries ago, the valleysswarmed with inhabitants depending on themines of gold ; but within the last century thedecline in the product has been great. The netprofit to the archbishop about 177^ was nearfour thousand pounds yearly, but from 179-5 to1800 scarcely six hundred pounds. On anaverage of twenty-two years, from 177^ to 1800,the produce was thirty-five pounds of gold andthree hundred and forty pounds of silver. Thesemines in ancient times had received the title ofthe "Throne ofEktto." If they deserved thatname three hundred years ago, the produce musthave been much greater, or the ideas of thosewho conferred it must have been of a very contractedkind with respect to mineral wealthsIf we may trust to an author who visited thisdistrict in 1784, the Romans must have originallyworked these mines, and having sufferedthem to go to decay, they were again put inactivity.Banquet says, that in the miningarchives he found this passage, " AurifodinceRomanum in campo hiimido versus septentrio-nem per mottos anno deserted facere ; anno 719iterum coeptcB sunt"*The discovery of America and of the mines itcontained seems to have kindled a most vehementpassion for exploring the bowels of theVierthaler, vol. i. p. 239. = Banquet, p. U2,S50 MINING IN THE cHAP. X.earth in search for gold, in most of the countriesof Europe ; but in no part of it to so great anextent as in the bishopric of Salzburg. Theinhabitants of that country seemed to thinkthemselves within the reach of the apple of theHesperides and of the golden fleece, and to findin their streams the Pactolus of antiquity. Betweenthe years 1538 and 1562 more than athousand leases of mines were taken. Thegreatest activity prevailed, and one or two largefortunes were made ; but by the beginning ofthe next century, though large quantities of iron,copper, calamine, cobalt, and vitriol, with somegold and silver, had been extracted, partly fromdisappointment and partly on account of religiousdifferences, the district was deprived of thegreater portion of its inhabitants. In processof time, too, the haines or glaciers extendedthemselves lower down on the mountain, andrendered the openings to the mines inaccessible ;yet so late as 1796, efforts were directed by thethen archbishop to work the mines, which werefilled with snow and ice, but with very littlesuccess \In the Tyrol, near to Brien, between thetowns of Wittenberg and Schwatz, are silvermines, which during the excitement in the sixteenthcentury had obtained the name of ElVierthaler, vol. i. p. 261.CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 251Dorado. How much earlier they lead beenworked does not appear; but in the year 1523they produced 38,000 pounds of silver ; in thenext year, 33,700 ; in 1525, 52,800. In 1564 theyfell off so as to yield only 11,400 pounds; andthough once they increased again to 20,000pounds, they never more attained that point ;and have long since ceased to afford any \About two miles from Hell, in the Tyrol, is asmall establishment where the sand is washedfor gold. Mines were opened here for gold byone Spengler, who was brought from the Hartsin 1435 ; and between that time and the year1504 sixteen mines in the whole were opened.As the mines were situated in a province belongingjointly to the archbishop of Salzburg andthe prince of Tyrol, disputes arose which impededthe work, and finally suspended it".Besides the product of the mines, gold wasobtained by washing in many parts of the Austriandominions. In the Danube there wereformerly gold washings, and even in the presentday some is found in the sands between Viennaand Pressure, mixed with transparent quartz andiron, but the quantity is so small as to be almostunworthy of notice.More extended accounts ofthe Austrian minesthan of other countries have been deemed prosVierthaler, vol. ii. p. 178. " Iceni vol. ii. p. 191.252 MINING IN THECHAP. X,per : they were the chief sources of mineralwealth through the middle ages. Their producein no instances and in no periods seems to havebeen large, when compared with what was yieldedin distant ages in Egypt, in Spain, in Asia, andin Thrace, and in modern times in Mexico andPeru. But their effect on the transactions ofthe world must be contemplated, not by whatthey would produce on the stock of gold andsilver in existence in the time of Augustus or inthe present day, but by what they must haveproduced on the very small amount of the preciousmetals which was possessed at the time oftheir respective workings.Saxony. The miucs of Saxony were first discovered inthe tenth century, when the whole district inwhich they are situated was covered with wood,and without inhabitants \ Some carriers fromHalle, on their way to Bohemia, where theycarried salt, observing metallic substances in thetracks made by the wheels, some of these weretaken up and sent to Goslar to be examined,when they were found to consist of lead with aconsiderable quantity of silver. This led to theestablishments forming, which have continued,with some variations in their products, from theyear 1169 to the present day. For some years,• Jerked's und Engelhardt's Erdebeschreibung von Kur-sachsen. Vol. i. p. 99.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 253beginning about 13^20 or 1380, the mines ofSchneeberg are said to have yielded so large aportion of silver, that the tithes on it amountedin thirty years to 324,000 quintals. If so, theproduce must have been at the rate of about£300,000 sterling annually. These mines musthowever have been exhausted long ago, as noappearance or trace of them is now in existence,and the spot where they are said to have beenworked is covered with corn-fields and vineyards\There is no part of the world in which theoperations of mining are conducted with moreskill, economy, and industry, than in Saxony.The annual produce of the precious metals, takenon an average of late years, cannot be estimatedhigher than about four hundred thousand ouncesof silver, and a few ounces of gold". The workaffords employment to about fifty or sixty thousandpersons; but the most important of theproducts are lead, copper, cobalt, iron, manganese,and fossil coal. There were formerly goldwashings in the streams, and gold was found inthe small brooks that run into the Multa, andin that river itself; but those operations haveceased long ago \The mines in the Hartz forest in Germany, Hanover.Putter's Reichsgeschichte in ihrem Hauptfadeiij page 380.2 Cassel's Erdebeschreibung. Vol. iv. p. 337.Mineralogical Geschcchte des Erzegebirges.254 MINING IN THECHAP. X.which at the time of their discovery formed aportion of Saxony, are now partly in the dominionof Hanover, and partly in that of Brunswick,and a small division in those of Prussia,have been worked from a distant period, butwere certainly not known in the early agesof the world. There are various conflictingopinions among the learned in antiquities respectingthe discovery of the mineral wealth ofthe Hartz. The most probable accounts fix itin the tenth century, and the tradition is, that ahunter of the name of Rami, when engaged inthe chase, had fastened his horse to a tree, whoby pawing with his feet had scraped away thesoil, and thereby discovered some minerals; thatspecimens of them were sent to the emperorOtho, to whom all minerals, as regalities of theempire, belonged, and who sent expert miners toexamine the district, from Franconia. TheseFranconia worked the mines for the emperor,and gained him very great profits about the year972. This course proceeded till the year IOO6,when a famine, followed by a pestilence, causedthe works to cease. They were resumed tenyears after, in IOI6, and continued at work till1181, when they were closed by warlike operations,and continued in a state of inactivity till1209. From that year they continued at workwith variations in their produce, till sometimebetween 1344« and 1353, when, according to oneCHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 255account, from a most contagious pestilence, andaccording to another by the falling in of thegalleries, by which many lives were lost, andfour hundred widows were left to lament theirhusbands, they were once more abandoned.In the year 1356, the golden bull of theEmperor Charles the IVth was issued. By it,these mines, as well as all others within theGerman empire, were conceded in full propertyto the several sovereign princes in whose dominionsthey were situated.This did not communicate to the Hartz minestheir former activity until the year 1453, whenthey were again restored, and have continuedat work up to the present time.We have no authentic documents to showthrough the whole series of years what has beenthe produce of gold and silver; but, supposingthe produce, in the years of activity, to benearly the same as of late years, we may estimatethe whole Hartz, including the dominions ofHanover and Brunswick, with the small partwhich belongs to Prussia, to have yielded aboutsixty ounces of gold, and about three hundredthousand ounces of silver yearly ^^ The other minerals of the district are of far greater valueand gold and silver, which were the cause of their originalworkings, have long continued objects of inferior importanceto the iron, copper, lead, zinc, vitriol, and sulphur, M'hich form256 MINING IN THE cHAP. X.The mines belonging to Prussia, besides thesmall portion in the Hartz, which is beforealluded to, are very inconsiderable as far as regardsthe precious metals. Those in the provincesof Mansfield and Gothenburg, ceded bySaxony in 1816, are said, in the thirteenth century,to have yielded yearly about thirty thousandounces of silver, but we have no means ofascertaining if they were worked at any formerperiod.Prussia. The mines of Tarnowitz, in the Prussian provinceof Silesia, exhibit evident proofs of havingbeen worked in very ancient times, and to amuch greater extent than in more moderndays. There are records which show that, afteran uncertain suspension, they were revived bysome protestant refugees from the county ofMansfield, about the year 1524. George Mar-thebases of the several manufactures carried on in this mountaindistrict.The paternal government of Hanover is liberal to the poorinhabitants of the Hartz. It allows them wood for miningpurposes from its forests without payment, and stores up alarge quantity of bread-corn in seasons of abundance in a magazineat Strode, which is dispensed to them at a cheaprate, when, in the variations of years, the price advances.These notices respecting the Hartz are abridged from VoyagesMetallurgiques de Jars, vol.i.; from PlethosErdebeschreibungder Fasten Wolfenbutel ; from Cassel, vol. iv. ; and part arewritten from personal inquiries made by the author on thespot in 1827.CHAP. X.Middle AGES. 257grave of Brandenburg, and his successor, GeorgeFredrick, are stated to have enriched themselvesby the produce of these mines, which were veryprofitable till about the year I6O0 \We have been induced to search with morediligence for any intelligence respecting themines in Germany, especially those which wereworked in the middle ages, from having metwith the following remark in Anderson's Historyof Commerce, vol. i. ]). Gj.It was the silver mines found in Germanyin the tenth and following centuries whichgradually increased the quantity of money, andthe price of necessaries even before the discoveryof America."Whatever the increase on those two headsmay have been, it must not be attributed solelyto the mines of Germany ; and it may not,therefore, be unnecessary to extend our inquiries,and to communicate the result of themto the other countries of Europe.In the empire of Charlemagne all the mines France,were the property of the crown, and continuedto be so till the reimi of Charles the Vlth,who in May, 1451, issued an ordinance, bywhich the rights of the crown were abandoned,^ The present produce of the mines of Tarnowitz is saidnot to exceed one hundred ounces of gold and eighty thousandounces of silver. — Kapfs Mizzen aus der Geschichte desSchleischen Mineralreichs, 1794.VOL. I. S258 MINING IN THECHAP. X.the chief object of which was said to have beento promote the working of mines in the Ma-cannonsand in the Lyonnois.It appears, however, by letters patent whichCharlemagne granted in ^86 to his two sons,Charles and Louis, that gold and silver were thechief objects whose search engaged the attentionof that monarch. The grant referred towas of certain districts with the royalties of thecrown. " Plies tr actum regions in saltii nostra21mringiaco, ad 20 milliaria in longitiidine et.10 in latitude, jure hereditary j^ossedendum ;et faculties damns in territory district illusdomination qucerere et facere aurum argentatque omnia metalla.''^ — In Goldasti.It appears that the right of coining moneywas a privilege conveyed with the grant of themining-district, from the expressions in it, *' insuperut defeats et jjossitis aureus, gross, etdenarii monetary ut bona ionia tanquamnostra" &c.The archives of Lorraine contain some intimationsof mines. It is there recorded thatGerard, the Sith Bishop of Toul, in the year975, granted several estates to the church ofDies, but reserved to himself decimal mince argenticthe tithes of the silver mines.It is related in the Chronicle of Denotes, thatin the year 997 two very distinguished menarrived at Belmont, and opened mines ; " qtio-CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 2591'um diebus argentine fossa report sunt, in quibusmultum argentum essefertur effossum"The Duke of Lorraine Antoine, in a deeddated in 1120, made some extensive grants ofland, but retained to himself whatever silvermight exist in the mountains.These intimations serve to show that somesilver must have been known, or have beenbelieved to exist at that time in that part ofwhat was a portion of the Frank kingdom.A class of mines has been noticed in France ofwhich it is difficult to determine whether theywere worked by the Romans as well as by themore modern possessors of the territory. Thegreater part of these are in the province ofLanguedoc. These are minutely enumeratedby Genssane in his " Histoire Naturelle de laProvince de Languedoc," published at Marseilles,1766.There is at Pradal, a small village situated alittle above the town of Ville-Magne, abundantproof of very extensive mining-operations. Allthe works which are above the level of thelittle river Maire, and which are of an immenseextent, exist to this day. They have been carriedbelow the bed of the river, and that portionof them has been submerged. If attention bepaid to the enormous excavations in the interiorof the mountain, it will be evident that a vasts 2260 MINING IN THE CHAP. x.quantity of metal must have been formerly extracted.The silver was coined at Ville-Magne,at a mint established there ; the walls, the ornaments,and the sculpture of which display, evenin their ruins, a royal origin \ The numberof other and smaller mines, both of lead andof silver, in the same neighbourhood, is veryconsiderable, but, according to Genssane, ofvery little productiveness at present. Some ofthem had been worked within the memory ofpersons still alive, and of others it was merelyreported that they had been exhausted in remoteages.Thus, near the baths of Rennes, in Languedoc"are remains of very extensive mines oflead and silver, the ruins of which point out thequality of the products. This is particularlythe case with the mines in the mountains ofCardon and Roquenere, and with that of goldin the mountain Blanchard, about a quarter ofa league below the baths \An ancient mine of silver, at the foot of theChateau de la Annette, had been examined bya commission from the king during the ministryof Colbert, when it was found to be filled withwater. Genssane visited and examined thatGenssane, vol. i. p. 278.2 Idem, vol. ii. p. 187-Idem, vol. iv. p. 187.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 26lmine, and reports it to be in the same state ;but be found in it a date, that of 1316, whichshows the period of its activity \In the mountains of Cevennes, gold andsilver are still found in toilettes in the riversLa See, I'Ardeche, La Gardon, and I'Eraut.They are supposed to be detached from theJilons cor in those mountains, and brought bythe streams through the ravines. This goldwas remarked by Agricola more than threecenturies before Genssane visited the spot, aswell as the peculiarity which still exists, thatthe gold is only to be found in the same placesas those smooth black pebbles resembling touchstones,called, by those who seek for gold, *'lamere de I'or."A great quantity of scoriae, the remains ofancient workings, are observable in this district,especially near the little river Genere. TheAbbe de Gua, who examined the heaps, thoughthe discovered proofs of their having been theresults of the operations of miners who had extractedgold, but Genssane was rather disposedto attribute them to some extensive workingsoof mines of antimony.Some silver appears to have been separatedfrom the lead which the mines of that metalsupplied to the wants of France. Thus at MastGenssane, vol. iv. p. 294,262 MINING IN THE cHAP. X.Dieu, in Languedoc, were to be seen the remainsof the operations of antiquity in greatheaps of cinders around mines which have beenlong exhausted, in which were found particlesof both lead and silver ; and another lead mineis to be seen near St. Sauveur, which still retainsthe ancient name I'Argentiere \Dr. Belon, who has been before mentioned,found in the department now called the Gard,in 1548, about six thousand persons occupiedin working mines, principally in search of gold.He relates a strange superstition among theinhabitants of that district, which, for its singularity,may not be unfit to be noticedthe French division of thePyrenneen mountainsthere are still the pits which led to minesGenssane, vol. i. p. 175 and 230."The inhabitants of Square," he says, "and of theborders of the lake of Gard, and also of Sale, are firmly persuadedthat the carp in those lakes are nourished with puregold ; and a great portion of the people in the Lyonnois arefully satisfied that the fish called humble and emblems eat noother food than gold. There is not a peasant in the environsof the lake of Bourges who will not maintain that the laurels,a fish sold daily in Lyons, feed on pure gold alone. Thesame is the belief of the people on the lake Caldron inSavoy, and of those near Lodi.""But," adds the doctor, "having carefully examined thestomachs of these several fishes, I have found that they livedon other substances, and that from the anatomy of the stomachit is impossible they should be able to digest gold." — Gobet,Les Anciens Genealogists de France, vol. ii . p. 63.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. ^63that have been long disused. They bear evidentmarks of a different origin. Some of these pitsare round, and are, with great appearance ofprobability, attributed to the Romans. Othersof them are square, and are supposed to havebeen formed in later ages by the Moors, whoruled in Spain, — who seem to have followed, inthe excavations, the same form as they generallyadopted in their buildings ^Malus the elder was sent by Henry theFourth, in the latter years of his reign, to examinethe state of the ancient mines in thePyrennees. In his report on the subject, it isaffirmed that they are as rich as those of Potash ;and, strange as it may appear, in an age whenabsolute personal slavery had been long abolished,recommended that slaves should be employedto perform the labour. The king, who was thenkeenly alive to all kinds of mining-projects,gave orders to commence opening and workingthese ancient pits ; but the sudden death of themonarch put a stop to the undertaking.Gaston de Fix, brother to Charles, King ofNavarre, is said to have worked some of thosemines to such advantage as enabled him to surpassin his expenditure that of all the monarchsof his day. Gobet remarks, that in his timeGobet, Les Anciens Genealogists de France, vol. ii,p. 122.264 MINING IN THE chap. X.the country people were satisfied with gettingup the lead, which they were enabled to sell inthe cities near them at a better price on accountof the silver which was found to be mixed withthat inferior metal.Henry the Fourth seemed to have been excited,by the rumours spread through Europe of thevast wealth of the mines of Peru, to entertainprojects for the discovery of similar sources ofwealth in his own dominions. He addressedseveral efforts to the object ; but the less sanguineSully, who viewed the whole with indifference,if not with contempt, co-operated butvery faintly in the designs of his master \Under the administration of Cardinal Richelieu a Germanadventurer with his wife, excited his attention to themines of the precious metals in France. Both the Baron deBeausoleil and AufFenbach and his wife, especially the lattertraversed the kingdom in search of these treasures, and madereports of extravagantly rich mines which they had discoveredand proposed to work.In consequence of their representations, measures weretaken to carry extensive plans into execution ; but from avariety of causes, which are ably pointed out in the " Metallurgyde Grass," the whole operations terminated in disappointment,and the loss of the capital that had been expended.Madame de Beausoleil et Autfenbach appears to have beena more accomplished charlatan than her husband the baron.In a work she published, under the title of '^ La Restitutionde Pluton," addressed to the cardinal, in 1640, she professesgreat skill in the discovery of mines, and asserts that, aftermuch experience in Hungary and in other parts of the world,she had discovered in various parts of France rich mines, theCHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 26^The mines of Sardinia, which have been no Sardinia.tired in an earlier part of this inquiry, had pro-workingof which she strongly urges by the representationthat " par le moyen dcsquelles les finances de sa majesticseront beaucoup plus grandes que celles de tous les princesChretiens, et ses sujets plus heureux de tous les peuples."The enumeration which this lady gives is a curious paper,whether it be viewed as an effort of quackery on her part, oras a proof of the view she had of the tendency, in that age, tobecome the dupes of metallurgists and alchemist, both descriptionsof which adepts seem to have abounded.We give an abridged specimen of her professions. In thePyrennees, near St. Real, she found a good mine of gold ; inthe mountain of Sault, also a mine of gold ; at a league fromLorde, a valuable mine of silver ; in the county of Fix, aleague from the river, a mine of gold ; in the mountainMontraustaud, a mine of silver ; in the mountain of Caravel,a mine of silver ; at a place called Al.sen, a mine of silver ;at half a league from Loural, a mine of gold, and another ofsilver near it, at Debate; at Cousin, a mine of silver containingmuch gold ; in the barony of Regis, near Narbonne,a mine of gold ; in the Condonnois, a mine of gold ; in thevillage of Nourishes, near Pongibant, and in the mountain ofPeut, good mines of silver ; in Provence, near to Frejus, amine of silver ; in Dauphine, a mine of gold in the mountaind'Auriau ; and, besides all these, vast mines of lead, iron, copper,sulphur, and coal, and others which yield precious stones,such as granites, rubies, hyacinths, opals, talc, turquoises,amethysts, alum, and diamonds like those of Alen^on ! ! !Mining in France seems, however, to have engaged themost attention from the beginning of the fifteenth to that ofthe following century, when various ordinances were issuedto promote and regulate the rights of^property, and the modesin which the operations were to be conducted. It is not improbablethat the discovery of the mines of America, and thecurrent of wealth that flowed from thence to Europe, mayQ66 mining in the chap. X.bably continued at work between the period towhich that notice refers, and that when the Mahometanssfrom Asia and Africa first gained afooting in Europe. A series of wars must haveimpeded the operations till after the defeat andcapture of Deliver, the last king of the Vandalrace. A peace was concluded then under thesanction of the Greek emperor, who appointedpraetorian prefects during the space of near onehundred and seventy years. This state of tranquillityafforded occasion for renewing the workof mining, and for acquiring and accumulatinga store of the precious metals of sufficient importanceto form an object worthy of militaryattack ; and we accordingly find that " theArabs, on their wav from Africa to the invasionof Spain, landed in Sardinia, and there seizedupon large treasures of gold and silver \'*Spain and We have already taken notice of the mines ofSpain and of their produce in remote ages,when then' riches were extracted in successionby the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, and theRomans. With the decline of the power of thelatter people, the productiveness of the mines ofhave had the effect of checking the efforts of France in thatkind of industry, as they evidently had in the other parts ofthe ancient continent.See Carbonic;, Histoire de I'Afrique et de I'Espagne sousla Domination des Arabes, vol, i, p. 103. Paris edit. 1765.CHAP. XMIDDLE AGES. 267the precious metals seems either to have ceasedor to have diminished — at least there are no accountsof any mines being worked under theSuevi or under the Gothic monarchs who atlength governed that country, nor any traces ofworks in mines at this time to be seen, that arenot evidently of Roman, of Moorish, or of moremodern construction.The works of the Romans in some parts areso obliterated, and the scoriae and ashes so decomposedor covered with soil, as to be nearlyuntraceable except by acute observers. Bowles,of English origin, but one of the best Spanishwriters on natural history, speaking of somegreat caverns between Ronda and Gibraltar,says, " Many people believe, without any reason,that these excavations are the work of theMoors ; but there is good reason to concludethat they are the work of ages long prior to theinvasion of Spain by that people \" He thenproceeds to give his reasons for this opinion : —On the Spanish as well as on the French side ofthe Pyrennees, the remains of the shafts dug bythe Romans are distinguished from those ofMoorish work by their shape — the first beinground, the second square ; which Bowles accountsfor by supposing that the Romans constructedLa Historia natural y la Geography fisica de Espaila,p. 30.268 MINING IN THE chap. X.their forts round in order to resist the force ofthe battering-rams with which they were liableto be attacked, and then dug their shafts in imitationof their fortifications ; but as the Moorsapprehended no attacks from such implements,their fortresses were built square, and the pitsleading to the mines were constructed in asimilar manner.Our present object is to examine what wasthe state of mining from the first invasion ofSpain by the Mahometanss down to their finalexpulsion, which latter event was nearly contemporarywith the discovery of the westernworld. Cardonne remarks S " That if we mayjudge from the imposts levied on the Christiansby the Moors for indulging them in the exerciseof their religious rites, there must have beenirreat wealth accumulated in the hands of someindividuals at the time of the invasion, or muchoold and silver must have been extracted fromothe mines." The same author asserts, but hasproduced none of the evidence for the facts hehas stated, that " the mines of gold and silverwhich existed in Spain were a great source ofwealth to the Arabs : they employed a greatnumber of workmen, and extracted a greatquantity of those metals." (Page 340.) InHistoire de I'Afrique et de I'Espagne sous la Dominationdes Arabes, vol. i. p. 180.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 269another passage, Cardonne speaks of Christianslaves being employed by the Moors in the workof the mines.We have not been fortunate enough to meetwith any passages in the Spanish Chronicleswhich throw any light on the subject; and theSpanish Arabian writers, whose works are saidto be still preserved, and which, when Clarkevisited and described the Escurial in 1763, consistedof eighteen hundred and twenty-fourvolumes, have been scarcely examined by anyChristian literati.In the absence of those means of judging ofthe state of mining under the Arabs whichhistory might have furnished, we have no otherresource but that obtained by examining thefew relations which are to be found in thewritings of such modern travellers as have paidattention to the subject.In the mountain called Lares, near to whichare the remains of a Moorish fortress and of amosque, is a mine which produced, when examinedby Bowles, only emery, but which hethought had been worked by the Moors chieflyon account of the gold then found mixed withit, and the process of separating which hedescribes according to conjecture, rather thanfrom any records he could procure \Bowles , ]). 55.270 MINING IN THE chap. X.The mine of Galatea, to the south of theRiver Guadiana in Andalusia, appears to havebeen worked in the middle ages. It containedsilver without any mixture of lead, though nearit is another mine yielding only lead. The minersseem to have mistaken the direction of the vein,and thereby to have lost it. The remains of acrucible, and of a repertory furnace, have beenfound in it; but it is inundated, which has beencaused by neglect, as, according to our author, itis situated on an eminence, and might be easilydrained \Near to Camilla, in the mountain Fuente de laReins, is the mine of Constantine. In formertimes, probably by the Moors, it was workedwith skill, as is demonstrated by the constructionof the shafts and galleries. The vein runsfrom north to south, and crosses a bed of schist.It was slightly worked when visited by Bowles,owing to the want of funds; though there wasabundance of wood near it, and a rivulet runningat the foot of the mountain, by which itmight be easily drained*.The chief mines, however, which the MoorsWorked in Spain, were those of Linares in theprovince, or, as the Spaniards call it, the kingdomof Jaen. "The hills which surround theBowles, p. 59. See Dillon's Travels in Spain, p. 288.2 Idem, page 65.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 271elevated plain of this district," says Bowles,*' are pierced as full of holes as a sieve by themines which the Moors worked ; for it musthave been done by them, since the Romanscould never have worked in a manner so barbarous\" Those Mahometan princes who ruledin Jaen seem to have struggled hard tosupport their revenues by extracting from thebowels of the earth that wealth which its miserablesurface could only yield by excessivetoil.It is probable they supplied their neighbouringstates with silver, copper, and lead —some of which minerals are everywhere to befound, and frequently all of them together. Thenumber of shafts in these hills is very surprising.They are formed about five paces from eachother; and according to Bowles there were morethan five thousand of them-thesepits may, and probably were, dug insuccession during the time of the Moorish domination,which terminated in Jaen two centuriesbefore the final conquest of Granada. Ifthese pits were the work of five hundred years,each year yielding ten excavations, and thoseexhausted, as they appear to have been, as soonas they could be robbed of their minerals, weBowles, page 416.^ Idem, page 416.27^ MINING IN THE chap. X.shall not estimate, however rich some of the pitsmay be found, that the annual products of thesemines could have been of very great amount.It may be proper to remark, that though someof these mines of gold and silver which havebeen noticed were slightly worked when Bowlesvisited them, they have now entirely ceased.Bowles says that, " In the sand-hills of aliciathere are still traces of gold; and it is astonishingto observe the prodigious labours whichmust have been performed to remove the sand,to wash it, and to separate the gold from it.The tradition in the province is, that the goldof this district was appropriated to the privatepurses of three Roman empresses, namely,Olivia, Agrippina, and Austin. If any learnedperson could verify and illustrate this tradition,he would enrich natural history and do honourto civil history."I know," he says, " that a German minister,sometimes at a great loss, washed these sandsand collected gold from them \"Without noticing an untouched vein of goldwhich Bowles traced in the mountains of Guadianaopposite to St. Ildefonso, or advertingto the gold mine which Donna Isabella workedin the mountains near Talavera, we may proceedto what have been the great objects ofDiscourse Preliminary., page 35.CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 273attention from the earliest ages of which historymakes mention down to the present time, themines of Almaden and of Guadalcanal. Thesemines were well known to the Romans, who expendedenormous sums on them : they werecontinued at work by the Moors, and haveonly ceased to be productive within a very fewyears.The mine of Almaden is of importance to thehistory of the precious metals, though its chiefproduce is quicksilver; but that metal hasbecomeof such indispensable use in the operation of separatinggold and silver from the ores with whichthey are mixed, or from the quartz or other earthsin which they are commonly enclosed, that withoutit the mines both of the new and the oldworld would have been less beneficially and extensivelyworked than they have hitherto been.At first the cinnabar or mercury was chieflyused as a paint, but its value for other purposeswas very early discovered. Theophrastus, whowrote 300 years before Christ, mentions it — aswell as Vesuvius, who was a contemporary ofAugustus ; and Pliny, in the following century,expressly speaks of it as the production of Beticain Spain.The Romans deemed mercury a poison ; butnotwithstanding that opinion their matrons usedthe cinnabar as a paint for the face, and the artistsapplied it to their works. Pliny says that theVOL. I. T274 MINING IN THE chap. X.mine was constantly locked up, and the keykept in possession of the governor of the province,who could only open it in pursuance ofan order from the emperor, and was obliged toclose it again as soon as a specified quantity,which was to be sent to Rome, had been takenout. Every trace of the Roman workings isnow obliterated; and it is doubtful whether theArabs continued to extract much or indeed anycinnabar, for all the present shafts and gallerieshave been constructed since the discovery ofAmerica, and probably owed their extension tothe great demand which arose for mercurywhen the mode of amalgamation was first introducedinto the mining-system of Mexico.The two brothers Beggars, of a German family,took a lease of the quicksilver mine aswell as of that of silver at Guadalcanal, engagingto deliver to the government 450 quintals of mercury;but being unable or unwilling to makegood their engagements, they gave up the silvermine and the cinnabar mine at the same time,in the year 1635.It is doubtful whether the mine of silver atGuadalcanal was much worked, if at all, by theArabs : if it was, it must have been in the earlydays of their dominion in Spain ; for tradition inthe neighbourhood speaks of it as a discoverymade in the year 1 505, a few years after the finalconquest and expulsion of the last of the MoorishCHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 275potentates. Whatever it might have producedunder the Arabs must have been much ]lessthan that subsequently extracted. Under theCastilian monarchs many shafts were sunk andseveral galleries constructed, and this swelledthe quantity of the treasure which was acquired.Very extravagant accounts are given of theamount obtained, but none of sufficient accuracyto obtain credit except that of one author, thehistorian of the house of Herat, who says thatduring a course of years (how many does notappear) the mine yielded eight millions of pesetas— a coin the fifth part of a hard dollar, or aboutten-pence of our money — or about three hundredand thirty thousand pounds sterling. This sumis said by the same author to have been appliedto the building of that most enormous andgloomy pile the Escurial.It is probable that at the most prosperousperiod of their working, both those mines, butespecially that of silver, were attended with aheavy loss to the crown ; and were consequently,if not abandoned altogether, suffered to proceedtowards dilapidation ; and thus being a burdento the possessor, were readily conceded to adventurerson what were deemed advantageousoterms.Though the process of these mines from badto worse till they became extinct does not fallwithin the period we are now considering, yetT 2276 MINING IN THE chap. x.as the history of them illustrates the coursewhich has very commonly accompanied the seekingfor wealth by exploring the bowels of theearth for silver and gold, it may not be amiss todigress from the immediate subject and to takea succinct view of it.TheFuggars obtained possession of the minesabout the year 1598. They were the best minersof that age, and it is now visible that their galleriesand excavations were constructed conformablyto the best principles of the art; but theyviewed their concession as a temporary propertyfrom which they were to extract what wealththey could with as much expedition as possible,and with the least expense to themselves. Withthis view they formed many galleries where theminerals appeared the most rich, and speedilyforsook them to open others. There are nowvisible as many as sixteen of these openings, theroofs of which were supported by wooden posts,but so slightly that they have all rotted, and thusthe passages became choked up. Two circumstancesseem to have accompanied the destructionand abandonment of this undertaking. TheSpanish government wished to raise the rent andto impose some taxes, when the Beggars turnedinto the mines a stream of water which they hadbefore conducted out fit, by which they becamecompletely inundated. They introducedcoining-machines, which they worked in theCHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES.mines, converted much of the silver into coin,and thus defrauded the government of its duties ;and with that coin gained such powerful protectorsabout the court, that they were enabledto escape from Spain in 1635 \ During theiroccupation this family had gained enormouswealth. Both brothers had been created countsin Spain, and had built a street in Madrid" whichstill bears their name; but they had transmittedthe greater part of their wealth to their paternalcountry, Germany, where families created inthis way still flourish as mediatised princes, withextensive landed property.The mines continued in a neglected state till1690, when a Jew named Gomez obtained agrant of it from King Charles the Second, andformed a company consisting of Portuguese of hisown nation. They attempted to drain the chiefmine, the Poco Rico or rich pit; but from wantof sufficient capital to construct engines, andfrom the unskilfulness of the workmen they hadengaged, they failed in their attempt. Gomezwas charged with duplicity, was arrested, and along time imprisoned at Seville whilst his causewas proceeding in the courts of law, and atlength he died before its termination.Whilst the persecution of the unfortunate Jewwas carried on, it was thought necessary to showHistoria Naturel por Guillernio Bowles p. 16 and 62.^ The street is called Calle Cares.278 MINING IN THE CHAP. X.his guilt by setting the mines to work, and thus,by proving their productiveness, prove his criminality.The crown undertook the work, andDon Alonzo Camilla Rueda of the council offinances was appointed superintendent, accompaniedby a wandering friar, who having residedsome time in America was supposed to be capableof performing the duties of an engineer.After a few years, with little progress in draining,sickness, want of money, and other impedimentsbaffled all attempts to reach the metals.The mine was once more abandoned, and Camillawith his officers and retinue returned to Madrid,to the loss of the crown and to the disappointmentof the ministers.The war of the succession which soon followedsuspended all mining projects ; but in1728 a new adventurer under took the work ofopening the mines of Guadalcanal. This wasan English woman of rank — Lady Mary Herbert,daughter of the Marquis of Powys. She hadresided in Paris, had been connected with thecelebrated Mississippi Law, and had therebyimproved a natural talent and disposition forenterprises of an extensive nature. This ladywas received with attention in Spain, and a companywhich had been formed two years beforeaccepted a proposal she made to drain the minesof Guadalcanal. The conditions were that shewas to be paid two hundred thousand dollarsCHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 279by instalments as the work" advanced, and toreceive one half the profit of the mine.Lady Mary departed from Madrid for Guamto which miners and engines had beensent from England at her expense, and at thatof her relation Mr. Gage, who accompanied her,and of her father the marquis. The instalmentswere paid regularly by the company, and thedraining of the mines proceeded simultaneously,when disputes arose. The Spaniards insisted thatthe lady had engaged to clear away the mud,whilst she contended that she had only contractedto clear the mine of water. A lawsuitwas instituted, and the payments of the companywere suspended.Her ladyship now prosecuted the work on herown account, and advanced to a depth in whichthe richest minerals were supposed to be ; whenshe presented a judicial request that a portionof the ore should be taken up, smelted in thepresence of the court, and its value ascertainedand attested. A decree was issued appointing theexamination. Ore of the weight of forty poundswas taken from one of the galleries, which producedten pounds thirteen ounces of pure silver.This specimen, which was handed about in avery ostentatious manner and shown to the king,who happened at that time to be at Seville,seemed to justify beyond all doubt the reputationof the mine for great riches. Jt was, however.280 MINING IN THE CHAP. x.asserted, that as all the agents employed by thelady were foreigners, imposition had been practisedon the judges and officers of the court, onthe Spanish agents, and on the numerous witnesseswho were present at the examination.During two years, whilst a suit thus occasionedwas proceeding, the expense of keeping thosegalleries that had been drained clear of waterwas too great to be borne, and they becamefilled again. Lady Mary, however, at length, byher interest at court, obtained a decree in herfavour : the mines were adjudged to her and herheirs for a term of thirty years, on condition ofworking them within two years at her own expense.She never, however, appeared afterwardsin the business, though agents said to have beenemployed by her spared no pains to engage newadventurers to contribute to form a fund forprosecuting the work.Mr. Gage, the relation and partner of thislady, then obtained a grant of the mine from thecrown in his own name in 1736, and continuedto work it during ten years ; and though heprocured some rich ores which yielded considerablequantities of silver, it never equalled theexpenditure — besides which the plunder of theagents, after the death of Mr. Richard Wesley,the chief of them, augmented the loss and closedthe whole operation.After that Mr. Thomas Sutton, created CountCHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 281de Coward, formed a company in Paris, and obtaineda grant of the mines in I768. Aftererecting hydraulic machines, and proceedingwith the drainage seven years, they discoveredthat the vein was in another shaft than that onwhich they had been operating. This company,like the others, dissipated the capital with noother fruits than some curious mineralogicalspecimens, with which the cabinet of naturalhistory in Madrid was enriched.Whoever may have attended much to the historyof mining, especially for the precious metals,must have seen for the most part similardisplays of high expectation followed by disappointment,and of real wealth squandered in thevain pursuit of that which existed only in thesanguine imaginations of wild projectors. When,a few years afterwards, the mines of Guadalcanalwere noticed by Dillon, they yielded ores tosome small extent ; but at present they are in aneglected state, and have been so during the lastthirty or forty years. It is, however, probablethat the mines of lead in Andalusia, which Spainis now working successfully, and which havelowered the price of that metal in every part ofEurope, may produce greater advantage to herthan that country ever drew from her laudedmines of silver and gold in the most prosperoustimes.It is asserted by Pliny in the second book, and282 MINING IN THECHAP. X.before noticed in this inquiry, that Astoria, Lusitania,and Alicia furnished annually twentythousand pounds of gold. This may be an erroror an exaggeration, or a mistake in the Romannumerals ; but there is no ground for believingthat any mines of gold were found, the workingsof which were constantly proceeding ; for ini every instance of which we have any accurateinformation, when gold has been found in mines,it has been speedily exhausted. The gold furnishedby the Spanish peninsula to its Romanmasters, be it as much as Pliny states, or only aportion of that quantity, was most probably suppliedby washing the sand of the streams. Thiswe may infer from the name given to several ofthe rivers, such as the Duero and the Varro,both of which yielded gold under the Moorishdomination, as did many others, as well as theircontributory brooks.In a country like Spain, where the necessariesof life are to be procured with but little labour,where both under the Romans and the Arabstheir rulers had unlimited power, and the greatbody of the people no means of resisting themost oppressive commands, a very great numberof persons might be employed in searching forgold; and though under other circumstancesthat labour might have been applied to morebeneficial purposes, yet none would be so captivatingto the ambitious and greedy governors.CHAP. X,MIDDLE AGES. 283It is then possible that, by such means as theypossessed, the Roman and the Arab chiefs wereable to extract by washing the sand a greaterportion of gold than can now be obtained by themore mild and better regulated governments ofmodern Europe.We find, accordingly ^ that in 938 the Arabianviceroy Abdoulrahman sent a present tothe caliph which, among other valuables, consistedof four hundred pounds of virgin gold,and the value of four hundred and twenty thousandsequins (about twenty-one thousand poundssterling) in silver. But the viceroy had ruledSpain twenty years at that time, and in such aperiod it must, with the number of christianslaves he could command, have been easy tohave collected such a quantity.No notices in ancient writings have been discoveredof mines of the precious metals in Portugaldistinct from those of Spain. Both theRomans and Moors considered Portugal, underthe name of Lusitania, as a province of Spain, andthe productions of the two countries are blendedtogether. No modern writer has noticed minesof silver, and only one has made mention ofgold. It is at a place called Adissa, in the districtof St. Uses. We have no accounts of itsorigin or past condition, but recently it has beenCardonne, vol. i. p. 320.284 MINING IN THECHAP. X.Northernnations.worked through the summer months, and onlyfour or five workmen are employed in the winter.The produce, as stated to M. Albi by Vandelli,director of the mines of the kingdom, is small ;being, in the year 1815, 411bs. of pure gold; in1816, 18lbs. ; in 1817, lbs. ; in 1818, 12lbs. ;in 1819, 13lbs. ; in 1820, Isles. ; and in 1821,18lbs\The northern nations of Europe appear tohave possessed more gold and silver than wasto be found in Germany, France, or the BritishIsles in the middle ages. The Danes or Nor-men,who subdued several of the countries tothe south of them, and committed extensivepiracies on others, had been enabled to collecta quantity of treasure, much of which was expendedin ornamenting their arms, and in decoratingthe vessels which they equipped for theirseveral predatory expeditions.We have in an anonymous writer, a contemporaryof Canute, a description in the Latin languageof the fleet with which that prince sailedto take possession of the throne of England ^It is entitled " A Panegyric on Emma, Queenof England," who was the wife of Canute. " Onthe stern of the ships'* he says, '* lions of molten• Essai Statistique sur le Royaume de Portugal par AdrianAlbi, vol. i. p. 13(1® Eminae, Anglorum Reginae Encomium, p. Kifi — 168.CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 0,85gold were to be seen ; and on the mast-headswere either birds whose turning showed thechanges of the wind, or dragons of various formswhich threatened to breathe out fire. There wereto be seen human figures looking like life glitteringwith gold and silver. Dolphins also wereseen of precious cast metal, and centaurs thatbrought to remembrance the ancient fables. Buthow shall I describe the sides of the vessels,which were not only painted with various colours,but swelled out with gold and silver ornaments? The royal ship surpassed all the othersas far as the king in his appearance exceededhis soldiers." In a subsequent passage, book ii.when describing the landing, he says, *the shipswere so splendid that they seemed a flame offire, and blinded the eyes of the spectators : thegold glittered on the sides, and the wroughtsilver work also that was mingled with it. Whocould look upon the lions of shining gold, whoon the human figures of cast electrum with theirgolden faces, who on the dragons gleaming withbrilliant gold — who could look on the carvedoxen that threatened death with their goldenhorns — who could behold all these objects withoutfearing a king possessed of such might ?"There can be no doubt but some of thewealth thus employed may have been acquiredfrom England and from France, who were eachat times induced to pay a tribute to the invading286 MINING IN THE chap. x.Norman, rather than have their dominions laidwaste by the extension of their rapine. Thus,as early as the year 845, a fleet of Danes orNorwegians sailed up the Seine to Paris, whenCharles the Bold was induced to pay them fourteenthousand marcs of gold; which, says Voltairein his General History of Europe, only emboldenedthem the more. In England, duringthe reign of Ethelred, a bribe of ten thousandpounds was paid to the Danes to induce themto desist from an invasion and to depart thekingdom ; and a few years later that king paidto Sweyn and Slave, who had established themselvesat Southampton, sixteen thousand poundson condition of their leaving the kingdom.About ten years afterwards the same princepurchased another temporary peace at the expenseof thirty thousand pounds, and at the endof the next four years renewed the vain attemptby a tribute of forty-eight thousand pounds.This last payment was followed twelve yearslater by a transfer of the crown of England toCanute the Dane.Another mode by which these sea kings, asthey are called by their own countrymen, obtainedthe precious metals, or at least gold, isdescribed by Adam of Bremen, who about theyear 1080 wrote his work ^' De Situ Danes, etMellquarum septentnonaliuyn Regwnum,''' Thatauthor, without taking any notice of Copenhagen,CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 287which probably was not then in existence, describesthe towns of Aarhusen and Albert inJutland, and of Linden in the island of Chosen,saying of the latter place, " It is a city inwhich there is much gold, which is procured bythose incursions on the barbarous nations on theshores of the Baltic sea, which are tolerated andencouraged by the King of Denmark on accountof the tribute he draws from them**It would appear that the inhabitants on theshores of the Baltic, from whom this gold wasobtained either by traffic or by force, must havebeen supplied from mines or washing either inNorway or Sweden, or from the more remotecountry of Russia.We have very imperfect accounts of anymines in Norway and Sweden : they are mostlysuch as have been collected by modern travellers,who, from being natives of other countries, referrather to the condition in which they foundthem than to any historical documents descriptiveof the ancient state. M. Jars says, "Thevestiges of gold are found in great numbers,and almost without trouble, in the mines ofsilver, copper, and other metals at Fallen,Belford, and other parts of Sweden." (P. 65.)The principal mines of gold in former timeswere those of Asheda in Zealand. These wereVoyages Metallurgiques, vol. i. p. 65.288 MINING IN THE CHAP. X.worked in the reign of King John the Thirdby one Henry Level, to whom at length theking conveyed them, but of late years theyseem to have been neglected \ In Norway thesame author speaks of a gold mine which hadbeen known in ancient times, had been againlatterly worked for ten years, but then abandonedbecause the produce did not cover theexpenses.The silver mines of Sweden and Norway havecontinued to be somewhat more productivethan those of gold, but even these are now, andprobably have ever been, but of small amount.The silver mine of Sail or Sala is said to havebeen worked five hundred years ago", and tohave yielded in 1506 thirty-five thousand marcs,but to have been revived only so late as 1623;and now, according to Crone, it yields I7OOmarcs annually \ The net profit of this minein 1767, according to the account of Jars, didnot exceed five thousand livres ; but that seemsto have arisen from some extra temporary expenses,incurred by making or extending a canalto drain the mine.> The Swedish mine at Adelfors yielded in 1736 twelvemarcs of gold, each marc being eight ounces. It was notquite sufficient to defray the expenses, on which account amotion was made in the senate to relinquish the working it.2 Travels of A. de la Moray in 171 Ij, vol. ii.Crone, Uebersicht der Staatskrafte von den EuropaischenReached und Landed, p. 123.Chapel. MIDDLE AGES. 289Two other mines were worked in Sweden in1711, one at Mont argent Oriental, the otherat Mont d' Argent Occidental, in the parish ofNorberk. These are stated to have yieldedhalf a ducat of pure gold to each quintal ofsilver; and Jars also states, that many othermines of silver were formerly worked in thesame vicinity. The silver mine of Kongsbergin Norway was scarcely known before 1623.Since that period, much expense has been incurredand many mechanical experiments tried ;but the variations in the product have been verygreat, and the demands for fresh capital veryfrequent. After sixty years' working and greatexpenditure, the disbursements and the producewere brought to balance each other. In someyears between 17-0 and I7G7 the mines paid alarge profit, but in some others occasioned aheavy loss to the crown, who is or was the proprietor.The works had been suspended on accountof some great requisite demands for newshafts, but it caused so much distress in theimmediate neighbourhood that the Startlingin 1815 again decreed the working, with whatsuccess is unknown. According to traditionaryreports, the mine was very productive in remoteages.It is not impossible that some of the goldwhich was found among the Danes and Norwegiansin ancient times might be the produceVOL. I. u290 MINING IN THE chap. X.of Russia, where mines of it had been wroughtin the times of high antiquity, though they hadfor some centuries ceased to yield any producetill they were revived again under Peter theGreat, in 1699. Notwithstanding the distance,the compendious value of gold may have madeit transferable to Denmark, with which countryall others are said to have had a great trade.Helmoldus, in his Chronicon Sclamcum, lib. Hi.says, " The people of Denmark abounded in allriches, the wealthy being clothed not only invarious sorts of scarlet, but also in purple andfine linen (nunc non solum scarlatina varrogrisio, sed purpura et basso induuntur), occasioned,"as he adds, " by the fishery of herringswhich is carried on on the shores of Chosen;whither traders of all nations resorting, bringwith them gold, silver, and other commoditiesfor purchasing the fish."Great Bri. Tlicsc islands do uot appear at any time totain and • i i i i ^ iIreland, have Contributed very largely to the generalstock of the precious metals of the world. Yetthe report of the riches of the mines was madeuse of by the Roman commanders to stimulatetheir troops to battle. Agricola, in his oration,before the battle of the Grampian mountains,reminded his soldiers of the riches whichwere to reward their valour. " Feet Britanniaaurum et argentum et alia metal pretium victorrise."CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. ^91These metals have in later times been obtainedin quantities sufficient to prove, that they mightat an earlier period have been an object worthyof conquest. In the reigns of James the Fourthand Fifth of Scotland, vast wealth was procuredin the eat hills from the gold collected fromthe sand washed from the mountains. In thereign of the latter, not less than to the valueof three hundred thousand pounds sterling. Inanother place, a piece of thirty ounces' weightwas sourd. Much also was obtained in thetime of the Regent Morton. The search isnow given over, but bits are still found accidentally.Lord Horton, owner of the leadhills, is in possession of a specimen that weighsan ounce and a half.*gold is to this day found in Cornwall mixedwith tin and other substances. The largestpiece that has yet been discovered is equal inweight to three guineas. It is probable that itwas the Cornish gold which proved the lure tothe Romans ; for it was impossible they or thePhoenicians could be ignorant of it, who hadsuch long commerce with the country, and whowere acquainted with the manner of obtainingit."In the reigns of Edward the First andThird, there were very considerable works atCombmartin in Devonshire: three hundred andthirty-seven miners, sent for out of Derbyshire,u 2292 MINING IN THE chap. x.were employed in them, and the produce was sogreat as to assist Edward the Third to carry onthe war with France ^"One Ulnar, an Englishman, worked the goldmines in Scotland in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.In that time three hundred men wereemployed near Elvansfoot, at a place still calledthe Gold-Scour, who, in the course of a fewsummers, are said to have collected equal to thevalue of £100,000-: they were resumed a fewyears ago under the superintendence of themanager of the lead mines at Wanlochhead ;but the price of labour was too high to inducethe continuance of the workings \Fabricius, professor of mineralogy in the universityof Kiel in Holstein, visited Englandabout the year 1740, chiefly with a view to examinethe state of the mines. He says in hiswork on the subject*, that in the tenth year ofQueen Elizabeth, miners were sent from Germanyto the company of mines royal establishedto work the mines of silver in Cardiganshire,and those in the county of Tipperary in Ireland.As far as relates to gold and silver, his informa-pennant'sWales, vol. i. p. 90, 91.2 William's History of the Mineral Kingdom, vol. ii.p. 365. Edinburgh, 1810.3 Ibid. vol. ii. p^ 364.■* Rise von J. C. Fabricius durcli verschiedene provincein England und Scotland.CHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. ^93tion is confined exclusively to Scotland. NearGlasgow, at Crawford Moor, he learned thatgold had been found there in the reigns ofQueen Elizabeth and King James the First;and that Sir John Erskine with four others, hadformed a plan for working the mines again.This Sir John Erskine was also a proprietor ofmines of silver at Alva, which had ceased to beworked in I72O, having beeii for six years beforecarried on under the direction of one Peek,an Englishman. Some silver mines near Linlithgowhad been worked in the reign of MaryStuart, but had been long abandoned; and anotherabout ten miles from Edinburgh, whoseore in the year I6O7 had yielded from eachquintal twenty-two ounces of pure silver, hadbeen long abandoned. The professor noticesalso the gold mine belonging to Lord Horton,near Moffat, which, he says, had been workedone hundred and fifty years before the time thathe was in Scotland.We have now no knowledge of the mines ofsilver in the county of Tipperary in Ireland,which the mines royal company are said tohave employed Germans to work. About theyear 1796, some stir was made in Ireland bygold having been found in the alluvial soil of thecounty wicklow, where some specimens of alarge size were discovered ; but though gold tothe value of ten thousand pounds was obtained,294 MINING IN THE chap. X.the whole cost of the labour far exceeded thatsum \The space whence the gold was collected is ofvery limited extent, not exceeding 350 yardsalong the banks of a brook not more than six orseven feet wide, which before the operationscommenced had formed a channel down tothe bed of rock. The banks of this streamare composed of a stratum of sand and gravelabout five feet thick, which reposes on a rockof argillaceous schist, and which latter is intersectedby veins of quartz. It is from thesandy stratum that the particles of gold wereextracted by washing.The ore was so pure, that twenty-four grainscontained but one grain and a half of alloy.The greater part was entirely free from stonymatter; but some of it was attached to quartzor a fine grained iron stone, and sometimes disseminatedin other minerals. One of the massesweighed five ounces, and another twenty-twoounces, the latter of which is said to be thelargest specimen of native gold ever discoveredin Europe ".The ancient laws of England were calculatedto discourage every branch of mining exceptthat of iron. From the time of the conquest.William's Mineral History:, vol. ii. p. 367-- Phase's Wicklow, p. 19.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. ^29^the crown, by virtue of the royal prerogative,assumed the entire right to all mines and minerals.It had been customary to issue grantsfrom the crown during the period which extendsfrom the reign of Edward the First to that ofHenry the Seventh, by which several personswere empowered to search for ores. Thesegrants were limited, some being confined toparticular counties, some to districts, and a fewextending to the whole kingdom. The onlyrestriction was one forbidding the works to becarried on under castles or houses, gardens, andorchards, the owners of which were to be indemnifiedfor any injury they might sustain. Inletters patent granted by Richard the Second,to Richard Wake, authorising him to search formines of gold and silver in the county of Devonduring ten years, he has unlimited power todig in all liberties on paying for any damageshe might commit, but on condition of his renderingone-tenth of the profit of the mines to holychurch, and one-ninth part to the Exchequer.There are records as early as the reign ofEdward the First, which show that tithes ofminerals were then paid. That prince directedthe same proportion of the produce of the minesto be paid to the parochial churches in Wales ;and the Abbey ofBasingwert derived a revenuefrom the same source.It does not appear in the remote ages of ourMINING IN THE chap. x.history, that the owner of the land on whichmines were discovered had a right to any portionof the mineral products before the fifth yearof Henry sixth, (1426). At that date the Dukeof Bedford, then regent of France, received alease for ten years of all the mines of gold andsilver in the kingdom of England, on conditionof paying one-tenth to holy church, a fifteenthto the king, and a twentieth to the lord of thesoil.When Henry had arrived at maturity he continuedmineral grants to several of his nobles ;among others to the Earls of Warwick andNorthumberland, and to his brother Richard,Earl of Gloster; but in these the terms werevaried. They were to pay to the king one-eighthof the profit, to the lord of the soil one-ninth,and to the parish priest one-tenth.Henry the Seventh, at the commencement ofhis reign, appointed Jasper, Duke of Bedford,and several other persons of high rank, governorsof all the mines in England and Wales;paying to the king the fifteenth part ofthejjnregold and silver, and to the lord of the soil theeleventh part as it groivs ; meaning probablythat portion of the crude ore.In the early part of the reign of Elizabeth,attention to mining was greatly revived. Acorporation was formed bearing the title of themines royal society. The first governor wasCHAP. X.MIDDLE AGES. 297William, Earl of Pembroke, with whom werejoined in the commission, as assistants, severalmen of high rank, some citizens and someforeigners of supposed experience in what relatedto the operations of mining. About thesame time (1567), another corporation wasformed for converting the metals into articlesfor useful domestic purposes, designated as thesociety for the minerals and battery icorJcs.Elizabeth, who resolutely maintained all theprerogatives of the crown, granted, in the mostextensive manner, the power of sinking shaftsand building houses, not only on the royal demesnes,but on the land of any of her subjects.Thomas, Earl of Northumberland, to whom themanor of Keswick had been granted by thecrown, resisted this claim to the copper mines onthat estate; but a decision was made against him,on the ground that the crown had not the powerof alienating the minerals which were inseparablylinked to the prerogative of the monarch. Thiswas deduced from the king's right of coinage,from which, however, only his right to the preciousmetals from which money was formed canbe inferred.Two opinions on this subject were contendedfor by different legal persons. Some maintained,that if any gold or silver was found in the minesof baser metals, the whole would belong to theking ; which, in fact, was bestowing all the298 MINING IN THE chap. x.mineral property on the crown, there beingscarcely any base metal but what holds someparticles of the nobler metals. The others, however,but at a later period, qualify their opinion,by saying, " That although the gold or silvercontained in the base metal of a mine, in thehands of a subject, be of less value than thebase metal, yet if the gold or silver do countervailthe charge of refining it, or be of moreworth than the base metal spent in refining it,this is a roijal mine; and as well the basemetal as the gold and silver in it belong to theprerogative of the crown \"Immediately after the revolution, the crown,by an act passed the first year of William andMary, relinquished all claims to the mines ofcopper, tin, iron, and lead, although gold orsilver might be extracted from them in anyquantities. By a subsequent act, which confirmedthe former, the crown reserved a rightto purchase within thirty days after raising allore made merchantable at the following rates,viz., copper at £l6 per ton; lead at £9; andtin at £40 ; and in default of such payment theowners were at liberty to dispose of their ore asthey pleased.Thus, though an appearance of right has beenThis opinion was given in the year 1640, and subscribedby Maynard and others, the first lawyers of that period.CHAP. X. MIDDLE AGES. 299reserved to the crown, yet the business of mininghas been practically free from restrictions, thoughnot from some antiquated trammels \The trammels which the feudal system hadimposed must naturally have operated as anobstacle to the extension of all those domesticarticles which are composed chiefly of mineralsubstances. The partial removal of those trammelsunder Elizabeth and the establishment ofmanufactures, though by a kind of corporatebody, produced some considerable beneficialeffects. Before her time our acquaintance withminerals was almost lost, and the manufactureswhich depended on them were either abandonedor in a state of decay.At the commencement of that reign, we importedfrom Germany, through the ports in theNetherlands, our swords, knives, stirrups, bits,and even our pins, as well as all our articles ofbrass and copper, and also our wire, excepting asmall quantity which was worked by hand. Thatpenetrating princess invited to her dominionsforeign miners, foreign smelters, and foreign artificersof metallic productions ; and, havingprohibited the importation of metal goods, in afew years the inhabitants were supplied withThe greater part of this history of the law relating tomines in England has been abridged from the account givenby Pennant, vol. i. p. 101^ et sequitur.300 METAL MANUFACTURE. CHAP. X.almost every description of hardware from theproduct and labour of their own land, ^The first step was thus gained, and the progresssince has been accompanied by so muchtalent, assiduity, and attention, that at lengthwe have surpassed our former continental instructors,and been enabled to supply the wants,as they arose, of the greater part of the morecivilized and more wealthy inhabitants of othercountries.If Elizabeth, instead of addressing her effortstowards the inferior metals, had, like most ofher predecessors, directed the attention of hersubjects to the search for gold and silver, shemight, like some of them, have obtained smallportions of those metals to supply her mints,but at a cost to herself or her people far beyondthe value of the products; and she would havesuspended if not prevented those proceedings inquestof iron, copper, lead, and tin, whose subsequentworkings have enriched thousands, andwhose labour has afforded employment and sustenanceto millions in successive generations.CHAP. xr. CONSUMPTION OF GOLD AND SILVER. 301CHAPTER XLOn the consumption of gold and silver in the centuries fromthe conclusion of the western empire to the discovery ofAmerica.The manners of a society must necessarilyhave a vast influence on the consumption of theprecious metals which exist within it. In theage of Charlemagne and in those of his successorsduring the following centuries, both themonarchs and their most powerful nobles werethe great proprietors of the soil, and cultivatedit for the maintenance of their households, bymeans of various descriptions of vassals, who,however distinguished by the greater or lessdegree of severity of their servitude, were in acondition little better than that of slaves. Everythingrequired for the domestic establishmentsof even monarchs themselves, with the exceptionof a few foreign luxuries, was drawn fromtheir own farms, and their ordinary clothing wasmade in their own houses ; and thus it becameconvenient to them to live, as they chiefly did,on their estates. From this mode of subsisting302 CONSUMPTION OF chap. XI.there could be little occasion for money, and asthere was but little circulation, there could beno great loss by wear when compared with the\ quantity of it actually in existence. As thelow prices of all commodities had accompaniedor followed the diminution of the stock of goldand silver, the few articles that were purchasedby the great mass of the people had fallen tosuch an extent, that no piece of gold or even ofsilver could be so small as to pay for whatlabourers needed for their daily subsistence.When a loaf of bread sufficient for a week's consumptionfor a man could be bought for a farthing,silver money could not be used in thetransaction; to say nothing of the case of onewho wished to purchase food for a day.The current money must then have beencomposed of the inferior metals, copper, tin, oriron ; consequently but little loss on gold andsilver would arise in the way which constantlyoccurs on those metals at present. Gold andsilver would only be needed in the largeroperations of commerce, and chiefly in thatbranch which consisted in furnishing suchcommodities as were required for military purposes.The taste and tendency of those ages wereaverse to commerce. Every free man felt itdisgraceful to meddle with trade either foreignor domestic, or to occupy his attention with anyCHAP. xr. GOLD AND SILVER.Other pursuit than that of arms. Hence, thecommerce of Europe fell almost exclusively intothe hands of the Jews, who, though sometimespersecuted, were sometimes caressed by themonarchs and the nobles ; and were, in fact, thechief depositaries of the treasures of gold andsilver.Although in the ninth and tenth centuries,the names of Bordenwick, Magdeburg, Effort,Forscheim, and Ratisbon, occur as tradingcities ; there seems reason to conclude that thechief business in them was conducted by theJews. The fairs and markets that were establishedfor purposes of trade were fixed atplaces and in situations which were deemed bythose people most adapted for their convenientresort.An author of the ninth century, who affirmsthis, complains of the Jews that " their richesand their pride had so increased, under thefeeble reign of Louis the First of France, thatboth had attained their highest pitch. Theyobtained for money whatever they desired, andeven succeeded to such an extent, that thepriests were forbidden to baptize their domesticswithout previously obtaining the consent oftheir masters. The principal persons of thecourt, whose money was diminished, and whosewants increased, sought their friendship, and304 CONSUMPTION OF CHAP. XI.even the chief bodies made presents of dressesto the wives of the Jews \"In spite of the temporary influence this tribemight attain, and of the occasional blandishmentswhich were sometimes lavished on them,they must have lived in a state of constant apprehensionif not of terror. This would inducethem to adopt secret repositories to secure theirmore compendious riches ; and, accordingly wefind, that both threats and personal inflictionswere frequently applied to extort from themtheir stores of hidden wealth. That part whichwas withdrawn from circulation and preservedin concealment, probably the most valuablepart, would thereby be kept from that consumptionby friction to which a quick circulationalways exposes the coin. It is in this way thatwe may account for the existence of so many ofthe gold bezants in the west of Europe, manycenturies after that particular coinage hadceased.It is further to be observed, that the coinageof the middle ages was conducted with littleskill and still less taste. The operation hadbeen rendered hereditary in certain familieswho were answerable for the intrinsic value ofthe pieces they issued, but troubled themselvesAgobardus. De Insolent Judeorum, p. 144.CHAP. xr.GOLD AND SILVER. 305very little about their beauty, being only compelledto stamp on them the name of the reigningsovereign. On account of the scarcity ofsilver about the year lfsJ13, the emperor of Germanyestablished numerous mints ^ in severalcities, and, that the rnoneyers might practise nodeceit, a number of persons were placed in eachunder the title o^ adjoins, whose duty it was tobuy and receive the metals, to watch carefullyall the transactions regarding the real value of• In England, in the establishment of a great number ofmints, the practice of the continent was adopted. During thereign of Ethelred, who died in 1017, there were mints in thefollowing towns : Bath, Bristol, Bedford, Buckingham, Cambridge,Canterbury, Chester, Chichester, Derby, Dover,Exeter, Gloucester, Huntingdon, Hertford, Rochester, Ipswich,Leicester, Lewes, Lincoln, London, Bedford, Maldon,Norwich, Oxford, Reading, Rochester, Shaftesbury, Shrewsbury,Stafford, Stamford, Standing, Sudbury, Wallingford,Markham, Watched, Wilton, Winchester, and Worcester.The rnoneyers, as designated by the initials of their namesin the reverses of the coins, amounted to no less than twohundred and forty-threes.After the Norman conquest, both the mints and the monsters.were much reduced in number, so that in the reign ofHenry VI., who died in 1461, the only mints in Englandwere at Bristol, Canterbury, Coventry, Durham, London,Norwich, Oxford, and York. In the reign of Henry VIL,these were again lessened, and only Canterbury, Durham,York, and London, continued to coin. In the reign of EdwardVI. the mint at Durham had ceased to Avork. Inthe reign of Elizabeth, all the coin was struck in London, andno traces of the other mints are to be found from that time.« Ruding's Annals of the Coinage, vol. i. p. 2G9.VOL. I. X306 GOLD AND SILVERCHAP. xr.the coins, and especially of those of inferiorstandard, but, above all, to superintend the securingthose emoluments to the emperor towhich he was entitled for his seigniorage. Thoseprecautions were found, however, so ineffectual,that it became necessary to issue penal ordinances,by which the punishment of the galleysin some cases, and of death in others, was decreed\Without farther mention of the productionsof the mints in the middle ages, it is sufficientto observe, that the coins of that period beingclumsily formed were thicker than those of morerecent date, and as they thus exposed a muchless surface to friction, there was proportionablyless loss on them than on modern pieces ofmoney.There is good reason to conclude, that duringthe period we are viewing a very small part ofthe produce of the mines of gold and silver waspermanently applied to other purposes than thatof money. A portion of it was undoubtedlyused for domestic utensils, for religious institutions,and for personal decorations; but it wouldappear that such portions were small and dispersedamong the higher classes of society, includingthe ecclesiastical communities, in very1 Schmidt, Histoire des Allemands, vol. ii. p. 380, andvol. iv. p. 27. Edition Liege, 17B4.CHAP. xr. AS ORNAMENTS. Solsmall quantities. We should be justified in concluding,that whatever existed in other formsthan that of money, was, with the money, heldto be at the disposition of the governmentwhenever the necessities of the public requiredit to be put in requisition. Thus, when Richardking of England was a prisoner in Austria, Louisof France in Egypt, and John of France inEngland, their redemption was effected byplacing in requisition, as has been already noticed,the plate of noble individuals and of religioushouses in all parts of their dominions.The gold and silver articles, of whatever kind,so collected, would be converted into coineither by those who delivered or those who receivedthem, and become a part of the generalmass of current money. In more tranquil seasons,when peace gave a breathing time for theindulgence of luxuries, the coin might andprobably would be reconverted into objects ofgratification. These changes might increase thewaste of both metals. As far as relates to silver,there is a small portion of waste at every melting;and though gold sutlers no loss by thatoperation, yet, in its application to objects ofpersonal decoration, it is divided into such smallparticles that some of them, from their very minuteness,become insensibly mixed up in othersubstances, from which they are only separatedX 2308 GOLD AND SILVERCHAP. XI.at an expense of time and labour which exceedstheir value.In some of the ancient chronicles, notices areto be found which would give a higher value tothe stock of silver and gold in the possession ofsome individuals than appears to be justified bya more rigid examination. In the gold, silver,and jewels, taken from Piers Gaston, the favouriteof Edward II., it is said by Rymer,that some of the silver articles in his collectionhad cost four times the value of the metal inworkmanship. The workmen on the preciousmetals, except, perhaps, on the inferior parts ofthe work, were not mere mechanics, but men ofa superior order, like artists, such as Cellini inItaly at a later period. Among the operators ongold and silver in England, we find severalecclesiastics noticed, especially one Alan de Walsingham\ a monk of Ely, who as well as othersof his class were celebrated for their superiorskill in the goldsmith's art. Whilst the fabricationof any articles is confined to artists, theymust necessarily be rare; and when they becomesubjects of extensive demand and use, the labourwill be executed by common mechanics or manufacturers.In that now usual appendage tothe dress of almost every decent person, theWalpole's Anecdotes of Painting, vol. i. cap. 20.CHAP. XI.AS ORNAMENTS. 309watch, though it had been introduced as earlyas the beginning of the fourteenth century, onlythe outer case was made of silver and the innerone of copper, and a gold watch was not knowntill a period long subsequent to the first invention.As far as is known of the jewelry of thatday it appears to have derived its great valuefrom the precious stones, and in a very smalldegree from the gold or silver in which it wasfixed. Thus when our Henry the Third pawnedhis jewels for five thousand marcs, or ten thousandpounds, to the king of France in 1261, thegold of the rings, in number three hundred andtwenty-four, however heavy they may havebeen, could have borne no proportion in valueto the sum borrowed, the security for whichmust have been founded on the precious stones.From the great value thus created in articlesof which gold and silver bore a part, we inferthat great care must have been taken of theirpreservation, and that the articles of silverwhose value was increased by the costly workmanship,and those of gold by the stones imbeddedin it, were rarely used, and that consequentlythere was but little loss occasioned bythat degree of friction to which they were exposed.The art of gilding and plating had been carriedto some considerable extent, and the metalwhich was thinly coated with gold or silver was310 FRAUDS IN GOLD AND SILVER. chap. XI.fraudulently sold for those metals. To preventsuch frauds, and also to prevent the use or wasteof too much gold and silver as the preamble recites,the act of the fifth Henry the 4th, cap. 13,was passed, which enacts *' that no artificer orother man shall henceforth gild or silver anylocks, rings, beads, candlesticks, harness of girdles,chalices, hilts, nor pummels of swords, norcovers for cups made of copper or latten, uponpain to forfeit to the king one hundred shillings ;but that the said artificers may work (chalicesexcepted) ornaments for the church of copperand latten, and gild or silver the same ; so thatalways on the foot or some other part the copperor the latten shall be plain, to the intent thata man may see whereof the thing is made for toeschew the deceit thereof."We conclude therefore, that during the periodin question, there could be but little consumptionof the gold and silver which composed themoney ; or of that used as utensils or ornamentsin an unmixed state ; but that, up to passingthe act quoted in the year 1403, there musthave been a considerable quantity consumed bygilding and plating on the inferior metals.CHAP. XII.Consumption OF METALS.CHAPTER XII.On the effect of the decrease of the precious metals on theprices of commodities in the period extending from the dissolutionof the Western Roman Empire to the discovery ofAmerica.The scattered fragments of information whichmay be collected by diligent research respectingthee attempts to obtain the precious metals fromthe bowels of the earth are chiefly of importanceto the purpose of this inquiry, becausethey lead to the inference that no great increaseor diminution, in the actual quantity of thosemetals, took place in the middle ages.At the period when the mines in Hungaryand Germany began to be worked, or as regardsthe former, recommenced their workings, it hasbeen hypothetically assumed that the wholequantity of coined money amounted to not morethan about thirty-three or thirty-four millionssterling.If we suppose the same rate of consumptionto have proceeded as at the former periods, weshall find that to replace that loss by wear whichwould have required in the time of Augustusat least an annual supply of one million sterling.312 VARIATIONS IN VALUE. cHAP. Xll.there would in the eighth century be only asupply of one tenth of that amount demanded.In fact, one hundred thousand pounds extractedfrom the mines and converted into coin in theeighth century would, on the supposition hereassumed, have been as adequate to the effect ofmaintaining an equilibrium on the price of commoditiesas a million sterling would have beenin the first century.There are no means by which to mark theseveral steps of the depression of prices whichaccompanied the gradual consumption of theprecious metals between the first and the ninthI century ; and even in the ages that followed,the facts are scattered among so vast a mass ofdocuments, and the variations in the real valueof the nominal money were so great, that thoughthe influence of the destruction of the preciousmetals on the depression of price can admit ofno doubt, yet that influence can only be calculatedin a way far from distinct and exact.If we take a view of Europe during the existenceof the Saxon heptarchy in England, weshall probably find the scarcity of money andthe depression of prices to have reached thelowest point. The Romans in abandoning Britain,Gaul, and the other western portions ofthe dominions, over which their power had onceextended, had carried with them all that wasmost portable and valuable.CHAP. XII.LIVING MONEY. 313Britain especially was so exhausted of theprecious metals in the form of money, that intrafficking, what the Saxon writers call livingmoney was usual and legal. " This consisted ofslaves and cattle of all kinds which had a valueset upon them by law, at which they passedcurrent in the payment of debts and the purchaseof commodities of all kinds, and suppliedthe deficiency of money properly so called."*' Thus for example, when a person owed anothera certain sum of money, which he had notasufficient quantity of coin to pay, he suppliedthat deficiency by giving a certain number ofslaves, horses, cows or sheep, at the rate set uponthem by law ; when they passed for money tomake up the sum. All kinds of mulcts imposedby the state or penances by the churchmight have been paid either in dead or livingmoney, as was most convenient ; with this singleexception, that the church, designing to discourageslavery, refused to accept slaves asmoney in the payment of penances ^ ." " Inthose parts of Britain where coins were veryscarce, almost all debts were paid and purchasesmade with living money. This was so muchthe case both in Scotland and Wales, that it ismuch doubted if any coins were struck in thosecountries in the Saxon period."Henry's History of Britaiiij v, iv, p. 243. " Ibid. p. 244.314 LIVING MONEY. chap. xii.We select a few facts to show how very smallmust have been the quantity of money at thatperiod in Britain, and how very low was the metallicvaluation of every description of property.The gold coin which circulated in Britain wasalmost exclusively that struck by the Romans atConstantinople, the larger pieces of which derivedtheir name of Bezants or Tyrants from thatcity. A pound of gold was coined into seventy-twoof these pieces. The celebrated St. Dunstanpurchased of king Edward the manor of Tendon,in Middlesex, about the year 960, for two hundredbezants, or a little more than three pounds'weight of gold, which would make the cost ofthat manor one hundred and forty or fiftypounds ; certainly not one hundredth, scarcelyone thousandth part of its present value in goldAlfred the Great was one of the richestprinces of the age, but he bequeathed by hiswill five hundred pounds only to each of hisI sons, and one hundred pounds to each of hisI three daughters. As the Saxon pound weightof silver, the money here spoken of, was 5400grains, it may be valued at two pounds sixteenshillings of our present money, thus making thelegacies to the sons fourteen hundred pounds,and those to the daughters two hundred andeighty pounds -.Canteen's Remains, p. 182.Testamentum iElfrcdi apud Asser, p. 23.CHAP. XII.LIVING MONEY. 315In Wilkins' Leges Saxon, as quoted by Dr.Henry, we have prices of various articles inEngland in the reign of Ethelred about the year997, which the learned Doctor has calculatedwith great correctness in money of the presenttime.Price of a man orahorseslave£2 16 3 sterling.1 15 2^^/ya mare oranass or■ coltmule.13 514 1t.i!^an ox7 OXa cow.062a swine1 lOia sheep.012a goat4iThough the money prices of that description ofproperty which the nobles chiefly possessed werethus low, they do not appear to have renderedthem less attached to their rural gratificationsor less tenacious of their exclusive rights to themthan their successors of the present generation.Such was their eagerness for field sports that theprice of a^iawk or a greyhound was the same ^s 1 ^ 9 jt^ ,^that of a man, and the robbing a hawk's nestwas as great a crime in the eye of the law as themurder of a human being.The vast amount, in proportion to the wholequantity of coin in circulation, which Ethelredpaid as tribute to the Danes, and which so exhaustedEngland as to compel her to submit to316 HIGH Value OF MONEY. chap. xii.the monarchy of Canute, may have made moneymore scarce in this island than in the neighbouringcountries on the continent. It does,however, appear that with them a great scarcitywas felt. It may not warrant the conclusion towhich Dr. Henry arrives, " that there was notone fifteenth part of the cash in England at anyonetime during the period between the arrivalof the Saxons and the Norman conquest that isin it at present ; and that this observation maybeextended to almost every other country ofEurope \" We are rather inclined to think thatthe money in western Europe must have beenfrom a twelfth to a fifteenth of the present stock,i and that a larger portion was accumulated inthe eastern part of Europe, and especially atConstantinople, the seat of the remnant of theIloman power, where it remained, or at least alarge proportion of it, til] the final conquest ofthat city by the Turks.In France money must have been as scarceduring the period as in England or nearly so.AVe find the king of that country, Charles theBold, at the latter end of the ninth century,when projecting a military expedition into Italy,could raise, by all methods, some of them veryviolent, no larger a sum than ten thousand1 Henry, vol. iv. p. 281.CHAP. XII. HIGH VALUE OF MONEY. 317marcs, or about the weight of seventy-two thousandounces of silver, little more than equivalentin money of this day to £18,000 ^It appears by ancient documents in Alsaceand in Saxony, if the price of corn be taken asthe criterion of the scarcity of money, that thesame deficiency was felt in those countries. InAlsace, at the end of the tenth century, thecommon money for current purposes was thepenning. It was of copper, and sixty of themweighed exactly one marc or half a pound avoirdupois,or 120 of them were a pound weight.The price of a sheffield or bushel of wheat, weighingsixty pounds, or the same nearly as ourEnglish bushel, was seven of these pfennigs.Copper, probably, bore a higher value in proportionto silver than it does in the present day;or the bushel of wheat was sold for less than apenny farthing About two hundred and fiftyyears later, in the same country, the same measureof wheat was sold at twenty-four pfennigs,or about threepence farthing'. It appears bythe accounts preserved in the cathedral of Strasbourg,that the wages paid to the masons employedin the erection of that edifice was fromone and a half to two of these pfennigs. At the1 Boulainvilliers, p. 114.2 Florencourt uber die Bergwerke der Alter, p. 57-3 Annales Colmarienses, 1289, ful. 24.318 HIGH VALUE CHAP. XII.building of the great bridge at Dresden, in thethirteenth century, the labourers were paid twopfennigs daily ; and, according to some fragmentsof mining accounts of Tillot and ChateauLambert, the operative miners received no morethan two pfennigs \TIjere are two records which have been preservedto the present time, which show the highvalue of money in France. The first is the ordonnancepromulgated by Charlemagne at Frankfort,in the year 794-. In the two precedingyears the harvests had been deficient, a scarcitywas experienced, and prices had risen. Theordonnance was issued to protect the consumersagainst those who always in seasons of scarcityhave been the objects of abuse — the traders incorn, stigmatised by the name of monopolists.The price at which bread was to be sold wasthus the maximum in a period of scarcity approachingto famine. The law was made in ageneral assembly, as it commences thus ": " Statutpiissimus Dominus noster convenient sanctashiodo, ut nullus homo, sive ecclesiasticus, sivelalciis, nunquam caries venta annual, sivetempore ahundanti(B, sive civitates, quam mediumpublicum et noviiur statutes &c. &c." Theprice fixed was for twenty-four pounds ofFlorencourt, p. 58.- Recueil des Historiens, tome cinquicme, p. Q)h\.CHAP. xir.OF MONEY. 319wheaten bread one denier, for thirty pounds ofrye bread, or forty pounds of barley bread, alsoa denier. The livre of Charlemagne was apound of silver of twelve ounces. It was dividedinto twenty sols, and those into twelvedeniers. The denier was thus equal to threepenceof our present money. The pound of commercethen contained twenty-four of our ounces,and we thus arrive at the conclusion, that themaximum price for thirty-six pounds of wheatenbread was threepence of our money, or twelvepounds for a penny, or that the legal four poundloaf of this country was then limited to be soldata price not exceeding a farthing and one-thirdof that coin. The scarcity of grain maybeinferred from one part of the ordonnance inquestion, by which it appears, that the corn belongingto Charlemagne himself, which was theproduce of the royal domains that he cultivated,was to be sold at a price one-third below theenacted maximum. It was probably deliveredto the persons immediately about the court, andconsidered as a gratuity to relieve them in aseason of general suffering \At a subsequent period, another ordonnanceof a king of France is to be found issued at thesame place as that of Charlemagne, but after aLamprey Traite dc Police, tome ii. p. 337; and M. de laBruere, Vie de Charlemagne, tome ii. p 33.320 VALUE OF MONEY. CHAP. Xii.famine and pestilence, " qui avoit fait mourirune infinite de personnes."This ordonnance of king John of France, issuedin 1350, fixes the rate at which thrashers in thebarn are to be paid for their labour. Thosewho thrashed by the day were to receive not4a^<C^ ^j^iftv^yu less than eighteen deniers \ The livre, which^ uA/,6rc if i» the time of Charlemagne was a pound of/ ^ silver of twelve English ounces, worth sixtyt<jA*?-*^ - shillings, had been diminished gradually either\ in weight or in purity, and was worth only tenfrancs of the present French money in the reignof John-thelivre was still divided into twenty sols,and they again into twelve deniers. It wastherefore of the value of one hundred pence ofour present money, and the sol was worth five-pence; and eighteen deniers were equal to a sol^^ and half, or sentence halfpenny.If the thrasher worked by the great, he was toreceive twelve sols or sixty pence for each maidof wheat, and eight sols or forty pence for eachmaid of barley or oats. The maid was a measurecontaining twelve setters, and each setterwas a fraction more than four bushels and a half:Recherches sur la Valeur des IMonnoies, et sur le Prix desGrains avant et acres le Concile de Francfort. Edit. Paris,1762.2 M. About de Bazinglien, Traits des IMonnoies, vol. i. p. SeditionParis, 1764.CHAP. xir.LOW WAGES. 321thus it appears, that for thrashing fifty-fourbushels he would receive five shillings, or nearlyone penny and a farthing each bushel.If the thrasher was paid in kind, he was toreceive every twentieth bushel of what hethrashed. We thence infer, that the averagework of a man was to thrash about six of ourbushels in a day. We thus see, that the rate ofwages for thrashing was to the price of thewheat as six to twenty, and the former beingsentence halfpenny, the latter would be twoshillings and a penny.At that time, it is affirmed that the rate ofwages had been increased one-third on accountof the scarcity of workmen which the precedingmortality had occasioned.There are many notices of prices of grain inFrance in the intermediate periods between thetwo decrees of Frankfort, as well as subsequentto the last of them, but their authenticity may bedoubted; and besides, the measures were so differentin the different provinces, that, added tothe changeable value of the money, no dependenceis to be placed on any calculations that cannow be made. These two ordonnances, to whichreference has been here made, will sufficientlyshow that the high value of metallic moneywhich has been noticed in Germany, and willbe enlarged upon in Great Britain, was felt inVOL. I. Y3-2^NORMAN ANDCHAP. XII,the same degrees in France in the prices of thenecessaries of life.From the Conquest till the time when, afterthe discovery of America, the precious metalsfrom the new world began to display their effectson the prices of commodities in Europe, we areled to draw our proofs and illustrations chieflyfrom English history, because the requisite documentsare more abundant and more accessible,and because the monetary system vas moresimple, and is now more easily to be made intelligible.At the time of the Conquest, the Normanmoney superseded the Saxon. The Normanpound was a troy pound weight of twelve ouncesof silver divided into twenty parts called shillings,and these again divided into twelve partscalled either pennies or pennyweights. Thus, themoney of that period, taking the silver at 5s.per ounce, may be valued at three times thesame denomination in the present day. Thoughthere was at intervals some alteration and someadulteration ' of the coin, yet large paymentsThe crime of clipping and counterfeiting the currentcoin seems to have been carried on to a great extent, thoughsome severe laws were enacted and put in force to punish theoffence. Whether guilty or not, the Jews vivere the principalsufferers for this breach of the laws, as two hundred and eightyof them were put to death in London alone in the year 1279,CHAP. XII.SAXON MONEY. 323being made by weight, operated as a check onthose deviations, and money continued at thesame value to the reign of Edward III., who, inthe year 1346, coined a pound of silver intotwenty-two shillings and sixpence, and thus reducedthe nominal pounds from three poundsof our present money, to two pounds twelveshillings and eighteen. The value of moneycontinued at that rate till the year 1412, thirteenthyear of Henry IV., when by the act ofparliament of that date the pound of silver wasordered to be coined into thirty shillings, andthus the value of money became double that ofour present currency. In the year 1464, EdwardIV. caused the pound weight of silver tobe coined into thirty-six shillings and sixpence,and thereby reduced the value of the nominalpound to about thirty-one of our present shillings.Henry VIII. in the first year of his reign,1484, coined the pound of silver into forty-fiveshillings, but in the thirty-fourth year reducedthe value of the shilling still more by coiningforty-eight from the pound. It continued atbesides many others in several parts of England, At thesame time, all the goldsmiths in the kingdom were seizedand thrown into prison on suspicion of being guilty of thesame crime. See Henry, vol. viii. p. 348 ; Anderson, vol. i.p. 129; Walsingham, Hist. Angel. p. 48; Hemingford, Hist.Ed. I., p. 6.Y 2S24 VARIATION IN THECHAP. xir.that rate till the third of Edward VI. in theyear 1550, when the pound was coined intoseventy-two shillings ; but in the sixth year ofthat prince the value of the shilling was increased,sixty being coined from the pound. Thisrate was continued through the reign of Mary tothe forty-third of Elizabeth, when sixty-two shillings,as has been continued to the present time,with the recent exception, were made from apound, and the fineness of the silver was improved.In order to simplify to the reader the viewintended to be presented, the money mentioned,in the several ancient writers hereafter quoted,will be reduced into money of the present day,on the assumption, that the statement of thealteration here given is sufficiently correct forthe purposes of this inquiry, though there maybesome exceptions, owing to short variations inthe course of so many centuries. Some deviationswere made on the introduction of goldcoin about the year 1395, on account of the relativevalue of that metal to silver being fixedby the king too high, which made the publicreluctant to receive it. Henry the sixth, in thefirst year of his reign, 1422, coined the pound ofsilver into thirty-seven shillings and sixpence,but in the fourth year brought it to thirty shillings,and in the last year again reduced it tothirty-seven and sixpence. There are othersmaller instances of deviation. If all of theseCHAP. XII. VALUE OF MONEY. 325had been noticed, they would have complicateda subject which it is the design of this inquiryto simplify and make intelligible. From theConquest to the year 1346, all monies are herereduced into our present currency at the rate ofsixty shillings to the pound j from 13i6 to1412, at the rate of fifty-two and eighteen tothe pound ; from 1412 to 1464, at the rate offorty shillings to the pound ; from 1484, at therate of forty-five shillings to the pound; from /*^thence to 1550, at the rate of forty-eight tothe pound ; during the next two years, at therate of seventy-two to the pound. In the year1551, the shilling was the sixtieth part of apound, but contained more alloy till the forty-thirdof Elizabeth, 1601, when the silver beingmade of greater fineness, the pound was madeinto sixty-two shillings. From the year 1551, theshillings will be considered of the same value asthat coin in our domestic transactions of the presentday, that is, as the twentieth part of a pound.Amidst numerous facts, tending to show thehigh value of gold and silver when comparedwith all other commodities, it is difficult, whereall are striking, to select those that shall mostclearly indicate their real worth or power ofpurchase.Athelstan, about the year 937, subdued ,the chief prince of Wales, and made a peaceon condition of a tribute being paid, consistinglipl-H^326 RANSOM OF THE KINGS chap. xii.of twenty pounds weight of gold and threer hundred pounds weight of silver, twenty-fivethousand oxen, besides hounds and hawks. Withthis treasure, whose value amounted in our presentmoney to no more than about seventeenhundred pounds, Athelstan was rendered sorich, that he was enabled to form family allianceswith Otho the great, emperor of Germany,with the mayor of the palace in Paris, and withLouis prince of Aquitain. This was, however,a few years earlier than the discovery of themines of Goslar in Hanover, by which, as hasbeen before noticed, the emperor Otho had beensuddenly enriched and elevatedIn the year 1192, Richard I. king of Englandwas detained by the Duke of Austria in passingthrough his dominion, on his return from theHoly Land, and delivered up to the emperor,Henry of Germany. In Rymer's Federal,(page 30) is preserved a letter from that monarchto his mother, Queen Eleanor, and to thejudges of England, in which he urges them "toraise the money required for his ransom by thatsordid emperor, being 70,000 marcs ;" and forthe attainment of this object, he desires thatall the money of the churches may be borrowedas well as that of the barons." There isno mention made of any application to the citizensor merchants, who were, probably, too poorAnderson, vol. i. p. 92.CHAP. XII. RICIIAIII) AND LEWIS. 3^7to offer a prospect of obtaining any contributionsfrom them. This sum in our presentmoney would amount to £140,000. Other accountsmake the ransom amount to-200,000,and one to £280,000 ; but the authority of Rymeris undoubtedly to be preferred to that ofany other.Arnold's, abbot of Lubec, in his continuationof the Chronicon Sclavicum of Helmoldus, (lib.iii.) says, "that when in January, 1194, KingRichard of England was discharged from hisimprisonment, his ransom was raised with greatdifficulty throughout all his dominions; so thateven the gold and silver cups and other vesselsused in the holy Eucharist were melted for thepurpose ; and that over and above that a taxwas laid upon all persons, both (ecclesiastical andcivil, of a fourth part of their income for oneyear. Twenty shillings were required on everyknight's fee; one year's clip of wool was borrowedof the Cistercians ; and the clergy of theking's dominions in France contributed verylargely to effect the monarch's deliverance."In 1248, during the contentions for the possessionof the holy land, Lewis, King of France,was made prisoner in Egypt by the Saracens,and his ransom was effected at the price of littlemore than fifty thousand pounds of our presentmoney.Near one hundred and twenty years later,328 ROYAL RANSOMS. cHAP. xil.John, King of France, was brought prisoner toEngland. The circumstances of his capture,and the state of his kingdom, with the claimsthe English monarch set up to the whole of hisdominions, were thought to justify the demandsfor an enormous ransom. At length the amountof the ransom was fixed at three million crownsof gold of three shillings value each, being, accordingto our estimation, about one milliontwo hundred and fifty thousand pounds of ourpresent money. The first payment was to beone fifth of that sum, and the remainder in subsequentinstalments. " This first payment,"says Voltaire, in his General History, "was foundso great, and France was so exhausted, that itwas not possible to furnish it ; so they wereobliged to recall the Jews and to sell to themthe privilege of living and trading in France,and the successor of John was himself reducedJohn died in the Savoy in 1364. From his first arrivalin England that monarch had employed secret agents in Londonand in other places, who privately collected the pickedgold money of the realm, consisting of the nobles of the firstand second coinage. These he had formed into plates, andpacked in barrels to be carried to France. On his death-bedhe sent to King Edward, confessed to him what he had done,and requested his forgiveness, which was granted ; but Edwardordered what had been thus collected to be seized, andpunished with severity the Lombards who had been accomplicesin the transaction. See Knightonon, column 2627, whohaving died, according to Holinshed, in 1386, must havebeen alive and well acquainted with the facts.CHAP. XII. PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS. 3929to the necessity of paying for the necessaries forhis household in money made of leather, in themiddle of which there was driven a silver nail'*There was great delay in the payment of thesucceeding instalments, and one fifth of theamount was still owing, when another war brokeout under Henry the Fifth, near forty yearsafterwards ^ .The public entertainments, and the expensesof them, will serve to show the high value ofmoney, or the low cost of all the necessaries andluxuries, as they were doubtless then deemed,of the table and the household. The accountof the preparation for the dinner at the coronationof Richard the First in 1189, to which allwho held lands as vassals of the crown were invited,is as follows. A robe for William, son ofthe Duke of Saxony (who was an accidentalvisiter in England), one pound seventeen shillings; for 870 hens, 200 cups, 1350 scutellum orplatters, twelve pounds fifteen shillings ; for2000 plates and 200 cups, three pounds fifteenshillings and nine-pence ; for 2000 hens to bebought and kept at Westminster for the coronation,and 200 more cups, twenty-four poundsnine shillings and three-pence ; for 1200 platesand 500 cups, six pounds three shillings andCetera, vol. vi. p. 1 78.330 COST OFCHAP. XII.nine-pence ; for 900 hens, eleven pounds fiveshillings ; for 1900 hens, and for bringing themto London, twenty-five pounds ten shillings ;and for 100 plates and 300 cups, three poundseighteen shillings \ It does not appear for howmany persons these preparations were made, norcan these be supposed to be the only articlesprovided, though there being no less than 4800hens prepared, we must suppose the companyamounted to some thousand persons.There is in the Chronicon Preciosum of Fleetwoodan account of the expenses of the installationfeast of the Prior of St. Austin in Canterbury,in the year 1309. That year was one ofpeculiar scarcity, and almost every descriptionof provisions was higher by very far than in theprevious or subsequent years of the same period.The cost of the various articles was as follows :Wheat, Els. 6d. per quarter; malt, 18*. perquarter; oats, 1^*. per quarter; wine, 4/. perpipe ; oxen, 54*. each ; hogs, 9'^. Gd. each ;sheep, 9-y. each ; geese, ll^d. each ; pullet,lord. ; and rabbits Gd. each. The number of.guests was six thousand, and the whole cost ofthe entertainment, including music, cooks andattendants, and also 3300 dishes and 1400 woodencans or jugs, amounted to eight hundred andMaux Hist. Exchequer c. 10. p. 253.CHAP. XII. ENTERTAINMENTS. 331sixty-two pounds. If this entertainment hadoccurred in 1299, ten years before, or in 1336,twenty-five years later, the cost would not haveamounted to one-third of the sum which wasexpended in this year of great scarcity.The cattle varied in price like every otherproduction of the soil, very far beyond any fluctuationsthat have been experienced in moderntimes ; but even when dearest they were at pricesso low as to indicate very clearly the high valueof the precious metals. Bishop Fleetwood, inthe Chronicon Pieciosum, says that in the year1000 an ox was sold for 7*« 6c?., a cow at 6s., asheep at 3s. , and a pig at Qs. In the year 1145,the same author gives sixty shillings as the priceof forty sheep, or Is. 6cl. a head, and oxen hereports at 9'^. each.Madox, in his Baroniae Anglice (cap. xiv),relates that the live stock of a farm was sold in1184, as follows : 33 cows and 2 bulls for 25/. 1*. ;500 sheep at 67l. 10s. ; 66 oxen for 54/. 9^. ; \5brood mares, J I. Ils. 6d.', 22 pigs for 31. 6s.;and 11 heifers for 8/. 2*. ; being at the rate of14*. 3^d. for the cows ; 2*. 8^^. for the sheep ;16*. 6d. for the oxen ; 10*. for the mares ; 14*.8^^. for the heifers ; and 3s. for the pigs. —Bishop Pearson, in this year, says that four henswere valued at 6fZ., and a ram at 2*.Madox, in his History of the Exchequer, re-33^ COST OFCHAP. XII.hates that Hugh de Bosco, sheriff of Hampshire,in 1199, stocked the king's lands of Mineswith twelve oxen at 9s. each, and one hundredsheep at 1*. each.In the year 1299, we find in the Chroniconthe prices of several articles as fixed by theCommon Council of the city of London, and asthey are for the most part that kind of foodwhich must be considered as luxurious, it is notsurprising, considering the state of society, inwhich the middle classes were few, and thehigher classes were supplied with them from theirown domains, and the consequently contractedmarket for them, that they should appear highwhen compared with the prices of sheep andoxen. The tarif is as follows, viz. — a cock, 9d. ;a goose, 1*. ; a capon, nid. ; 2 pullets, 9cl;plover, 3d. ; a swan, 9,?. ; a crane, 3s. ; 2 woodcocks,4|r/. ; a fat lamb from Christmas to Shrovetide,is., afterwards 1*. ; wheat, 5s. per quarter,and in some parts of the country 4s. perquarter.In the year 1315, the act of the 8th EdwardSecond was passed on account of the intolerablyhigh price of provisions, by which it was enactedthat those who would not sell their commoditiesat the following rates should forfeit them to theking, viz., a best ox not fed with corn at 48*.,if fed with corn, 7'-2s. j a best fat cow at 36s. j aCHAP. XII,ENTERTAINMENTS. 333fat hog of two years old, 10*. ; a fat wether sheepunshorn at 5s. y if shorn, at 3s. 6d. ; a fat goosefor J^d. ; a capon, 6d. ; 24 eggs at 3d. ^In the year 1336, every article of food fellto a very low price, a circumstance attributedby Knightonon and by Fabian, two contemporarywriters, to the king, Edward III., having collectedtogether all the coin of the kingdom to carry onhis hostile operations against France and Scotland.He seized on all the money belonging tothe Lombards in England, and on all the propertyof the alien priories. He also borrowed,though not till the following years, all the goldand silver plate, even gold cups set with jewels,giving his written acknowledgment to pay forthe same as therein valued. These valuationsare a proof that a pound in money was a poundweight of twelve ounces of silver, no goldbeing then coined ; for in the valuations, verylittle allowance is made for the fashion unlessfor the precious stones that were set in theplate. Some of these pieces being old and battered,are said to be ^^ ponders et pret'ii sexlihraruiii'' of the weight and value of sixpounds -.The low prices of 1336, according to theChronicon, were for wheat 6*. per quarter \ an1 Rymer's Cetera, vol, iv. p. 510.- Federal vol. v. p. 39.334 LOW PRICES OF CHAP. XII.ox, Nos. ; a fat sheep, ^s. ; a fat goose, Gd. j ayoung pig, 3d. ; and six pigeons, 3d.The wages of labour, or the rates allowed forthe subsistence of different classes of persons,may both be usefully employed to elucidate thevalue of the precious metals.We find in the Chronicon Preciosum, that inthe year 1237 there were three chaplains whodid daily duty in the church of the Templar,each of whom were paid a yearly salary of fourmarcs, each marc being eight ounces of silver,thus making their pay equal to ces of our currency.By an act of 36th of Edward III. cap. 8., inthe year 1414, it is ordered that no man shallgive to a parish priest more than ten pounds ayear, or else his board and four pounds a year.In 1414, by the act of 5th Henry V. cap. 8., itis enacted that the yearly salary of chaplains shallbe nine pounds six shillings and eighteen, andthat of parish priests twelve pounds. In 1421,the archbishop of Canterbury, in convocation,confirmed a former order, by which each parishpriest was to content himself with eight marcs ayear, or with four marcs and his diet.Fleetwood, speaking of the year 1439, observes,that a clergyman could maintain himselfrespectably for ten pounds a year.We find in the Chronicon, that workmen tooktheir wages in wheat at the price of sixteen-chap.Xir. NECESSARIES OF Life. 335pence the bushel in the year 1351 ; at whichtime weeders and haymakers were paid at therate of 2|</. per day; reapers of corn from 4d.to 6d. per day ; masons and tilers 6^(1. and otherlabourers led. per day. The wages to servantsemployed in husbandry was fixed by the 121thof Richard II. cap. 2., at the following rates.Bailiff, 31*. and clothing once a year ; a firsthind, 21*. 3d. ; carter and shepherd, 21*. 3d. ;cowherd and swineherd, 14*. id. ; a woman,12*. Sd. yearly. It is presumed these wageswere besides their food and lodging, though thatdoes not appear by the act.By Madox's Formulae Anglican, it appearsthat, in 1425, cows were commonly valuedat 16*. per head.According to the Chronicon, in 1445, wheatwas 6*. 6d. per quarter; ale at Id. a gallon ; ayoung swan, 6d. ; a goose 6d.The expense of maintenance was proportionablylow. In the second volume of theFoedera, p. 101 G, we find the sum alloweddaily, for the maintenance of the bishop of St.Andrews, who in the year 1305 was imprisonedin the Tower for his adherence to his king,Robert Bruce, viz. :336 LOW PRICES OF CHAP. XII.d.For the bishop's table . . 6One man servant . . 3One boy, ditto . • ^iChaplain to say mass . • ^ibeing equal to three shillings in the presentday.In the year 1470, Edward the Fourth heldKing Henry the Sixth as a prisoner in theTower. He was attended by ten persons, andthe allowance for the subsistence of the wholewas at the rate of 3l. 10s. per week. — Foedera,vol. ii. p. 712.According to the Formulae Anglican ofMadox (p. 110), the Lady Anne, daughter ofKing Edward the Third, who was married toLord Howard, son of the Earl of Sorry, wasallowed, in 1496, 1/. 11^. weekly, "for her exhibition,destination, and convenient diet of meatand drink ; also for one gentlewoman, one woman,one girl, one gentleman, one yeoman, andthree grooms, in all eight persons, 80/. 12s. peryear ; which included their clothing and wages ;besides 25l. 10s. 4^d. for the maintenance ofseven horses*'It is thus seen, that as late as the end of thefifteenth century, about the time of the discoveryof the mines of America, but before any considerablepart of their products had circulated inCHAP. XII. COMMODITIES. 337Europe, a family of such distinction as to needseven horses could be supported at little morethan one hundred pounds of our money for ayear.When the order of the Knights Templar wasabolished in England in 1310, and their vastwealth seized by the crown, the allowance madeto the members of that community appears tohave been very disproportionate to the rankthey had held, and the profusion in which theyhad lived. The grand master was assigned apension of six shillings a day, and each of theknights one shilling, of our money.Although wine was a commodity of foreigngrowth, yet its consumption must have beenlarge among the more opulent classes of thecommunity, and the price of it at various periodsmust be an indication of the value of money.According to the Chronicon, the price of theRochelle wine in the reign of King John, in theyear 1^216, was 31. per ton, the ton being then,as now, nearly two pipes. Anjou wine was3/. Ins. and the best French wine 4/. per ton.In Rymer's Foedera (vol. i. p. 36) we find, in1236, the retail price of wine to be sixpence pergallon. In 1313 in Stow's Survey is an accountfrom the offered or treasurer of the Earlof Leicester, who seems to have been themost expensive person of his age: his annualconsumption of wine is stated to be threeVOL. I. z338 PRICES OF WINE chap. xii.hundred and seventy-one pipes, which cost2/. 10^. lO^f/. per pipe. It seems probable, fromsome casual remarks, that this wine was drawnfrom the estates belonging to the earl in Anjou,where, like some others of the English nobility,he had extensive possessions. In 1340, the currentvalue of French wine, according to theFoedera, was 4<l. 10s. the pipe.By an act of Richard II. in 1381, wines wereto be sold by retail at the following prices, viz.Gascon, Spanish, and Rhenish wine at 1*. 3d,per gallon, and Rochelle wine at lOd. the gallon.According to Stow's Survey, the price of Gasconwine in 1499 was Ql. lis. 6d. per pipe.The price of wine seems to have fluctuatedmuch, according to the relative productivenessof the respective seasons, similar to what is seenin this country in the price of cider in thosecounties where it forms the common drink ofthe most numerous class of the inhabitants. Itmay not be the most certain test to apply to thevalue of money, but it seemed improper to omitthe few notices of its price which are scatteredthrough the early records of this kingdom.Rymer, in the Foedera, gives an account ofa transaction which throws light incidentally onthe prices of several commodities at nearly thelatest time of the period we are viewing, a fewyears before the discovery of America.In 1170, seven Spanish ships, loaded with iron.CHAP. XII.AND OF SHIPS.wine, fruits, and wool, on their voyage to Flanders,had been captured by some English vessels,and brought into our ports. The owners appliedto the king, Henry VI., for redress, andexhibited on oath an account of the burden andvalue of the ships, and the prices at which themerchandise would have sold had they reachedthe place of their destination. The value of theships, including their stores and provisions, isstated as follow, viz. :Money of that time.Money of this time.1 ship of100 tons£107 10£273 15178 10280 10178 10150 .382 10The owner's of these cargoes also declared uponoath, that if the vessels had arrived in Flanders,the merchandise with which they were freightedwould have sold at the following prices, viz.the Gascon or Bordeaux wine at 6/. the pipe,the Bastard wines 51. the pipe, the iron 11/.the ton, and the wool 5l. per sack, each sackbeing one quintal and three quarters; thus littlemore than l\d. per pound for the Spanish wool,which at that period was celebrated for its superiorfineness.In this recapitulation of prices, that of cornz ^z340 VARIATIONS IN THE chap. xii.has not been overlooked, though it has been butslightly noticed. We have good reason to knowthat the system of agriculture was bad, as italways necessarily must be in the early progressof civilization. With bad agriculture, the variationin the productiveness of different yearswill be greater than in an improved state ofculture. The prices of corn, consequently, inthat step of low advancement, will be chiefly influencedby the fertility or non-fertility of a particularyear or of a series of years. These pricesare therefore a less sure test by which to trythe value of the precious metals than the commodities,like wool, iron, coal, and some others,which do not depend on the changes of the atmospherein a climate, like that of Europe, subjectto great vicissitudes.There is another reason why the price of cornis an uncertain criterion. In ancient times inEngland, wheat could not be considered as thechief food of the inhabitants : very little of itwas used by the agricultural population, whichthen composed nine-tenths of the inhabitants ;and among the people in the towns it was by nomeans the universal or the principal food. Ryeand barley were the chief articles in consumption; but among a people who were chiefly fedby corn of their own growth, the quantity broughtto the markets in the towns would perhaps bemuch less of those kinds of grain than of wheat.CHAP. xir.PRICES OF CORN. 341Hence, though registers of the prices of wheatare to be found in ancient records, those of ryeand barley are but rarely noticed. The circumstanceof that kind of corn being least noticedwhich was the most used gives a degreeof uncertainty to all calculations founded on theprices of corn alone.There is also reason to believe that when thepopulation of this country was very much lessdense than it is at present, there were much morenumerous herds of black cattle, perhaps of sheep,but certainly of swine, in proportion to the numberof inhabitants, than there have been in succeedingages. The value of meat as compared with thatof grain must then have been lower, and probablycontributed, especially in those seasons,which frequently returned formerly, when ascarcity of corn occurred, more to the subsistenceof the lower classes than the several descriptionsof the cereals.It may be inferred that cattle of both kindswere more abundant than at present, becausealmost the only articles that were exported werethe skins and the wool, and these were morethan sufficient to pay for five times as much wineand all other commodities as our ancestors drewfrom foreign countries ; and all the writers ofthe time agree that the balance was dischargedin the precious metals, by which England wasenabled to pay the heavy exactions of the papal342 SUPPLY OF WOOL.CHAP. XII.throne. On this subject, Matthew Paris, speakingof the year 1240, says, " Such was the rapacityof the Popes, and such the stupid bigotryand ignorance of the laity, that it was the subjectof general complaint that there did not remainin all England so much treasure as hadbeen extorted from it in three years by the seeof Rome." Henry the Third in 1244, on inquiry,ascertained that for several years the annualamount sent to the Popes had been sixtythousand marcs, or one hundred and twentythousand pounds of our present money.By comparing the price of wool, as given inthe reign of Edward the Third, with Exchequerrecords of the year 1354, we find that the quantityof wool exported amounted to full 12,715,200pounds weight. The sheep of that age weresmaller in size than those of the present day,and the wool thus exported could not be theproduce of less than three or four million sheep.Besides the wool, there was in the same yearcoarse cloths exported whose value amountedto 16,266/. in the money of that time, or to41,490/. in our present money.In a country where no other clothing wasused by the great mass of the inhabitants butthat made from the wool of their flocks, whereaftersupplying that demand there could be sucha surplus as is here exhibited, the carcasses oftheanimals must in deficient harvests have suppliedCHAP. XII. FLUCTUATIONS IN CORN. 343that vacuum which was created by the scarcityof corn. The flocks of sheep were kept in Englandthen as they are now in Spain, in Saxony,and in Poland — for the sake of the profit gainedby the wool, and not for the sake of the meat,which, unless in years following an unproductiveharvest, was of very little value.After these observations on the uncertaintyof the price of wheat as a standard by which tomeasure the value of the precious metals, wemay be permitted to lay before our readers thebest account we have been enabled to collect ofthose prices at different periods.The great fluctuations in the value of corn informerages have been already noticed. Theyarose out of the want of capital by which apart of the surplus produce of the most productiveyears might be retained to meet theexigencies of following years of scarcity. Therequisite capital was not then created, and theland with its annual fruits was almost the onlykind of wealth in existence. The surplus of theproductive years could find no purchasers whocould store it, and the price fell so as scarcely torepay even the labour which had been expendedon the crops. On the other hand, when a yearof scarcity occurred, as there was no previouslystored stock, the few who had money becamecompetitors with each other, and the pricesrose to a height above those of medium years344 FLUCTUATIONS IN CORN.CHAP. XII.of which we have had no instances in moderntimes.The instances of the variation in prices whichare recorded in former times will excite surprisein those readers who have not paid attention tothe subject, and ought to make us all gratefulto that Providence which has brought us intolife in a period much less exposed to sufferingthan that in which our forefathers lived.As it may be desirable to produce at oneview the scattered notices respecting the pricesof wheat which are to be found in the variousancient authors, we here exhibit such as havebeen collected, which, though the list is veryimperfect, will tend in some measure to showthat the variations in price depended much moreon the fertility or barrenness of the seasons, andon the favourable or unfavourable state of theweather at the respective harvests, than on anygreat alteration in the value of the gold or silverfor which they were exchanged.Year. Price per quarter in Price per quarter inmoney of that time. money of the presenttime.£>. s. d. £. s. d.a 1120 . . .020a 1197 . • . 18 8a 1213), . « , ^I lowest price . U 1 oIQIP i highest price .060a 1223 , . . 12a 1237 . • .0342 164 61 16CHAP. XII.PRICES OF WHEAT.a 1243b 1244b 1246a 1247a 1257g 1258a 1270a 1286Year. Price per quarter inmoney of that time.£. s. d..060.0601613 4.14a great famine whenmany people werestarved . .200a famine, when, according toPelham as quoted by Fleetwood," provisions were soscarce that parents did eattheir own children," wheatsold at . . 4 16and sometimes at 6 8early part of this year 2 8A storm whichfell on St. ]margaret'snight broughtthe price after thatto . . " 'was, according toStow, the hottestsummer ever known.Wheat in London 2in some parts 18Wheat in some parts 1 4in other parts 10in the northwest. .0081616.026a 1287a 1288g 1288a 1289Price per quarter inmoney of the presenttime.£. s. d.1818.280.2003 1214 819 4.2803 4101 6.0463 410a 1290a 1294a 1295PriceES OFWHEAT.CHAP XII.Year.Price per quarter inmoney of that time.Price per quarter inmoney of the presenttime.£.s.d.£. s. d.a 1299 ..050a 1302 .12a 1309 .2 ..116d 1 309 average of the months■ and of the differentqualities of wheatat Oxford.12 6d 1310 . ditto.14d 1311 . ditto18d 1312 . ditto5i .13 ^d 1313 . ditto9i .14 4id 1314 . ditto15 3d 1315 . ditto.119a 1315 after harvest1.300a 1316 after harvest2.600a 1317 before harvest26 12a 1317 after harvest.220d 1324 Oxford averages18d 1325 . ditto16 3d 1326 . ditto14 3d 1327 . ditto11 6d 1328 . ditto.090e 1329 ..170a 1349 ..053f 1351 .17 4a 1359 .1.374a 1361 ..053a 1369 .12 12 8a 1379 .10 6a 1387 at Leicester.053a 1390 . ditto.239a 1401 ..220a 1407 ..096a 1407 seed wheat11 1a 1416 .1 12a 142316CHAP. xn.PRICES OF WHEAT.Year.Price per quarter inmoney of that time.Price per quarter inmoney of the presenttime.£.s.d.£. s. d.a 1434 .12 13 4a 1434 after harvest10 8c 1436 .13 4a 1439 .11 13 4a 1440 .1.280a 1444 ..088a 1445 ..090a 1447 •16a 1449 .10a 1451 .16a 1453 .10 8a 1459 .10a 1463 inLondon.040a 1463 illNorfolk.034a 1464 .10 4a 1486 .11 12 10a 1491 .19 1a 1494 ..0.054a 1496 ..054a 1497 .1.16 8g 1499 ..060g 1504 ..077a 1521 .1.16 8a 1551 .10a 1553 .to >.0801556 Ja 1557 before harvest22 13 41557 after hartest.0501 The prices marked (a) are extracted from the ChroniconPreciosum of Fleetwood; those marked (b) from MatthewParis ; those marked (c) from the Rolls of Parliament ; thosemarked (d) from a valuable work entitled " Prices of Corn inOxford," recently published, by the Rev. W. F. Lloyd, Process OF WHEAT. cHAP. XII.If the years in which famine or a scarcityapproaching to famine be taken from the foregoingcatalogue of prices, it will be found thatno great difference is observable between theearly and late years of the period which intervenesbetween the time of the Norman conquestand that of the discovery of America. An inferencefrom hence may perhaps be fairly drawnthat no very great increase or decrease in thestock of the precious metals occurred duringthose centuries ; or it may be presumed thatthe supply from the mines was nearly equal tothe consumption by friction on the circulation,and to that portion which either had been lostfrom being buried in the ground and not againfound, or that had been lost by shipwrecks.dent of Christchurch ; those marked (e) from Cotton's Records;those marked (f) from Rymer's Foedera; and thosemarked (g) from Stow's Survey.CHAP xiii. TRADE WITH ASIA. 349CHAPTER XIII.On the interchange of the precious metals between the easternain western parts of the civilized world in the period betweenthe dissolution of the western Roman empire andthe discovery of America.It would lead far from the immediate purposeof this inquiry to enter into the considerationof that extensive subject, the commerce betweenAsia and Europe in the period in question. Itwould lead still farther to take a view of the politicalevents of the period. They both had, however,a considerable influence on the locality ofthe metallic money, as they removed it from onepart of the world to another, though they did notproduce any great effect on the increase or decreaseof the whole quantity. The crusades, whichoccupied a long and stirring space, and whichcarried the population and wealth of the westernworld to the boundaries of Asia, must havemade the precious metals more abundant in theGreek empire, contracted as it then was, and inthe territories under the dominion of the Mahometan; but the commerce carried on by theVenetians, the Genoese, and the Pisans musthave brought some portion of it back again to350 ITALIAN TRADE WITH chap. Xlii.western Europe, in exchange for the wool,wine, iron, Hen, and other commodities whichthe industry of those divisions of Europe furnished.Although this commerce between Europe andAsia was of trifling extent as compared withwhat has existed since the discovery of the routeto India by the Cape of Good Hope, yet asits influence on the civilization of Europe waspowerful at an early period, it would be impropernot to take a slight review of its history andprogress. Constantinople, from its first establishmentas the capital of the Roman empire,had gradually become the depot for thevaluable productions of Asia. Spices, incense,perfumes, garments of silk, and diamondsand other precious stones, were storedthere and distributed from thence to the otherparts of Europe. Some parts were conveyed byland through the valley of the Danube, but the« greater portion passed through the hands of theVenetians, a people that arose out of the ruinsof the kingdom of Lombardy.The turbulent state of the Italian continentrendered all property insecure at first, and thisled to the occupation of some' islands in theAdriatic, where commerce might be conductedwith less danger of interruption from the prevailingcommotions. When the Arabian powerarose in Asia, the intercourse between VeniceCHAP. Xin, THE Mahometan. 351and Constantinople was increased by the aidwhich the former could give to the latter insecuring them by their naval armaments againstthe Mahometan pirates, who had at that earlyperiod commenced their maritime expeditionsagainst the shores of Asia, Africa, and Europe.The Venetians claimed and obtained specialprivileges in Constantinople. They were indulgedwith freedom from taxation on the goodsthey imported in their own ships ; a part of thecity was appropriated to their exclusive residence ;and a court of law was established, to whichalone they were amenable in all cases. Fromthe commerce with the heretics of Constantinople,the first step was taken towards an intercoursewith the infidels in their vicinity; andreligious hatred being thus weakened or lostsight of in the gains of trade, the Venetians extendedtheir commerce to the towns on theBlack Sea, and to all the countries occupied bythe followers of the Arabian prophet.This trade at the commencement, as was thecase in the more remote ages, was chiefly inhumanbeings. The Venetians bought slaves,whether christians or infidels, and found readypurchasers among the Mahometanss who hadpossessed themselves of Sicily and Spain. Theyproceeded farther and drew a great gain bysupplying weapons of war to the unbelievers.This trade, though forbidden by an edict of the352 ITALIAN TRADE WITH CHAP. Xlll.Emperor Charlemagne, and by decrees of thePopes, was continued in a contraband way toa very profitable extent. The inhabitants ofAmalfi shared the disgrace and the profit of thistrade with the Venetians, and both were soonafterwards joined in it by the cities of Genoaand of Pisa. Before the commencement of thecrusades, the ships of those states found a beneficialemployment in conveying to Palestine thecrowds of pilgrims which flocked from everypart of Christendom to offer their devotions atthe sacred shrine of Jerusalem. The Amalfianshad obtained permission to establish a factory inthe holy city, at that time in the power of asultan of the race of the Patentes, which servedas a shelter for pilgrims, and as a storehouse forthe commodities which Europe furnished to theMahometanss. Those Italian states were thechannels by which the gold from India, fromthe eastern shores of Africa, and from the interiorof that continent, flowed into Europe. TheByzantines drew some of it by their land tradewith the east, some of it reached Asia Minor bythe cities on the Persian gulf, and some wasbrought either by the Red Sea or by the caravans,which after crossing that sea near thestraits of Babelmandel passed the whole lengthof Arabia on the eastern side of it.A modern writer on this subject observes,that *' the Lombards and the Franks, who ruledCHAP. xii.TRADE OF ITALY. 353over extensive countries, wanted not gold butindustry and cultivation. They perceived thenecessity of employing the Venetians, whobrought to them from the east, drugs, salt,clothing, arms, gold, gold dust, silver, and ahundred other commodities, which they exchangedfor grain, wine, iron, wood for shipbuildingand for oars, and other purposes ; forwood abounded in Italy and on the Alps. Thesewere eagerly demanded and abundantly supplied,in spite of the prohibitions of Agnello Participation.Doge of Venice, in 822, and of the Greekemperor in 971- The latter particularly complainedthat the Venetians, not being satisfiedwith trading in the products of the neighbouringcountries, and with being the carriers betweenthe several Mahometan divisions of Egypt, Cara-mania, and Barbary, were supplying the infidelswith ship timber and with arms \" The sameauthor observes, p. 39, " The Venetians obtainedthe privilege in several Mahometancountries, as well in Africa and Caramania,as in the cities on the Black Sea, of possessingchurches, keeping inns, and of being tried bytheir own judges. They were besides exemptfrom taxation on wine, and were even permittedto coin echinus out of the old Saracenic dirhemi."Memorie Storicha de* Veneti di Jacopo Filial. Padova,1812, vol. vi. p. 23.VOL. [. A A3o4f EFFECT OF THE CRUSADES chap. Xlii.We are not, however, disposed to think thatduring the middle ages much more gold wasbrought into Europe from Asia and Africa thanthe amount of silver which was sent from Europeto those divisions of the globe. The' proportionatevalue of gold to silver was less in Asiathan in Europe. At all times a profit might begained by exchanging one for the other : whengold in Asia and Africa was worth no more thaneight or nine times its weight in silver, it wasworth in Europe, and especially in westernEurope, from ten to thirteen times its weight.The goods which Asia furnished were neitherheavy nor bulky in proportion to their value ;and it must have required many ship loads ofiron, wool, and timber to pay for a single cargoof the rich commodities of the east. It is not,therefore, probable that any great balance infavour of Europe, to be paid in the precious metals,could arise from the commerce that wasthen carried on. The plunder of Constantinopleby the Venetians and other of the Crusadersprobably transferred more metallic wealth towestern Europe than all the commerce of thecenturies that preceded it : if the statementsof Gibbon be correct, that the emperor Alexiuspaid to the Marquis of Montserrat the enormoussum of sixteen hundred pounds of gold,and that on the second capture, when thecity was delivered over to the allied armies.CHAP. XIII. ON THE TRANSFER OF MONEY. 355the booty of the captors, which was brought tothe public account, besides what was secretlyappropriated by individuals, amounted to eighthundred thousand pounds, it is not improbablethat the soldiers of the cross may have carriedto the east more of the precious metals thanever returned to that division of Europe. Suchwas the general eagerness to embark on the expedition,that sovereigns pledged their jewelsand even their crowns to obtain money for theirequipment, that the nobles mortgaged or soldtheir estates to raise the requisite sums, and thechurches and monastic establishments convertedinto money their ornamental and sacred utensilsof gold and silver to aid the great undertakingof rescuing the Holy Land from the power of theunbelievers. Much of the money thus obtainedmust have been expended in arms, horses, andother articles which their several countries couldsupply ; much of it would necessarily be expendedin long journeys from France, Spain,Britain, and Germany, to the confines of Asia;or in the sea voyage by those who, like theroving Normans, adopted that mode of repairingto the theatre of warlike operations. But stillmuch must have remained and have been appliedboth by the leaders of the several bodies,and by many individuals in those bodies, tosupply the necessaries of life after their arrivalin Asia.A A 2356 EFFECT OF THE CRUSADES chap. will.When the Crusaders had so far succeeded asto capture Jerusalem and to establish in that citya Christian kingdom, there is good ground toconclude that the revenues raised within it wereinsufficient to defray the expenditure of the government,but that sums were annually contributedby the several powers which had achievedthe conquest to maintain the throne they haderected.The rude nations of western Europe musthave been powerfully impressed with the magnificentobjects which the oriental world presentedto their view. The thousand luxuries of theeast would excite a desire to possess them, andto transfer them as well to ornament their owncountries as to serve as memorials of the adventurousexpeditions in which they had borne apart. A great portion of what had been acquiredas booty in the east would be expended in objectswhich could not be supplied by the industryof their own countries, but whose valuewhen they arrived there would be estimated asmuch from the danger and glory by which theyhad been acquired, as by their rarity, theirbeauty, or their utility.It cannot be doubted but that the severalcrusades tended to soften the manners of thosewho were engaged in them ; that they advancedthe knowledge, the civilization, and the industryof Europe, and by these means increased theCHAP. xril. ON THE TRANSFER OF MONEY. 357wealth of its various nations; but that wealthwas of a more substantial and stationary kindthan the precious metals which only measure orrepresent labour, which act as a stimulus to industryboth of body and mind, but are, after all,the least part of the real wealth of a community.We do not suppose, taking into considerationall the circumstances to which we have adverted,that the operation of the crusades was of greatinfluence, either in augmenting or diminishingthe stock of gold and silver in Europe, thoughit gave an impulse directing the course of thosemetals sometimes from the west to the east,and again at other times in an opposite direction; and thereby produced an exchange ofcommodities which is one of the natural meansof promoting national prosperity.358 ADDITION TO GOLD AND SILVER cHAP. xiv.CHAPTER XIV.On the produce of the mines and on the state of the coinageabout the time of the discovery of America.From the few and indistinct notices of themines from 806 to the discovery of America whichare collected in chap. x. vol. 1., it is scarcelypossible to do more than form a conjecture concerningthe amount of their produce. Thewhole period was a time of hostility and turbulence.There was little security for any kindof property, and less still for that which couldalone induce the working of mines for silver andgold. None of the mines that are noticed wereuninterruptedly wrought, and few of them wereworked simultaneously. Some were most productiveat one period, and then yielded nothingfor centuries; whilst others were discovered andexplored and speedily abandoned. The art ofseparating the precious metals from the oresand from the inferior metals with which theywere mingled had been lost since the time ofthe Roman operations, and were recovered bythe same slow and gradual steps by which theCHAP. XIVIN THE DARK AGES. 359ancients had proceeded. As the mines wereworked in countries very remote from eachother, the improvements either in the mechanicalor scientific process would not be speedily diffused,and though some might advance rapidly,others would do so at a slower pace.Under the circumstances of the period inquestion, extending from about the year 800 to1500, it seems scarcely possible to come to anyother conclusion than that the mines of the preciousmetals on the ancient continent producedfar less on the average of the seven centuriesthan those same mines had done in the centuryclosing in 1800.The average product of the mines of Europe,including those of the Russian dominions inAsia, did not in the last twenty years of theeighteenth century amount to more gold thanequal in value to two hundred thousand poundssterling, and silver equal to six hundred thousandpounds \ Of this gold, more than onehalf was yielded by the mines of Russia, whichafforded none before the year 1704. Of the remainder,the greater portion was extracted fromthe Austrian dominions, and the remainder inSee Necesse Zahlenstatistik der Europaischeii undaussereuropaischen Staten, page 16. von C. C. Andre —Stuttgart, 1823 ; also, Algerine deutsche Real Encyclopaedia,under the articles Gold and Silver.360 ADDITION TO GOLD AND SILVER CHAP. XIV.various small quantities from Saxony, Prussia,and Hanover. The mines in those territoriesin the long period of the dark ages wereslightly and irregularly worked, were subject tofrequent and sometimes long interruptions, andin their best times never yielded such suppliesas they have afforded in more recent years.The silver in the same twenty years which themines of the old continent produced was nearlyon an annual average as follows, viz. Russia06150,000, Austria c£'200,000. Saxony £100,000,Prussia and Hanover, including the small shareof Brunswick in the Hartz, £110,000, and allthe other mines about £40,000. It will be seenin the tenth chapter of this inquiry, that themines in Germany, excepting those in Saxony,were very little worked or even known till thelatter end of the period from 800 to 1500;that their greatest produce was but a fewyears before the termination of the period ;and if we take the annual average quantityof the precious metals yielded between 800and 1500 at a seventh or an eighth of theaverage of that yielded between Iso and 1800,when the Russian mines were in active operation,we cannot be very far from the truth, andan approximation to it is all that is attainable inthe present state of our knowledge on this obscuresubject. If the former calculation assumedin this inquiry be tolerably accurate, that one partCHAP. XIV.IN THE DARK AGES. 361in three hundred and sixty of the gold and silveris annually consumed by wear, and that in the year800 the stock of those metals had been reduced,from what it was in the time of Augustus, toabout thirty-five or thirty-six millions, it willfollow that a yearly addition of so small anamount as one hundred thousand pounds fromthe mines would be a supply fully adequate to replacesuch consumption.As far as a judgment can be formed from thefew facts that are discoverable, we should bedisposed to conclude the whole quantity yieldedby the mines during the period would, on ayearly average, amount to one hundred thousandpounds, but that the later years were somewhatmore productive than the earlier. We arerather inclined to this opinion by the rise of afew common articles as noticed by Ruding,(vol. i. p. 193 and 19t), which appear to haveincreased in money price between 1 150 and 1450,at the rate of nearly one hundred per cent.There seems thus no reason to suppose thatthe additional quantity of gold and silver broughtinto circulation between the years 800 and1500 was much, if any, more than was requiredto keep the stock of the last of thoseyears to as high a standard as it had reached inthe first of them ; and we judge that thequantity must have remained nearly the samefrom the prices of commodities, when valued by362 SMALL PRODUCE OF MINES CHAP. xiV.their weight in gold and silver, not havingvery considerably varied. The small quantityof gold and silver in existence during the periodin question may he inferred from the verysmall portion of coined money which was issuedfrom, the several mints after the operations ofcoining were performed exclusively by the chiefsof the several kingdoms, or by those to whomthat privilege was specially granted.There are in the records at the Tower, theexchequer, and the mint, some accounts of thelatter department in England from a very earlyperiod, when our kings exercised the businessof coining. The sources from which the suppliesof the precious metals were drawn arehowever by no means accurately indicated. Inthe reign of Edward 11. the silver which wasbrought to the mint was classed into that whichwas produced from the royal mines, and intothat of foreign countries ; and the latter wasdivided into three other classes, distinguished asargentine c'lsmarinum, argentum transmarimim^and bullion \We have foiuid no accounts by which anycalculation can be formed of the proportionwhich these several descriptions of silver boreThis distribution was preserved in the next reign ; afterwhich no traces of it are to be found in the mint accounts atthe exchequer. See vol. i. p. 126, of Ruding on coins.CHAP. XIV. IN ENGLAND. S63to each other or any way of estimating theirwhole amount, except by the gross quantity;which is shown by receipts of the exchequerfor the bulHon delivered to the mints.If a judgment can be formed from the fewspecific notices of the sums actually receivedinto the mint from the mines royal, the fargreater part of the small sums of money whichthe mints obtained must have been acquired byforeign trade; for, according to the accounts ofWilliam de Wimondham, warden of the mint,it appears that in the year 1294 the mines ofMartinstowe, in Devonshire, brought to themint only 370 pounds of silver, or in our presentmoney, £1100, and in the next year 521pounds, or £1563 ; that in the year 1296, 348miners of the wapentake of the Peak in Derbyshirewere sent into Devonshire to assist inworking the mines, and the produce was increasedto 704 pounds, or £2112. In the year1299, it appears that William de Alton, clerk,keeper of the king's mines in Devonshire, finallydelivered up his accounts to the exchequer,when those mines seem to have ceased \ Asthe sums here noticed as the produce of theDevonshire mines are so small, we may consAccording to Holinshed, vol. li. p. 316, the accounts ofWimondham were in his time remaining in the exchequer.364 Raymond Lilly,CHAP. XIVelude that those of Waterford in Ireland, ofSomersetshire, and of Cardiganshire, must havebeen still more minute, and that the chief supplymust have been obtained from the foreigncommerce of that age, which consisted chiefly inthe exports of wool and a few cloths and hides.The supply of gold to the mint, when it firstbegan to be coined into money in the reign ofEdward III., could only have been procured bypurchase with silver or with some other commodities,as no accounts appear of any beingfurnished by the royal or other domestic mines.Although it can have little connexion with theactual supply of gold, it is scarcely possible topass without notice one of those delusions of thehuman mind which extensively prevailed in formerages, and has not been wholly dissipatedeven in the age in which we have lived.Raymond Lucy, who came to England inthe reign of Edward III., pretended, and wasbelieved, to possess the power of transmutingthe inferior metals into gold and silver. He seemsto have been a strange compound of fanaticismand imposture. He was originally a Jew, whohad been converted to Christianity and hadbecome a Dominican friar. Cramer, abbot ofWestminster, brought him to England, and introducedhim to the king, for whom he agreedto exercise his science on condition of theCHAP. XIV. THE ALCHEMIST.monarch entering into a war with the Turks.The king was too much occupied with his warsin France to attack the Turks, and Fully refusingon that account to continue his operationsin making more gold, was in consequenceof it imprisoned and kept in durance a longtimein the Tower. It seems to have beenbelieved by Ashore \ upon the testimonyof Norton and Hermes Bird, that this manactually made gold whilst a prisoner in theTower; and besides giving credit to this fromtradition, he mentions as a corroborative proof,that the money coined from this gold had onthe reverse *' a cross fleury with lionel, andthe inscription, Jesus cmtem transient per mediumforum that": intimating, that as JesusSee Ashore's Theatrum Chemical Britannica, p.442—467.These words were supposed in the time of the travellerMandeville, who began his journeys in 1320, to be a charmsufficient to ensure protection against wars and againstthieves. His words are, " And an half mile fro Nazareth isthe lee of our Lord : for the Lewes ladder him upon ahigh roche, for to make him lee down, and have slainhim : but Jesus passed among hem, and lepte upon anotherroche ; and zit ben the steppes of his feet in the roche, wherehe allyghte. And therefore seen men, whan thei dryden hemof theses, on ony were or of enemies, ' Jesus autem transientper medium illorum bat :' that is to seine, Jesusforsooth passing by the myddes of hem, he went : in tokenand mynde, that our Lord passed though out the Lewes -cruelty and escaped safely fro hem ; so surely nowe men passedSG5366 Raymond Lilly.CHAP. XIV.passed invisible and in a secret manner throughthe midst of the Pharisees, so that gold wasmade by an invisible and secret art amidst theignorant." Some instances of faith in this delusivenecromantic art may be traced in thestatutes and other public documents almost tothe first year of William and Mary, when theact of the 5th of Henry IV. was repealed whichhad been enacted to prevent the "craft of themultiplication of gold."From whatever sources the supply of goldand silver to the mints of this kingdom mayhave been drawn, the quantity received in themfrom the period when regular accounts have beenpreserved ^ will show how very small was theamount.The clear accounts commence with the reignof Edward I. in ]27-> between which and thereign of Edward 11. in 1307, the silver receivedamounted tothe perils of theses. And then sey men two vers of theAutre. Irruat super eos formed et pavor, &c. And thanemay men passe with often perils." Mandeville's Travels,p. 137, edit. 1727-1 See Ruding's Annals of the Coinage of Great Britain,vol. i. p. 135.CHAP. XIV.ENGLISH COINAGE.The following sums 'Reign of Edward II , fromJ307 to ]327- . 1Reign of Edward III., from1327 to 13473The same reign from 1347to 1354*The same reign from 1354to 1377 '^ . . 1The reign of Richard II.,from 1377 to 1399The reign of Henry IV.,from 1399 to 1413The reign of Henry V.,from 1413 to 14226 .The reign of Henry VI.,from 1422 to 146 H .The reign of Edward IV.,and to the accession ofIn money of thatperiod.£. s. d.15,992 13 266,232 4 222,253 12 312,403 16 821,018 15 62,311 6 34,248 17 19,026 229,892 3 5In money of thepresent time.£. S. d.46,\77 19 6498,696 12 666,760 16 933,060 1 6290,443 19 55,546 9 410,196 18 421,662 1059,784 6 10Of this amount the mint of London received =£8018 18;*. ;that of Dublin £6053 1*. 5d., and Canterbury .£1920 I3s. 9d.2 London received .t92,33i) 12s. 2d., and Canterburyc£73,892 12*.3 In the 20th year of Edward III., the pound of silverwhich had before been coined into 20s. was made into^'1 2s. 6d. In this period London received £22,115 7s. 9d.,and Canterbury c£ 138 4*. 6d.The whole of this was delivered in London. In the 27thyear of Edward III. the pound of silver was made into £1 5s.Of this sum £5,272 was delivered at Calais, £ 1,892 os. 9d.at York, and the remainder in London.^ In the reign of Henry 5th the pound of silver was coinedinto thirty shillings.^ Till the last year of this reign the money continued at368 ENGLISH COINAGE.CHAP. XIV.In money of In money of thethat period. present time.£. s. d. £. s. d.Henry VI., from 1461to 1485 > . 47,843 1 76,548 1 6The reign of Henry VII.,from 1485 to 15092 . 49,36712 76,32010 6From the commencement of the reign of EdwardI. in 1272, to the death of Henry VII. in1509, a period of two hundred and thirty-sevenyears, we thus find the amount of the silver receivedat the exchequer for the mints, whenreduced to its money value of the present time,did not exceed nine hundred thousand pounds.The gold received in that period is only tobe ascertained with any precision from the 18thyear of Edward III., 1345.In money ofIn money of thethat period.present time.During the remainderof that reign there£. s. d.£. s. d.was received38,405 683,430 18 6In the reign of Richard II.4,785 210,403 15 4Henry IV.8,372 1319,001 16the same rate as in the preceding, but afterwards the poundof silver was coined into thirty seven shillings and sixpence.During the reigns of Richard the 2d, and of Henry the4th and 5th, all the silver was delivered in London. In thereign of Edward the 4th, £1556 was delivered at York,£903 3s. at Bristol, and the rest in London.- During this reign the money continued at the rate ofthirty-seven and sixpence to the pound of silverCHAP. XIV. ENGLISH COINAGE. 369In money ofthat period.£. s. d.In money of thepresent time.£. s. d.In the reign of Henry V.Henry VI.Edward IV.22,610 1640,800 12102,650 1044,221 1281,601 4164,240 18Henry VII. 27,550 18The silver thus brought to the mints beingin our present valuation of that metal 1And the gold44,008 141,185,198446,908Makes the whole quantity in the 237 yearsfrom 1272 to 1509 . . 1,632,106Or average quantity annually . 6,886 10Although there is doubtless some obscurity inthe original documents in the Exchequer fromwhich Ruding derived his information, it is byno means probable that there should be any suchmaterial error in them as to affect the accuracyof the inference here intended to be drawn, viz.that the amount of coined gold and silver moneyat the time of the discovery of America vasvery minute when compared with the quantitywhich it has reached since that period, andwith that which must have been in existencewhen the Roman empire was at the height of itsgrandeur and power.To show the contrast in a more striking pointof view, the following table exhibits the amountof money coined in this kingdom during theseveral reigns after the products of the mines ofthe Spanish and Portuguese dominions in AmericaVOL. I. B B370 ENGLISH COINAGE. cHAr. XIV.had been distributed among the various nationsof the civilized world, which distribution wasscarcely accomplished before the commencementof the seventeenth century.Coinage of Great Britain in each reign, fromthe accession of James I. in l603, to that of hispresent Majesty in 1830: — ■James I. Gold . 3,606,389Silver . 1,807,2775,473,660Average of the 22 years . . 248,800Charles I. including the Commonwealth.Gold . 3,465,188Silver . 9,776,54413,241,732Average of the 35 years . . 378,338Charles II. Gold . 4,177,253Silver . 3,722,1807,899,433Average of the 22 years . . 358,01 1James II. Gold . 2,113,038Silver . ' 2,115,1154,228,753Average of the 4 years . . 1,057,184William and Mary and WilliamIII. Gold . 2,341,889Silver . 7,093,0749,434,903Average of the 12 years . . 807,2401 In this is included £1,596,799 of base money coined forIreland,CHAP. XIV. ENGLISH COINAGE. 371Reign of Aline, Gold . 2,484,.031Silver . 618,2123,102,743Average of the 1 3 years . . 238,072George I. Gold . 8,492,870Silver . 233,0458,72.'),921Average of the 14 years . . u23,380George II. Gold . 11,602,216Silver . 304,36011,960,576Average of the 37 years . . 361,258George III. from the commencementof his reign to 1809 inclusive.Gold . 00,214,774Silver . 03,41900,278,193Average of the 50 years . . 1,525^504George III. from 1809 to his demise.Gold . 9,538,669Silver . 6,933,34616,472,013Average of the 1 1 years . . 1,497,536George IV. Gold . 36,147,700Silver . 2,216,16838,303,808Average of the 9 years . . 4,202,652It would be delusive to compare the periodbetween 1272 and 1509 with that between 1603and 1829, in order to induce a calculation ofthe proportionate quantity of gold and silver inthe respective periods. In the first of them theannual sum being only ^6,886, and in the latter372 ENGLISH COINAGE. CHAP. XIV.the enormous amount of £819,415, we mightbe led to conclude that the actual quantity ofthe coins in circulation was one hundred andtwenty-twofold greater in modern times thanbefore the beginning of the sixteenth century.Thus, on the supposition already assumed, thatthe stock of gold and silver at the discovery ofAmerica amounted to about thirty-five millions,our drawing conclusions from this contrastalone would lead us to calculate the preciousmetals now in existence at the incredible, if notimpossible, amount of four thousand eight hundredmillions, whereas we are well warranted inconcluding that they do not amount to morethan about one tenth of that value.This great discrepancy between the metallicwealth actually in existence, and that whichwas annually converted into the current coin ofEngland, may be accounted for in several ways.In the early period of our coinage a large proportionof foreign coins had been introduced,especially of gold, and that long before any recordswhich remain notice the fabrication ofeither gold or silver coins in England. In thetime of the Anglo-saxons and of the Anglo-normans,the gold of the eastern empire at Constantinoplehad travelled to the west of Europe,and was commonly used in all the larger operationsof commerce. The coin known by thename of Bezants was of greater purity than anyl^l^^/ijCHAP. XIV. FOREIGN MONEY IN ENGLAND. 373of that which issued from the mints of Germanyor France. Its fineness was of twenty-fourcarats, whilst the gold which was coined inFrance in the reign of Philip III., about the year1230, was only of the fineness of twenty-threecarats \ Besides these coins from Constantinople,the gold pieces struck in France were introducedin considerable quantities into Englandafter the conquests made by our ancestors inFrance. The agnes of the reign of St. Louis,sometimes called stones or multones, from /having on one side a lamb with a banner, andthe words Agnus Dei qui tolls peccant mundimiserere nobis, and on the other a cross withthe motto Christ's I'egnat, vinci, imperator wereof gold of the fineness of twenty-three caratsand a half. These and other coins of a extemporaneousperiod circulated, or rather passed inlargepayments, in England for a long period ;whilst that which was subsequently coined inFrance from the reign of Philip le Bel, whichcommenced in 1285, to a later period, being reducedin purity from one to two carats belowthe standard of St. Louis, had little circulationout of the country where it was issued. TheAngels were a coin fabricated by the Englishin Paris, whilst they exercised the governmentof France under the reign of Henry V., and inSee About do Bazinghen, vol. i. p. 104, and vol. ii. p. 109.374 BASE MONEY.CHAP. XIA".the minority of Henry VI. These pieces ofgold were of great purity, and when transferredto England maintained their credit during a longtime.Bazinghen, who relates whatever concernsthe coinage of his own country, says onthis subject : " On lit dans un ancien manuscrit,que le Roi angleterre fit faire cette minnie,que etoit door fin, a plus haut titre qu* aucun deses voisins, aspirant par ce moyen alien desFrancois de Charles VII., qui en meme tensavoit et contraint d'empirer consideratenesssa minnie: ce que Henry VI., ne fit pointpendant qu'il fut maitre de Paris." Vol. i. p. 53.Besides the money which was of competentpurity, a great number of coins of adulteratedgold and silver was introduced from foreigncountries, which, in spite of all the precautionsto prevent it, circulated before they were detecteda longer or shorter period, according totheir better or worse imitation of the domesticcoinage. The city of Luxemburg, or as it wasthen called, Lushburgh, seems to have been thechief place for manufacturing the base coin, ifwe can judge from a petition of the Commonsin the parliament held at Westminster in 1344,which states that " many merchants and otherscarried the good money out of the kingdom, andbrought in its room false money called Lusshe-bourne, which were worth only eight shillingsin the pound or less, by which means those whoCHAP. XIV. BASE MONEY. 37,5took them at a low price to utter again weresuddenly, wrongfully, and beyond measure enrichedJ whilst those who were unable to distinguishthe said money were cheated and impoverished,and the whole realm was fraudulentlyfilled with those base coins ^."The Commons prayed not merely that theordinary magistrates might be urged to tryand punish the offenders, but the severer measureof seizing and confiscating the estates ofall " who were notoriously suspected," and afterwards"to inquire ofthe truth concerning them ;"and this was urged because the parties wereso wealthy, that otherwise they might escapepunishment, and because the king would be enrichedby the wealth which the suspected personshad fraudulently acquired " as in consciencehe ought to be " ."The laws which existed before to prevent theintroduction of base coin appear to be as severeand as rigorous as any that could be enacted,and if they were found insufficient, we mustconclude they were so flagrantly unjust thatThese coins are noticed thus in Piers Plowman's vision.As in Lushburth is a luther away, yet lokith like sterling,The mark of the money is good, and the metal feeble.So fareth it bi some folk now, they have a faire speech,Crowne and christendom, the king's mark of leven.And the metal that is mans soule, with since is foule allied."Fo. 82, b.2 Rolls of Parliament, vol. ii. p. 16.376 CRUELTY TO JEWS. cHAP. xiv.they could not be executed. It appears by a■ law passed in the 20th of Edward III. (129!2),that no man could bring money or land in anypart of England except at Dover, Sandwich,London, Boston, or Southampton, where officerswere appointed by the king to examine ailthe money of the passengers who landed fromforeign countries, and were empowered to seizeall that was adulterated or deficient in weight.There were other severe conditions enacted inthe statutes of the same reign, entitled Sfatutumde Moiety, Statute de Monetd parvturif andArticuli de Monetd.A rigour much " beyond the laws" was howeverpractised in those early ages. It fell sometimeson the Lombards, sometimes on the goldsmiths,but with the greatest weight on the unfortunateJews. Knightonon says, that the king conveneda parliament, in which the Jews were convictedof clipping and corrupting the coin, and theywere banished never to return, principally onaccount of their unbelief and the falsifyingwhich the Christians harshly imputed to them ;and that the Commons gave to the king the fifthpenny of all their moveables that the measuremight be carried into execution without delaysAnother historian of the same age states,that this banishment of the Jews was the con-knight,column 2466.CHAP. XIV.CRUELTY TO JEWS. 377sequence of a complaint of the lords of parliamentto the king, of the malice and perfidy ofthat people, of their usury, their forgeries, andtheir debasement of the coin. Whatever proofsmay have been given of these charges, the kingand council resolved that on a fixed day andhour the whole should be apprehended in everycity of the kingdom and be immediately banished.Apart of their property was confiscated,and a part was allowed to be carried with them.Some of the wealthiest of the race loaded aship with vast treasures. When they had nearlyreached the mouth of the Thames, the masterof the ship cast anchor, and at low water thevessel was dry on the sand. He then persuadedthe Jews to walk with him on the sand,telling them that the tide would not flow for along time. Having led them as far as he couldfrom the ship, and finding the tide was comingin, he stole away from them and ascended theship's side by a rope.The wretched Jews, when they discoveredtheir situation, called to him for help ; but hemocking them, bade them call on Moses whohad conducted their fathers through the RedSea, and thus left them to perish. He then returnedto the king, to whom he related what hadhappened, and obtained from him both favourand reward \Hemingfordj sub anno 1290.VOL. I. C C378 CRUELTY TO JEWS.CHAP. XIV.Such is the story which is told by the historian,without any of those indignant expressionswhich the moral feelings of the present daywould extort from the most hardened persecutor.It seems to be told rather as a good jokethan with that kind of feeling which every virtuousmind would be now impressed with, inrecounting the sufferings of the most guiltyoffenders against the laws of society.Another cotemporary writer has howevergiven a different statement of the conduct ofthe king, and much more favourable to his character; for he relates, that when the king heardthe story he condemned to the gallows all whowere concerned in the robbery and murder \Notwithstanding the banishment of the Jews,the establishments for strict examination, andthe severe penalties which the king, at the requisitionof his parliament, enacted, the basemoney continued to flow into the kingdom in amost copious stream. These coins were broughtinto the country by foreign merchants, probablyconcealed in goods. They were distinguishedby the names of pollards, cowards, scalding,brabant, eagles, leonine, sleeping, and variousother denominations -. They were chiefly white1 Wilkes' Chronicle, p. 122, as quoted by Ruding in hisfirst volume, p. 380.- Walsingham says, speaking of the base coins, " Gallicnempe hand monetary fabricaverunt ; quae non coat argenteaCHAP. XIV.BASE MONEY. 379money resembling silver, but very artificiallycompounded of silver, copper, and sulphur, sothat the silver did not form more than one-fifthof the weight.When these fraudulent pieces had got intogeneral circulation, they became so notoriousthat the officers of the crown, who had probablyconnived at or aided their introduction, gaveinformation concerning them; and they wereordered to be delivered up to the king, who professedto pay the full value of the silver theycontained, and to recoin it into legal money.How they were estimated does not appear, butit is very certain that by the operation of thuschanging the base for the legal coins, Henry VII.drew into his exchequer a considerable profit.Several of the parliaments which were summonedto meet between the reigns of Edward I.and Henry VII. were chiefly called for thepurpose of considering the state of the circulatingcurrency, or to enact laws to prohibit theexport of the domestic coins, or of gold andsilver plate and bullion, to prevent the introductionof foreign coins without due examination oftheir value before they were allowed to be circulated,or to enact the punishment to be inflictedon such as were proved guilty of deedsuperficially deargentata, et current in lochs plurimaloco sterlingorum, multitude decent furent per eadem." —Hist. Hang. p. 77.380 LAWS PROTECTING THE COIN. chap. xiv.basing, or clipping the coin, of secretly introducingforeign money, or of committing forgeryor usury.The whole history of the period tends toshow, that the money in England of domesticcoinage formed but a small part of that whichwas in existence within the kingdom, and it hasbeen dwelt upon here at greater length than itwould have otherwise been entitled to occupy,because it appeared necessary to account for theenormous difference in the extent of Englishcoinage between the series of years which precededthe discovery of America, and the samelength of time in the present and two precedingcenturies.END OF VOL. I.LONDON:nniNXED BY THOMAS D.,SV1S0N, W'HITEFKIAUS.