SECRET SOCIETIESOF THEMIDDLE AGES.'%w^COMMITTEE.ssA-rsia-.'.xciiigh,fei^.,'i'.ll., .i les. Jdlm«ilm, Ei., P.R.S.TlvFU IlQd.StrJ.C. HabbiHua.Blin HJ. H. WBrmQulb. Eq.IhvEdJilTdliw, Giq ArM. J- WhitbBw.lbi. A.IH. tTHE LIBRARY OF Entertain KNOfFLBDQE.K^l^h-tUy^ I hot^iAcSECRET SOCIETIESOF THEMIDDLE AGES.LONDON!CHARLES KNIGHT & Co Ludgate-street.MDCCCX2XYU.yHS 137LONDON: .Rumford Street.CONTENTS.Introduction • • • . • ,1THE ASSASSINS.CHAPTER LState of the World in the Seventh Century— WesternEmpire — Eastern Empire — Persia — Arabia — Mohammed— His probable Motives — Character of his ReligionThe Koran . • 1 . .13CHAPTER II.Origin of the Halifax— The first Khalifs— Extent of theArabian Empire— schism among the MohammedanSoonees and Sheaths — Sects of the latter — The Keis-sane — ^The Zeidites — ^^The Ghoollat — ^The Imame»>—Sects of ^^The Imamee — ^Their political Character — ^^TheCarmathites — Origin of the Fatimite Khalifs — SecretSociety at Cairo — Doctrines taught in it — Its Decline 24CHAPTER III.Ali of Rei — His son Hassan Sabah — Hassan sent tostudy at Nishaboor — Meets there Omar Klhiam andNizam-al-Moolk — Agreement made by them — Hassanintroduced by Nizam to Sultan Malekk Shah — Obligedto leave the Court — Anecdote of him — His own accountof his Conversion — Gk>es to Egypt — Returns toPersia — Makes himself Master of Alamoot. • • 43Vi HOfiTEfiTB.CHAPTER IV,Description of Alamoot — Fruitless attempts ia recove^it 'Extension of ^^The Israelite Power — ^^The Israelitesin Syria — Attempt on the Life of Abo-Hard Is!<a —Treaty made with Sultan Sanjar — death of Hassan —His Character • . • • .56CHAPTER V.Organisation of the Society — Names given to the Israelites— Origin of the name Assassin — Marco Pulses descriptionof the Paradise of the Old Man of theMountain — Description of it given by Arabian writersInstances of the obedience of the Fedavee • . G6CHAPTER VI.KeUh Buzoorg Oomeid — Affairs of the Society in Persia^-Tliey acquire the Castle of Banias in Syria — Attemptto betray Damascus to the Crusaders — murders committedduring the reign of KeUh Buzoorg • . 84CHAPTER VII.Keah Mohammed — murder of the Khalif — Castles gainedin Syria— Israelite Confession of Faith — JIIohammcd*sSon Hassan gives himself out for the promised Imam—His followers punished — Succession of Hassan — Heabolhhes the Law — Pretends to be descended from theProphet — Is murdered • • . .93CHAPTER VIII.Mohammed II. — Anecdote of the Imam Fukhr-ed-decnNoor-ed-deen — Conquest of Egypt — Attempt on theLife of Saladin • . . ,. .102CHAPTER IX.Sinan the Dai-al Kebir of Syria — Offers to become aChristian — His Ambassador murdered by the Templar•tConstants. viiPage?cardinal ^e Vitry's Account of Ae Assassins — Miir-jeer of .the Marquis of Montferrat-^Defence of Kingrichard. .-. • .114CHAPTER X.Heath of Jellal-ed-deen— Character of Ala-ed-deen, hissuccessor — The Sheikh Jemal-ed-deen — The AstronomerNasir-ed-deen — The Vizir Sheref-al-Moolk —Death of Ala-ed-deen — Succession of Kukn-ed>deeu^the last Sheikh-al-Jebal . . . .143CHAPTER XI.The Mongols — Hoolagoo sent against the Ismailites —Rukn-ed-deen submits — Capture of Alamoot — Destructionof the Library — Fate of Rukn-ed-deen — Massacreof the Ismailites — St. Louis and the Assassins — Missionfor the Conversion of the People of Kuhistan — Conclusion. . . • . • 15GTHE Templar.CHAPTER LIntroduction — The Crusades — Wrong Ideas respectingtheir Origin — True Causes of them — Pilgrimage —Pilgrimage of Frotmond — Of the Count of Anjou —Striking Difference between the Christianity of theEast and that of the West — Causes of their differentCharacters — Feudalism — The Extent and Force of thisPrinciple • . . . , . 1G9CHAPTER II.First Hospital at Jerusalem — Church of Santa Maria deLatina — Hospital of St. John — The Hospitallers —Origin of the Templar — Their original Poverty —They acquire Consideration — St. Bernard — His Chas••Yin CONTENTS.Pageracer of ^^The Temples — ^^The Order approved of andconfirmed by the Council of Troyes — Proofs of theEsteem in which they were held • • .185CHAPTER III.Return of the Templar to the East — Exoneration andRefutation of the Charge of a Connection with the*•' Ismailites — actions of the Templar — Crusade ofLouis VII. — Siege of Ascalou — Sale of Nassir-ed-deenCorruption of the Hospitallers — The Bull, OrmeDatum Optimum — Refusal of the Templar to marchagainst Egypt — Murder of the Israelite Envoy . 199CHAPTER IV.Heroism of the Templar and Hospitallers — Battle ofHitting — Crusade of Richard of England and Philip ofFrance — Corruption of the Order — Pope Innocent III.writes a Letter of Censure — Frederic II. — GreatSlaughter of the Templar — Henry III. of England|. and the Templar — Power of the Templar in Moravia— Slaughter of them by the Hospitallers — Fall of Acre 210CHAPTER V.Classes of ^^The Templar — ^^The Knights ^^Their Qualifiesof Reception — Dress and Arms of theKnight — Mode of Burial — ^^The Chaplains — Mode ofReception — Dress — Duties and Privileges — The — Mode of Reception — Their Duties —The Affiliated — Causes and Advantages of Affiliation^^The Donates and Relates • • .221CHAPTER VI.1 i Provinces of the Order — Eastern Provinces — Jerusalem —Houses of this Province — Tripolis — Antioch — CyprusWestern Provinces — Portugal — Castile and Leon —Aragon — France and Auvergne — Normandy — Aquitaine— Provence — England — Germany — Upper andCentral Italy — apulia and Sicily • • • 242>CONTENTS. IXPageCHAPTER VII.Office of the Order— The Master—Mode of Election—Iii Rights and Privileges — Restraints on him — TheSeneschal — Tie Marshal — ^^The Treasurer — ^The Draper^^The Turcopilar — Great-Priors — Commanders — visitors— Sub-Marshal-^Standard-bearer . . . 253CHAPTER VIII./Chapters — Mode of holding them — templar' Mode ofLiving — Amusements — Conduct in War • • 266CHAPTER IX.Molay elected Master — Last attempt of the Christians inSyria — Conduct of the Three Military Orders — Philipthe Fair and Pope Boniface VIII. — Seizure of thePope — Election of Clement V. — ^^The Papal See removedto France — Causes of Philip's enmity to the TemplarArrival of Molay in France — His interviews with thePope — Charges made against the Templar — Seizureof the Knights — Proceedings in England— Nature ofthe Charges against the Order . . « 276CHAPTER X.Examination of the captive Knights — Different kinds ofTorture — Causes of Confession — What Confessionswere made— Templar brought before the Pope — theirDeclarations — papal Commission — Molay brought beforeit — Poniard de Nisi — Defenders of the Order —Act of Accusation — Heads of Defence — witnessesagainst the Order — Fifty-four Templar committed tothe Flames at Paris — Remarkable words of Turmericde Villars-le-Duc — templar burnt in other places —Further Examinations — The Head worshipped by theTemplar — John de Pollincourt — Peter de la Pale , 293CHAPTER XLExaminations in England — Germany — Spain — Italy —Naples and Provence — Sicily — Cyprus — Meeting of theContents.PageCouncil of Vienne — Suppression of the Order — Fateof its Members — Death of Molay • . .317THBSECRET TRIBUNALS OP WESTPHALIA.CHAPTER I.Introduction — ^^The Original Westphalia — Conquest ofthe Saxons by Charlemagne — His Regulations — Dukesof Saxony State of Germany — Henry the Lion —His Outlawry — Consequences ot it — Origin of German• Towns — Origin of the Fehm-gerichte, or Secret Tribunals— Theories of their Origin — Origin of theirName — Synonymous Terms • . . 332CHAPTER II.The Tribunal-Lord— Tie Count— The Schdppen— TheMessengers — ^^^The Public Court — ^^^The Secret TribunalExtent of its Jurisdiction — places of holding theCourts — Time of holding them — Proceedings in themProcess where the Criminal was caught in the factInquisitorial Process • • • • 346CHAPTER III.Accusatorial Process — Persons liable to it — mode ofCitation — Mode of Procedure — Right of Appeal . 360CHAPTER IV.The General Ghapier^Rights of the Emperor— Of hisLieutenant— Of the Stuhlherrn^ or Tribunal-Lords . 372CHAPTER V.Fehm-courts at Celle — At Bnmswick — tribunal of theKnowing in ^^The Tyrol — ^^The Castle of Baden — africanHurrah •••••• 377CONTENTS. XIPageCHAPTER VI.The Emperor Lewis the Bavarian — Charles IV. — Wenceslaus— Rupertian Reformation — Encroachments ofthe Fehm-courts — Case of Nickel Weller and theTown of Gdrlitz— Of the City of Cantrip:— Of HansDavid and the Teutonic Knights — Other instances ofthe presumption of the Free-counts — Citation of theEmperor Frederic III. — Case of the Count of Mecklenburg385CHAPTER VII.Cause of the degeneracy of the Fehm-courts — Attemptsat reformation — Causes of their high reputation — Caseof the Duke of Wittenberg — Of Kerstiau KerkerinkCauses of the Decline of the Fehm-jurisdiction . 398t-r SECRET SOCIETIESTHE MIDDLE AGES.INTRODUCTION. ■'it we had Ihe means of investigations; historically Iheorigin of Secret Societies, we should probably findthat they began to he formed almost as soon as anyknowledge had been accumulated "by particular individualsbeyond what constituted the common stock.lee same thing has happened to knowledge thathas happened to all other human possessions, — itsactual holders have striven to keep it to themselves.It is true that in this case the possessor of the advantagedoes not seem to have the same reason for beingaverse to share it with others which naturally operatesin regard to many good things of a different kind ;he does not, by imparting it to those around him,diminish his own store. This is true, in so far asregards the possession of knowledge considered inits character of a real good ; Ihe owner of the treasuredoes not impoverish himself by giving it away,as he would by giving away his money, but remainsas rich as ever, even after he has made ever so manyothers as ricci as himself. But still there is one thingthat he loses, and a thing upon which the humanmind is apt to set a very high value ; he loses thedistinction which he derived from his knowledge.This distinction really serves, in many respects, the2 Secret SOCIETIES.same purpose that money itself does. Like money,it brings observation and worship. Like money, ittie dearest of all things, power. Knowledge,ever held, is indeed essentially power; to Caen,^ to know, is the same won! and the same^ with to can, that is, to be able. But there isan additional and a different species of power conferredhy knowledge when it exists as the distinctionof a few individuals in the midst of general ignorance.Sit is power not only to do those things theAs of doing which it teaches ; it is, besides, theof governing other men throiig^h your compartmentand their weakness.So strong is the motive thus prompting the possessorof knowledge to the exclusive retention of hisacquisitions, that unless it had been met by anothermotive appealing in like manner directly our self-interest,it appears probable that scarcely any generaldissemination of knowledge would ever havetaken place. .The powerful counteracting motive inquestion is derived from the consideration that inmostcasesone of the most effective ways which thepossessor of knowledge can take of exciting the admirationof others, is )o communicate what he knows.The light must give itself forth, and illuminate theworld, even'that it may be itself seen and admired. Inthe very darkest times, the scholar or philosophermay find his ambition sufficiently gratified by themere reputation of superior attainments, and thestupid wonder, or it may be superstitious terror, ofthe inquiring multitude. But as soon as anythinglike a spirit of intelligence or of curiosity hassprung up in the general mind, all who aspire tofame or consideration from their learning, their discoveries,or their intellectual powers, address themselvesto awaken the admiration of their fellow-men,not by concealing, but by displaying their kuuw-INTSODOCnOH. 3ledge — not by sealing up the precious fountain, butby allowing its waters (o flow freely forth, that allwho choose may drink of them. From this tinascience ceases almost lo have any secrets; and, allthe influences to which it is exposed acting in thesame direction, the tendency of knowledge becomeswholly diffusive.But in the preceding state of things the case wasaltogether the reverse. Then there was Utile or noinducement to the communication of know led [^, andevery motive for those who were in possession of itto keep it to themselves. There was not intelligentenough abroad to appreciate, or even to understand, ithe truths of philosophy if they had been announced 'in their simplicity, and explained according to their 'principles ; all that was cared for, all that wascapabia iof arousing the vulgar attention, was some display,made as surprising and mysterious as possible, oftheir practical application. It would even have beenattended nith danger in many cases to attempt toteach true philosophy openly, or to make open professionof it ; it was too much in opposition to someof the strongest prejudices which everywhere heldsway. 1 1 is not, then, to be wondered at, that its ml'tivators should have sought to guard and preserve itby means of secret associations, which, besides excludingthe multitude from a participation in thething thus fenced round and hidden, answered alsodivers other convenient purposes. They atlitrdedopportunities of free conference, which could nototherwise have been obtained. There was much inthe very forms of mystery and concealment thusadopted calculated to impress the popular imagination,and to excite its reverence end awe. Finally,the veil which they drew around their proceedings 'enabled the members of these secret societies tocombine their efforts, and arrange their plans, inSECRET SOCIETIES.security and without interruption, whenever they cherishedany desig;Lis of poetical innovation, or otherprojects, the open avowal and prosecution of whichthe established authorities would not have tolerated.The facilities afforded by the system of secret association,and it may even be said the temptationswhich it presents, to the pursuit of political objectsforbidden by the laws, are so great as to justify allgovernments in prohibiting; it, under whatever pretenceit may be attempted to be introduced. It isnothing to the purpose to argue that under bad governmentsvaluable political reforms have sometimesbeen effected by such secret associations which wouldnot otherwise have been attained. The same modeof proceeding, in the nature of the thing, is equallyefficacious for tile overthrow of a good government.Bad men ore as likely to combine in the dark fortheir object as good men are for theirs. In anycircumstances, a secret association is an imperiumin, imperio, a. power separate from, and independentof, that which is recognized as the supreme powerin the stale, and therefore something essentially disorganizing,and which it is contrary to the first principlesof all government for any state to tolerate. Inthe case of a had government, indeed, all means arefairly available for its overthrow which are notmorally objectionable, the simple rule for their applicationbeing that it shall be directed by considerationsof prudence and discretion. In such a casea secret association of the friends of reform maysometimes be found to . supply the most effectivemeans fur accomplishing; the desired end ; but thatend, however desirable it may be, is not one whichthe constitution of the state itself can rationally contemplate.The constitution cannot be founded uponthe Supposition that even necessary alterations of itare to be brought about through agencies out ofWTRODUonoN. Aitself, and forming' no pari of its Mffular mechanism,Whenever such agents are successfully broughtiaUi operation, there is a revolution, and the constitutionis at an end. Even the amendment of the constitutionso effected is its destruction.Yet most of the more remarkable secret associationswhich have existed in different ages and countrieshave probably either been originally formed toaccomplish some political end, or have come to contemplatesuch an object as their chief design. Evenwhen nothing more than a reformation of tuft Inational religion has been, as far as can be discovered, ifthe direct aim of the association, it may still be fairlyconsidered as of a political character, from the mannerin which religion has been mixed up in almostevery country with the civil institutions of the state.The effect which it was desired to produce upon thegovernment may in many cases have been very farfrom extending to its complete abolition, and thesubstituting of another form of polity ; an alterationin some one particular may have been all that wassought, or the object of the association may evenhave been to support some original principle of theconstitution against the influence of circumstanceswhich threatened its subversion or modification.Whether directed to the alteration or lo the maintenanceof tile existing order of things, the irregularand dangerous action of secret combinations is, aswe have said, a species of force which no stale can .reasonably be expected to recognize. But it ma^^nevertheless have happened at particular emerged* jlies, and during times of very imperfect civilization, 1that valuable service has been rendered by such combinationsto some of the moat important interests ofsociety, and that they have to a considerable extent 1;replied the defects of the rude and imperfect argumentsof the ordinary government.e SECRET SOCIETIES.The system of secret association is, indeed, thenatural resource of the friends of political reform, intiriieB when the general mind is not sufficiently enlightenedlo appreciate or to support their schemesfor the improvement of the existing institutions andorder of things. To proclaim their views openly insuch circumstances would be of no more use thanharanguing to the desert. Ttiey might even exposethemselves to destruction by the attempt. But,united ina secret association, and availing themselvesof all Ihe advantages at once of their superior knowledgeand intelligence, and of their opportunities ofacting in concert, a very few individuals may workwith an effect altogether out of proportion to theirnumber. They may force in a wedge which in timeshall even split and shiver into fragments Ihe stri:ni;thof the existing social system, no matter by how manyages of barbarism it nay be consolidated. Or, inthe absence of a more regular law and police, theymay maintain the empire of justice by stretchingforth the arm of their own authority in substitutionfor that of the slate, which lies paralysed and powerless,and turning to account even the superstitionsand terrors of the popular imagination by makingthese, as excited by their dark organization and mysteriousforms of procedure, the chain whereby tosecure the popular obedience.On the whole, Ihe system of secret association forpolitical objects, even when there is no dispute aboutthe desirableness of the ends sought lo be accomplished,may be pronounced lo be a corrective ofwhich good men will avail themselves only in timesof general ignorance, or under governments that sinagainst the first principles of all good government,by endeavouring lo put a stop to the advancement ofsociety through the prohibition of (he open expressionof opinion ; but, in countries where the liberty ofIntroduction. 7discussion exists, and where the public mind istolerably enlightened, as entirely unsuited to thecircumstances of the case as it is opposed to the rulesand maxims on which every government must takeits stand thut would provide for its utvn preservation.In there happier circumstances the course for thefriends of social improvement tn follow is to comeforward into the full light of day as the only placeworthy of their mission, and to seek the relationof their views by directly appealing to the understandingsof their fellow-citizens.One evil to which secret societies are always exposedis the chance of the objects and principles oftheir members being misrepresented by those interestedin resisting their power and indolence. Asthe wakeful eyes of the government, and of those concededin the maintenance of the actual system, willbe ever upon them, they must strictly confine theknowledge of their real views and proceedings to theinitiated, and as their meetings must for the samereason be held in retired places, and frequently bynight, an opportunity, which is rarely neglected, isafforded to their enemies of spreading the mostcalumnious reports of their secret practices, which,though conscious of innocence, they may not ventureopenly to confute. Uy arts of this kind the suspicionsand aversion of the people are excited, andthey are often thus made to persecute their bestfriends, and still to bow beneath the yoke of their realfoes. The similarity of the accusations made againstsecret associations in all parts of the world is a sufficientproof of their falsehood, and we should alwayslisten to them with the utmost suspicion, recollectingthe quarter from which they proceed. Of the spotlesspurity of the Christian religion when first promulgatedthrough the Roman world no one canentertain 'a doubt; yet when persecution obliged itsSECRET SOCIETIES.professors to form as it were a Secret society, theecharges of Thespian banquets, and of the intercourse of the sexes, were made againstthem, which ihey themselves afterwards brought, aodwith probably as little truth, against the various seelsof the Gnostic heresy. Wherever there is secrecythere will be suspicion, and charges of somethingunable to bear the light of day will be made.The ancient world presents one secret society of aprofessedly political character — thai of the Pytbago-Of religious ones it might be expected to yielda rich harvest to the inquirer, when we call to mindsbeen written in ancient and modern timesconcerning the celebrated mysteries. But the originalGrecian mysteries, such as those of Eleusis, appearto have been nothing more thou public services ofthe gods, with some peculiar ceremonies performed atthe charge of the state, and presided over by the magistrates,in which there were no secrets communicatedto the initiated, no revelation of knowledge beyondthat which was generally attainable. The privatemysteries, namely, the Orphic, Isaac, and Mitbraic,which were introduced from the East, were merelymodes employed by cunning and profligate impostorsfor taking advantage of the weakness and credulityof the sinful and the superstitious, by persuadingthem that by secret and peculiar rites, and the invocationof strange deities, the apprehended punishmentof sin might be averted. The nocturnal assembliesfor the celebration of these mysteries werebut too often scenes of vice and debauchery, and theywere discountenanced by all good governments. Itis to these last, and not to the Eleusinian mysteries,that the severe strictures of the fathers of the churchapply*.The history of Pythagoras and his doctrines isSee Loljeck's excellent vote " Aglaophamui."INTRODUCTION.extremely obscure. The accounts of this sage whichhave come dawn to us were not written till manycenturies after his death, and but little relianceis to be placed on their details. Pythagoras wasik Samian by birth ; he flourished in the sixth centurybefore Clirisl, at the time when Egypt exercisedso much influence over Greece, and its sageKnight the banks of the Nile in search of wisdom.There is, therefore, no improbability in the traditionof Pythagoras also having visited that land of mystery,and perhaps other parts of the East, and markedthe tranquil order of things where those who wereesteemed the wise ruled over the ignorant people.pie may therefore have conceived the idea of unitingthis sacerdotal system with the rigid morals andaristocratic constitution of the Dorian states of Greece.His native isle, which was then under the tyrannyof Polycrates, not appearing to him suited for theintroduction of his new system of government, heturned his eyes to the towns of Magna Grscia, orSouthern Italy, which were at that time in a highlyflourishing condition, whose inhabitants were eagerin the pursuit of knowledge, and some of whichalready possessed written codes of law. He fixedhis *hew on Croton, one of the wealthiest and mostdistinguished of those towns.Aristocracy was the soul of the Dorian politicalconstitutions, and the towns of Magna Grscia wereall Dorian colonies ; but in consequence of their extensivecommerce the tendency of the peoplethat time towards democracy. To preserve the aristocraticprinciple was the object of Pythagoras ; bhe wished lo make the aristocracy not merely onebirth ; he desired that, like the sacerdotal castesthe East, it should also have the supremacy in knoledge. As his system wis contrary to the gene:feeling, Pythagoras saw that it was only by gainingSECRET SOCIETIES.the veneration of the people that he could carry itinto effect ; and by his personal advantages of beautyof form, skill in gymnastic exercises, eloquence, anddignity, he drew to himself the popular favour bycasting the mantle of mystery over his doctrines. Hetins at once inspired the people with awe for them,and the nobles with zeal to become Initialed in hisHeareth,Tile most perfect success, we are told, attendedthe project of the philosopher. A total change ofmanners took place in Croton ; the constitution becamenearly Spartan ; body of 300 nobles, renderedby the lessons of the sage as superior to the people inknowledge of every kind as they were in birth, ruledover it. The nobles of the other slates flocked to Crotonto learn how to govern by wisdom ; Pythagoreanmissionaries went about everywhere preaching thenew political creed ; they inculcated on the peoplereligion, humility, and obedience; such of the noblesaa were deemed capable were initiated in the wisdomof the order, and taught its mansions and principles; a. golden age, in which power was milled withwisdom and virtue, seemed to have begun uponearth.But, like every thing which struggles against thespirit of the age, such a political system was notfated to endure. While Croton was thechief seat ofPythiigoresnism, luxury had fixed her throne in theneighbouring city of Sybaris. The towns were rivals :one or the other must full. It was little mure thanthirty years after the arrival of Pythagoras in Crotonthat a furious war broke out between them. Led byMilo and other Pythagoreans, who were as expertti military airs as skilled in philosophy, the Croputterly annihilated the power of their rivals,and Sybaris sank to rise no more. But with hersank the power of the Pythagoreans. They judgedIntroduction. 1 1it inexpedient to give a large share uf the booty tothe peuple ; the popular discontent rose ; Ceylon, amau who had been refused admittance into the order,took advantage of il, and urged the people on ; thePythagoreans were all massacred, and a democracyestablished. All the other towns took example byCroton, a general persecution of the order commenced,and Pythagoras himself was obliged to seeksafety in flight, and died far away from the townwhich once had received him bb a prophet ThePythagoreans never made any further attempts atattaining political power, but became a mere sect ofmystic philosophers, distinguished by peculiarities offood and dress.Ancient times present us with no other society ofany importance to which we can properly apply theterm secret.The different sects of the Gnostic, who are bythe fathers of the chm^h styled heretics, were to acertain extent secret societies, as they did not propoundtheir doctrines openly and publicly ; but theirhistory is so scanty, and so devoid of interest, thatan examination of it would offer little to detain ordinaryreaders.The present volume is devoted to the history oithree celebrated societies which flourished during themiddle ages, and of which, as far as we know, nofull and satisfactory account is to be found in Englishliterature. These are the Assassins, or Israelites,of the East, whose name has become in all the languagesof Europe synonymous with murderer, whowere a secret society, and of whom we have in geneoral such vague and indistinct conceptions ; the militaryorder of the Knights Templar, who were mostbarbarously persecuted under the pretext of theirholding a secret doctrine, and against whom thecharge has been renewed at the present day ; and.12 SECRET SOCIETIES.finally, the Secret Tribunals of Westphalia, in Germany,concerning which all our information hashitherto been derived from the incorrect statementsof dramatists and romancers*.It is the simplicity of truth, and not the excitementof romance, that the reader is to expect to find in thefollowing pages, — pictures of manners and modes ofthinking different from our own, — knowledge, notmere entertainment, yet as large an infusion of thelatter as is consistent with truth and instruction.Since the present work was prepared, a translation ofVon Hammer's History of the Assassins has been publishedby Dr. Oswald Charles Wood.whyTHE ASSASSINS*State of the World in the Th Century— Wealcm EmpitB—EoBtcru Empire — Persia — Arabia — Moliajnined — His probablyMotives— Character of his Religion— The Koran.At the commencement of the 7th century of theChristian era a new character was about to be impressedon a laisse portion of the world. During thetwo centuries which preceded, the Goths, Vandals,Huns, and other martial tribes of the Germanicrace, had succeeded in beating' down the barriersopposed to them, and in conquering and dismemberingthe Western Empire. They brought with themand retained their love of freedom and spirit ofdauntless valour, but abandoned their ancient andferocious superstitions, and embraced the corruptausten which then degraded the name of Christianity.This system, hardened, as it were, by ideas retainedand transferred from the original faith of its newdisciples, which ideas were fostered by those passagesof the books of the Hebrew Scriptures which accordedwith their natural sentiments, alter wards, when alliedwith feudal ism, engendered the spirit which poured thehosts of Western Europe over the mountains andplains of Asia for the conquest of the Holy Land.• slammer's G»«cAicA(e dtj- Aaainaai (History gf flieAstBSBins), Boil the sttDH wtHer'a Fandi/rulien dei Orient(Mines of the East), M. JourUain's Ktlrml de rOnirage deISirMiond mr la DgHaitie del Iimotlilfi, aqd Malcolm's historyof Persia, are the principal authorities for the followingit of the Assassins.ISECRET SOCIETIES.A diS«Teiit picture was at this time presented bythe empire of the Earl It still retained the extentassigned to it hy Theodosius ; and all the countriesfrom the Danube, round the eust and south coasts ofthe Mediterranean, lo the straits of Gates, yielded amore or leas perfect obedience to the successors ofConstantine. But a despotism more degradingless ferocious, than those of Asia paralyzedthe patriotism and the ener^ of their subjects ; andthe acuteness, the conscientiousness, and the imaginationof the Greeks, combined with mysticism and thewild fancy of the Asiatics to transform the simplicityof the religion of Christ into a revoking system ofintricate metaphysics and gross Idolatry, which aidedthe influence of their political condition in chillingthe martial ardour of the people. The various provincesof the empire were held together the loosestand feeblest connexion, and it was apparent that avigorous shock would suffice to dissolve the union.The mountains of Armenia and the course of theEuphrates separated the Eastern Empire from thatof Persia, This country had been under the dominionof the people named Parthian at Ihe time whenthe eagles of the Roman republic first appeared outhe Euphrates, and defeat had more than once attendedthe Roman armies which attempted to entertheir cornea. Like every dominion not founded onthe freedom of the people, that of the Ascites (theParthian royal line) grew feeble with time, and aftera continuance of nearly time centuries the sceptre ofGraces passed from the weak hand of the lastmonarch of his line to that of ArdeshirBabegan (thatis the son of Babe), a valiant officer of the royal *army, and a pretended descendant of the ancientmonarchs of Persia. Ardeshir, to accomplish thisrevolution, availed himself of the religious prejudicesof the Persian people. The Fuitbiau monarchs hadstained to the manners and the religion of the Greeks,and the Lights religion— the original faith of Persia,and one of the purest and most spiritual of those lowith a divine origin may not be assigned — had beenheld in slight estimation, and its priests unvisited byroyal favour. It was the pride and the policy ofArdeshir to restore the ancient religion lo the dignitywhich it had enjoyed under the descendants of Cyrus,and Religion, in return, lent her powerful aid lo hisplans of restoring the royal dignity to its pristinevigour, and of infusing into the breast of the peoplethe love of country and the ardour for extending thePersian dominion to what it had been of old ; andfor 400 years the Sassanides* were the most formidableenemies of the Roman empire. But theirdominion had, at the period of which we wrlle, nearlyattained the greatest limit allotted to Oriental dynasties; and though Noosheerwan the .Must had attainedgreat warlike fame, and governed with a vigour andjustice that have made his name proverbial in theEast, and Khoosrno Purveez displayed a magnificencewhich is still the theme of Persian poetry andromance, and carried his victorious arms over Syriaand Egypt, and further along the Alcan coast thaneven those of Darius I, had been able to advance,yet defeat from the gallant Emperor Heraclitusclouded his latter days, and Ihe thirteenth year alterhis death, by showing the Persian armies in flight,and the palladium of the empire, the jewel-set apronof the blacksmith Kawah, in the hands of the roversof the deserts, revealed the secret that her strength■ The Bane given to the dynasty Founded by Arrester,from Ilia pretended ancuitoc Sansiui, a grandson ol' Isfundrar,t hid i^atlf celebrated in the ancient history of Peisio.Istuiideur was the son ot Guahtup, who is aunpuaud to be theDatiua Hjitaapes of the Greek histDiiuDs. Sic J.ihn Maratnuied 1g identify Isfundear with the Secus of theISECRET SOCIETIES.WHS departed from Persia. The brilliancy oF theearly part of the reign of Khoosroo Purveez had beenbut the flash before death which at times is displayedin empires as in individuals. The vigour wasgone which was requisite to stem the torrent oflaiialic valour about to burst forth from the wilds ofArabia.It is the boast of Arabia That it has never beenconquered. Thi': immunity from subjugation has,however, been only partial, and is owing to thenature of the country ; for although the barren Bandsof the Hejaz and Need have always baffled theefforts of hostile armies, yet the more inviting regionof Yemen, the Happy Arabia of the ancients, hasmore than once allured a conqueror, and submittedto his sway. The inhabitants oF this country havebeen the same in blood and in manners from thedawn of history. Brave, but not sanguinary, robbers,but kind and hospitable, of lively and acuteintellect, we find the Arabs, from the days of Abrahamto the present times, leading the pastoral andnomadic life in the desert, agriculturists in Yemen,traders on the coasts and on the confines of Syria andEgypt. Their foreign military operations hadhitherto been confined to plundering expeditionsinto the last-mentioned countries, unless they werethe Hycsos, or Shepherd Rings, who, according lotradition, once made the conquest of Egypt. Arabiaforming a kind of world in itself, its various tribeswere in ceaseless hostility with each other ; but it wasapparent that if its brave and skilful horsemen couldbe united under one head, and animated by motiveswhich would inspire contained and rouse valour,they might present a force capable of giving a. fatalfihouk to the empires of Persia and of Rome.It is impossible, on taking a survey of the historyof the world, not to recognize a great predisposingTHF ASSASSINS. 17which appoitils the lime and circumstances ofevery event which is to produce any considerablechange in the state of human affairs. The agencyof this overruling providence is nowhere more perceptiblethan in the present instance. The tire wascome for the Arabs to leave their deserts and marchto the conquest of the world, and the man was bornwho was to inspire them with the necessary motives.Mohammed illustrious*) was the son of Abd-Allah (Servant of God), a noble Arab of the iriheof Koreish, which had the guardianship of the Kaabasquare House. of Mecca), the Black Stone containedin which (probably an aerolite) had been foragesan object of religious veneration to (he tribes ofArabia. His mother was Amineh, the daughter ofa chief of princely rank. He was early left anorphan, with the slender patrimony of five camelsand a female Ethiopian slave. His uncle, AboTalib, brought him up. At an early age theyoung Mohammed accompanied his uncle lo thefair of Bozr.i, on the verge of Syria, and in his18th year he signalized his valour in an engagementbetween the Koreish and a hostile tribe. Atthe age of 25 he entered the service of Khadijah, awealthy widow, with whose merchandise he visitedone of the great fairs of Syria. Mohammed, thoughpoor, was noble, handsome, acute, and brave ;Khadijah, who was fifteen years his senior, was inspiredwith love ; her passion was returned ; and theThe Oriental proper names being mostly all significant.vra aliall trsimlatB IliBin when we first employ them. As,however, it ia nut always that it can be discovered that AboriginalArabic character am of aa eastern word which womeet in Roman letter, we shall be sometimes obliged tu leavenames unexplained, and at other times lu haiaid conjecturalifiUnationi- la the hurt cuci vb ball affix » muk ofISECRET SOCIETIES.ffift of her hand and wealth gave the nephew ofAbooo Talib affluence and consideration.Mohammed's original turn of mind appears tohave been serious, and it is not unlikely that thegreat troth of the Unity of the Deity had been earlyimpressed on his mind by his mother or his Jewishkindred. The Koreish and the rest of his country-idolaters;Christianity was now corruptedby the intermixture of many superstitions ; the fire-worshipof" the Persians was a worshipping of theDeity under a material form ; the Mosaic religionhad been debased by the dreams and absurd distinctionsuf the Rabbis. A simpler form than anyof these seemed wanted for man. God, moreover,was believed to have at sundry times sent prophetsinto the world for its reformation, and might doso again; the Jews still looked for their promisedMessiah ; many Christians held that the Faradetewas yet lo come. Who can take upon him toassert that Mohammed may not have believed himselfto be set apart to the service of God, and appointedby the divine decree to be the preacher of apurer faith than any wliici) he then saw existing?Who will say that in his annual seclusion of fifteendays in the cave of Hire he may not have fallen intoecstatic visions, and (hat in one of these wakingdreams the anp:el Gabriel may not have appeared tohis distempered fancy lo descend to nominate him tothe office of a prophet of God, and present to him,in a visible form, that portion of his future law whichhad probably already passed through his mind*?The Knlila Khan of Coleriiiffe (Poetical Works, vol. i.p. 'iG6) ii a fine distance qC this pnv/ei a{ tht mini, withdrawnI'niin Ihe contemplation ul' material objecta. The readier willprobably recollect the sign given Iron heaven to Lurtl Hubert□f CbeibiDj, on the aceaiion of hii work initteii against re-THE ASSASSINS.portion of self-delusion is always mingled'^vith successful imposture ; the impostor, as it were,makes his first experiment on himself. It is muchmore reasonable to conclude that Mohammed had atfirst no other object than the dissemination of truthby persuasion, and that he may have beguiledhimself into a belief of his being the instrumentselected for that purpose, than that the citizen of atown in the secluded region of Arabia beheld inambitious vision from his mountain-cave his victoriousbanners waving on the banks of the Oxus anilthe Bro, and his name sainted as that of the Prophetof God by a fourth part of the human race.Still we must not pass fay another, and perhaps a truersupposition, namely, that, in the mind of Mohammed,as in that of so many others, the end justified themeans, and tithe deemed it lawful to feign a visionand a commission from God in order to procure frommen a hearing for the truth.Whatever the ideas and projects of Mohammedmay originally have been, he waited till he hadattained his fortieth year (the age at which Mosesshowed himself first to the Israelites), and thenrevealed his divine commission lo his wife Khadijah,his slave Zeid, his cousin Aii, the son of AboooTalib, and his friend, the virtuous and wealtliyAbooBekr. It is difficult U> conceive any motive butconviction to have operated on the minds of these[b6 religio. This wcitei has lately henid m;sofawas (elected as the instrument tor accok In the hand of Quid ; and giving, iiHID niimliiic of moiiltae, iba should be ui1 un which she wan lyiii[;. Suuhis theiioiI Io supposed intimation in regard toMk effect; she believed herself tu havea, and Iharelbra did in reality toil it.20 SECRET SOCIETIES.different persons, who at once acknowledged hisclaim to the prophetic oRicc ; and it speaks not alittle for the purity of the previous life of the newProphet, that he could venture lo claim the faithof those who were most intimately acquainted withhim. The voice of wisdom has assured hs thata prophet lias no honour in his own country andamon his own kindred, and the Example of Mohammedtestified tile truth of the declaration.During thirteen years the new religion made butslow and painful progress in the town of Mecca ;but the people of Yathreb, a town afterwards dignifiedwith the appellation of the City of the ProphetiMedinat-en-Nabi), were more susceptive of faith ;and when, on the death of Abooo Talib, who protectedhis nephew, though he rejected his daims, hiscelebrated Flight (^Hejrd) brought him to Yathreb,the people of that town took arms in his defenceagainst the Koreish. It was probably now that newviews opened to the mind of the Prophet. Princeof Yathreb, he might hope to extend his sway overthe ungrateful Mecca; and those who had scoffed athis arguments and persuasions might be taughtlessons of wisdom by the sword. These anticipationswere correct, and in less than ten years afterthe battle of Bear (the first he fought) he saw histemporal power and his prophetic character acknowledgedby the whole of the Arabian peninsula.It commonly happens that, when a new form' ofreligion is proposed for the acceptance of mankind,it surpasses in purity that which it is intended tosupersede. The Arabs of the days of Mohammedwere idolaters ; 300 is said to have been the numberof the images which claimed their adoration in theCaaba. A gross licentiousness prevailed amongthem; their polygamy had no limits assigned to it*.See, in Sir J. Malcolm's History pf Persia, the diiilotjuoTHE Assassins.For this the Prophet substituted the worship of OneGod, and placed a check on the sensual propensitiesof his people. His religion contained descriptionsof the future state of rewards and punishments, bywhich he allured lo obedience and terrified fromcontumacy or opposition. The grains of hell whichhe menaced were such as mere most offensive lo thebody and its organs, the joys of Paradise wereverdant heads, shady trees, murmuring' brooks,gentle airs, precious woes in cujus of gold and silver,stately tents, and splendid sofas ; the melody ofthe songs of angels was to ravish the souls of theblessed, the black eyed Horses were to he the ever-blooming'brides of the faithful servants of God.Yet, though sensual bliss was to be his ultimatereward, the votary was taught that its attainmentdemanded self-denial on earth ; and it has beenjustly observed that " a devout Mussulman exhibitsmore of the Stoical than of the Epicurean characters."As the Prophet had resolved that the swordshould be unsparingly employed for the division ofthe truth, the highest degree of the future bliss waspronounced to be the portion of the martyrs, i. r.,of those who fell in the holy wars waged for thedissemination of the faith. " Paradise," says theProphet, " is beneath the shadow of swords." At theIwtweeu the Persian king Tezdijird and tho Arab cnvov.Whtttevet/' said tholfltttr-thou hast said repairing thefoimei condition of the Amen is tie. Their food was greenlixardBj they buried their infant daughters alive ; nay sconeof them feasted on dead carcases and dtaiik blood, whileothers slew their relations, and thought themselves great andvaliant when, by such an act, the; became possessed ot momproperty. They were clothed with hair garments, knew not' ,good firm evil und made nu distinction between that whichs unlawful.it God in his Twhich teai-heB u!a holy prophet a, MciedIB faith," Sec.ISECRET Societies.day of judgement the wounds of the fallen warriorwere to be resplendent lis vermilion, and odoriferousaa musk; and the wings of angels were to supplythe loss of limbs. The religion of Mohammed wasentitled Islam (/eaigTiaUoTt), whence its votaries werecalled by the Arabs Moslems, and in Persian Mussulman.Its articles of belief were five — belief ingot,in his angels, in his Prophet, in the lost day, and inpredestination. Its positive duties were also five —purification, prayer, fasting, alms, and the pilgrimageto Mecca, Various rites and observances which theArabs had hitherto practised were retained by theProphet, either out of regard for the prejudices of hisfollowers, or because he did not, or could not, divesthis own mind of respect for usages in which he hadbeen reared up from infancy.Such is a slight sketch of the religion whichMohammed substituted for the idolatry of Arabia.U contained little that was original; ^1' its details ofthe future state were borrowed from Judaism or fromthe Magian system of Persia. The book whichcontains it, entitled the Koran reading), was composedin detached pieces, during a long series ofyears, by the illiterate Prophet, and taken down fromhis lips by his scribes. His own account of its originwas that each !julia, or revelation, was brought to himfrom heaven by the angel Gabriel. It is regarded bythe Mohammedan East, and by most EuropeanOrientalis, as the masterpiece of Arabian literature;and when we make due allowance for, the difference ofEuropean and Arabian models and taste, and considerthat the rhyme* which in prose ie insufferableto the former, may to the latter sound grateful, wemay allow that the praises lavished on it are not• The Hebrews, as appears from the poetic parts of theScripture, had the lame delight in the clang of rhyme as theArabs. See particularly Isaiah iu the originalTHE ASSASSINS.zaunmerited. Though tedious and often childish legends,and long' and tiresome civil regulations, occupythe greater part of it, it is pervaded by a fine strainof fervid piety and humble resignation to the will ofGod, not unworthy of the inspired seers of Israel ;and the sublime doctrine of the Unity of God runslike a vein of pure gold through each portion of themass, giving lustre and dignity to all. Might wenot venture to say that Christianity itself has derivedadvantage from the imposture of Mohammed, andthat the clear and open profession of the DivineUnity by their Mohammedan enemies kept theCltfistiaua of the dark ages from smothering it beneaththe moss of superstition and fable by which theycorrupted and deformed so much of the majesticsimplicity of the Gospel ? No one, certainly, woulddream of comparing the son of Abd-allah with theSon of God, of setting darkness by the side of light ;but still we may confess him to have been an agentin the hands of the Almighty, and admit that hisassumption of the prophetic ofRce was productive ofintimately cThe Mohammedan religion is sonetted with history, law, manners, aIhe part of the East of which we are about to nthat this brief view of its origin and nature was iienable. We now proceed to our history.Secret Socrates.Aralr the Halifax— ThB final KhaUfs— Orient of theaEmpire — Schism aniDag tho Mohammedanss —Suoaeea and Shears— Seels of the latter— The Keissanee-The ZeidilHS— The GhooUat- The Iraamee— Sects of thelaiamee— Their political Character— The CarniathitBa—Origin of the Fatimite Thalia— Secret Society al Cairo-doctrinestaught in it — Its DecllDC.The civil and ecclesiastical dignities were united inthe person of Mohammed, As Emir (prince) he administeredjustice and led his followers to battle ; asImam director) he on every Friday (the Mohammedansabbath) taught the principles and^duties ofreligion from his pulpit. Though hia wives werenumerous, the Prophet had no male issue survivingat the lime when he felt the approaches of death ;hut his daughter Fatima was married to his cousinAli, his early and faithful disciple, and it was naturallyto be expected that the expiring voice of theProphet mould nominate him as his Khalif (successor)over the followers of bis faith. But Ayesha, Ihedaughter of Abooo Bekr, Mohammed's youthful andbest beloved wife, was vehemently hostile to the souof Abooo Talib, and she may have exerted all the influenceof a revengeful woman over the mind of thedying Prophet. Or perhaps Mohammed, like Alexander,perplexed with the extent of dominion towhich he had attained, and aware that only a vigourof character similar to his own would avail to reliantenlarge it, and, it may be, thinking himself answerableto God for the choice be should make,deemed il the safest course to leave the matter to thefree decision of his surviving followers. His appointingAbooo Bekr, a few days before his death, toofficiate in Its pulpit, might seem to indicate an intentionof Conferring; the khalifat ou him ; and he i.ssaid to have at one time declared that the strength ol'character displayed by his distinguished follower,Omar, evinced hia possession of the virtues of aprophet and a khalif Tradition records no equallystrong declaration respecting the mild and virtuousAli.At all events the Prophet expired without havingnamed a successor, and the choice devolving on hiscompanions dissension was ready to break out, whenOiuar, abandoning his own claims, gave his voice forAbooo Bekr. All opposition was thus silenced, andthe father of Ayesha reigned for two years over thefaithful. Ah at first refused obedience, but he finallyacknowledged the successor of the Prophet. Whendying, Abooo Bekr bequeathed the sceptre to Omar,as the worthiest, and when, twelve years afterwards,Omar perished by the dagger of an assassin, sixelectors conferred the vacant dignity on Othman, whohad been the secretary of the Prophet. Age havingenfeebled the powers of Othman, the reins of authoritywere slackened, and a spirit of discord pervadedall Arabia, illustrative of the Prophet's declaration ofvigour being essential to a khalif, A numerousbody of rebels besieged the aged Othman in Medina,and he was slain, holding the Koran in his lap, by abaud of murderers, headed by the brother of Ayesha,who, the firebrand of Islam, it is probable had beensecretly active in exciting the rebellion.The popular choice now fell upon Ali, but the implacableAyesha stimulated to revolt against his tSocieties,thirty two powerful Arab chiefs, named Tells andSober, vii raised their standing in the province ofArabian Iralt. Ayesha, mounted on a camel, appearedin Ic thickest of the battle, in which the rebelchiefs were defeated and slain. The generous Aliodwell at the tomb of the Prophet, whereshe passed in tranquillity the remainder of her days.The khalif himself was less fortitude. Moawiya,the Governor of Syria, son of Hoo Sofian, the mostviolent of the opponents of the Prophet, assumedthe office of the avenger of Othman, whose death hecharged on Ali and his party, and, declaring himselflo be the rightful khalif, roused Syria lo arms againstthe Prophet's son-in-law. In the war success was onthe side of Ali, till the superstition of his troopsobliged him to agree to a treaty; and shortly afterwardshe was murdered by a fanatic in the mostof Coofa, His son Ilassanwaa induced by Moawiyato resign his claims and retire to the city of Medina ;but his more high-spirited brother, Hussein, tookarms against the half Yezid, the son of Moawiya;and the narrative of his death is one of the most patheticand best related incidents of Oriental history*.The sisters and children of Hussein were spared bythe lenient of the victorious Yezid, and from themdescend a numerous race, glorying in the blood ofAli and the Prophet.The Arabian empire was now of immense extent.Egypt, Syria, and Persia had been conquered in thereign of Omar. Under the first klwlifs of thedynasty of Ihe Ommiades (so called from Ommiyah,the great-grandfather of Moawiya), the conquest ofAfrica and Spain was achieved, and the later princesof this family ruled over the most extensive empireof the world.• Sm Ockley'a Destiny of the Sstweni.ftVhe great schism of the Mohammedan churchemust be permitted to employ this term, the onlyone our language affords) commences with the accessionof the house of Ommiyah. The Mohammedanhave, as is generally known, been from thattime to the present day divided into two great sects,the Soonees and the Sheaths, the orthodox and thedissenters, as we might venture to call them, whoseopposite doctrines, like those of the Catholics and theProtestants of the Christian church, are each theestablished faith of great and independent nations.The Ottoman and the Usbeg Turks hold the Soonerfaith; the Persians are violent Sheahs; and nationaland religions animosity concur in making them thedetermined and inveterate foes of each other.The Sinners hold that the first four khalifs wereai] legitimate successors of the Prophet; but as theirorder was determined by their degree of sanctity,they assign the lowest rank to Ali. The Shefiha, onthe contrary, maintain that the dignity of the Prophetrightl\il]y descended to the son of his uncle andthe husband of his daughter. They therefore regardAbooo Bekr, Omar, and Othman, ag usurpers, andcurse and revile their memory, more especially thatof the rigid Omar, whose murderer they venerable asa.saint. It must be steadily ke'|>t in mind, in everydiscussion respecting the Mohammedan religion,that Mohammed and his successors succeeded inestablishing what the lofty and capacious mind ofGregory VII. attempted in vain— the union of thecivil and ecclesiastical powers in the same person.Unlike the schisms of the eastern and western, ofthe Catholic and Protestant churches, which originatedin difference of opinion on points of disciplineor matters of doctrine, that of the Mohammedanssarose solely from ambition and the struggle for temporalpower. The sceptre of the greatest empire ofSBCBET SOCIETIES.the world was tb be the rcwaril of the party whocould gain the greatest number of believers in hisright to grasp the staff and ascend the pulpit of theProphet of God. Afterwards, when the learning ofthe Greeks and the Persians became familiar to theArabs, theological and metaphysical niceties anddistinctions were introduced, and the two great stemsof religion threw out numerous sectarian branches.The Soonees are divided into four main sects, all ofwhich are, however, regarded as orthodox, for theyagree in the main points, though they differ in subordinateones. The division of the Sheahs is also intofour sects, the point of agreement being the assertionof the right of Ali and his descendants to the imitatorsupreme ecclesiastical dignity; the point of differencebeing the nature of the proof on which hisrights are founded, and the order of successionamong his descendants. These four sects and theiropinions are as follows ; —I. The erst and most innocuous of the sects whichmaintained the rights of the family of Ali were theKeissane*, so named from Meissen, one of his freedmen.These, who were subdivided into severalbranches, held that Ali's rights descended, not loHassan or Hussein, but to their brother, .One of these branch-sects maintainedthat the imamat remained* in the person of thisMohammed, who had never died, but had sinceappeared, from time lo time, on earth, under variousnames. Another branch, named the Hashemites,held that the imamat descended from to his son Aboo-Hashem, who transmittedit to Mohammed, of the family of Abhfts,fromwhom it descended lo Saffah, the founder of theAbbasside dynasty of khatilsT. It is quite evident• Hence they were named the SfandiQu ((fo^/yn*).t Abbas, the anceulai of this family, was one of the unclesTHE Assassins.that the object of this sect was to cive a colour tothe claims of the family of Abbas, who stigmatizedthe family of Ommiyah as usurpers, and insistedthat the khalifat belonged of right to themselves.Abo-Moslem, the great general who first gave dominion(o the family of Abbas, was a real or pretendedmaintainer of the tenets of this sect, the onlybranch, by the way, oi' the Shells which supportedthe house ol' Abbas,II. A second branch of the Shells was namertZeiditea. These held that the imamat descendedthrough Hassan and Hussein to Zein-al-Abedeen, theson of (bis last, and thence passed to Zeid (whencetheir name), the son of Zeiu ; whereas most ntlierSheSliB regarded Mohammed Bakir, the brother ofZeid, as the lawful imam. The Zeidiles differedfrom the other Sheikhs in acknowledging the threefirst khalifs to have been legitimate successors of theProphet. Eris, who greater a part of Africa fromthe Abbasside khalifs, and founded the kingdom ofFez, was a real or pretended descendant of Zeid.III. The Ghoollat (Ultra), so named from theextravagance of their doctrines, which, passing allbounds of common sense, were held in equal abominationby the other Sheahs and by the Soonees.This sect is said to have existed as early as the timeof All himself, who is related to have burnt some ofthem on account of their impious and extravagantof the Prophet. They obtained possession of the khali&tk.D. ^50, and retained it through aa hereditary luccegiiun ofprinces fur 500 yetua. Ai-M.msooi, the second khalit' of this(laity, transferred the royal residence from Damascus), whereth OmiuiadHB had dwelt, to Bagdad, which he ToUDded ontho banks of the Tigris. This city, also named the City ofTime. the Vale of Peace, the Bouse of Peace, baa acquired,bejnnd what any other town can claim, a degree of [oratio- ' ■ "y by means of the inimitable Hound Bad OnSvichis tbu enaoblingpower of genius!I30 SECRET SOCIETIES.opinions. They held, as we are told, that there wasbut one imam, and they ascribed the qualities ofdivinity to Ali. Some maintained that there weretwo natures (the divine and the human) in him,others that the last alone was his. Some a^n saidthat this perfect nature of Ali passed by transmigrationthrough his descendants, and would continue so todotill the end of all things; others that the transmissionstopped with Mohammed Bakir, the son ofZein-al-Aliedeen, who still abode on earth, but unseen,like Kaiser, the Guardian of the Well of Life,according to the beautified eastern legend*. Others,still more bold, denied the transmission, and assertedthat the divine Ali sat enthroned in the clouds, wherethe thunder was the voice and the lightning thescourge wherewith he terrified and chastised thewicked. This sect presents the first (though a veryearly) instance of the introduction into Islam of thatmysticism which appears to have had its original■ Olivier, by sahib supposed, but perhaps erroneously, tobe the prophet Has, ia legacdecl by the Al ubammediiai lathelight of a beneficent genius. He is the giver of youth tuthe animal and the vegetable world. He ia dad in gannetof the Digit brilliant green, and he staudi as keeper of theWell aC Life in the Land of Darkness. According to theromance of the host, Slander, that in, Alexander the Great,lesulvifd to march into the Wet, to the Land oE Da'kneaB, thathe might drink ol the water of immortality. During seenentire days he and his followers journeyed through dark anddismal deserts. At length Ihey fninll; discerned in the distancethe green lightwbichshune from the raiment of Hier.As they advanced it became more and more resplendent, likethe brightest and purest emeralds. Ai the monarch approached,Rhine dipped a cup in the verdant Water of Lite,reached it to him ; but the impatient of Iskander wna aoI that be gpilf the contents of the cup, and the Uvnf fatenot permit the guardian of the fount to fill it for himagain. The mora! of this tale is evident. Its hI the journey of the Macedonian to the templeTHE ASSASSINS,31 nbirth-place Jn the dreamy groves of India, As apolitical party the Ghoollat never seem to have beenformidable,IV. Such, however, was not the case with theImamee, the most dangerous enemies of the houseof Abbas, Agreeing with the Ghoollat Id the doctrineof an iiivinblf imam, they maintained thatthere had been a series of insibk imams antecedentto him, who had vanished. One branch of this sect(thence called the Severer — Sebihi) closed the serieswith Ismail, the grandson of Mohammed Bakir,the seventh imam, reckoning All himself the first.These were also called Ismailites, from Ismail. Theother branch, called Imagines, continued the seriesfrom Ismail, through his brother Moose Casino,down to Asperse, the twelfth imam. These werehence called the Twelves (Esjiaashree). Theybelieved that the imam Asperse had vanished in acavern at Hilla, on the banks of the Euphrates,where he would remain invisible till the fetid of theworld, when he would again appear under the nameof the Guide ( Mehdee) to lead mankind into thetruth. The Imamee, wherever they might stop inthe series of the visible imams, saw that, for theirpolitical purposes, it was necessary to acknowledge akind of locum tenentea imams but, while the Zeid-iles, who agreed with them in this point, required inthese princes the royal virtues of valour, generosity,justice, knowledge, the Imamee declared themselvessatisfied if they possessed the saintly ones of thepractice of prayer, fasting, and alms-giving. Henceartful and ambitious men could set up any puppetwho was said to be descended from the last ol thevisible imams, and aspire to govern the Mohammedanworld in his name.The Twelves were very near obtaining possessiontof the khalifat in the time of the first Embassies;ISECRET SOCIETIES.for the celebrated Hftronn Er-Raaheed's son, Al-manhood,the eighth khalif of that house, movedeither by the strength or prepoiideraiiue whichthe Sheath party had arrived at, or, us the easternhistorians tell u^;, yielding to the suggestions of luswho was devoted to that seel, named Aii Rica,the eighth imam, to be his successor on the throne.He even laid aside the black habiltcnenls peculiar tohis family, and wore green, the colour ol' AH andthe Prophet. But the family of Abbas, which nownumbered 30.000 persons, refused their assent tothis renunciation of the rights nf their line. Theyrose in &rnis, and proclaimed as khalif Al-mammon'sQQcle Ibrahim. The obnoxious vizir perished, andthe, opportune death of AU Rica (by poison, as wassaid) relieved the sou of Maroon Er-rushed fromembarrassment. Ali Rica was interred at Meshed,in the province of Khorasan ; and his tomb is, to thepresent day, a place of pilgrimage for devout Per-The Ismai'lit^s were more successful in their attemptsat obtaining temporal power; and, as weshall presently see, a considerable portion of theirdominions was wrested from the house of Abbas.Religion has, in all ages, and in all parts nf theworld, been made the mask of ambition, for whichits powerful influence over the minds of the ignorantso well qualities it. , But the poetical influence ofreligion among the calmer and mure reasoning nationsof Europe is slight compared with its powerover the more ardent and susceptible natives of Asia.Owing to the effects of this principle the despotismof the East has never been nf that still, undisturbednature which we might suppose to be its character.To say nothing of the bloody wars and massacreswhich have taken place under the pretext of religion■ See Fiiubc'ii KtiuiasSii.ill tip countries from Japan to the Imius, the Mohammedanportion of the East has been, ulniogtwithout ceasing', the theatre of sanguinary dramaswhere ambition, under the disguise ot'rehg'ion, soughfor empire ; and our own data have seen, in the case Iof the Waliabees, a bold though unsuccessful attempt Jof fanaticism to achieve a revolution in a part of the 1Ottoman empire. It was this union of religion with. \policy which placed the Suave family on the throne \of Persia in the fifteenth century; and it wasalso which, at a much earlier period, established the 1dominion of the Facsimile khalifs of Egypt. The '1progress of this last event is thus traced by oriental fThe encouragement given to literature and scilbj the enlightened Al-maroon had diffused a degree 1of boldness of speculation and inquiry hitherto un Jknown in the eiripire of the Arabs. The subtile Jphilosophy of the Greeks was now brought icontact with the sublime but corrupted theology <^the Persians, and the mysticism uf India secretlymingled itself with the mass of knowledge. We arenot, perhaps, to give credit to the assertion of theArab historian that it was the secret and settled planof the Persians to undermine and corrupt the religion,and thus sap the empire, of those who hadovercome them in the field ; but it is not a Utileremarkable that, as the transformation of the Mosaicreligion into Judaism may betrayed to Persia, andas the same country sent forth the monstrous opinionswhich corrupted the simplicity of the Gospel,, !so it is in Persian that we find the origin of most of Jthe sects which have sprung up in islam. Lilliput ,1agreeing with those who would derive all knowledge ffrom India, it may be held not improbable that the• Iinri anil Maris, quuled hy Hammer.intricate metaphysics and myBticiein of that countryhave been the source of much of the corruption ofthe various religions which have prevailed in Cis-indianAsia. It is at least remarkable that thenorth-east of Persia, the part nearest to India, hasbeen the place where many of the impoalnrs whopretended to intercourse with the Deity made theirappearance. It was here that Man! (Maiiex), thehead of the ManichEeans, displayed his arts, andit was in Khorasan l Suit-land) that Harem,who gave himself out for an incarnation of theDi^ily, raised the standard of revolt against thehouse of Abbas. But, be this as it may, on surveyingthe early centuries of Islam, we may observethat all the rebellions which agitated theempire of the khalifs arose from a union of the claimsof Ihe family of Ali with the philosophical doctrinescurrent in Persia.We are loid that, in the ninth century of the Christianera, Abdallah, a man of Persian Lineage, residing;at AliWBZ, in the south of Persia, conceived the designof overturning the empire of the chalcis by secretlyintroducing into Islam a system of atheism andimpiety. Not to shock deep-rooted prejudices infavour of the established religion and government,he resolved lo communicate his doctrines gradually,and he fixed on the mystic number seven as that ofthe degrees through which his disciples should passto the grand revelation of the vanity of all religiousand the indifference of all actions. The politicalcloak of his system was the assertion of the cairnsof the descendants of Mohammed, the son of Ismail,to the imamut, and his missionaries (jaw) engiiji;edwith activity in the task of making proselytes throughoutthe empire of the khalifs. Abdallah afterwardsremoved to Syria, where be died. His son andTHE ABSASB1)«9. SSgrandsons followed up bia plans, and in their time aconvert was made who speedily brought the systeminto active operation*.Tile name of this person was Warmth, a, native ofthe district of Koofa, and from him the sect wascalled Carmathitea. He made great alterations in jthe original system of Abdallah ; and as the sect way ■now grown numerous and powerful, he resolved to' Iventure on putting the claims of the descendants oF MIsmail to the test of the sword. He maintained' ■that the indefeasible right to earthly dominion lay Iwith what he styled the imam Hu^soom (iipotlegl}^- 9a sort of ideal of a perfect price, like the wise man' Iof the Stoics; consequently all tie reigning princes 1were usurpers, by reason of their vices and imper Jfactious ; and the warriors of the perfect prince were'lto precipitate them all, without distinction, lTomtheir< Jthrones. Warmth also taught his disciples to ud'*'!deratand the precepts aq^ observances of Islam in if^Mfigurative sense. Prayer signifies obedience to the' ^imam Maa^soom, alms-giving was paying the tithedue to him (that is, augmenting the funds of thesociety), fasting was keeping the political secretsrelating to the imam and his service. It was notthe tinsel, or outward word of the Koran, whidtL Jwas lo be attended to ; the taweel, or expositionsalone worthy if note. Like those of MokannSf ' 1and other opponents of the house of Abbas, thc'Lfollowers of Caimaih distinguished themselves bf Mwearing white raiment to mark their hostility lo tlMPlreigning Thalia, whose garments and standards rc^ljoined the black hue which they had dlsplayejjlagainst the white banners of the house of Ommiyab.*JA bloody war was renewed at various periods during[ J• Mariti i» Hammer's authority far tha preceding »«-•count of Abdallab. 11 h to be observed Bat thipi Abikllali inunnoticed by Hetbctgt,SECRET Societe.tai entire century between (he followers of CsiriiiiLtliand the troops of the Halls, with va.vyin^ success.In the Course of its war the holy city of Mecca wustaken by the sectaries (as it has been of late yearsby the Wuhabees), after the fall of 30,000 Moslemsin its terence. The celebrated black stone was takenand conveyed in triumph to Hnjar, where it remainedlor two-and-twen(y years, hill it was redeemed for50,000 ducats by the emir of Irakk, and replaced inits arig;tnal seat. Finally, like so many of theirpredecessors, the Carmatliites were vanquished bjthe yet vis^roua power ofthe empire, and their name,though not their principles, was extinguished.During this period of contest between the houseof Abbas and theCarmathites, a dai visionary')of the latter, named Abdallah, contrived to liberatefrom the prison into whiiili he had been thrown bythe khalif Motadhad a real or pretended descendantof Fatima, named Obeid-Alkh*, whom he conveyedto Africa, and, proclaiming him to be the promisedMehdi {guidt!), succeeded in establishing for him adominion on the nor lb coast of that country. Thegratitude of Obeid-Alluh was shown by his puttingto death him to whom he was indebted Jcir hispower; but talent and valour can exist without thepresence of virtue, and Obeid-AUah and his two nextdescendants extended their sway to the shores ofthe Atlantic, Moez-ladin-AIIuii, his great-grandson,having achieved the conquest of Egj-pt and Syria,wisely abandoned his former more instant coniesalong the coast of the Mediterranean, his eyebeing fixed on the more valuable Asiatic empire ofthe Embassies. This dynasty of Fatimite khalifs,lenpss ofthe descent oCObeiJ-Allah has lineauf dispute among the eastern histuriuiiii ande in the iutcTeBta ol'tbe house ufAbbaa ulcaiueilmoke him out an impMtot.THE ASSASSINS. 37as they were called, reigned during tWo centuries atCairo, on the Nile, the foes and rivals of those whosat in Bagdad, on the banks of the Tigris. Likeevery other eastern dynasty, they gradually sank intoimpotence and imbecility, and their throne wasfinally occupied by the renowned Koord Saladin.Obeid- Allah derived his pedigree from Ismail, theseventh imam. His house, therefore, looked to thesupport of the whole sect of the Severer, or Israelites,in their projects for extending their sway overthe Mohammedan world ; and it was evidently theirinterest to increase the numbers and power of thatsect as much as possible. We are accordingly justifiedin giving credit to the assurances of the easternhistorians, that there was a secret institution at Cairo,at the head of which was the Fatimite khalif, and ofwhich the object was the dissemination of the doctrinesof the sect of the Ismailites, though we maybeallowed to hesitate as to the correctness of someof the details.This society, we are told, comprised both menand women, who met in separate assemblies, tor thecommon supposition of the insignificance of thelatter sex in the east is erroneous. It was presidedover by the chief missionary {Dai'al'Doat*)y whowas always a person of importance in the state,and not unfrequently supreme judge {Kadhi-al-kodkatf). Their assemblies, called Societies ofWisdom (Mejalis-alrhicmet), were held twice a- week,on Mondays and Wednesdays. All the membersappeared clad in white. The president, having firstWaited on the khalif, and read to him the intendedlecture, or, if that could not be done, having gottenhis signature on the back of it, proceeded to theassembly and delivered a written discourse. At the^ * That is, Missionary of Missionaries,t Cadi of Cadhis.DSECRET SOCIETIES.conclusion of it those present kissed lix hand andreverently touched with llieir forehead the handwritingof the khalir. In this state the society continuedtill the reign of that extraordinary madmanthe khalif Hakem-bi-emr-iliah judge by the commandof God), who determined to place it on asplendid looting. He erected fur it a stately edifice,Billed the House of Wisdom iDaral-kicmef).abundantly furnished with books and mathematicalinstruments. Its doors were open to all, and paper,pens, anal ink were profusely supplied for the use ofthose who chose to frequent it. Professors of law,mathematics, logic, and medicine were appointed logive instructions ; and at the learned disputationswhich were frequently held in presence of the khalif,these professors appeared in their state callant{KkalaU), which, il is said, exactly resembled therobes worn at the English universities. Theincome assigned to this establishment, by Ihe munificenceof the khalif, was 257,000 dneais annually,arising from the tenths paid to the crown.The course of instruction in this university proceeded,according to Macri.si, by the following ninedegrees; — I. The object of the first, which was longand tedious, was to infuse doubt!' and difficultiesinto the mind of the aspirant, and to lead him torepose a blind confidence in the knowledge and wisdomof his teacher. To this end he was perplexedwith captious questions; the absurdities of the literalsense of the Koran, and its repugnance to reason,were studiously pointed out, and dark hints weregiven that beneath this shell lay a kernel sweet tothe taste and nutritive to the soul. But all furtherinformation was most rigorously withheld till he hadconsented to bind himself by a most solemn oath toabsolute faith and blind obedience to his instructor.2. Wher. he had taken the. oath he was admitted toTHE ASSASSINS.the second decree, which inculcated the acknowledgmentof the imams appointed by God as the sourcesof all knowledge. 3. The third degree informedhim what was the number of these blessed and holyimams; aad this was the mystic seven ; for, as Godhad made seven heavens, seven earths, seas, planets,metals, tones, and colours, so seven was the numberof these noblest of God's creatures. 4. In the fourthdegree the pupil learned that God had sent sevenlawgivers into the world, each of whom was commissionedto alter and improve the system of hispredecessor; that each of these had seven helpers,who appeared in the interval between him and hissuccessor; these helpers, as they did not appear aspublic teachers, were called the mule (same), incontradistinction to the speaking lawgivers. Theseven lawgivers were Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses,Jesus, Mohammed, and Ismail, thesonof JaafFer; theseven principal helpers, called Seats (soon), were Seth,Shem, Ishmael (thesonof Abraham), Aaron, Simon,All, and Mohammed, the son of Ismail. It is justlyohsen-ed* that, as this last personage was not morethan a century dead, the teacher had it in his power tofi£ on whom he would as the mute prophet of the presenttime, and inculcate the belief in, and obedienceto, him of all who had nut got beyond this degree. 5.The fifth degree taught that each of the seven muteprophets had twelve apostles for the dissemination ofhis faith. The suitableness of this number was alsoproved by analogy. There are twelve signs of thezodiac, twelve months, twelve tribes of Israel, twelvejoints in the (bur fingers of each hand, and so forth.6. The pupil being led thus far, and having shownno symptoms of restiveness, the precepts of theKoran were once more brought under consideration,I he was told that all the positive portions ofHanover, p.S4,40 SECRET SOCIETIES.religion must be subordinate to philosophy. Hewas consequently instructed in the systems of Platoand Aristotle during a long space of time ; and (7),when esteemed fully qualified, he was admitted tothe seventh degree, when instruction was communicatedin that mystic Pantheism which is held andtaught by the sect of the Soothes. 8. The positiveprecepts of religion were again considered, the veilwas torn from the eyes of the aspirant, all that hadpreceded was now declared to have been merelyscaffolding to raise the edifice of knowledge, andwas to be flung down. Prophets and teachers,heaven and hell, all were nothing ; j^ture bliss andmisery were idle dreams ; all actions were permitted.9. The ninth degree had only to inculcate that noughtwas to be believed, everything might be done*.In perusing the accounts of secret societies, theirrules, regulations, degrees, and the quantity ornature of the knowledge communicated in them, adifficulty must always present itself. Secrecy beingof the very essence of everything connected withthem, what means had writers, who were generallyhostile to them, of learning their internal constitutionand the exact nature of their maxims and tenets ?In the present case our authority for this account ofa society which chiefly flourished in the tenth andeleventh centuries is ML*3risi, a writer of the fifteenthcentury. His authorities were doubtless of moreancient date, but we know not who they were orwhence they derived their information. Perhaps ourMr. De Say (journal des Savant, an 1818) is of opinionthat the Arabic words Taleel and Ibahat will not bear thestrong sense which Hammer gives them. The former, hesays, only signifies that Deism which regards the Deity asmerely a speculative being, and annihilates the moral relationsbetween him and the creature ; the latter only denotes emancipationfrom the positive precepts of laws, such as hastingsprayer, &c., but not from moral obligations.THE ASSASSINS, 41safest course in this, as in similar cases, would be toadmit the general truth of the statement, but to sufferour minds to remain in a certain degree of suspenseas to the accuracy of the details. We can thus atonce assent to the fact of the existence of the collegeat Cairo, and of the mystic tenets of Soofeeism beingtaught in it, as also to that of the rights of the Fa-timesto the khalifat being inculcated on the mindsof the pupils, and missionaries being thence sent overthe east, without yielding implicit credence to thetale of the nine degrees through which the aspiranthad to pass, or admitting that the course of instructionterminated in a doctrine subversive of all religionand of all morality.As we have seen, the Dai-al-doat, or chief missionary,resided at Cairo, to direct the operations of thesociety, while the subordinate dais pervaded all partsof the dominions of the house of Abbas, makingconverts to the claims of Ali. The dais were attendedby companions {Refeek), who were persons who hadbeen instructed up to a certain point in the secretdoctrines, but who were neither to presume to teachnor to seek to make converts, that honour beingreserved to the dais. By the activity of the dais thesociety spread so widely that in the year 1058 theemir Bessassiri, who belonged to it, made himselfmaster of Bagdad, and kept possession of it duringan entire year, and had money struck, and prayermade, in the name of the Egyptian khalif. The emir,however, fell by the sword of Toghrul the Turk, whoseaid the feeble Abbasside implored, and these twodistinguishing acts of Mohammedan sovereignty wereagain performed by the house of Abbas. Soon afterwardsthe society at Cairo seems to have declinedalong with the power of the Fatimite khalifs. In1123 the powerful vizir Afdhal, on occasion of somedisturbance caused by them, shut up the Dar-al-42 SECRET SOCIETIES.hlcmet, or, as it would appear, destroyed it. Hissuccessor Maroon permitted the society to holdtheir meetings in a building erected in another situation,and it lingered on till the fall of the khalifatof Egypt. The policy of Afdhal is perhaps best tobe explained by a reference to the state of the East atthat time. The khalif of Bagdad was become amere pageant devoid of all real power ; the formerdominions of the house of Abbas were in the handsof the Seljookian Turks ; the Franks were mastersof a great part of Syria, and threatened Egypt, wherethe khalifs were also fallen into incapacity, and thereal power had passed to the vizir. As this lastcould aspire to nothing beyond preserving Egypt, asociety instituted for the purpose of gaining partisansto the claims of the Fatimites must have been ratheran impediment to him than otherwise. He musttherefore have been inclined to suppress it, especiallyas the society of the Assassins, a branch of it, hadnow been instituted, which, heedless of the claims ofthe Fatimites, sought dominion for itself alone. Tothe history of that remarkable association we nowproceed.THE ASSASSINS.Chapter HI.Ali of Kei~Hia son Uasaaa Sabah— HasEia sent lo study dMihabaur— Meta there Omar Khiaza and Nizam-al-Moolk \Agreement made by them — Hassan introduced by Niulo Sultan Male Shah— Obliged to leave the Court— Anoc-flute of him— His own account of his Convictions Goes lo^fpt — Kittens to Persia — Makes himself Matter of Alaswas 11 man named Ali, who resided icity of Rei, in Persia. He was a strenuous She \and maintained that his family had originally cfrom Koofa, in Arabia ; but the people of Khoraaan Iasserted that his family had always dwelt in one of Jthe villages near Too, iii that province, and that Iconsequently his pretensions to an Arabian extractlion were False. Ali, il would appear, was anxious |to conceal his opinions, and enipUiyed the strangest Iasseverations lo convince the governor of the pro |vince, a rigid Sooiiite, ol' his orthodoxy, and finallyretired into a monastery to pass the remainder of hisdays in meditation. As a. further means of clearinghimself from the charge of heresy he sent his onlysou Hassan Sabah* lo Nishaboor to be instructed bythe celebrated imam Mowafek, who resided at th ^place. What lessons he may have given the yoiHassan previously to parting with him, and what Jcommunication he may have afterwards kept up wi Thim, are points on which history is silent.The fame of the imam Mowafek was great cbI] Persia, and il was currently' believed that those '• Ot Ilasian-ben-Sabah (iwt 0/ Sa6oAJ, so named fromSabah Homairi, one ofhi^ pretended Arabianwho had the good fortune to study the Koran andthe Soonna* under him were secure of their fortunein after-life. His school was consequently throngedb; youths ambitious of h knowledge and future distinction; and there Hassan met, and formed a strictintimacy with, Omar Khan, afterwards so distinguishedas a poet and an astronomer, and withNiaam-a!-Moolk Regulation of the Reitlm), whobecame viii to the monarchs of the house of Seljook.This lust, in a history which he wrote of himself andhis times, relates the following; instance of the earlydevelopment of the ambition of Hassan. As theseThree, who were the most distinguished pupils of Gibeimam, were one day together, "It is the generalopinion," said Hassan, " that the pupils of the imamare certain of being fortunate. This opinion may beverified in one of us. So come, let us pledge ourselvesto one another that he who shall be successfulwill make the other two sharers in bis good fortune."His two companions readily assented, and the promisewas mutually given and received.Nizam al-moola entered the path of pul tics, wherehia talents and his noble qualities had free course,and he rose through the various gradations of office,till at length be attained the highest post ia therealm, the viziriate, under Alp Arslaii (Strong Lion),the second monarch of the house of Seljook. Whenthus exalted he forgot not his former friends ; andcalling to mind the promise which he had made, hereceived with great kindness Omar Khan, whowaited on him to congratulate bim on his elevation ;and he offered at once to employ all his interest toprocure him a post under the government. ButOmar, who was devoted to Epicurean indulgences,and averse from toil and care, thanking his friend,■ The Soonna is tlw body of ttaaiiioiia, answering to theMiehua orthe leva, belt by the oilhoiliji Mussulman.THE ASSASSINS. 45declined his proffered services ; and all that the vizircould prevail on him to accept was an annual pensionof 1,200 ducats on the revenues of Nishaboor, whitherhe retired to spend his days in ease and tranquillity.The case was different with Hassan. During theten years' reign of Alp Arslan he kept aloof from thevizir, living in obscurity, and probably maturing hisplans for the future. But when the young princeMalekk Shah (King King) mounted the throne hesaw that his time was come. He suddenly appearedat the court of the new monarch, and waited on thepowerful vizir. The story is thus told by the vizirhimself in his work entitled Wasaya political Institutes),whence it is given by Mirkhond."He came to me at Nishaboor in the year thatMalekk Shah, having got rid of Award, had quietedthe troubles which his rebellion had caused. I receivedhim with the greatest honours, and performed,on my part, all that could be expected from a manwho is a faithful observer of his oaths, and a slave tothe engagements which he has contracted. Each dayI gave him a new proof of my friendship, and Iendeavoured to satisfy his desires. He said to meonce, 'Khqjah (master), you are of the numberof the learned and the virtuous ; you know that thegoods of this world are but an enjoyment of littleduration. Do you then think that you will be permittedto fail in your engagements by letting yourselfbe seduced by the attractions of greatness and thelove of the world ? and will you be of the number ofthose who violate the contract made vMh God?*'Heaven keep me from it!' replied I. 'Thoughyou heap honours upon me,' continued he, 'andthough you pour upon me benefits without number,you cannot be ignorant that that is not the way toperform what we once pledged ourselves to respectingeach other.' ' You are right,' said I ; ' and ID 54SSECRET SOCIETIES.Iam rciidy la satisfy yon in what I promised. Allthat I [possess of honour and power, received frommy fathers or acquired by myself, belongs to you iacommon with me.' I then introduced him into thesociety of the sultan, I assigned him a ranlc and suitabletitles, and I related to the prince all thai hadformerly paused between him and me, I spouse interms of such praise of the extent of his knowledge,of his excellent qualities, and his p;oo(I morals, thathe obtained the rank of minister and of a confidentialman But he was, like his father, an impostor, ahypocrite, one who knew how to impose, and awretch. He so well possessed the art of coveringhimself with an inferior of probity and virtue thatin a Utile time he completely gained the mind of thesultan, and inspired him with such confidence thatthat prince blindly Followed his advice in most ofthose altars of a greater and more important naturewhich required good faith and sincerity, and he wasalways decided by his opinion. I have said all thisto let it be seen that it was I who had raised him tothis fortune, and yet, by an effect of his bad character,there came quarrels between the sultan and me, theunpleasant result of which had like to have been thatthe good reputation and favour which I had enjoyedfor so many years were near going into dust andbeing annihilated; for at last his malignity brokeout on a sudden, and the effects of his jealousyshowed themselves in the most terrible manner inhis actions and in his words."In fact, Hassan played the part of a treacherousfriend. Everything that occurred in the divan wascarefully reported to the sultan, and the worst constructionput upon it, and hints of the incapacity anddishonesty of the vizir were thrown out on the fittingoccasions. The vizir himself has left us an accountof what he considered the worst trick which his oldTHE ASSASSINS.schoolfellow attempted to play him. The sultan, itseems, wishing to see & clear and regular balance-sheetof the revenues and expenditure of his empire,directed Nizam-al-Moolk lo prepare it. The vizirrequired a space of more than a year for the accomplishmentof the task. Hassan deemed this a goodopportunity for distinguishing himSelf, and boldlyoffered to do what the sultan demanded in forty days,not more than one-tenth of the time required by thevizir. All the clerks in the finance department wereimmediately placed at the disposal of Hassan ; andthe vizir himself confesses that at the end of the fortydays the accounts were ready lo be laid before thesultan. But, just when we might expect to seeHassan in triumph, and enjoying the highest favourof the monarch, we find him leaving the court indisgrace and vowing revenge on the sultan and hisminister. This circumstance is left unexplained bythe Ornament of the Realm, who however acknowledges,with great naivete, that, if Hassan had notbeen obliged lo thy, he should have left the court himself.Bui other historians inform us that the vizir,apprehensive of the consequences, had recourse toart, and contrived to have some of Hassan's papersstolen, so that, when the latter presented himselfbefore the sultan, full of hope and pride, and commencedhis statement, he found himself obliged to slopforward of some of his most important documents.As he could not account for this confusion, the sultanbecame enraged at the apparent attempt lo deceivehim, and Hassan was forthwith obliged lo retire fromcourt with precipitation.Nivam-al'Moolk determined lo keep no measureswith a man who had thus sought his ruin, and heresolved to destroy him. Hassan fled U> lei, but,not thinking himself safe there, he went further south,48 SECRET SOCIETIES.and took refuge with bis friend the reis* Aboo-'l-Fazlfather ofExceMevce)^ at Isfahan. What his plansmay have hitherto been is uncertain ; but now theyseem to have assumed a definite form, and he unceasinglymeditated on the means of avenging himself pi)the sultan and his minister. . In consultation one daywith Aboo-'l-F#izl, who appears to have adopted busspeculative tenets, after he had poured out his complaintsagainst the vizir and his master, he concludeby passionately saying, " Oh that I had but two faithfulfriends at my devotion ! soon should I overthrowthe Turk and the peasant," meaning the sultan andthe vizir. Aboo-'l-Fazl, who was one of the postclear-headed men of his time, and who still did notcomprehend the long-sighted views of Hassan, beganto fancy that disappointment had deranged the intellectof his friend, and, believing that reasoning wouldin such a case be useless, commenced giving him athis meals aromatic drinks and dishes prepared withsaffron, in order to relieve his brain. Hassan perceivedwhat his kind host was about, and resolved toleave him. Aboo-'l-Fazl in vain employed all hiseloquence to induce him to prolong his visit ; Hassandeparted, and shortly afterwards set out for Egypt.Twenty years afterwards, when Hassan had accomplishedall he had projected, when the sultan andthe vizir were both dead, and the society of the Assassinswas fully organized, the reis Aboo-'l-Fazl, whowas cite of his most zealous partisans, visited him athis hill-fort of Alamoot. " Well, reis," said Hassan,• lies, from the Arabic RAs (the head), answers vfi somerespects to captain, a word of similar origin. Thus the masterof a ship is called the Reis. Sir John Malcolm says, " it isequivalent to esquire, as it was originally understood. It impliesin Persia the possession of landed estates and some magisterialpower. The reis is in general the hereditary headof a village."THE ASSASSINS. 4$which of us was the madman ? did you or I standmost in need of .the aromatic drinks and the dishesprepared with saffron which you used to have servedup at Isfahan? You see that I kept my word assoon as I had found two trusty friends."When Hassan left Isfahan, in the year 1078, thekhalif Mostanser, a man of som energy, occupied thethrone of Egypt, and considerable exertions were madeby the missionaries of the society at Cairo to gain proselytesthroughout Asia. Among these proselytes wasHassan Sabah, and the following account of this conversion,which has fortunately been preserved in hisown woes, is interesting, as affording a proof that,like Cromwell, and, as we have supposed, Mohammed,and all who have attained to temporal power byn^eans of religion, he commenced in sincerity, andwas deceived himself before he deceived others.From my childhood," says he, " even from the ageof seven years, my sole endeavour was to acquireknowledge and capacity. I had been reared up, likemy fathers, in the doctrine of the twelve imams, andI made acquaintance with an Israelite companion{Refeek), named Emir Dhareb, with whom I knitfast the bonds of friendship. My opinion was thatthe tenets of the Ismailites resembled those of thePhilosophers, and that the ruler of Egypt was a manwho was initiated in them. As often, therefore, asEmir said anything in favour of these doctrines Ifell into strife with him, and many controversies onpoints of faith ensued between him and me. Igave not in to anything that Emir said in disparagementof our sect, though it left a strong impressionon my mind. Meanwhile Emir parted from me,and I fell into a severe fit of sickness, during whichI reproached myself, saying, that the doctrine of theIsmailites was assuredly the true one, and that yetout of obstinacy I had not gone X)ver to it, and that'SBsecret Societies.should death (which God avert!) overtake me, Tshould die without having attained to the truth. Atlen^h I recovered of that sickness, and I now metwith another Israelite, named Abooo Nejm Zaraj. ofwhom I inquired toucliinir the truth of his doctrine.Hoo Nejm explained it lo me in the fullest manner,GO that 1 saw quite through the depths of it Finally1 met a dai, named Moomin, to whom the sheikhAbd-al-Melik (Sfen'ont of the King. i.e. of God) BenAttach, the director of the missions of Irakk, had givenpermission lo exercise this office. I besought that huwould accept my homage (in the name of the Fati-mite khalif), but this he at the first refused to do,because I had been in higher dignities than he; butwhen I pressed him thereto beyond all measure, heyielded his consent. When now the sheikh Abd-al-Melikcame tore, and through intercourse learnedto know me, my behaviour was pleasing unto him,and he bestowed on me the office of a dai. He saidunto me, ' Thou must go illo Egypt, lu be a sharerin the felicity of serving the imam Bystander.' Whenthe sheikh Abd-al-Melik went from Rei to IsfahanI set forth for Egypt."There is something highly interesting in this accountof his thoughts and feelings given by HassanSabah, particularly when we recollect that this wasthe man who afterwards organized the society of theAssassins, so long the scourge of the East. We herefind him, according to his own statement, dreadingthe idea of dying without having openly made professionof the truth, yet afterwards, if we are to creditthe Oriental historians, he inculcated the doctrine vfthe indifference of all human actions. Unfortunatelythis declension from virtue to vice has been loo oftenexhibited to allow of our doubting that it may havehappened iu the case of Hassan Sabah. Aliirlher lesMiikboiid.THE ASSASSINS.SIflection which presents itself is this : Can anything bemore absurd than those points which have split the .Moslems into sects? and yet how deeply has consciencebeen engaged in them, and with what sincerety have they not been embraced and maintained !Will not this apply )□ some measure to the dissensionsamong Christians, who divide into parties, not forthe essential doctrines of their religion, bnt for somemerely accessory parts?Hassan, on his arrival in Egypt, whither his famehad preceded him, was received with every demonstrationof respect. His known talents, and theknowledge of the high favour and consideration whichhe had enjoyed at the court of Malekk Shah,the khallf esteem him a most important acquisition ito the cause of the Israelites, and no means womitted to soothe and flatter him. He was met oti.Jthe frontiers by the Dai-ul-Doat, the sherif Taher4Casting, and several other [wrjons of high considerabletion ; the great officers of state and court waited oahim as soon as he had entered Cairo, where thekhalif assigned him a suitable abode, and loadedhim with honours and tokens of favour. Bnt suchwas the state of seclusion which the Fatimite khalifsbad adopted, that during the eighteen months whichHassan is said to have passed at Cairo he never oncebeheld the face of Mostanser, though that monarchalways evinced the utmost solicitude about him, and. .never spoke of him but in terms of the highest praiseWhile Hassan abode in Egypt the question of tlsuccession to the throne (always a matter of disputein Oriental monarchies) became a subject of disseiK.Pnon and angry debate at court. The khalif had 1declared his eldest son, Near, to be his legitimate Jsuccessor; but Bedr-al-Jemali, the Emir-al-Juyoosh,or commander-in-chief of the arcny, who enjoyedalmost unlimited power under the Fatimites, assertedSECRET SOCIETIES.Ihe superior right of Musteali, the kbalif'a secondson, which right his power afterwards made good,Hassan Sabah, not .very wisely, a£ it would seem, tookthe side of Prince Near, and thereby drew on himself'the hostility or Bedr-al-Jemaji, who resolved on hisdestruction. In vain the reluctant lihalif struggledagainst the might of the powerful Emir-al-Juyoosh ;he was obliged to surrender Hussanto his vengeance,and to issue an order for conmiittinij; him lo closecustody in the castle of Damietta.While Hassan lay in confinement at Damietta oneof tile towers of that city fell down without any apparentcause. This being looked upon in the lightof a miracle by the partisans of Hassan and thekhalif, his enemies, to prevent his deriving any advantagefrom it, hurried him on board of a shipwhich was on the points sailing for Africa. Scarcelyhad the vessel put to sea when a violent tempest came(in. The sea rolled mountains high, the thunderroared, and the lightning flamed. Terror laid holdon all who were aboard, save Hassan Sabah, wholooked calm and undisturbed on the commotion ofthe elements, while others gazed with agony on theprospect of instant death . On being asked the causeof his tranquillity he made answer, in imitation St Paul, " Our Lord iScydtia) has promisedme that no evil shall befall me." Shortly afterwardsthe storm fell and the sea grew calm. The crew andregarded bim as a man under theespecial favour of Heaven, and when a strong westwind sprung up, and drove Ihem to the coast ofSyria, they offered no opposition to his leaving' thevessel and going on shore.Hassan proceeded to Aleppo, where he staidsome time, and thence directed his course to Bagdad.Leaving that city he entered Persia, traversed theprovince of Khuzisian, aid, visiting the cities ofTHE ASSASSINS. S3Isfahan und Yezd, went ou to the eastern provinceof Kerman, everywhere making proselytes to ibisopinions. He then returned (o Isfahan, where hemade a stay of tour months. He next spent threemonths in Khuzistan. Having fixed his view onDamaghan and the surrounding country in Irali asadistrict well calculated to be the seat of the powerwhich be meditated establishing, he devote threeentire years tu the task of gaining disciples amongits inhabitants. For this purpose he employed themost eloquent dais he could find, and directed themto win over by all means the inhabitants of thenumerous hill-forts which were in that region. Whilehis dais were thus engaged be himself traversed tilemore northerly districts of Jofjan and Dilem, andwhen he deemed the time fit returned to the provinceof Irakk, where Hussein Ka'ini, one of the mostJealous of his missionaries, had been loug since engagedin persuading the people of the strong hill-fortof Alamoot to swear obedience to the khalifMostauser. The arguments of the dai had provedconvincing to the great majority of the inhabitants,but the governor, All Mcbdi, an upright and worthyman, whose ancestors had built the fort, remained,with a few others, faithful to his duty, and wouldacknowledge no spiritual head but the Abbassidekhalif of Bagdad ; no temporal chief but the Sel-jovianMalekk Shah. Mehdi, when he first perceivedthe progress of Ismailisra among his people,expelled those who had embraced it, but afterwardspermitted tern to return. Sure of the aid of a strongparly within the fort, Hassan is said to have employedagainst the governor the same artifice by whichDido is related to have deceived the Lysias*. HeSir J. Malcolm Bays that the person with whom lie readthis portion ofhiatutr in Persia uliimtvcd tn him tiuit the EnglishHere well ai^ijuaiiitod with thin BlCdli^rcm, as it was by meansuf it thut they got Calcutta from the poor Emperor ol' Delhi.SECRET SOCIETIES.offered him 3,000 ducats for as much ground as hecould compass with an ox-hide. The guileless Mehdiconsented, and Hassauinslantly cutting the hide intoghosts surrounded with it the fortress of Alamoot.Mehdi, seeing himself thus tricked, refused to standto the agreement, Hassan appealed to justice, andto the arms of his partisans within the Fortress, andby their aid compelled the governor lo depart fromAtannoot. As Mehdi was setting' out for Damaghan,whither be proposed to retire, Hassan placed in hishand an order on the reis Mozalfer, the governor ofthe castle of Kirdkoo, couched in these terms : " Letthe reis Mozaffer pay to Mehdi, the descendant ofAll, 3,000 ducats, as the price of the fortress ofAlamoot. Peace be upon the Prophet and hisfamily ! God, the best of directors, suffice us."Mehdi could hardly believe that a man of the consequenceof the reis Mozaffer, who iieid an importantgovernment under the Seljookian sultans, would paythe slightest attention lo the order sofa mere adventurerlike Hassan Sabah ; he, however, resolved, outof curiosity, or rather, as we are told, pressed by hiswant of the money, to try how he would act. Heaccordingly presented the order, and, to his infinitesurprise, was forthwith paid the 3,000 ducats. Thereis had in fact heeii long in secret one of the mostzealous disciples of Hassan Sabah.Historians are careful to inform us that it was onthe night of Wednesday, the si\lh of the monthRejeb, in the 483d year of the Hejra, that HassanSabah made himself master of Alamoot, which wasto become the chief seat of the power of the sect ofthe Ismailites. This year answers to the year 1090of the Christian era, and thus the dominion of theAssassins was founded only nine years before theChristians of the west established their empire in theHoly Land.56 SECRET SOCIETIES.Chapter IV.Description of Alamoot — Fruitless Attempts to (cover it —Extension of the Israelite Power — The IsmaVUtet in SyriaAttempt on the life of Ahoo-Hafd Ista — treaty madewith Sultan Sanjar — Death of Hass^ — pis Gh^cacter.Alamoot, a name so famous iii th l^tetory of theEast, signifies the Vulture's Nest, ^n appellation derivedfrom its lossy site. I( was built in tba yfiar860, on the summit of 9 \d\\ which bears a fanciedresemblance to a lion couching with his nose to theground, situated, according to Hammer, in 50^*^ E.long, and 36° N. let. It was regarded as the strongestof 50 fortresses pf the s^-me kind, which were scatteredover the district pf Roodbar (River^land)^ themountainous region lYhich forms the border betweenPersian Irakk and the i^ore northerly provinces ofDilem and Tab^ristaq, and is wa(;er^d by the streamcalled the I^^iug^s River {Shahrood)- As soon asHassan saw himself master of this important placehe directed his thoughts to the m^^^us of increasingits strength, fie repaired the original walls, andadded new ours ; be sunk wells, and dug a caiial,which conveyed water from a considerable distanceto the foot of the fortress. As the possession ofAlamoot made him master of the surrounding country,he learned to regard the inhabitants as his subjects,and he stimulated them to agriculture, andmade large plantations of fruit-trees around theeminence on which the fortress stood.But before Hassan had time to commence, muchless complete these plans of improvement, he sawTHE ASSASSINS. 57himself in danger of losing all the fruits of his toil.It was not to be expected that the emir, on whomthe sultan had bestowed the province of Roodbar,would calmly view its strongest fort in the possessionof the foe of the house of Seljook. Hassan, therefore,had not had time to collect stores and provisionswhen he found all access to the place cut off by thetroops of the emir. The inhabitants were about toquit Alamoot, but Hassan exerted the usual influenceof a commanding spirit over their minds, and confidentlyassured them that that was the place in whichfortune would favour them. They yielded faith tohis words and staid; and at length their perseverancewore out the patience of the emir, and Alamootthence obtained the title of the Abode of Fortune.The sultan, who had at first viewed the progress ofhis ex-minister with contempt, began soon to growapprehensive of his ultimate designs, and in 1092 heissued orders to the emir Arslantash lion-stone)to destroy Hassan and his adherents. Arslantashadvanced against Alamoot. Hassan, though he hadbut 70 men with him, and was scantily supplied withprovisions, defended himself courageously till AboooAH, the governor of Casveen, who was in secret oneof his dais, sent 300 men to his aid. These fellsuddenly, during the night, on the troops of theemir ; the little garrison made at the same time asortie; the sultan's troops took to flight, and Almostremained in the possession of the Israelites.Much about the same time Malekk Shah sent troopsagainst Hussein Kain, who was actively engaged inthe cause of Hassan Sabah in Kuhistan. Husseinthrew himself into Moominabad, a fortress nearly asstrong as that of Alamoot, and the troops of thesultan assailed him in vain. It was now thatHassan began to display the system which we shallpresently unveil. The aged vizir, the great andgoodNizam-a.l-Moolk, perished by the dangers of hisemissaries, aud the sultan himself speedily followedr to the tomb, not without suspicion ofCircuits titles were now particularly favourable tothe plans of Hassan Sabah. On the death of sultanMate Shah a civil war broke out among his eons ,for the succession. All the niiiitary chiefs and personsof eminence were engaged on one side or theother, and none had leisure or inclination to attendto the progress of the Israelites. These, therefore,went on gradually extending their power, and fortressafter fortress fell into their hands. In the course oftenyears they saw themselves masters of the principalhill-forts of Persian Into; they held that, ofShnhdovr* (King's pear), and two other fortresses,close to fsfahan; that of Khalankjian, on the bordersof Far and Kuhistaii ; Damnghan, Kirdkoo, andFiroozkoo, in the district of Komis ; and Landseerand several others in Kuhistan. It was in vainthat the most distinguished imams and doctors ofthe law issued their jHuas against the sect of theIsraelites, and condemned them lo future perdition ;in vain they called on the orthodox lo employ the• This castle woa built by sultan Malekk Shah. The followingvug its origin; — An Malekk Shah, who was h greatlover of the chase, was out iiii<! iluy a hunting;, quae of ihuhounili what Bslray ud the nearly inaccessible lOck un whichIhe castle was afterwards elected. The ambassBilur of thuByxaulina emperor, who was af Ihe [city, absvrrod to thusultan, that in his master's dominions so advantageous asituation would not b« Ml unoccupied, but would lung siocoha«B been crowned with a ciistle- The sultan flowed theambassador's advice, and erected the castle of the King'sPearl on this lusty tuck. When the case t«tl into ic handsuF Ihe Ismailites, pious Moslems rcmarkeil that it could iratebye letter luck, since its site hod been pointed out b]>^ B duganundeui beast iu tlieii eyes), quid its elediua advised byaa infidel.sword of justice in freeing the earth from this godlessand abominable race. The sect, strong in its secretbond of unity and determination of purpose, wenton end prospered ; the dagger avenged the fate ofthose who perished by the sword, and, as the orientalisEuropean historian of the society expresses it*,*',head9 fell like an abundant harvest beneath thetwofold sickle of the sword of justice aad the daggerof murder."The appearance of the Ismaiiiles, under their newform of organization, in Syria, happened at the sametime with that of the crusaders in the Holy Land.The SilJDokian Turks had made the conquest of thatcountry, and the different chiefs who ruled Damascus,Aleppo, and the other towns and their districts, somaof whom were of Turkish, others of Syrian extraction,were in a constant stale of enmity with each other.Such powerful auxiliaries as the followers of HassanSabah were not to he neglected ; Itisvan, Prince ofAleppo, so celebrated in the history of the crusades,was their declared favourer and protector, and anIsraelite agent always resided with him. The firstwho occupied this post was an astrologer, and on hisdeath Ihe olhce tell to a Persian goldsmith, namedAbooo Taher Essai. The enemies of Risvan feltthe effects of his alliance with the Israelites. ThePrince of Emessa, for example, fell by their daggers,as he was about to relieve the castle of the Roods, towhich Raymond, Count of Toulouse, bad laid siege.liisvan put the strong castle of Sarmiu, which layabout a day's journey south of Aleppo, into the handsof Aboo-'!-Fettah, the nephew of Hassan Sabah, andhis Dai-el-Kebir great Mmioiiary) for the provinceof Syria. The governor of this Fortress was AboooTaher Essai. A few years afterwards(ll07) thepeople of Apamea invoked the aid of Abooo TaherHaminerj 97.SECRET SOCIETIES.Aboooagainst Khalaf, their Egyptian governor.Taher took possession of the town in the name nibut Tancred, who was at war with thatand attacked it, it was forced toAbooo Taher stipulated for free egressfor himself; but Tancred, in violation of the treaty.brought him to Antioch, where be remained till hisransom was paid. Aboo-' !■ Fell ah and the otherIsmailites were given up to the vengeance of the sonsof Khalaf. Tancred took from them at the samee another strong fortress, named Kefrkna. Thisis to he noted as the first collision between theCrusaders and the Assassins, as we shall now beginto call them. The origin of this name shall presentlybe es planned.On the return of Abooo Taher to Aleppo a veryremarkable attempt at assassination took place.There was a wealthy merchant, named Abo-HardIsta*, a sworn foe to the Ismailites, and whohad spent laisse sums of money in his effortsto* injure them. He was now arrived from theborders of Toorkislan with a richly laden caraVanof 500 camels. An Isma'ilite, named Aimed,a native of Rei, had secretly accompanied himfrom the time he left Khorasan, with the design ofavenging Ihe death of his father, who had fallenunder the blows of Abo-Hard's people. The Is-malice,on arriving at Aleppo, immediately communicatedwith Abooo Taher and Riavan. Revenge,aiitl the hope of gaining the wealth of the hostilemerchant, made them yield assent at once to theproject of assassination. Abooo Taher gave Aimed• That il, Jesus. It moy Le here olnecvei that the propernameiofthi: Old Tusts.nient ace still used In the Eus. Ibrahim.iMniiiel, YHhyu, Jaossiif, Mousss,DBUOd, Sulviiuiin, lam,Re Abraham, lahmBcl.Jatob, Joseph, Moses, David, Solomon,nail JuabuiL, at Ji'sua.THE ASSASSINS. 61a sufficient number of assistants ; Risvan promisedthe aid of his guards; and one day, as the merchantwas in the midst of his slaves, counting his camels,the murderers fell on him. But the faithful slavesvaliantly defended their master, and the Israelitesexpiated their guilt vdth their Ives. The princes ofSyria heaped reproaches on Risvan for this scandalousviolation of the rights of hospitality, and hevainly endeavoured to justify himself by pretendingignorance of the fact. Abooo Taher, as the increasinghatred of the people of Aleppo to the sectmade that town an unsafe abode, returned to Persia,his native country, leaving his son, Aboo-'l-Fettah,to manage the affairs of the society in his stead.The acquisition of castles and other places ofstrength was now the open and' avowed object of thesociety, whose aim was evidently at the empire ofAsia, and no mean was left unemployed for theeffecting of this design. lu the year 1108 theymade a bold attempt at making themselves mastersof the strong castle of Khizar, also in Syria, whichbelonged to the family of Monad. The festival cfEaster being come, when the Mussulman garrisonwas in the habit of going down into the town topartake in the festivities of the Christians, duringtheir absence the Ismailites entered the castle, andbarred the gates. When the garrison returnedtowards night, they found themselves excluded ; butthe Ismailites, in their reliance on the strength ofthe place, being negligent, the women drew up theirhusbands by cords at the windows, and the intruderswere speedily expelled.In the year 1113, as Mevdood, Prince of Mosul,was walking up and down, on a festival day, in themosk of Damascus, with the celebrated Togteghin,he was fallen on and slain by an Israelite. Themurderer was cut to pieces on the spot.ESECRET SOCIETIES.This year was, however, near proving fatal to thesociety in Syria. Risvan, their great protector, died ;and the eunuch Looloo, the guardian of his youngson, was their sworn enemy. An order for theirindiscriminate destruction was forthwith issued, and,in consequence, more than 800 men, women, andchildren were massacred, while 200 more werethrown into prison. Ahoo-'i-Feltah was put todeath with torture; his body was cut to pieces andburnt at (he gale iookinir towards Irakk, and hishead sent through all Syria. They did not, however,fall totally unavenged ; the daggers of thesociety were directed against the governors and meninpower, many of whom became their victims.Thus, in the year 1115, as the Attabeg Togtegtiinwas receiving an audience at the , court of the khalifof Bagdad, the governor of Rhorasan was fallenupon by three Ismailites, who probably mistook himfor the Attabeg, and he and Ihey perished. In 1119as Redit, the governor of Aleppo, was journeyingwith his irons to the court of the emir Il-ghazi,they were fallen upon by two assassins; Bedii and oneof bis sons fell by their blows; his other sons cut themurderers down ; but a third then sprang forth, andgaw the finishing stroke to one of the young men,who was already wounded. The murderer was taken,and brought before Togteghin and il-Ghazi, whoonly ordered him to be put in prison; but hedrowned himself to escape their vengeance, fromwhich he had, perhaps, nothing to apprehend.In fact at this time the dread of the followers ofHassan Sabah had sunk deep into the hearts of allthe princes of the East, for there was no securityagainst their daggers. Accordingly, when the nextyear (liao) Abooo Mohammed, the head of them atAIcp])o, where they had re-established themselves,sent to the powerful U-Ghazi to demand of him possessionof the castle of Sherif, near that town, hefeared to refuse ; tut the people of Aleppo, at thepersuasion of motte of their fellow citizens (who speedily(laid for his advice with his bloorl), rose cm nowe,levelled the walls, tilled up the ditches, and unitedthe castle to the town. Even the great Noor-ed-deen(hams) of Religion) was sone years afterwardsobliged to have recourse to the same artifice to savethe castle of BeJtlaha from becoming one of theirstRing-holds.The same system was pursued in Persia, wheresultan Sanjar, the son of Maiek Shah, had unitedunder his sceptre the greater part of the dominionsof his father and Fakhr-al-Moolk (Fame of theRealm). The son and successor of Nizam-al-Moolkand Chakar Beg, the great uncle of the sultan, perishedby the daggers of the emissaries of HassanSabah. Sultan Sanjar was himself on his march,intending to lay siege to Alamoot, and the otherstrongholds of the Ismailites, when one morning, onawaking, he found a dagger struck iu the groundclose to his pillow. The sultan was dismayed, buthe concealed his terror, and a few days afterwardsthere came a brief note from Alamoot, containingthese words : " Were we not well affected towards thesuhau, the dagger had been struck in his bosom,not in the ground." Sanjar recollected that his brotherMohammed, who had laid siege to the castles ofLamseer and Alamoot, had died suddenly jttst asthey were on the point of surrendering — an event hoopportune for the society, that it was but natural toascribe it to their agency — and he deemed it the safestcourse to proceed gently with such dangerous opponents.He accordingly hearkened to proposals ofpeace, which was concluded on the following conditions;I. That the Ismailites should add no newworks to their castles ; 2. That they should purchase154 SECRET SOCIETIES.no arms or military machines ; 3. That they shouldmake no more proselytes. The sultan, on his part,released the Ismailites from all tolls and taxes in thedistrict of Kirdkoh, and assigned them a part of therevenue of the territory of Komis by way of annualpension. To apprehend clearly what the power ofthe society was, we must recollect that sultan Sanjarwas the most powerful monarch of the East, that hismandate was obeyed from Cashier to Antioch, fromthe Caspian to the Straits of Bab-els Mantel.Thirty-four years had now elapsed since the acquisitionof Alamoot, and the first establishment of thepower of Hassan Sabah. In all that time he hadnever been seen out of the castle of Alamoot, and hadbeen even known but twice to leave his chamber,and to make his appearance on the terrace. Insilence and in solitude he pondered the means ofextending the power of the society of which he wasthe head, and he drew up, with his own hand, therules and precepts which were to govern it. Hehad outlived most of his old companions and earlydisciples, and he was now childless, for he had putto death his two only sons, the elder for havingbeen concerned in the murder of his faithful adherentHussein Kain; the younger for having violatedthe precept of the Koran against drinkingwine. Feeling the approaches of death, he summonedto Alamoot Keah Buzoorg Oomeid (^Kedhof Good Hope)y who was residing at Lamseer, whichhe had conquered twenty years before, and Abooo Ali,of Casveen, and committed the direction of the societyto them, appointing the former to be its properspiritual head and director, and placing in the handsof the latter the administration of the civil and externalaffairs. He then calmly expired, apparentlyunconscious of or indifferent to the fact of having, bythe organization of his pernicious society, renderedTHE ASSASSINS. 65his name an object of execration, a by-word and aproverb among the nations.Dimly as we may discern the character of HassanSabah through the medium of prejudice and hatredthrough which the scanty notices of it have reachedus, we cannot refuse him a place among the higherorder of minds. The founder of an empire or of apowerful society is almost always a great man ; butHassan seems to have had this advantage overLoyola and other founders of societies, that he sawclearly from the commencement what might bedone, and formed all his plans with a view to oneultimate object. He surely had no ordinary mindwho could ask but two devoted adherents to shakethe throne of the house of Seljook, then at the acmeof its power.E 266 SECRET SOCIETIES.Chapter V.Organization of the Society — Names given to the IsraelitesOrigin of the name Assassin — Marco Polo's description ofthe Paradise of the Old Man of the Mountain — Descriptionof it given hy Arabian writers — Instances of the obedienceof the Fedavee.Having traced thus far the history of this celebratedsociety, having: shown its origin, and how it grewout of the claims of the descendants of All to thekhalifat, mixed with the mystic tenets which seemto have been ultimately derived from India, we proceedto describe its organization, and its secret doctrines,as they are related by oriental historians.Hassan Sabah clearly perceived that the plan ofthe society at Cairo was defective as a mean of acquiringtemporal power. The Dais might exertthemselves, and proselytes might be gained ; but tillpossession was obtained of some strongholds, and amode of striking terror into princes devised, nothingeffectual could be achieved. He first, therefore, aswe have seen, made himself master of Alamoot andthe other strong places, and then added to the Daisand the Refeek another class, named Fedavee devoted),whose task it was to yield implicit obedienceto the mandate ot their chief, and, without inquiry orhesitation, plunge their dangers into the bosom Ofwhatever victim was pointed out to them, eventhough their own lives should be the immediatesacrifice. The ordinary dress of the Fedavee was(like that of all the sects opposed to the house ofAbbas) white; their caps, girdles, or boots, werered. Hence they were named the White {Mubei-'V-THE ASSASSINS. 67yazah)^ and the Red {Muhammere*) ; but theycould with ease assume any guise, even that of theChristian monk, to accomplish their murderous designs.The gradations in the society were these. At the headof it stood Hassan himself and his successors, with thetitle of Seydna, or Sidnaf (sour Lord), and mountain Chief), a na^ie derived from thatof the territory which was the chief seat of the powerof the society. This last, owing to the ambiguity ofthe word sheikh (which, like seigneur and signorysignifies either an elder or chief), has been ridiculouslytranslated by the early European historiansOld Man of the Mountain. Under him were theDai-'l-Kebir great Missionaries), of which therewere three, for the three provinces of Jebal, Kuhistan,and Syria. Then came the Dais, next the Refeek,then the Fedavee, and lastly the Lazik, or aspirants.Hassan was perfectly aware that without the compressingpower of positive religion no society canwell be held together. Whatever, therefore, his privateopinions may have been, he resolved to imposeon the bulk of his followers the most rigid obedienceto the positive precepts of Islam, and, as we haveseen, actually put his own son to death for a breach ofone of them.Hassan is said to have rejected two of the degreesof the Israelite society at Cairo, and to have reducedthem to seven, the original number in the plan ofAbdallah Maison, the first projector of this secretsociety. Besides these seven degrees, through whichthe aspirants gradually rose to knowledge, Hassan.Ahmar, fain. Hara, is red in Arabic; hence the celebratedMoorish palace at Granada was called Alhambra (^AHard), i. e. the Ked.f Hence the Spanish Cid. I Hammer, book ii.SECRET Societies.order, Iduct of \in what Hammer terms the breviary of thedrew up seven regulations or rules for the conductthe teachers in his society. 1. The first of these,named Shinar-Risk (knowledge of duty), inculcatedthe requisite knowledge of human nature forselecting fit persons for admission. To Diis belongedthe proverbial expressions said to have been currentamong the Dais, similar to those used by the ancientPythagorean-s, such ns Sow not an barren ground(that is, Waste not your labour on incapable persons).Speak not in a house when there U a lamp, (Chat is,Be silent in the presence of a lawyer). 2. The^^condrule was called Teens ( Gaining of confidence), andtaught to win Ihe candidates by flattering their passionsand inclinations. 3. The third, of which thename is not given, taught to involve them in doubtsand difficulties by pointing out the absurdities ofthe Koran, and of positive religion. 4. When theaspirant had gone thus far, the solemn oath of silenceand obedience, anil of communicating his doubts tohia teacher alone, was to tie imposed on the disciple;and then (5.) he was to be informed that the doctrinesand opinions of the society were those of thegreatest men in church and state. 6. 'J'he Lessee{^ConJiTTnation) directed to put the pupil again throughall he had learned, and to confirm him in it. And, (7.)finally, Ihe TeBvil (^Instnicfion in allegory) gave theallegorical mode of interpreting the Koran, and drawingwhatever sense might suit their purposes from itspages, Any one who had gone through this courseof instruction, and was thus become perfect imbuedwith the spirit of the society, was regarded as an accomplishedLai, and employed in the important officeuf making proselytes and extending its influence.We must again express our opinion that the minuteaccounts which are given to us by some writers, respectingthe rules iind doctrines of S'Th Assassin. 69should be received with a considerable degree ofhesitation, owing to the character and the means ofinformation of those from whom we receive them.In the present case om* authority is a very suspiciousone. We are told that when Alamoot was taken byHoolekoo Khan, the Mongol prince, he gave hwvizir, the learned Ata-Melek (King's father) [Jowani,permission to examine the library, and to select suchbooks as were worthy of being preserved. The vizirtook out the Romans and some other books of value inhis eyes ; the rest, among which are said to have beenthe archives and the secret rules and doctrines of thesociety, he committed, after looking cursorily throughthem, to the flames. In an historical work of hisown he gave the result of his discoveries in thosebooks, and he is the authority from which Mirkhondand other writers have derived the accounts whichthey have transmitted to us. It is quite clear, therefore,that the vizir of Hoolakoo was at liberty toinvent what atrocities he pleased of the sect which wasdestroyed by his master, and that his testimony is consequentlyto be received with suspicion. On the otherhand it receives some confirmation from its agreementwith the account of the society at Cairo givenby Maris, and is not repugnant to the spirit ofSoofeism.This last doctrine, which is a kind of mystic Pantheism,viewing God in all and all in God, may produce,like fatalism, piety or its opposite. In the eyesof one who thus views God, all the distinctions betweenvice and virtue become fleeting and uncertain,and crime may gradually lose its atrocity, and be regardedas only a mean for the production of a goodend. That the Ismai'Iite Fedavee murdered innocentpersons without compunction, when ordered so to doby his superiors, is an undoubted fact, and there isno absurdity in supposing that he and they may havesecret SOCIETIES.thought that in so doing they were acting right, aiiiipromoting the cause of truth. Such Sanctifying ofcrime is not confined to the Est; the maxim thatthe end sanctions the means is of too convenient a.nature not to have prevailed in all parts of the world ;and the assassins of Henry III. and Henry IV, ofFrance displayed all the sincerity and constancy ofthe Israelite Fedavees. Without, therefore, regarding'the heads of the Israelites, with Hammer,mere ruthless and impious murderers, who trampledunder foot religion and morals with all their obligations,ue may assent to the opinion of their leadingdoctrine being Soofeism carried to its worst consequences.The followers of Hassan Sabah were called theEastern Ismai'lites, In distinguish them from those ofAfrica, They were iso named the Eatiniyeh (/«-temtU or Secret), from the secret meaning which theydrew from the text of the Koran,andMoalhad,or Moo-laid( Tt7ipiniis') on account of the imputed impiety oftheir doctrines, — names common to them with most ofthe preceding sects. It is under this last appellationthat they were known to Marco Polo, the Venetiantraveller. The name, however, by which they arebest known in Europe, and which we shall henceforthchiefly employ, is that of Assassins. This name isvery generally derived from that of the founder oftheir society; but M. De Soy has made it probablethat the oriental term Hashisheen, of which theCrusaders made Assassins, comes from Hashish,a species of hemp, from which intoxicating opiateswere made, which the Fedavee were in the habit stakingpreviously to engaging in their daring entersprises,oremploye(lasamedium of procuring deliciousvi^ns of the paradise promised to them by the8heikh-al-Jebal.[t is a curious question how Hassan Sabah con-theASSASSINS. 71trivet to infuse into the Fedavee the recklessness oflife, joined with the spirit of implicit obedience to thecommands of their superiors, which they so invariablydisplayed. We are told* that the system adopted forthis purpose was to obtain, by purchase or otherwise,from their parents, stout and healthy children. Thesewere reared up in implicit obedience to the will of theSheikh, and, to fit them for their future office, carefullyinstructed in various languages. The mostagreeable spots were selected for their abode, theywere indulged in the gratification of their senses,and, in the midst of their enjoyments, some personswere directed to inflame their imaginations by glowingdescriptions of the far superior delights laid upin the celestial paradise for those who should be admittedto repose in its bowers ; a happiness only tobe attained by a glorious death met in obedience tothe commands of the Sheikh. When such ideas hadbeen impressed on their minds, the glorious visionsever floated before their eyes, the impression was keptup by the use of the opiate above-mentioned, and theyoung enthusiast panted for the hour when deathsobtained, in obeying the order of the Sheikh, shouldopen to him the gates of paradise to admit him tothe enjoyment of bliss never to end.The celebrated Venetian, Marco Polo, who traversedthe most remote parts of the East in the 13th century,gave on his return to Europe an account of the regionswhich he had visited, which filled the minds of menwith wonder and amazement. As is usual in suchcases this was followed or accompanied by unbelief,and it is only by the inquiries and discoveries ofmodern travellers that the veracity of Marco Polo,like that of Herodotus, has been established andplaced beyond doubt.Among other wonderful narratives which we meetWilkes Geschichte der KreuzzUge, vol. ii.72 SECRET SOCIETIES.in the travels of Marco Polo is the account which hegrives of the people whom he calls Mulehetites (that is,Moolahid), and their prince the Old Man of theMountain. He describes correctly the nature of this society,and gives the following romantic narrative of themode employed by that prince to infuse the principle ofimplicit obedience into the minds of his followers*.In a beautiful valley," says he, " enclosed betweentwo lofty mountains, he had formed a luxurious garden,stored with every delicious fruit and every fragrantshrub that could be procured. Palaces ofvarious sizes and forms were erected in different partsof the grounds, ornamented with worlds of gold, withpaintings, and with furniture of rich silks. By meansof small conduits contained in these buildings streetsof wine, milk, honey, and some of pure water, wereseen to flow in every direction. The inhabitantsof these palaces were elegant and beautiful damsels,accomplished in the arts of singing, playing upon allsorts of musical instruments, dancing, and especiallythose of dalliance and amorous allurement. Clothedin rich dresses, they were seen continually sportingand amusing themselves in the garden and pavilions,their female guardians being confined thin doors,and never suffered to appear. The object which thechief had in view in forming a garden of this fascinatingkind was this : that Mahomet having promisedto those who should obey his will the enjoyments ofparadise, where every species of sensual gratificationshould be found in the society of beautiful nymphs,he was desirous of its being understood by his followersthat he also was a prophet, and a compeer ofMahomet, and had the power of admitting to paradisesuch as he should choose to favour. In order thatnone without his licence should find their way into thisJhsUcious valley, he caused a strong and inexpugnableMinded's Translation.THE AMABSnra. ?3castle lo be erected at the opening; of it, through, whelpthe entry was by a secret passage. At his court,hkewtse, this chief entertained a number of youths',from the ag of twelve to twenty years, selectedfrom the inhabitants of the surrounding mountains,who .showed a disposition for martial exercises, andappeared to possess the quality of daring courage. Tothem he was in the daily practice of discoursing onthe subject of the paradise announced by the Prophetand of his own, of granting admission, and at certaintimes he caused draughts of a soporific nature to beadministered to ten or a dozen of the youths, andwhen half dead with sleep he bad them conveyed tothe several apartments of the palaces in the garden.Upon awakening from this state of lethargy theirsenses were struck with all the delightful objects thathave been described, and each perceived himself surroundedby lovely damsels, singing, playing, and attractinghis regards by the most fascinating caresses,serving him also with delicious viands and exquisitewines, until, intoxicated with excess of enjoyment,amidst actual rivers of milk and wine, he believedhimself assuredly in paradise, and felt an unwillingnessto relinquish its delights. When four or fivedays had thus been passed, they were thrown oncemore into a state of somnolency and carried out ofthe garden. Upon their being introduced to his presence,and questioned by him as to where they hadbeen, their answer was, ' in paradise, through thefavour of your highness ;' and then, before the wholecourt, who listened to them with 'eager curiosity andastonishment, they gave a circumstantial account ofthe scenes to which they had been witnesses. Thechief thereupon addressing them said, ' We have theassurance of our Prophet that he who defends hislord shall inherit paradise, and if you show yourselvesilevoletl to the obedience of tiny orders, lliat happy lot74 SECRET SOCIETIES.awaits you.' Animated to enthusiasm by words ofthis nature all deemed themselves happy to receivethe commands of their master, and were forward todie in his service'*This romantic narrative, more suited to a placeamong the wonders of the "Thousand and OneNights" than to admission into sober history, hasbeen very generally rejected by judicious inquirerssuch as De Say and Welkin, the able historiansof the Crusades; but it has found credence withHammer, to whose work we are indebted for the fargreater part of the present details on the subject ofthe Assassins. This industrious scholar has, as hethinks, found a proof of its truth in the circumstanceof similar narratives occurring in the works of someArabian writers which treat of the settlements of thesociety in Syria, forgetting that a fabulous legend isoften more widely diffused than sober truth. All,therefore, that can be safely inferred from this collectionof authorities is that the same marvellous talewhich the Venetian traveller heard in the north ofPersia was also current in Syria and Egypt. Its truthmust be established by a different species of proof.'In the Siret-al-Hakem memoirs of Hakem)y aspecies of Arabian historic romance, the following accountof the gardens at Massyat, the chief seat ofthe Assassins in Syria, was. discovered by Hammer*: —Our narrative now returns to Ismail the chief ofthe Ismailites. He took with him his people ladenwith gold, silver, pearls, and other effects, taken awayfrom the inhabitants of the coasts, and which he hadreceived in the island of Cyprus, and on the part ofthe king of Egypt, Dealer, the son of Hakem-biemr-lllah. Having bidden farewell to the sultanof Egypt at Tripolis, they proceeded to Massyat, whenFundgrubeu des Orients, vol. iii.THE ASSASSINS. 75the inhabitants of the castles and fortresses assembledto enjoy themselves, along with the chief Ismail andhis people. They put on the rich dresses with whichthe sultan had supplied them, and adorned the castleof Massyat with everything that was good and fine.Ismail made his entry into Massyat with the Devoted(Fedavee)^ as no one has ever done at Massyatbefore him or after him. He stopped there sometimeto take into his service some more personswhom he might make Devoted both in heart andbody.With this view he had caused to be made a vastgarden, into which he had water conducted. In themiddle of this garden he built a kiosk raised to theheight of four stories. On each of the four sideswere richly-ornamented windows joined by fourarches, in which were painted stars of gold andsilver. He put into it roses, porcelain, glasses; anddrinking vessels of gold and silver. He had withhim Mamlooks (i. e. slaves), ten males and ten females,who were come with him from the region ofthe Nile, and who had scarcely attained the age ofpuberty. He clothed them in silks and in the fineststuffs, and he gave unto them bracelets of gold andof silver. The columns were overlaid with musk andwith amber, and in the four arches of the windowshe set four caskets, in which was the purest musk.The columns were polished, and this place wasthe retreat of the slaves. He divided the gardeninto four parts. In the first of these were pear-trees,apple-trees, vines Cherries, mulberries, plums, andother kinds of fi'uit-trees. In the second wereoranges, lemons, olives, pomegranates, and otherfruits. In the third were cucumbers, melons, leguminousplants, &c. In the fourth were roses, jessamine,tamarinds, narcissi, violets, lilies, anemones,&c. &c.f2SECRET SOCIETIES,The garden was divided by canals of water, aadthe kiosk was surrounded with ponds and reservoirs.There were groves in which were seen antelopes,ostriches, asses, and wild cows. Issuing from theponds, one met ducks, geese, partridges, details, hares,foxes, and other animals. Around the kiosk thechief IsmaVI planted walks of tall trees, terminatingin the different parts of the garden. He built therea sat house, divided into two apartments, the upperand the lower. From the latter covered walks ledout into the garden, which was all enclosed withwalls, so that no one could see into it, for these walksand buildings were all void of inhabitants. He madea gall of coolness, which ran from this apartmentto the cellar, which was behind. This apartmentserved as a place of assembly; for the men. Havingplaced himself on a sofa there opposite the door, thechief made his men sit down, and gave them to eatmid to drink during the while length of the day untilAt nightfall he looked around him, and,selecting those whose firmness pleased him, said tothem, ' Ho ! such-a-one, come and seat thyself Dearme.' It is thus that Ismail made those whom hehad chosen sit near him on the sofa and drink. HeThen spoke to them of the great and excellent quali-liesof the imam Ali, of his bravery, his nobleness,iind his generosity, until they fell asleep, overcomeby the power of the lienjek' viluch he had given them,and which never failed to produce its effects in lessthan a quarter of an hour, so that they fell down asif they were inanimate. As soon as the man hadfallen the chief Ismail arose, and, taking him up,brought him into a dormitory, aid then, shutting theThe Arabic name ot the hyuBcyamus, oc henbane.Hnmiiier conjectures that the weird ini,7<, Lor, with theI'uiitii- nrliule in this plural, ui-hinje, ii the same with theiii'|M'UtliB ut tliB ancients.— rimdnrubeQ cs Tints, iii. 202.Tee ASSASSINS.lioor, carried him on his shoulders into the gallery ofcoolness, trhich was in the garden, and thence intothe kiosk, where he committed him to the care of themale and female slaves, directing them to complywith all the desires of the candidate, on whom theyflung vinegar till he awoke. When he was come tohimself the youths hdc! m^dens said lo him, ' We areonly waiting tor thy death, for this place is destinedfor thee. This is one of the pavilions of paradise,and we are the horses and the children of paradise.If thou wert dead thou wouldst be for ever with us,but thou art only dreaming, and wilt soon awake.'Meanwhile the chief Ismail had returned lo tuft companyas soon as he had witnessed the awakening ofthe candidate, who now perceived nothing but youthsand maidens of the greatest beauty, and adornedin the most magnificent manner.He looked round the place, inhaled the fragranceof musk and frankincense, and drew near to thegarden, where he saw the beasts and the birds, therunning wafer, and the trees. He gazed on thebeauty of the kiosk, and the vase of gold and silver,while the youths and maidens kept him in converse.lu this way he remained confounded, not knowingwhether he was awake or only dreaming. Whentwo hours of the night had (tone by, the chief Ismail returnedto the dormitory, closed to the door, and thenceproceeded to the garden, where his slavesaround him and rose before him. When thedate perceived him he said unto him, 'O chief Is ^mail, do I dream, or-am I awake ?' The chief Ismail ithen made answer to him, ' O such-a-one, beware of Jrelating this vision to any one who is a stronger tibiaplace ! Know that the Lord Ali has shown thee ,the place which is destined for thee in paradise.Know that at this moment the Lord Ali and I havebeen silting together in the regions of the empyrean.I7B SEOBBT SOCIETIES.So do uot hesitate a moment in the service of theitnata whobas given thee to know bis felicity.' Thenthe chief Ismtkii ordered supper to be serve. It wasbrought in vessels of*gold and of silver, and consistedof boiled meats and roost meats, with other dishes.White the candidate ate lie was sprinkled with rosewater; when he called fur drink there were broughtto him vessels of gold and silver filled with deliciousliquors, in which also had been mingled some benjeh.When he had fallen asleep, Ismail carried htm throughthe gallery back to the dormitory, aud, leaving himthere, returned to his company. Ater a little timehe w^V back, threw vinegar on his fat, and then,bringing him out, Offered one of the Mamlooks toshake him. On awaking, and finding himself inthe same place among the guests, lie said, 'There isno god but God, and Mohammed is the Prophet ofGod !' The chief Ismail then drew near and caressedhtm, and he remained, as it were, immersed ilk intoxication,wholly devoted to the service of the chief,who then said unto him, *0 such-one, know thatwhat thou hast seen was not a dream, hut one of themiracles of the imam All. Know that he has writtenthy name among those of hia friends. If thou keepthe secret thou art certain of thy felicity, but if thouspeak of it thou wilt incur the resentment of theimam. If thou die thou art a martyr ; but bewareof relating this to any person whatever. Thou hastentered by one of the gates to the friendship of theimam, and art become one of his family ; but if thoubetray the secret, thou wilt become one of his enemies,and be driven from his house.' Thus this manbecame one of the servants of the chief Ismail, whoin this manner surrounded himself with trusty men,until his reputation was established. This is what isrelated of the chief Ismml and his Devoted."To these romantic tales of the paradise of the OldTHE ASSASSINS. 79Man of the Mountain we must add a third of a stillmore juggling character, furnished by the learnedand venerable Sheikh Abd-ur-Rahman servant ofthe Compassionate, i. e., of God) Ben Ebubekr of Damascus, in the twenty-fourth chapter of *his work entitled " A Choice Book for discoveringthe Secrets of the Art of Imposture."After giving some account of Sinan, the chief ofthe Syrian Assassins, whom we shall presently haveoccasion to mention, the sheikh proceeds to narratethe artifice which he employed to deceive his followers: —There was near the sofa on which he saga holein the ground sufficiently deep for a man to sil downin it. This he covered with ti thin piece of wood,leaving only so much of it open as would contain theneck of a man. He placed on this cover of wood adisk of bronze with a hole in the middle of it, andput in it two doors. Then taking one of his disciples,to whom he h^ given a considerable sum ofmoney to obtain his consent, he placed the perforateddisk round his neck, and kept it down by weights, sothat nothing appeared but the neck of the man ; andhe put warm blood upon it, so that it looked as if hehad just cut off his head. He then called in hiscompanions, and showed them the plate, on whichthey beheld the head of their comrade. ' Tell thycomrades,' said the master to the head, ' what thouhast seen, and what has been said unto thee Theman then answered as he had been previously instructed.'Which wouldest thou prefer,* said themaster, ' to return to the world and thy friends, orto dwell in paradise ?' ' What need have I,* repliedthe head, ' to return to the world after having seenmy pavilion in paradise, and the horses, and allthat God has prepared for me? Comrades, saluteFuadgruben des Orients, vol. iv.BOSECRET SOClETrKB,my family, and lake care not to disobey this prophet,who is the lord of the prophets in the state of time,as God has sold unto me. Farewell,' These wordsstrengthened the faith of the others ; but when Iheywere gone the master took the man up out of thehole, und cut wolf his head in right earnest. It wasby such means as this that he made himself obeyedby his people."The preceding accounts, whatever may be thoughtof their truth, serve to testify a general belief throughoutthe East of some extraordinary means being employedby the mountain chief to acquire the powerwhich be was known to possess over the minds of hisFemale. And, in fact, there is no great improbabilityia the supposition of some artifice of that naturehaving been occasionally employed by him ; for,when we recollect that an Asiatic imagination iscoarse, especially among the lower orders, and thatin the Bast men rarely see any females hut those oftheir own family, the chief might find no great difficultyin persuading a youth, whom he had transportedin a stale of stupor into an apartment filled with younggirls, of his having been in the actual paradise promisedto the faithful.But, laying aside supposition, we may observethat the very power over the minds of their followersascribed to Hassan Sabah and his successors has beenactually exercised in our own days by the chief of theWahabees. Sir John Malcolm* informs us, from aPersian manuscript, that a few years ago one of thatsect, who had stabbed an Arab chief near Bussora,when taken, not only refused to do anything lombardssaving his life, but, on the contrary, seemed anxiouslyto eoiut death. He was observed to grasp somethingfirmly in hia band, which he appeared to prize beyond'""3 itself. On its being taken from him and examHistory uf Peisis, vol. i.mined, it proved lo be an order from the Wiihabeechief for an emerald palace and a number of beauty'iii female slaves in the blissful paradise of the Pro Ipoet. This story, however, it must be confessed, jappears to be little consistent with the principlesthe sect of the Wahnbees, and we may suspect thatit has originated in some misapprehension.The following instance of the implicit obedienceof the Fedavee to (he orders of Hassan Sabah isgiven by a respectable oriental historian*. An ambassadorfrom the Sultan Malekk Shah having cometoAlamoot lo demand the submission and obedienceof the sheikh, Hassan received him in shall in whichhe had assembled several of his followers. Making ia si to one youth, he said, "Kill thyself!" In- jinstantly the young man's dagger was plunged into hisown bosom, and he lay a corpse upon the ground.To another he said, " Fling thyself down from thewall." In an instant his shattered limbs were lyingin the castle ditch. Then turning lo the terrifiedenvoy, " I have seventy thousand followers who obeyme after this fashion. This be mj answer to thymaster."Very nearly the same tale is told of the Assassinsof Syria by a western writers. As Henry Count ofChampagne was journeying, in the year 1194, fromPalestine to Armenia, his road lay through the confinesof the territory of the Israelites. The chiefsent some persons to salute him, and to beg that, onhis return, he would atop at, and partake of the hospitalityof his castle. The count accepted the invitation.As he returned the Ddi-al-Kehir advancedto meet him, showed him every mark of honour, andled him to view his castles and fortresses. HavingThi) WBB Ibe Aimeaiain Cilicia.82 SECRET SOCIETIES.passed through several, they came at length to onethe towers of which rose to an exceeding height.On each tower stood two sentinels clad in white.*' These," said the chief, pointing to them, " obey mefar better than the subjects of you Christians obeytheir lords ;*' and at a given signal two of them flungthemselves down, and were dashed to pieces. "Ifyou wish** said he to the astonished count, *' all mywhite ones shall do the same." The benevolentcount shrank from the proposal, and candidly avowedthat no Christian prince could presume to look forsuch obedience from his subjects. When he wasdeparting, with many valuable presents, the chief saidto him significantly, " By means of these trusty servantsI get rid of the enemies of our society**In oriental, and also in occidental history, thesame anecdote is often told of different persons, acircumstance which might induce us to doubt of itstruth altogether, or at least of its truth in any particularcase. The present anecdote, for instance, witha slight variation in the details, is told of Abooo Taher,a celebrated leader of the Carmathites. This chief,after his expedition to Mecca, in which he had slain30,000 of the inhabitants, filled the hallowed wellZemzem with the bodies of dead men, and carriedoff the sacred black stone in triumph, had the hardihoodto approach Bagdad, the residence of the khalif,with only 500 horsemen. The pontiff of Islam,enraged at the insult, ordered his general Abooo Sayto take 30,000 men, and make him a prisoner. Thelatter, having collected his forces, sent a man off toAbooo Taher to tell him on his part that out ofregard for him, who had been his old friend, he advisedhim, as he had so few troops with him, eitherto yield himself at once to the khalif or to see aboutmaking his escape. Abooo Taher asked oi theenvoy how many men Abooo Saj had with him. TheTHE ASSASSINS. 63envoy replied, "Thirty thousand." "He still wantsthree like mine," said Abooo Taher ; and calling tohim three of his men, he ordered one of them to stabhimself, another to throw himself into the Tigris, athird to fling himself down from a precipice. Hiscommands were at once obeyed. Then turning tothe envoy, " He who has such troops fears not thenumber of his enemies. I give thyself quarter ; butknow that I shall soon let thee see thy general AboooSaj chained among my dogs." In fact, that verynight he attacked and routed the troops of the khalif,and Abooo Saj, happening to fall into his hands, soonappeared chained among the mastiffs of the carmelitechief*.The preceding details on the paradise of theSheikh-al-Jebal, and his power over the minds of hisfollowers, will at least help to illustrate the mannersand modes of thinking of the orientals. We nowresume the thread of our narrative, and proceed tonarrate the deeds of the Assassins, as we shall henceforthdesignate them.# • D'Herbelot, /i/re Arbroath.SECRET SOCIETIES.Chapter VI.Keith BiwoorR O Dm eid— Affairs of the Society in Persia—They acquires the Castle of Bathos, in Syren— Attempt tu^tmy Damascus to the Crusaders— Murcia connectedduring the reign of KeSh Buioorg.Keah Btif.ooRG OoiMBin trod faithfully in the footprintsof his predecessor. He built the strong fortressof Maimoondees, and he made the enemies of thesociety feel that it was still animated by the spirit of■ Hassan Sabah. Sultan Sanjar, who, on account ofthe favourable terms on which he had made peacewith the Assassins, was regarded by tile rigidly orthodoxus a secret follower of their doctrine, declaredhimself once more their open enemy, and sent anarmy to ravage Kirdkoh. These troops were defeatedby those which Kean sent against |^m; butthe following year Sanjar put to the sword a greatnumber of the members of the sect. The dagger, asusual. retaliated. Mahmooi), the successor of Uanjur,having first tried in vain the elect of arms, sent hisgrand falconer Uerenkesh to Alamoot, to desire thataiL envoy might be sent to him to treat of peace. TheKhojah (Master) Mohammed Assisi accompaniedBerenkesh back to court, and kissed the hand of thesultan, who spoke to him a lew words about thepeace; but as theKhojahwasgoingout of the palace,he and his followers were fallen upon and massacredby the people,Alien the sultan sent an ambassador to Alamootto exculpate himself from the guilt of participation inhats rioklioa of the laws of nations, Keah madeASSASSINS.answer, "Go back to the sultan, and tell him, inmy name, Mohammed Assisi trusted to your per-idiots assurances, and repaired to your court; if youspeak truly, deliver up the murderers to justice; if not,expect my vengeance." On the refusal of the sultanto surrender the murderers, a corps of Asshssuis appearedat the gates of Casveen,Glen 400 men, and ledaway 3,000 sheep, 200 horses, and 200 oxen. Nextyear the sultan took, and retained for a short time, thefortress of Alamoot; butabodyof 2,000 men which hesent against Lamseer fled, without drawing a sword,when they heard that the Refeek companions) of thesociety were marching against them. Shortly afterwardsthe sultan died, and the Assassins made anotherincursion into the district of Casveeu, whereihey carried off booty and prisoners.The mountain chief would tolerate no rival nearhis throne. Hearing that one Abooo Hasten, adescendant of Ali, had arrogated to himself the dignityof imam in the province of Ghilan, which liesnorth of K.uhistan, and had issued letters calling onthe jieojalB to acknowledge him, Keah write to himto desist from his pretensions. Tic self-appointedimam only replied by reviling the odious tenets ofthe Israelites, The sheikh forthwith sent a body ofhis troops against him, took him prisoner, and, aftertrying him by a court-martial, committed him to theThough, Ihave seen, the settlements of thenthe mountainous region of Irakk, inthe north-west of Persia, their power wds of such anature that no distance was a security against it. AFedaveecould speedily traverse the intervening regionsto plant his dagger in the bosom of any prince orminister who had incurred the vengeance of theSheikh-al-Jebal. Accordingly we find the shah(fKi/ig) of Khaurism, between which. aaA. Vxb!*. 'at).BS SECRET aocrETiSR.the extensive province of Khorasaii, coming: loSultan MasEDod, the successor of Manhood, to concertwith him a plan Ibr the Restriction of these formidablefaces t» princes. The shah of Khaurismhad been formerly rather disposed to favour the Ib-allies, but his eyes were now opened, and he wasbecome their most inveterate enemy. Stilton Massood,we know not Ibr what reason, bestowed on himthe lands which Berenkesh, the grand falconer, hadheld of the sultan. Berenkesh, mortally offended atthis unworthy treatment, retired, with his family, tothe territory of the samnites, and sought the protectionof KeSh, whose open enemy he had hithertobeen. Policy, or a regard to good faith and humanity,made the Assassin prince grant the protectionwhich was required ; and when the shah of Kbauriamwrote, reminding Keah of his own former friendship,and the bitter hostility uf Berenkesh, and re({ueEtiiighim, on that plea, to give up the fugitive, the sheikhreplied, "The shah of Khaurism speaks true, but wewill never give up our suppliants." Long and bloodyenmity between the sheikh and the shabswas theconsequence of this refusal to violate the rights ofhospitality.The Syrian branch of the society begins at thistime lo attract rather more attention than that ofPersia, chiefly on account of its connexion with theCrusaders, who had succeeded in establishing anempire extending from the frontiers of Egypt to thoseof Armenia. A Persian Israelite, named Belirataof Astrabad, who is said to have commenced hiu- career by the murder of hia own father, gained theconfidence of the vizir of the prince of Damascus,who gave him the castle of Banias, or Panis (theancient Balance), for the use of the society. Thisplace, which became the nucleus of the power ofthe Assassins m Syria, lies in a fertile, well-wateredTHE ASSASSINS. 87plain, about 4,000 paces from the sea. The valleywhence the numerous streams which fructify it issueis called the Wadi-al-Jinn (Valley of Bemons)^a place," observes Hammer, whom no casuscoincidence escapes, " from its very name worthyof becoming a settlement of the Assassins." FromBanias they extended their power over the neighbouringcastles and fortresses, until, twelve yearsafterwards, the seat of dominion was transferredthence to Massy at.Behram fell shortly afterwards in an engagementagainst the people of the valley of Tai'm, the brotherof whose chief had perished by the daggers of theAssassins. His successor was Ismail, a Persian, whocontinued the bond of amity with the vizir of Damascus,whither he sent, by way of resident, a mannamed, rather inappropriately as it would appear,Aboo-'l-Wefa (Father of Fidelity). This man sowon the favour of the vizir and prince that he wasappointed to the office of Harem, or supreme judge ;and having thus acquired power and influence, heimmediately turned his thoughts to the best mode ofemploying them for the advantage of the society, anobject always near the heart of a true Israelite. Aplace of strength on the sea-coast would, he conceived,be of the utmost importance to them; so hefixed his eyes upon Tyre, and fell upon the followingexpedient to obtain possession of itThe Franks had been now upwards of thirty yearsestablished in the East. Their daring and enthusiasticvalour was at once the dread and the admirationof their Mussulman foes, and feats almost surpassingthe fables of the romances of chivalry hadbeen performed by their gallant warriors. Thesewere the auxiliaries to whom Aboo-'l-Wefa directedhis attention; for we are to observe that as yet thefanatic spirit had not united all the Moslems in enmityagainst the followers of the Cross, anil theprinces of Aleppo, Damascus, and the other districtsof Syria, had been more than once in alliance withthe Christian realms of Jerusalem and Antioch.Aboo-'l-Wefa sent therefore and concluded a secrettreaty with Baldwin II., king of Jerusalem, inwhich he engaged, if the Christian warriors wouldsecretly march and appear before Damascus on aFriday, when the emir and his officers would he atthe kiosk, to give them possession of the gates of thetown. The king was in return to put Tyre intothe hands of the Israelites.The Christian army was assembled; all the baronsof the kingdom appeared in arms; the king in personled the host; the newly-formed military order ofthe Templar displayed for the first time in the fieldtheir striped banner Beaiiseant, afterwards so wellknown in many a bloody fray. Prince Bernard ofAntioch, Count Pontius of Tripolis, the brave Josce-lin of Edessa, led their knights and footmen to sharein the capture of the wealthy city of Damascus. Themountains which environ Lake Tiberias were leftbehind, and the host joyfully emerged into the plainwatered by the streams Abana and Phaqiar. Buthere defeat awaited them. Taj-al-Molook (diademof Kings) Boozi, the emir of Damascus, had in timediscovered the plot of his harem. He had put himand the vizir to death, and had ordered a "generalmassacre of the Ismailites in the city*. The Christianarmy was now at a place named Mar] Safer, and&e footmen had begin to plunder the villages forfood, when a small body of gallant Damascene warriorsrushed from the town and fell upon them.The defenceless Christians sank beneath their blows,incapable of resistance. The rest of the army advancedto aid OP avenge their brethren, when sud-totanumbcc alaiii was G,000.THE ASSASSINS. 89deny* the sky lie cum e overcast, thick darkness envelopedall objects, the thunder roared, the lightningflashed, the rain poured down in torrents, and, by arapid transition, peculiar to Eastern climates, therain and waters turned into snow and ice, and augmentedthe horrors of the day. The superstitious audconscience-stricken Crusaders viewed in this awfulphenomenon the immediate agency of heaven, an Jdeemed it to be sent as a punishment for their sins ;and, recollecting that on that very spot but four yearsbefore King Baldwin had gained, with a handful of ,men, o victory over an army of the Damascenes, theywere plunged into grief and humiliation. Tbe onlyadvantage which they derived from this expeditionwas the acquisition of the castle of Banias, which thelamailite governor put into their hands, that undertheir protection be might escape the fate of hisbrethren.Banias was given up to the Christians iu the sameyear in which Alamoot was taken by the Seljuokiansultan, and thus the power of the Assassins seemed tobe almost gone. But it had in it a conservative principle,and, hydra-like, it grew by its wounds. Almostwas speedily recovered, and three years afterwardsBanias was once more the seutofa Dai-al-Kebir. At the same time the dagger raged withunwonted fury against all of whom the society stoodin apprehension, and the annals of the reign ofKeah fiuzoorg Oomcid furnish a list of illustrious ,The first of these was the celebrated Aksunkur,Prince of Mosul, a warrior equally dreaded by the JChristians and by the Assassins. As this prince, on ihis return from Maarra Mesrin, where the Moslem 'and Christian hosts bad parted without venturing toengage, entered the mosk at Mosul to perform hisIt was the month of December,t99 SECRET SOCIETIES.devotion, he was attacked at the moment when heWas about to take his usual seat by eight assassins,disguised as dervishes. Three of them fell beneaththe blows of the vacant emir, but ere his people couldcome to his aid he had received his death-wound andexpired. The remainder of the murderers becamevictims to the vengeance of the people ; one youthonly escaped. The Arabian historian, Kemal-ed-Been, relates on this occasion a curious trait of thefanaticism and Spartan spirit which animated themembers of the sect of the Ismailites. When themother of the youth above-mentioned heard that theformidable Aksunkur had been slain, she painted herface and put on her gayest raiment and ornaments,rejoicing that her son had been found worthy to diethe glorious death of a martyr in the cause of theImam. But when she saw him return alive and unscathed,she cut off her hair and blackened her countenance,and would not be comforted.In the following year {1 127) fell Moin-ed-deen,(he vizir of Sultan Sanjar. In this case the Assassinhad engaged himself as a groom in the service of thevizir. As Mniu-ed-deen went one day into thestable to look at his horses the Assassin appeared beforehim, stripped, and holding one of the horses bythe bridle. As the vizir, unsuspicious of danger,came near where he was, the false groom made thehorse rear, and, under the pretence of soothing andpacifying the restive animal, he took out a smalldagger which he had concealed in the horse's mane,and plunged it into the bosom of the vizir.The slaughter of the Milites by the Prince ofDamascus was not forgotten, and two years afterwardshe received two dagger wounds, one of whichproved mortal. Their vengeance was not appeasedby his blood, and his son and successor, Shems-at-Look sua of Kijigt), perished by a conspiracyTHB Assassin.:^with the guilt of which the Assassin were charged.In the catalogue of the victims of this period appearalso the gaines of the Judges of the East and of theWest, of the Mufti of Casveen, of the Reis of Isfa-han, and the Reis of Tebrcez.Tile East has been at all times prolific of crime ;human life is not there held to be of the value atwhich it is estimated in Europe; and the dagger andpoison are freely employed to remove objects of apprehension,to put obstacles out of the way of ambition,or to satiate the thirst of vengeance. We arenot, therefore, lightly to give credit lo every chargemade against the Assassins, and to believe themguilty of murders from which they had no advantageto derive. Thus, when at this time the Fatimite KhalifAmir bi-ahkami-llah ( Commander of the observanceof the last of God) fell by the hands of murderers,the probability is that he was not a victim to thevengeance of the Israelite society, whom he hadnever injured, but rather to that of the family of thepowerful vizir Afdal,who had been assassinated sometimebefore by the khalif 'h order, as we have everyreason to suppose.With a greater show of reason may the murder ofMostarshcd, the Khalif of Bagdad, be imputed to thepolicy of the mountain chief. The Seijookian princes,the predecessors of Massood, had been satisfied toexercise all real power in the empire which had onceobeyed the house of Abbas, leaving to that feebleShadow uf God upon Earth the unsubstantial privilegeof having the coin of the realm struck andprayers offered on Friday in the mosk in his name.But Massood arrogated even these rights to himself,and the helpless successor of the Prophet was obliged'!to submit to the indignity which he could not pre *vent. At length some discontented military chiefspassed with their troops over to the khalifi and i>er-92 SECRET SOCIETIES.suadod him that by one bold effort he might overthrowthe might ot' the Turkish sultan, and recoverall his rights. The khalif listened to their arguments,and, placing himself at the head of an army,marched against Sultan Massood. But fortuneproved adverse to him. At the first shock thegreater part of the troops of Bagdad abandoned him,and he remained a captive in the hands of the sultan,who brought him with him a prisoner to Martha.Here a treaty was concluded between them, and thekhalif bound himself not to go any more outside ofthe walls of Bagdad, and annually to pay a sum ofmoney. This treaty appears to have been displeasingto the Assassins; and, watching their opportunity,when Massood was gone to meet the ambassadors ofSultan Sanjar, a party of them fell upon and massacredthe khalif and his train. The lifeless body ofthe Commander of the Faithful was mangled bythem in the most scandalous manner.After a blood-stained reign of fourteen years andthree days Keah Buzoorg Oomeid died. Departingfrom the maxims of Hassan Sabah, who it isprobable wished to imitate the conduct of the Prophet,and leave the supreme dignity elective, he appointedhis own son, Keah Mohammed, to be hissuccessor, induced either by paternal partiality, orbelieving him to be the person best qualified for theoffice.THE ASSASSINS. 93Chapter VII.Keah Mohammed — Murder of the Khalif — Castles gained inSyria — Israelite Confession of Faith — Mohammed's SonHassan gives himself out for the promised Imam — HisFollowers punished — Succession of Hassan — He abolishesthe Law — Pretends to be descended from the Prophet — Ismurdered.The policy of the society underwent no alteration onthe accession of Mohammed. The dagger still smoteits enemies, and as each victim fell, the people whomaintained the rights of Ismail, and who were keptin rigid obedience to the positive precepts of theKoran, beheld nothing but the right hand of Heaven'made bare for the punishment of crime and usurpation.The new mountain prince had hardly takenthe reins of government into his hands when Rushed,the successor of the late khalif, eager to avenge themurder of his father, assembled an army and marchedagainst Alamoot. He had reached Isfahan, but therehis march terminated. Four Assassins, who hadentered his service for the purpose, fell upon him inhis tent and stabbed him. When the news was conveyedto Alamoot great rejoicing were made, andfor seven days and seven nights the trumpets andkettle-drums resounded from the towers of the fortress,proclaiming the triumph of the dagger to thesurrounding country.The Syrian dominion of the Ismailites was at thistime considerably extended. They purchased fromIbn Amroo, their owner, the castles of Cadmus andKahaf, and took by force that of Massyat front ihft94 SECRET SOCIETIES.lords of Sheis6r. This castle, which was situated onthe west side of Mount Legal, opposite Apparatus,became henceforth the chief seat of Jsmailite powerin Syria. The society had now a line of coast to thenorth of Tripolis, and their possessions extended inlandto the verge of the Hauran.The reign of Mohammed presents few events toillustrate the history of the Assassins. It was probablyin his time that the following confession of theIsraelite faith was made to the persons whom SultanSanjar sent to Alamoot to inquire into it*;This is our doctrine," said the heads of the society." We believe in the unity of God, and acknowledgeas the true wisdom and right creed only thatwhich accords with the word of God and the commandsof the Prophet We hold these as they aredelivered in the holy writ, the Koran, and believe inall that the Prophet has taught of ,the creation, andthe last things, of rewards and punishments, of thelast judgment, and the resurrection. To believe thisis necessary, and no one is authorized to judge of thecommands of God for himself, or to alter a singleletter in them. These are the fundamental doctrinesof our sect, and if the sultan does not approve ofthem, let him send hither one of his learned divines,that we may argue the matter with him."To this creed no orthodox Mussulman could wellmake any objection. The only question was, whatwas the Israelite system of interpretation, and whatother doctrines did they deduce from the sacred text ;and the active employment of the dagger of the Fe-daviesuggested in tolerably plain terms that therewere others, and that something not very compatiblewith the peace and order of society lay behind theveil. Indeed the circumstance of the Israelite chiefsAs Saojar lived to a great age he was contemporary withMFeral of toe Israelite sheikhs.THE ASSASSINS. 9^professing themselves to be only the ministers andrepresentatives of the invisible imam was in itselfhighly suspicious; for what was to prevent their enjoiningany atrocity which might be for their interest,in the name of their viewless master? They areignorant indeed of human nature who suppose thata prompt obedience would not be yielded to all suchcommands by the ignorant and bigoted members ofthe sect.The ill leaven of the secret doctrine displayeditself before very long. Keah Mohammed, who appearsto have been a weak, inefficient man, was heldin little esteem by his followers. They began toattach themselves to his son Hassan, who had thereputation of being a man of prodigious knowledgelearned in tradition and the text of the Koran,versed in exposition, and well acquainted with thesciences. Hassan, either through vanity or policy,began secretly to disseminate the notion of his beitighimself the imam whose appearance had been promisedby Hassan Ben Sabah. Filled with this idea,the more instructed members of the society vied witheach other in eagerness to fulfil his commands, andKeah Mohammed, seeing his power gradually slippingfrom him, was at length roused to energy.Assembling the people, he reprobated in strong termsthe prevailing heresy. " Hassan'* said he, " is myson, and J am not the imam, but only one of hismissionaries. Whoever maintains the contrary is aninfidel." Then, in true Assassin fashion, he gaveeffect to his words by executing 250 of his son's adherents,and banishing an equal number from thefortress. Hassan himself, in order to save his life,was obliged publicly to curse those who held the newopinions, and to write dissertations condemning theirtenets, and defending those of his father. Bythese means he succeeded in removing suspicionIM SECRET ancients.from the mind of the old chief; but, as he continuedto drink wine in private, and violated several of theother positive precepts of the law. his adherents becameonly the more convinced of his beingthe imam,at whose coming all the precepts of the law were tocease to be of any force.Hassan was obliged to be cautious and concealhis opinions during the lifetime of his father ; for,whatever their opinion might be of the capacity andintellectual power of the head of their sect, the Assassinsbelieved themselves to be bound to obey hisorders, as proceeding from the visible representativeof the sacred invisible imam ; and, high as their venerationfor Hassan was, his blood would have flowedun the ground the instant an order to that effect leadpassed the lips of his father. But no sooner wasKeah Mohammed dead, after a reign of twenty-fouryears, and the supreme station was come to Hassanhimself, than lie resolved to fling away the mask atonce, and not only to trample on the law himself, butto authorize and encourage all his people to do theAccordingly, when the month Ramazan (the MohammedanLent) of the 559th year of the Hejra(a. n. 1163) was come, he ordered all (he inhabitantsof Hoodbar lo assemble on the place of prayer ( moselle),or esplanade, before the castle of Alamoot.Facing the direction of the Keblali* he eased apulpit to be erected, at whose four corners were displayedbanners of the different hues familiar to Islam,namely, a white, a red, a yellow, a gi'een, coloursadverse to the black of the Embassies.On the Itt day of the month the people, inobedience to his commands, appeared in great numbersbeneath the walls of the fortress. After a little• That is, thi: point towards which they turD in prayer,namely, Mecca.THE ASSASSINS. 91'time Hassan came forth and ascended the pulpit. Allvoices were hushed; expectation waited on the wordsof the Sheikh-al-Jebal. He commenced his discoursebyperplexing- the minds of his auditors by enigmaticaland obscure sentences. When he had thus deludedthem for same time, he informed them Chat an envoyof the imam (that is, the phantom of a khalif whowas still sitting on the throne at Cairo) hod arrived,and had brought him a letter addressed to all Israelites,whereby the fundamental tenets of the sect wererenewed and confirmed. He proceeded to assurethem that, by this letter, the gates of mercy and com-pa-ssiou had been opened for all who would follow andobey him ; that they were the true elect ; that theywere freed from all obligations of the law, and deliveredfrom the burden of all commands and prohibitions; that he had now conducted them to the dayof the resurrection, that is, of the revelation of theimam. He then commenced in Arabic the Shootsor public prayer, which he said he had receivedfrom the imam; and an interpreter, who stood at thefoot of the pulpit, translated it for them Co the followingeffect ; —Hassan, the son of Mohammed, the son of Oomeid, is our khalif {mceesKOr), dai, andhooper proof). All who follow our doctrine musthearken to him in affairs of faith and of the world,and regard his commands as imperative, his words asimpressive. They must not transgress his prohibitions,and they must regard his commands as ours.They should Imo that our lord has had compassionupon them, and has conducted them to the mosthigh God."When this proclamation was made known Hassancame down from the pulpit, directed tables to bespread,and commanded the people to break the fast,and to give themselves up, as on festival days, to all98 SECRET SOCIETIES.kinds of enjoyment, with music, and various gamesand sports. " For this," cried he, " this is the dayof the resurrection ;" that is, according to the Israelitemode of interpreting the Koran, the day of themanifestation of the imam.What the orthodox had before only suspected wasnow confirmed. It was now manifest, beyond doubt,that the Ismailites were heretics who trampled underfootall the most plain and positive precepts of Islam ;for, though they might pretend to justify their practiceby their allegorical system of interpretation, itwas clearly repugnant to common sense, and mightbe made the instrument of sanctioning, under thename of religion, every species of enormity. Fromthis time the term Moolahid (impious) began tobecome the common and familiar appellation of theIsmailites in the mouths of the orthodox Moslems.As to the Ismailites themselves, they rejoiced in whatthey had done ; they exulted like emancipated bondsmenin the liberty which they had acquired; andthey even commenced a new era from the 17th (or,according to some authorities, the 7th) Ramazan ofthe 559th year, namely, the day of the manifestationof the imam. To the name of Hassan they henceforthaffixed the formula " On his memory be peace ;"which formula, it would appear, was employed byitself to designate him ; for the historian Mirkhondassures us that he had been informed by a credibleperson that over the door of the library in Alamootwas the following inscription :—With the aid of God, the bondsOf the law he took away,The commander of the world,Upon whose name be peace."The madness of Hassan now attained its climax.He disdained to be regarded, like his predecessors,M8 merely the representative of the imam on earth,THE ASSASSINS. 99but asserted himself to be the true and real imam,who was now at length made manifest to the world.He sent letters to all the settlements of the society,requiring them to acknowledge him in his new capacity.H e was prudent enough, however, to show aregard for the dignity and power of* his differentlieutenants in these letters, as appears by the followingspecimen, being the letter which was sent toKuhistan, where thesis Mozafiar commanded : —'' I Hassan say unto you that I am the representativeof God upon earth, and mine in Kuhistan is thereis Mozaffar, whom the men of that country are toobey, and to receive his word as mine'*The reis erected a pulpit in the castle of Moomina-bad, the place of his residence, and read the letteraloud to the people, the greater part of whom listenedto its contents with joy. The tables were coveredbefore the pulpit, the wine was brought forth, thedrums and kettle-drums resounded, the notes of thepipe and flute inspired joy, and the day of the abolitionof the positive precepts of the law was devotedto mirth and festivity. Some few, who were sincereand upright in their obedience to Islam, quitted theregion which they now regarded as the abode of infidelity,and went in search of other abodes ; others,of a less decided character, remained, though shockedat what they were obliged every day to behold. Theobedience to the commands of the soi-plant imamwas, however, tolerably general, and, according toHammer, who can scarcely, however, be supposedto regard the system of Hassan as really more licentiousthan he has elsewhere described that of Mahomet," the banner of the freest infidelity, andof the most shameless immorality, now waved onall the castles of Roodbar aid Kuhistan, as thestandard pf the new illumination ; and, instead ofthe name of the Egyptian khalif, resounded from100 SECRET SOCIETIES.all the pulpits that of Hassan as the true successor ofthe Prophet*'The latter point had presented some difficulty toHassan ; for, in order to satisfy the people on thathead, it was necessary to prove a descent from theProphet, and this was an honour to which it was wellknown the family from which he was sprung hadnever laid claim. He might take upon him to abolishthe positive precepts of the law as he pleased, andthe people, whose inclinations were thereby gratified,would not perhaps scan very narrowly the authorityhy which he acted ; but the attempt to deprive theFatimite khalif of the honour which he had so longenjoyed, and to assume the rank of God's vicegerenton earth in his room, was likely to give too great ashock to their prejudices, if not cautiously managed.It was necessary, therefore, that he should provehimself to be of the blood of the Fatimites. Heaccordingly began to drop some dark hints respectingthe truth of the received opinion of his being the sonof Keah Mohammed. Our readers will recollectthat, when Hassan Sabah was in Egypt, a disputehad taken place respecting the succession to thethrone, in which Hassan had nearly lost his life foropposing the powerful commander-in-chief (Emir"al-Jooyoosh), and Near, the prince for whom thekhalif Mostanser had designed the succession, hadbeen deprived of his right by the influence of thatofficer. The confidents of Hassan now began togive out that, in about a year afler the death of thekhalif Mostanser, a certain person named Aboo-'l-Zeide, who had been high in his confidence, hadcome to Alamoot, bearing with him a son of Near,whom he committed to the care of Hassan Sabah,who, grateful to the memory of the khalif and hisson, had received the fugitive with great honour, andassigned a village at the foot of Alamoot for theTHE ASSASSINS. 101residence of the young imam. When the youthwas grown up he married and had a son, whom henamed On his Memory be Peace. Just at the timewhen the imam's wife was confined in the village,the consort of Keah Mohammed lay in at the castle ;and, in order that the descendant of Fatima mightcome to the temporal power which was his right,a confidential woman undertook and succeeded inthe task of secretly changing the children. Otherswent still further, and did not hesitate to assert thatthe young imam had intrigued with the wife of KeahMohammed, and that Hassan was the fruit of theiradulterous intercourse. Like a true pupil of ambition,Hassan was willing to defame the memory ofhis mother, and acknowledge himself to be a bastard,provided he could succeed in persuading the peopleto believe him a descendant of the Prophet.These pretensions of Hassan to a Fatimite pedigreegave rise to a further increase of the endless sects intowhich the votaries of Islam were divided. Those whoacknowledged it got the name of Nezori, and by themHassan was called the Lord of the Resurrection{Kaim-al-Kiamet)^ and they styled themselves theSect of the Resurrection:The reign of the vain, inconsiderate Hassan wasbut short. He had governed the society only fouryears when he was assassinated by his brother-in-law,Naive, a descendant, we are told, of the family ofBuyah, which had governed the khalifs and theirdominions before the power passed into the hands ofthe Turkish house of Seljobk.G^SECRET SOCIETIES.Mohammed II. — AnocdolB of Ia Imam Faltlir-Bd-doan —Noor-ed-deea — Conquest uf Egypt — Attempt on the Life ofSaladin.The death of Hassan was amply avenged by his sonand successor, Mohammed H, Not only was themurderer himself put to death; vengeance, in itaoriental form, extended itself to all his kindred ofboth sees, and men, women, and children bled beneaththe sword of the executioner. Mohammed,who had been carefully trained up in the study ofphilosophy and literature, was, like his father, puJedup with vanity and ambition, and, far from recedingfrom any of his predecessor's pretensions to theimamat, he carried then to even a still greater lengththat! he had done. At the same time he maintaineda high character for knowledge and talent amonghis literary contemporaries, who were numerous, forhis reign extended through a period of forty-six years,and the modern Persian literature was now fastapproaching its climax. Not to nientioa other names,less familiar to our readers, we shall remark, as aproof of what we have said, that this was the periodin which Nizam of Ghent sang in harmoniousnumbers the loves of Khosroo and Sheen, and ofMujiioon and Leila (these last the Romeo and Julietof the east), the crown and flower of the romanticpoetry of Persia. Then tno flourished the greati panegyrist En verse, and a crowds historians, jurists,I iind divines.One of the m, celebrated men of this time wasTHE ASSASSINS, 103the imam Fakhr-ed-deen (glory of Religion) Rash,who g-jve public lectures on the law in his Da^trVecity o(' Rei. It being slanderously reported that hewas devoted in secret lo the opinions of the Israelites,and was even one of their missionaries, he adoptedthe ordinary expedient of abusing and reviling thatsect, and each time he ascended the pulpit to preachlie reprobated and cursed the/mpioiu in no measuredterms. Intelligence of what he was abofit was notlong' in reaching the eyrie of the Sheikh-al-Jeba!,and a Fedavee received his instructions, and forthwithset out for Rei. He here entered himself as astudent of the law, and sedulously attended the lecturesof the learned imam. During seven monthshe watched in vain fair an opportunity of executinghis commission. At length he discovered one daythat the attendants of the imam had left him to gotofetch him some ftx)d, and that he was alone in hisstudy. The Fedavee entered, fastened the tours,seized the imam, cast him on the ground, and directedhis dagger at his bosom, "What is thydesign ?" said the astonished imam. " To rip upthy belly and breast." "And wherefore ?'' " Wherefore?Because thou hast spoken evil of the Israelitesill the pulpit." The imam implored and entreated,vowing that, if his life was spared, he wouldnever more say aught to offend the sect of Ismail,I cannot trust thee," cried tie Assassin; " forwhen I am gone thou wilt return to thy old courses,and, by some ingenious shift or other, contrive tofree thyself from the obligation of thy yah." Theimam then, with a most solemn oath, abjured theidea of explaining away bis wor<b, or seeking absolutionfor perjury. The Assassin got up from overhim, saying, "I hed no order to slay thee, or I shouldhave put thee to death without fail. Mohammed, thuGouef Hassan, greets thee, aud invites thee to honourSECRET B0CIBTIB8.tam by a visit at his castle. Thou shalt there haveunlimited power, and we will all obey thee like trustyservants. We despise, sf) saith the sheikh, the discoursesof the rabble, which rebound from our earslike nuts from a ball; but you should not revile us,since your words impress themselves like the strokesof the graver ia the stones'' The imam replied thatit was totally out of his power to go to Alamoot, butthat in future he should be most careful never to suffera word to pass his lips to the discredit of the mountainprince. Hereupon the Fedavee drew 300 piecesof gold from his girdle, and, laying them down, said,See ! here is thy annual pension ; and, by a decreeo£ the divan, thou shalt every year receive an equalsum through the reis Mozoffer, I also leave thee,for thy attendants, two garments from Yemen, whichthe Sheikh-al-Jebal has sent thee." So saying, the• Fedavee disappeared. The imam took the moneyand the clothes, and for some years his pension waspaid regularly. A change in hia language now becameperceptible, for, whereas be was ijsed before,when, on Creating of any controverted point, hehad occasion to mention the Israelites, to expresshimself thus, "Whatever the IsniaTlltes, whom Godcurse and destroy ! may say'" — now that he waspensioned he contented himself with merely saying,*' Notwithstanding what the Ismuilltes maysay." When one of his scholars asked him thecause of this change he made answer, " We cannotcurse the Ismailites, they employ such sharp andconvincing arguments'' Tins anecdote is related byseveral of the Persian historians, and it serves toprove, like the case of sultan Sanjar, related above,that the Ismailites were not so thoroughly ruthlessand bloodthirsty as not to prefer rendering an enemyinnocuous by gentle means to depriving him of life.historian record no uthei- event connected with^f OieTHE ASSASSINS. 105eastern establishment of the Ismailife societyduring the loug reign of Mohammed II. We shallnow, therefore, (urn our view to the Syrian branch,which attracts attention by the illustrious names whichappear in oriental history at that time, and with whichthe ruler of Massyat come into hostile or friendlyrelations. The names of Noor-ed-deeo slight ofReligion), Salah-ed-deeu (Integrity of Rdigiov),the Nomadic and Saladin of western writers, and theLion-hearted king of England, will at once awake theattention of the reader.The celebrated Emod-ed-deen (Pillar of Religion)Zengi, who gave the Christian power in the east itsfirst shock by the conquest of Edessa, perished by thehand of a slave shortly after that achievement. Hispower and the title Atabeg. fell to his son Mooredwho carried on the war against the Christianswith all the activity of his father, and with more of ,the gentleness and courtesies which shed a lustre onreal and valour. Noor-ed-deen was one of the mostaccomplished characters which the East has exhibited.i]e was generous and just, and strict in the observanceof all the duties of Islam. Pomp or magnificencesurrounded him. He wore neither silk nor gold.With the fifth part of the booty, (which was his shareas prince, he provided for all his expenses. A zealousMoslem, he was evermore engaged in the combats ofthe Holy War, — either the greater, which was heldto be fought against the world and its temptations byfasting and prayer, Ly study, and the daily practiceof the virtues required of him who is placed in authority,— or the asser, which was fought with naturalweapons against the foes oflslam. From this unionof piety and valour he acquired the titles of Gash(victor) and Shelled (Martyr); for, though he didnot fall in the defence of the faith, he was regardedas being entitled lo oil the future rewards attendantISECRET SOCIETIES.on actual martyrdom. Notwithstanding his beingone or the most deadly foes that the Christians everencountered, their historians did justice to the illustriousNoor-ed-deen, and the learned William, Archbishopof Tyre, says of him, "' He was a prudent,moderate man, who feared God according to the faithof his people, fortunate, and au augmenter of hispaternal inheritance''The possession of Mosauland Aleppo made Noor-ed-teen master of northern Syria ; the southern partof that country was under the Prince of Damascus.Twice did the atabeg lay siege, without effect, to thatcity ; at length the inhabitants, fearing the Crusaders,invited him to take possession of it, and the feebleprince was obliged to retire, accepting Emessa inexchange for the " Queen of Syria." The power ofNoor-ed-deen now extended from the Euphrates tothe Holy Land, aud his thoughts were directedtowards his grand abject of expelling the Franks fromthe Bast, wtieu an opportunity presented itself ofbringing Egypt once more under the spiritual dominionof the house of Abbas.Degeneracy is the inevitable lot of unlimited power.The Facsimile Commanders of the Faithful were nowbecome mere puppets in the hands of their ministers,and the post of vizir was now, as was so often thecase with the throne, contended for with arms. Acivil w«r was at this time raging in Egypt betweenShaver and Dhai^am, rival candidates for the vizir-hate.The former came in person to Damascus, andoffered the alabeg Noor-ed-deen a third of the revenuesof Egypt if he would aid him. to overcome hisrival Without hesitation Noor-ed-deen ordered Asad-ed-teen lion of Religion) Sheerlioh mountainLiori)^, a Moorish chief who oommauiied for himat Emessa, to assemble an array and march forThe foijnar oS Ibeso oamea ia Arabic, the lultei Persian.THE ASSASSINS. , 107Egypt. Sheerkoh obeyed, and sorely against hiswill, and only at the urgent command of Noor-ed-deen, did his nephew, the then little known, afterwardsso justly famous, Saladin, quit the banquetsand enjoyments of Damascus, and the other townsof Syria, to accompany his uncle to the toils and theperils of war. Dhargam was victorious in the firstaction, but he being murdered shortly afterwards byone of his slaves, Shaver obtained possession of thedignity which he sought. The new vizir then triedto get rid of his allies, but such was not the intentionof Noor-ed-deen, and Sheerkoh took his post withhis troops in the north-eastern part of the kingdom,where he occupied the frontier town of Belbei's, onthe most eastern branch of the Nile, under pretextof receiving the third part of the revenue which hadbeen promised to Noor-ed-deen. Shaver, anxious toget rid of such dangerous guests, formed a secretleague with Amalric, King of Jerusalem, and engagedto give him 60,000 ducats for his aid against them.Sheerkoh, who had been reinforced, advanced intoUpper Egypt, and Saladin took the command ofAlexandria, which he gallantly defended for threemonths against the combined forces of the Christiansand Egyptians, and, after some fighting, peace wasmade on condition of Noor-ed-deen receiving 50,000ducats, and double that sum being paid annually tothe King of Jerusalem.Shortly afterwards an unprincipled attempt wasmade on Egypt by Amalric, at the suggestion of theCashier of the Hospitallers, and Shaver, in his distress,had once more recourse to Noor-ed-deen. Thephantom-khalif joined in the supplication, and sentwhat is the greatest mark of need in the east — locksof the hair of his women, which is as much as to say,Aid ! aid ! the foe is dragging the women forth bythe hair." Belbei's had now been considered ojxdSECRBT Societies.Cairo was besieged by the Christians;. Shaver hadburnt the old town, und defended himself and thekhalif in the new town, the proper Cairo. Sheerkohappeared once more in Egypt with a larger arrayinn before*, but, ere he reached the beleagueredtown. Shaver and Amalric had entered into a composition,and the former had withdrawn on receiving' asum of 50,000 ducats. Sheerkoh however advanced,and pitched this tents before the walls of Cairo. Thekhalif' Adhad nnd his principal nobles came forth toreceive him, and that unhappy prince made his complaintsof the tyranny and selfishness of Shaver, whohad brought so ranch misery on him and his kingdom.He concluded by requesting the head of his vitcir atthe hand of the general of Noor-ed-deen. Shaver,aware of the danger which menaced him, invitedSheerkoh, his nephew, and the other chiefs of thearmy, to a banquet, with the intention of destroyingthem, but his plot was discovered, and his head castat the feet of the khalif. Sheerkoh was forthwithappointed lo the vacant dignity, with the honourabletitle of Melik-el-Mansoor ( Victorious King), but heenjoyed it only for a short time, having been carriedoft' by death in Utile more than two montis after ibiselevation. He was succeeded in his rank, and in the• He was accompanied by Saladin, who gin^atliBfollowinBaccount of bia qwd repugnance lo Ihe expedition: — 'whenNoor-ed-deBn ordered me to go to Egypt with my uncle, afterSheerkoh had said to me in his presence, ' Come Yooasur,make ready foi the jaune 1' I replied, 'By God, if thou wentto Kine me Ihu kingdom nf Egypt I would not go, for 1 have(madura in Alexandria what 1 shall not forget while I live.'Bui Sheerkoh said to Noor-ed-deen, ' It cannot be but that heBhoald accompany me.' Whereupon Noor-ed-deen repeatedhis command, but I operated in my residual. As Noor-ed-deenalso adhered to his determination, I excused myself by pleadingthe narrowness of my circumstances. Nor ed-aileen Ira,e me all that was requisite for my outfit, l-ut I fight as if 1'going to deaths'' — Abul/eila.THE ASSASSINS. 109command of the army, by his nephew Saladin, whonow became ti effect master oF Egypt. Noor-ed-(been, thinking the time was come for establishingthe spiritual s vay of the house of Abbas, sent directionsto Saladin to fill all the offices which had beenoccupied by the Sheahs with the orthodox, and hearprayer celebrated in the name of the Kiialil' of Bagdad;but this present chief, who knew that (he greatmajority of the people of Egypt were firmly attachedto the belief of the Fatimites being the rightful successorsoi the Prophet, hesitated to comply. At lengththe death of tie FatiJiiite khalif occurred most opportunelyto free I'iin from embarrassment. Adhad-latin-Allah. the last of the descendants of Moez-ladin-Allah, the founder of the dynasty, died suddenly — ofdisease, according to the oriental historians, — by thehand of Saladin, according to the rumour which eventaching the Christians", All obstacles being nowremoved, public prayer was celebrated in the raosksof Egypt in the name of the Abbasside khalif, andthe pinner of the western Ismailites, after a continuanceoF 200 years, brought completely to an end.Noor-ed-deen, who saw that the power of his lieutenantwas now too great to be controlled, adoptedthe prudent plan of soothing him by titles and marksof confidence. The khidif of Bagdad sent him adress of honour and a letter of thanks for havingreduced under his spiritual dominion a province whichhad been so long rebellious against his house. Butthe mast important consequence of the timely deathof the khalif to Salutis was the acquisition of theaccumulated treasures of the Fatimites, which fellinto his hands, and which he employed as the meansof securing the fidelity of hia officers and soldiers.As a specimen of oriental exaggeration, we shall givethe list of these treasures as they are enumerated by• WilUaiuofTjre wc 12.110 SECRET SOCIETIES.eastern writers. There were, we are assured, no lessthan 700 pearls, each of which was of a size thatrendered it inestimable, an emerald a span long,and as thick as the finger, a library consisting of2,600,000 books, and gold, both coined and in themass ; aloes, amber, and military arms and weaponspast computation. A large portion of this enormoustreasure was distributed by Saladin among his soldiers; the remainder was applied, during ten successiveyears, to defray the expenses of his . warsand buildings. As Saladin's name was Yoossuf(Josephus the same with that of the son of Jacob,the minister of king Pharaoh, it is not an improbablesupposition that, in Egyptian tradition, the twoJoseph have been confounded, and the works of thelatter been ascribed to the former ; for it is the characterof popular tradition to leap over centuries, andeven thousands of years, and to form out of severalheroes one who is made to perform the actions ofthem all.As long as Noor-ed-deen lived, Saladin continuedto acknowledge his superiority; and when, on hisdeath, he left his dominions to his son Malek-es-Sale) the coins of Egypt bore the name of theyoung prince. As Malek-es-Saleh was a minor,and entirely under the guidance of the eunuchKameshtegin, great discontent prevailed amongthe emirs ; and Seif-ed-deen (Sword of Religion),the cousin of the young prince, who was at thehead of an army in Mesopotamia, prepared to wrestthe dominion from the young Malek-es-Saleh. Alleyes were turned to Saladin, as the only person capableof preserving the country. He left Egypt withonly 700 horsemen. The governor and people ofDamascus cheerfully opened the gates to him. Hemsand Hama followed the example of Damascus. saladintook the government under the modest title ofTHE ASSASSINS. 111.lieutenant of the youn atabeg, whose rights hedeclared himself ready to maintain on all occasions.He advanced to Aleppo, where Mal^k-es-Saleh wasresiding ; but the militia of that town, moved by thetears of the young prince, who was probably influencedby the eunuch Kameshtegin, who feared tolose his power, marched out and put to flight thesmall force with which Saladin had approached thetown. Having collected a larger army, Saladin laidsiege regularly to Aleppo, and Kameshtegin, despairingof force, resolved to have recourse to treachery.He sent accordingly to Si nan, the Sheikh of theAssassins, who resided at Massyat, representing tohim how dangerous a foe to the Ismailites was thevaliant Koord, who was so ardent in his zeal for thehouse of Abbas, and had put an end to the dynastyof the Fatimites, who had so long given lustre to themaintainers of the rights of Ismail by the possessionof extensive temporal power and dignity. He remindedhim that, if Saladin succeeded in his ambitiousprojects in Syria, he would, in all probability,turn his might against the Assassins, and destroytheir power in that country. These arguments wereenforced by gold, and the sheikh, readily yielding tothem, despatched without delay three Fedavees, whohell on Saladin in the camp before Aleppo. Theattempt, however, miscarried, and the murderers wereseized and put to death. Saladin, incensed at thisattempt on his life, and guessing well the quarterwhence it came, now pressed on the siege withgreater vigour.Finding the benefit which might be derived fromthe daggers of the Fedavee, Kameshtegin resolved toemploy them against his personal enemies. The vizirof the young prince, and two of the principal emirs,had laid a plot for his destruction. Coming to theknowledge of it, he determined to be beforehand withSECRET SOdBTlES.them, and, watching the moment when Malek-es-Sale was about to mount hm horse to go to thechase, be approached him, requesting his signaturelo a blank paper, under pretence of its being necessaryfor some affair of urgent importance. Theyoung prince signed his name without suspicion, andKameshteg^n instantly wrote on the paper a letter tothe Sheikh of the Assassins, in which Male k-es- Sale hwas made to request him to send men to put thosethree emirs out of the way. The Israelite chiefreadily complied with the request, as be supposed itto be, of bis young friend and neighbour, and severalFedavees were despatched to execute his wishes. Twoof these fell on the vizir as he was going out of theeastern gate of a mosk near bis own house. Theywere cut to pieces on the spot. Soon after three fellon the emir JVluJnbeed as he was on horseback. Oneof them caught hold of the end of his cloak, in orderto make more sure of him, but the emir gave ibishorse the spurs, and broke away, leaving his cloakbehind. Tbe people seized the Assassins, two ofwhom were recognized as being acquaintances of theemir's head groom. One of them was crucified,and along with, him the groom as an accomplice : onthe breast of the latter was placed this inscription,This is the reward of the concealer of Ibe Impious."Tbe others were dragged lo the castle, and beaten onthe soles of their feet to make them confess what badinduced them to attempt the commission of such acrime. In the midst of his tortures one of them criedout, " Thou didst de»re of our lord Sinan the murderof thy slaves, and now thou lost punish us for performingthy wishes." Full of wrath Malek-es-Saiehwrote a letter to the sheikh Sinan filled with the bitterestreproaches. Tbe sheikh made no other replythan that of sending him back the letter bearing hisjubscvlptioido not tell us whatTHE ASSASSINS. 113the final result was ; and it is also in a great measureuncertain at what time this event occurred.The Assassins did not give over their attempts uponSaladin, whose power became more formidable tothem after he had deprived the family of Noor-ed-deen of their honours and dominions ; and he wasagain attacked hy them in his camp before thefortress of Ezag. One of them assailed him andwounded him in the head, but the sultan (he hadnow assumed that title) caught him by the arm andstruck him down. A second rushed on — he was cutdown by the guards ; a third, a fourth, shared thesame fate. Terrified at their obstinate perseverance,the sultan shut himself up in his tent during severaldays, and ordered all strangers and suspicious personsto quit the camp.Next year (1176) the sultan, being at peace withhis other enemies, resolved to take exemplary vengeanceon those who had so unprovoked attemptedhis life. Assembling an army, he entered the mountains,wasted with fire and sword the territory of theIsmai'lites, and came and laid siege to Massyat. Thepower of the Syrian Ismailites would have been nowextinguished but for the intercession of the Prince ofHama, the sultan's uncle, who, at the entreaty ofSinan, prevailed on his nephew to grant a peace oncondition of no attempt being made at any futuretime on his life. Sinan gladly assented to theseterms, and he honourably kept his engagement, forthe great Saladin reigned fifteen years after thistime, carried on continual wars, conquered Jerusalemand the Holy Land, exposed himself to dangerin the field and in the camp, but no Assassinwas ever again known to approach him with hostileintentions.s*S£GRBT 8O0IKTt&S.IIIX.Sinus the Dai-al-Kebir of Syria — OlTais to become a ChristianHis Ambassador miirdeteJ by the Templar — Cuduialde Vitry'a Account of the Asa a9 sins— Murder ol the Majquit of Montl'eciat — Defence of King Richard.Thb person who had the chief direction of the affairsof the society in Syria in the time of Saladin was oneof the most remarkable characters which appear inthe history of the Assassins. His name was Rasheed-ed-teen lOrlAodon in Religion) Sinan. Ihe son ofSuleiman of Bassa. Like so many others of theimpostors who hove appeared from time to time inthe east, he had the audacity to give himself out foran Incarnation of the Divinity. No one ever sawhim eat, drink, sleep, or even spit. His clothing wasof coarse hair-cloth. From the rising to the settingof the sun he stood upon a lofty rock, preaching tothe people, who received hia words as those of asuperior being. Unfortunately for his credit, hisauditors at length discovered that he bad a halt inhis gait, caused by a wound which he received from aAlone in the great earthquake of 1 1 57. This did notaccord with the popular idea of the perfection whichshould belong to the corporeal vehicle of Divinity.The credit of Sinan vanished at once, and those whohad just been adoring the god now threatened totake the life of the impostor. Sinan lost notchesself-possession ; be calmly entreated them to bepatient, descended from his rock, caused food to bebrought, invited them to eat, and by the persuasivepowers of his eloquence induced ftwm \»THB Assassins.him as their ao\e chief, and all unanimously sworeobedience and fidelity to him.The neglect ol' chronology by the oriental historians,or their European translators and followers, isfrequently such that we are left in great uncertaintyas to the exact time of particular events, and are thusunable to trace them to their real causes and occasions.The mention of the earthquake of 1157 wouldhowever seem to make it probable that it was aboutthat time that Sinan put forward his claims to divinity;and as, at that very period, Hassan, the son of Ke^hMohammed, was giving himself out for the promisedimam, we may suppose that it was his example whichstimulated Sinan to his bold attempt at obtainingindependent dominion over the Syrian branch of theIsmE^lJtes.Sinan was, like Hassan, a man of considerablelearning. His works are held in high estimation bythe remains of the sect of the Israelites still lingeringamong the mountains of Syria. These works,we are told, consist of a chaotic mixture of mutilatedpassages of the Gospel and the Koran, of contradictoryarticles of belief, of hymns, prayers, sermons, andregulations, which are unintelligible even to thosewho receive and venerate (hem.The sacred books ol the Christians formed, as wesee, a part of the studies of the Sheikh of Massyat,and, as it would appear, he thought he might deriveBorne advantage from his acquaintance with them.The religio-military society of the Knights of theTemple, whose history we shall soon have to record,had possessions in the neighbourhood of those of theAssassins, and their superior power had enabled them,at what time is uncertain, to render the latter tributary.The tribute was the annual sum of 2,000ducats, and Sinan, to whom probably all religionstile alike, and who had unbounded power over theISECRET SOCIETIES.minds of his people, conceived the idea of releasing;himself from it by professing the same religion withhis neighbours. He acci willingly sent, in the year1IT2, one of his must prudent and eloquent, ministerson a secret embassy lo Auialric Kiiip; ol Jerusalem,offering, in the mime of liimsel'' und his people, toetnbriice the Ciiri-tian religion, and receive the rile ofbaptism, provided the king would engage to makethe Templar renounce the tribute of ^,(J00 ducats,and B^ree to live with them henceforward as goodneighbours and friends and brethren. Overjoyed atthe prospect if making converts of such importance,the king readily assented to the desires oi the chief, and he at the same time assured theTemplar that their house should not be a loser, ashewould pay them 2,000 ducats annually out of histreasury. The brethren of the Temple made no objectionto the arrangement ; and alter the Israeliteambassador had been delalnid and treated honourablyIbr some days by the king, he set out on hisTurn, accompanied by a guide and escort sent bythe king to conduct him as far as the borders of theIsraelite territory. They passed in safety throughthe country of Tripolis, and were now in the vicinityof the first castles of the Israelites, when suddenlysome Templar rushed forth from an ambush, andmurdered the ambassador. The Templar werecommanded by a knight named Walter du Mesnil, aone-eyed, daring, wicked man, but who, on this occasion,it would appear, acted by the orders of his superiors,who probably did not consider the royal promisegood security for the 2,000 ducats ; for, when Amalric,filled with indignation at the base and perfidiousaction, assembled his barons at Sidon to deliberateon what should be done, and by their advice sent twoof their number to Ado de St. Amant, the Masterof the Temple, to demand satisfaction for the iniquityASSASSINS. 117tous deed, the master contented himself by sayingthat he had imposed a penance on brother Du Mesnil,and had moreover directed him to proceed to Romewithout delay, to know what farther the apostolicfather would order him to do, and that, on this accounthe must, in the name of the pope, prohibit anyviolence against the aforesaid brother. The king,however, was not regardless of justice and of his owndignity. Shortly afterwards, when the master andseveral of the Templar were at Sidon, he assembledhis council again, and, with their consent, sent anddragged Du Mesnil from the house of the Templar,and threw him into prison, where he would probablyhave expiated his crime but for the speedy death ofthe king. All hopes of the conversion of the Israeliteswere now at an end.It is on this occasion that the Archbishop of Tyregives an account of what he had been able to learnrespecting the Assassins. As what we have previouslyrelated of them has been exclusively drawn fromeastern sources, it will not be useless to insert in thisplace the accounts of them given by the Cardinal deVitry, who has followed and enlarged the sketch ofthe archbishop*.Jn the province of Phoenicia, near the borders ofthe Antaradensian town which is now called Tortoise,dwells a certain people, shut in on all sides by rocksand mountains, who have ten castles, very strong andimpregnable, by reason of the narrow ways and inaccessiblerocks, with their suburbs and the valleys,which are most fruitful in all species of fruits andcorn, and most delightful for their amenity. Thenumber of these men, who are called Assassins, issaid to exceed 40,000t. They set a captain overGeste Dei per Francis, vol. i. pp. 994, 1062.MRTilliam of Tyre makes their number 60,000. He declareshiBinability to give the origin of the name A»&«A!9iuQi»*IISECRET Societies.themselves, not by hereditary succession, but by theprerogative (if merit, whom they call the Old Maa(Veterum seu fiewvi), uot so much on account of hisadvanced asa aa for his pre-eminence in prudence anddignity. The first and principal oiftoi of this unhappyreligion of theirs, and the place there they had theirorigin and whence they came to Syria, is in the veryremote parts of the east, near the city of Ba^itd andthe parts of the province of Persia. These people,who do not divide the hoof, nor make a differencebetween what is sacred and what is profane, believethat ail obedience indifferently shown by them towardstheir superior is meritorious for eternal life. Hencethey are bound to their master, whom they call theOld Man, with such a bond of subjection and obediencethat there is nothing' so diHicuIt or so dangerousthat they would fear to undertake, or which theywould not perform with a cheerful mind and ardentwill, at the command of their lord. The Old Man,their lord, causes boys of this people to be brought upin secret and delightful places, and having: ^'^ themdiligently trained and instructed in the different kindsof languages, sends them to various provinces withdaggers, and orders them to slay the great men ofthe Christians, as well as of the Saracens, either becausehe is at enmity with them for some cause orother, or at the request of his friends, or even for thelucre of a large sum of money which has been givenhim, promising them, for the execution of this command,that they shall have far greater delights, andwithout end, in paradise, after death, than even thoseamidst which they had been reared. If they chanceto die in this act of obedience they are regarded asmartyrs by their companions, and being placed bythat people among their saints, are held in the greatestreverence. Their parents are enriched with mwiyfalls bj the master, who b called the Old Man, andThe ASSASSINS.if they were slaves they are let gu free ever after.Whence these wretched and misguided youths, whoare sent from the convent (convent) of the aforesaidbrethren to dilTercnt parts of the world, undertaketheir deadly legation with such joy and delight, andperform it with such diligence and solicitude, transformingthemselves in various ways, and assumingthe manners and dress of other nations, sometimesconcealing themselves under the appearance of merchants,ut other times under that of priests andmonks, and in an infinity of other modes, that thereis hardly any person in the whole world ro cautious8 to be able to guard against their machinations.Hey disdain to plot against an inferior person. Themto whom they are hostile either redeemthemselves by a lartiv sum of money, or, going armedlad attended by a body of guards, pass their life inlUpicion and in dread of death. They kept the lawf Mahomet and his institutions diligently and straitlybeyond all other Saracens till the times of a certainaster of theirs, who, being endowed with naturalmiss, and exercised in the study of different ,began with all diligence to read and examinele law of the Christians and the Gospels of Christ,admiring the virtue of the miracles, and the sanctity1 the doctrine. From a comparison with these hea to abominate the frivolous and irrational docsof Mahomet, and at length, when he knew thenth, he studied In recall his subjects by degrees froms of the cursed law. Wherefore he exhortedP%bd commanded them that they should drink winein moderation and eat the flesh of swine. At teug^h,after many discourses and serious admonitions oftheir teacher, they all with one consent agreed to renouncethe perfidy of Mahomet, and, by receivingf face of baptism, to become Christians."'e may, from this account, perceive that the Cm-isoSecret SOCIETIES.IIeaters hod a tolerably clear idea of the nature andconstitution of the society of the Assassins. TheCardinal de Vitry plainly describes them as forminga religion, that is, an order under an abbot; andperhaps the resemblance which Hammer traces betweenthem and the Templar, which we shall noticewhen we come to speak of this last society, is notquite so fanciful as it might at first sight appear. Itis curious, too, to observe that the Christians also believedthat the Sheikh-al-Jebal had some mode ofinspiring the Fedavee with a contempt of life and anaspiration after the joys of paradise.The dagger had not been unsheathed against theChristian princes since, forty-two years before (1 ] 49),Raymond, the young Count of Tripolis, was murderedas he knelt at his devotions, and the altar wassprinkled with his blood. A more illustrious victimwas now to bleed ; and, as the question of whowas the real author of his death forms a curious historicalproblem, we shall here discuss it at somelength.Conrad Marquis of Montserrat, a name celebratedin the history of the third crusade, had just beennamed King of Jerusalem by Richard Lion-heartKing of England. In the latter end of the month ofApril 1192 the marquis, being at Tyre, went to dinewith the Bishop of beauvais. One writer says that,the marchioness having stayed too long in thebath, anil tie marquis being averse to dining alone,he mounted his horse and rode to dine with theBishop; but, finding that that prelate had alreadyfinished his meal, he was returning home to his palace.Aa he passed through a narrow street, andwas come near the toll-house, two Assassins, havingwatched their opportunity, approached him. Theone presented a petition, and, while he was engagedreading it, both struck him with their daggers, crying.THE ASSASSINS. 121Thou that be neither marquis nor king." One ofthem was cut down instantly, the other sought refusein a neighbouring clutch, and, according to an Am-bienhistorian, when the wounded marquis wasbrought into the same church, he rushed on himanew, and completed his crime. Others relate thatthe marquis was carried home to his palace, where helived long enough to receive the holy sacrament andto give his last instructions to his wife. The twoaccounts, we may perceive, are by no means repug-These Assassins, who were both youths, had beenfor some time — six months it is said — in Tyre, watchingfor an opportunity to perform the commissionwhich had been given them. They had feigned aconversion from Islam, or, as some say, had assumedthe habit of monks, in order to win the confidence ofthe marquis, and thus procure more ready access tohim. One of them, we are told, hast even enteredhis service, and the other that of Malian of Ibelin.The question now comes, at whose instigation wasthe murder committed Here we tint several bothoriental and occidental witnesses disposed to lay theguilt on Richard, King of England, those writers whowere hia own subjects indignantly repelling the accusation,and some indifferent witnesses testifying in hisfavour. Previous to examining these witnesses wemust state that king Richard was at enmity withPhilip Augustus, King of France ; that though hehad given the crown of Jerusalem to the Marquis ofMontserrat, there was little kind feeling betweenthem, and they had been enemies; and, finally, thatthe history of the English monarch exhibits no traitsof 'such a generous chivalrous disposition as shouldput him beyond suspicion of being concerned hi anassassination.Of the writers who charge king Richard with the"^►SECRBT SOCIETIES.murder it is to be observed that the only ones thatare contemporary are the Arabian historians. Thefollowing; passage is quoted from the History ofJerusalem and Hebron, by Hammer, who regardsit as quite decisive of the guilt of the English king:"The marquis went, on the 13th of the monthRebi-al-Ewal, lo visit the Bishop of Tyre. As hewas going out he was attacked by two Assassins, whoslew him with their daggers. When taken andstretched on the rack, they confessed that they hadbeen employed by the King of England. They diedunder the torture." Boha-ed-deen, the friend andbiographer of Saladin, writes to the same ettecl. Itis therefore evident that, at the time, it was reportedthat the marquis had been murdered by persons employedby the King of England ; and Vinisauf andthe other English writers assure us that the Frenchparty and the friends of the murdered marquis endeavouredto throw the odium of the deed on kingRichard. As that mode of getting rid of an enemywas far too familiar in the east, it was natural enough[hat the Arabian writers should adopt the reportwithout much inquiry. This consideration aloneought very much to invalidate (heir testimony. SomeGerman chroniclers also, following the reports whichwere industriously spread lo the disadvantage of theEnglish king at the time he was a prisoner in Austria,did not hesitate to accuse him of the murder of themarquis; but, as has been justly observed, these, aswell .as the preceding, were either partial or at adistance*.In opposition to these assertions, we have the unanimoustestimony of all the English writers, such asViiilsauf (the companion and historian of king Richard'scrusade), Hovered, Brompton, William of NewsRaumGr, Gi-schiciile der HohL-nitaulftn, ii,, p. 490. Will.Gesch^elite Jtr KreuiiUge, iv., iH'J.f bridge. The Syrian bishop, Aboo-'J-Paraj, mentionsreport of the Assassin who was put to the rackiMvio^ laid the guilt on king Richard, but adds Chatthe truth same afterwards to light. Hugo Flagon,Lfi judicious and impartial writer, sofar from imputingIhe death of the marquis to king Richard, assigns theiwuse which moved the Assassin prince to order theitb uf the marquis, namely, the same which welU presently see stated in the letter ascribed Co theI Man of the Mountain. Rigor, who wrote thehistory of Philip Augustus, does not by any meansmute the murder of the marquis to king Richard,Bough lie says that while Philip was at Tortoise iet-3 were brought to him Irom beyond sea, warning[1 to be on his guard, as Assassins (^Araacid/E) had;□ sent, at the suggestion and command of thek King of England, to kill him, " for at that time theyI' |l&d slain the king's kinsman, the marquis." Philip,^^B [seal, but more probably feigned alarm, immediatelysurrounded his person with a guard of .The Arabic historian, Ebn-el-Athir, theend of Saladin, says that the sultan had agreedwith the Old Man of the Mountain, for a sum of10,000 pieces of gold, to deliver him of both kingRichard and the marquis, but that Sinan, not thinkingit to be for his interest to relieve the sultan of theEnglish king, had taken the money and only put litemarquis out of the way. This narrative is whollyimprobable, for treachery was surely no part of thecharacter of Saladin ; but it serves to prove the impartialitywhich is so justly ascribed to the Arabicwriters in general. The testimony of Abiilfeda isas follows: "And in it (the year of the Hejra 588, orA. D. 1192,) was slain the Marquis, Lord of Soon (or'fire); may God, wbof^e name be exalted, curseA Balance, or Assassin (in one copy HathI^SEOBBT SOCIETIES.We thus see that the evidence in TavDur of the Kingof England greatly preponderates, not a single writerwho was on the spot laying the murder to his charge ;DD the contrary, those who had the best means ofbeings informed treated the imputation with contempt,as a base calumny devised by the French party, Butthere is a still more illustrious witness in his behalf, ifthe testimony ascribed to him be genuine — the OldMan of the Mountain himself. Hampton gives twoletters purporting to have been written by this personage,the one to the Duke of Austria, the other tothe princes and people of Europe in general Thelatter is also given by William of Newbridge, withsome variation. Both have been admitted by Rymerinto his Fonder. Gibbon, who seems to have knownonly the last, pronounces it to be an "absurd andpalpable forgery." Hammer, whose arguments weshall presently consider, undertakes to demonstratethat these epistles are forgeries. Rapier, moreprudently, only says that this last is nOt genuine inits present form.Thefollowingaretranslationsof these documents: —The Old Man of the Mountain to Leopold,Duke of Austria, greeting. Since several kings andprinces beyond sea accuse Richard, King of England,and lord, of the death of the marquis, I swear by theGod who reigned for ever, and by the law which wehold, that he had no guilt in his death ; for the causeof the death of the marquis was as follows,One of our brethren was coming in a ship fromAmelia (SalMeya) to our parts, and a tempestchancing to drive him to Tyre the marquis had himtaken and slain, and seized a. large sum of money"luslBmid, lorn, iv., pp. Ii, 113. lUfniae, 1792.THE Assassins. 135which he had with him. But we sent our messengersto the marquis, requiring him to res ore tousthe money af our brother, and to satisfy us respecting'the death of our brother, which he laid uponReginald. the Lord of Sidon, and we exerted ourselvesthrough our friends till we knew of a truth thatit was he himself who had had him put to death, andhad seized his money."And again we sent to him another of our messengers,named Curious, whom he was minded lofling into the sea; but our friends made him departwith speed out of Tyre, and he came to ub quicklyand told us these things. From that very hour wewere desirous lo slay Uie marquis ; then also we senttwo brethren to Tyre, who slew him openly, and asit were before all the people of Tyre.This, then, was the cause of the death of themarquis :, and we say to you in truth that the lordRichard, King of England, had no guilt in this deathof the marquis, and these who on account of thishave done evil to (he lord King of England have doneit unjustly and without cause."Know for certain that we kill no man iu thisworld for any hire or money, unless he has first doneus evil.And know that we have executed these letters inour house at our castle of Messiah, in the middle ofSeptember. In the year from Alexander M. D. & V."The Old Man of the Mountain to the princes ofEurope and all the Christian people, greeting.We would not that the innocence of any oneshould suffer by reason of what we have done, sincewe never do evil lo any innocent and guiltless person; but those who have transgressed against us wedo not, H with Lod to aid, long suffer to rejoice in theinjuries dune to our simplicity.ISECRET Societies.We therefore signify to the whole of you, testifyingby him through whom we hope to be saved, thatthat Marquis of Montfort was slain by no machinationof the King of England, but he justly perished,by our will and command, by our agtelQces, for thatact in which he transgressed against us, and which,when admonished, he had neglected to amend. Forit is our custom first to admonish those who haveacted injuriously in anything to us or our friends togive us satisfaction, which if they despise, we takecare to take vengeance with severity by our ministers,who obey us with such devotion that they do notdoubt but that they shall be gloriously rewarded byGod if they die in executing our command.We have also heard that it is bruited about ofthat king that he has induced us, as hein leas uprightand consistent (mini integral et coniifaitfea),to Hand some of our people to plot against the Kingof France, which, beyond doubt, is a false fiction,and of the earnest suspicion, when neither he, God iswitness, has hitherto attempted anything against us,nor would we, in respect lo our honour, permit anyundeserved evil to be planned against any man.Farewell."We will not undertake to maintain the genuinenessof these two epistles, but we may be permittedto point out the futility of some of the objectionsmade to them. Hammer pronounces the first ofIhem to be an undoubted forgery because it commenceswith swearing by the law, and ends by beingdated from the era of the Seleucus. Both, hesays, were equally strange to the Ismai'lites, whoprecisely at this time had begun to trample the lawunder foot, and hod abandoned the Hejra, the only1 known in Mohammedan countries, for a ncommended with the reign of Hassan H, He fur-theAssassins. 127ther 8863, in the circumstance of a letter from theOld Man of the Mountain {Sheikh-al-Jebat) beingdated from Massyat, a proof of the ignorance of theCrusaders respecting the true head and seat of theIsmMlite power. These objections are regarded bySilken as conclusive. They will, however, losemuch of their force if we bear in mind that the lettersare manifestly translations, and that the chief ofMassyat at that time was Sinan, who some yearsbefore had offered to become a Christian, and whodoes not seem at all lo have adopted the innovationsof Hassan the Illuminator. Sinan mi<!;ht easily havebeen induced by the friends of the King of England,one of the most steady of whom was Henry of Champagne*,who succeeded Conrad of Montserrat in thekingdom, to write those letters in his justification,and it is very probable that the translations weremade in Syria, where the Arabic language was ofcourse better understood than in Europe, and senteither alone or with the originals. The translatormight have rendered the title which Sinan gave himselfby Senex df, Jtfojife, which would be better understoodin the west, and he may also have given thecorresponding year of the era of the Seleucus (theone in use among the Syrian Christians) for the yearof the Henri used by the Israelite chief, or indeedSinan may have employed that era himself Inthis case there would remain little to object to thegenuineness of the letter to the Duke of Austria.Hammer regards the expression our simplicity (Implicitnostra) as being conclusive against the genuinenessof the second letter. We must confess thatwe can see no force in the objection. Sinan mightwish to represent himself as a very plain, simple,innocent sort of person. It might further be doubted• '* An instance of Henry's intimacy with thu Aaauxins hasSECRET SOCIETIESif a European forger would venture to represent theprince of the Assassins — the formidable OW Mbqof the Mountain — in such a respectable light as lieappears in these two epistles*.But there is another account of the death of theMarquis of Montserrat, which is probably much betterknown to the generally of readers thnn any of thepieiedinffones. The far-famed author of " Waverley"lias, in his romantic tale at the " TaUcmau," madeContain to be wounded and vanquished in Ihe listsby the son of the King of Scotland, the champion ofking Richard, and afterwards slain by the dagger,not of the Assassins, but of bis confederate in villanythe Master of the Temple, to prevent his makingconfession of their common guilt!Yielding to none in rational admiration of thegenius of Sir W, Scott, we cannot avoid expressinga wish that he had ceased to write when he hadexhausted that rich field of national feelings andmaniierb with which he wus alone familiar, and fromwhich he drew the exquisite delineations of " Waverley"and itsSwittish brethren. All his later works,no doubt, exhibit occasional scenes far beyond thepower »f any of his imitators; but when his musequits her native soil, she takes leave of nature, truth,and simplicity. Even the genius of a Scott is inadequateto painting manners he never witnessed, sceneryhe never beheld.The tale of the " Talisman" is a flagrant instance.Topography, chronology, historic truth, oriental manners,and individual character, are all treated with amost magnanimous neglect, indeed, even, we mightsay, with contempt ; for, cnreli-ss, from " security toplease," as ibe author is known to have been, hisvagaries must sometimes have proceeded from mere• Sir J. Mackintosh (History of EagUBd, L 187) seems toregard Ibe letter an gemiiue.tHE ASSASSINS. unskilfulnessand caprice. It would, we apprehend,perplex our oriental travellers and geographers topoint out the site of the fountain named the Diamondof the Desert, not far from the Dead Sea. and yetlying half-way between the camp of the Saracens andthat of the Crusaders, which last, we are told, laybetween Acre and Ascalon, that is, on the sea-coast,or to show the interminable sandy desert whichstretches between the Dead Sea and the Mediterranean.As to historic truth, we may boldly say thatthere is hardly a single circumstance of the romancein strict accordance with history ; and as to the truthof individual character, what are we to say to thegrave, serious, religious Saladin, but the very yearbefore his death, being in the flower of his a^e, ramblingalone through the desert, like an errant knight,singing hymns to the Devil, and coming disguised as aphysician to the Christian camp, to cure the maladyof the English monarch, whom he never, in reality,did or would see*? We might enumerate manyadditional instances of the violation of every kind ofunity and propriety in this single tales.Let not any deem it superfluous thus to point outthe errors of an illustrious writer. The impressionsmade by his splendid pages on the youthful mindMay it not be said that real historic characters shouldnot be misrepresented ? Sir W. Scott was at full liberty tomake his Vainly and his Suis Gill)erts as accomplished villainsas he pleased ; he might do as he pleased with his own ;but what warrant had he ftoin history for painting Conrad ofMontserrat and the then Master of the Templar under suchodious colours as be does ?f The author invariably writes Montserrat for Montserrat.The former is in Spain, and never was a marquisate. As itwere tu how that it was nu error of the press, it is staid, " Theshield of the marquis bore, in reference to his title, a serratedand rocky mountains*' We also find naphtha and bitumen confounded,the Brier being described as the solid the latter asthe liquid substance.ISO SECRBT SOCIETIES.are permanent and ineffaceable, and, if not corrected,may lead to errors of a graver kind. The " Talisman"moreover affects a delusive show of truth and accuracy; for, in a note in one part of it, the author(ironically, no doubt) affects to correct the historianson ,a point of history. The natural inference, then,is that he has himself made profound researches, andadhered to truth ; and we accordingly find anothernovelist, in what he terms a history of chivalry, declaringthe '* Talisman" to be a faithful picture of themanners of the age. Sir W. Scott, however, hashimself informed us, in the preface to " Ivanhoe," ofhis secret for describing the manners of the times ofRichard Coeur de Lion. With the chronicles of thetime he joined that of Froissart, so rich in splendidpictures of chivalric life. Few readers of these romancesperhaps are aware that this was the same inkind, though not in degree, as if, in his tales of thedays of Elizabeth and James I«, he had had recourseto the manner-painting pages of Henry Fielding;for the distance in point of time between the reignof Richard I. and that of Richard II., in which lastFroissart wrote, is as great as that between the reignsof Elizabeth and George II. ; and, in both, mannersunderwent a proportional change. But we are inthe habit of regarding the middle ages as one singleperiod of unvarying manners and institutions, andwe are too apt to fancy that the descriptions of Froissartand his successors are equally applicable to allparts of it.THE ASSASSINS. 131Chapter X.Jellal-ed-deen — Restoration of Religion — His Harem makesthe Pilgrimage to Mecca — Marries the Princess of GhilanGeography of the Country between Roodbar and theCaspian — Persian Romance — Zohak and Feridoon — ReiKaoos and Roostem — Ferdoosee*s Description of Mazande-ran — History of the Shah Name — Proof of the Antiquityof the Tales contained in it.The unhallowed rule of Mohammed II. lasted forthe long space of thirty-five years, during whichtime all the practices of Islam were neglected by theIsmai'lites. The moses were closed, the fast of Ramazanneglected, the solemn seasons of prayerdespised. But such a state can never last; manmust have religion ; it is as essential to him as hisfood ; ind those pseudo-philosophers who have endeavouredto deprive him of it have only displayed inthe attempt their ignorance and folly. The purificationof the popular faith is the appropriate task of thetrue philanthropist.We may often observe the son to exhibit a characterthe diametrically opposite of that of his father,either led by nature or struck by the ill e Sects of hisfather's conduct. This common appearance was nowexhibited among the Assassins. Mohammed disregardedall the observances of the ceremonial law ; hisson and successor, Jellal-ed-deen glory of Religion)Hassan, distinguished himself, from his early years, bya zeal for the ordinances of Islam. The avowal of hissentiments .caused considerable enmity and suspicionbetween him and Mohammed; the father feared theson, and the son the father. On the days of publicIIsecret SOCIETIES.audience, at whicH Jellal-ed-deen was expected to appear,the old sheikh used the precaution of wearing ashirt of mail under his clothes, and of increasing' thenumbers iiis^ards. Hisdeath. which occurred whenhis son had attained his twenty-fifth year, is ascribedby several historians, though apparently without anysuCGcient reason, to poison administered to him byTile succession of Jellal-ed-deen was uncontested.He immediately set about placing all things on thefooling which they lead been on previous to the timeof Oh hU Memory be Pace. The moses wererepaired and reopened; the call to prayer soundedas heretofore from the minarets; and the solemnassemblies for worship and instruction were heldonce more on every Friday, Imams, Koran-readers,preachers, and teachers of all kinds, were invited toAlamool, where they were honourably entertainedand richly rewarded. Jellal-ed-deeri wrote to hislieutenants in Ku'^istan and Syria, informing themof what he had done, and inviting them to follow hi:<example. He also wrote to the khalif, to the powerfulShah of Khaurism, and to all the princes ofPersia, to assure them ofthe purity of his faith. Hisambassadors were everywhere received with honour,aid the khalif and all the princes gave to Jellal-ed-deen, in the letters which they wrote in reply, thetitle of prince, which had never been conceded toany of tus predecessors. The imams, nnd the menlearner in the law, loudly upheld the orthodoxy ofthe faith of the mountain-chief, on whom they bestowedthe Dame of Nev new) Musulman. Whenthe people of Casveen, who had always been atenmity with the Israelites, doubted of his orthodoxy,Jellal-ed-deen condescended to ask of them to sendsome persons of respectability to Alamoot, that liejDJglil have an opportunity of convincing them.THE ASSASSINS. 133They came, and in their presence he committed tothe flames a pile of books which he said were thewriting of Hassan Sabah, and contained the secretrules and ordinances of the society. He cursed thememory or Hassan and his successors, and the envoysreturned to Casveen, fully convinced of his sincerity.In the second year of his reign Jellal-ed-deen gavea further proof of the purity of his religious faith bypermitting, or, perhaps, directing, his harem, that is,his mother, his wife, and a long train of their femaleattendants, to undertake the pilgrimage to the holycity of Mecca, to worship at the tomb of the Prophet.The sacred banner was, according to custom, bornebefore the caravan of the pilgrims from Alamoot, andthe Tesbeel, or distribution of water to the pilgrims,usual on such occasions*, was performed by the haremof the mountain-prince on such a scale of magnificenceand liberality as far eclipsed that of the greatShah of Khaurism, whose caravan reached Bagdadat the same time on its way to Mecca. The khalifNassir-ladin-IUah even grave precedence to the bannerof the pilgrims from Alamoot, and this mark of partialitydrew on him the wrath of the potent prince ofKhaurism. Twice did the latter afterwards collect an♦ "Sehil, ia Arabic *the way means generally theroad, and the traveller is hence called Ibnres-sebii, the son ofthe road ; but it more particularly signifies the way of pietyand good works, which lead:* to Paradise. Whatever meritoriouswork the Moslem undertakes, he does Ft sybil Allay onthe way of God, or for the love of God ; and the most meritoriouswhich he can undertake is the holy war. or the fight forhis faith and his country, on God's way. But since piouswomen can have no immediate share in the contest, everythingwhich they can contribute to the nursing of the wounded,and the refreshment of the exhausted, is imputed to them asequally meritorious as if they had fought themselves. Thedistribution of water to the exhausted and wounded warriorsis the highest female merit in the holy war on God's way'* —Hammer » History of the Assassins Wood's translation, p. 144.SECRET 80C1ETIKB.army to make war on the successor of thee Prophet.With the first, conKifitinif of nearly 300,000 men, hemarched against Bagdad, and had reached Hampdenand Iloluan, when a violent snow-storm o^g«d himto retire. He had collected his forces a second time,when the hordes of Chinghis Khan burst into hisdominions. His son and successor resumed his plans,and reached Hampden, when again a snow-storme lo avert destruction from the City of Peace.As the power of the Mongol conqueror was nowgreat and formidable, the prudent prince of Alamootsent in secret ambassadors to assure him of his submission,and to tender his homage.Jelkl-ed-deen took a more active part in the politicsof his neighbours than his predecessors had done.He formed an alliance with the Atabeg Mozaffer-ed-deen (Cavsiiig the Religion to be victorious), the governorof Azerbeijan, against the governor of Irakk, whowas their common enemy. Ileevenvlsited the Atabegat his residence, where he was received with theutmost magnificence, and each day the Atabeg sent1,000 dinars for the expenses of this table. The twoprinces sent to the khalif for aid; their request wasgranted; and they marched against, defeated, andslew the governor of Irakk, and appointed another inhia place. After an absence of eighteen monthsJellal-ed-deeu returned to Alamoot, having in themean time, by his prudent conduct, greatly augmentedthe fame of his orthodoxy. He now ventured toaspire to a connexion with one of the ancient princelyhouses of the country, and asked in marriage thedaughter of Ry Kaoos, the prince of Ghilan. Thelatter having expressed his readiness to give his consent,provided that of the khalif could be obtained,envoys were despatched to Bagdad, who speedily returnedwith the approbation of NaMir-ladin-IUah, andthe jii-iacesB of Ghilan was sent to Alamoot.THE ASSASSINS. 135The mention of Ghilan aod of Ky Kaoos presentsan opportunity, which we are not willing to let pass, ofdiversifying our narrative by an excursion into theregions oi Persian geography and romance, whichmay cast a gleam of the sunshine of poetry over theconcluding portion of our history of the dark andsecret deeds of the Ismailites.The mountain range named Demavend, on thesouth side of which Roodbar, the territory of the Ismailites,lies, is the northern termination of the provinceof Irakkkk Ajemee, or Persian Irakkkk. Beyond itstretches to the Caspian Sea a fertile region, partlyhilly, partly plain*. This country is divided into fivedistricts, which were in those times distinct from andindependent of each other. At the foot of the mountainslay Taberistan and Dilem, the former to theeast, the latter to the west. Dilem is celebrated ashaving been the native country of the family ofBuyah, which, rising from the humblest station, exercisedunder the khalifs, and with the title of (prince of the Princes a power nearlyregal over Persia during a century and a half.North of Dilem lay Ghilan, and north of TaberistanMazenderan, the ancient Hyrcania. In the midst ofThis par( of Persia also acquires interest from the circumstanceof Russia being believed to be looking forward to obtainingit, one day or other, by conquest or cession.t Azed-ud-dowlah, one of the most celebrated of theseprinces, had a dyke constructed across the river Kur, in theplain of Murdasht, near the ruins of Persepolis, to confine thewater, and permit of its being distributed over the country.It was called the Bund Ameer (prince's Dyke), and travellersignorant of the Persian language have given this name to theriver itself. We must not, therefore, be surprised to find in*' Alla Rooks" a lady singing,There's a bower of roses by Bendameer's stream f*and asking,<^ Do the roses still bloom by this ccUm Bendameer ? "Calm and stilly beyond doubt is the Bendameer.136 Secret SOCIETIES.these four provinces lay Ruyan and Rostemdar, remarkablefor having been governed for a space of800 years by one family of princes, while dynastyafter dynasty rose and fell in the neighbouring states.In these provinces the names of the royal lines recalto our mind the ancient history, both true and fabulous,of Iron (Persia), as we tint it iii the poem ofFerdoosee, the Homer of that country. The familyof Kawpara, which governed Buyati and Rostemdar,affected to derive their lineage from the celebratedblacksmith Gavah, who raised his apron as thestandard of revolt against the Assyrian tyrant Zohak^and the family of JJavend, which ruled for nearlyseven centuries, with but two interruptions, overMazenderan and Taberistan, were descended fromthe elder brother of Noosheerwan the Just, the mostcelebrated monarch of the house of Hassan.This region is the classic land of Persia. Whereastheir romantic history relates, Jemsheed, the thirdmonarch of Iran after Cayamars, the first who ruledover men, had long reigned in happiness and prosperity,his head was lifted up with pride, and Godwithdrew from him his favour. His dominions wereinvaded by Zohak, the prince of the Sauces (Assyriansor Arabs); his subjects fell away from him, and,aller lurking for a hundred years in secret places, hefell into the hands of the victor, who cut him asunderwith a saw. A child was born of the race of Jem-sheet,named Feridoon, whom, aa soon as he came tothe light (in the village of Wereghi, in Taberislau),his mother Faranuk gave to a herdsman to rear, andhis nourishment was the milk of a female buffalo,whose name was Pocirmayeh. Zohak meantime hada dreiim, in which he beheld two warriors, who ledup to him a third, armed with a club which terminatedin the head of a cow. The warrior struck himII the head with his club, and took him aud chainedTHE ASSASSINS. 137him in the cavern of a mountain. He awoke with aloud cry, and called all the priests, and astrologers,and wise men, to interpret his dream. They fearedto speak. At last they told him of the birth andnurture of Feridoon, who was destined to overcomehim. Zohak fell speechless from his throne at theintelligence. On recovering, he sent persons in alldirections to search for and put to death the fatalchild ; but the maternal anxiety of Faranuk was onthe watch, and she removed the young Feridoon tothe celebrated mountain Elburz, where she committedhim to the care of a pious anchorite. Zohak, aftera long search, discovered the place where Feridoonhad been first placed by his mother, and in his ragehe killed the beautiful and innocent cow Poormayeh.Zohak is represented as a most execrable tyrant.Acting under the counsel of the Devil, he had murderedhis own father to get his throne. His infernaladviser afterwards assumed the form of a young man,and became his cook. He prepared for him allmanner of curious and high-seasoned dishes; forhitherto the food of mankind had been rude andplain. As a reward, he only asked permission tokiss the shoulders of the king. Zohak readily grantedthis apparently moderate request ; but from the spotswhere the Devil impressed his lips grew forth twoblack snakes. In vain every art was employed toremove them, in vain they were cut away, they grewagain like plants. The physicians were in perplexity.At length the Devil himself came in the shape of aphysician, and said that the only mode of keepingthem quiet was to feed them with human brains.H is object, we are told, was gradually in this way todestroy the whole race of man.The design of the Devil seemed likely to be accomplished.Each day two human beings were slain,and the serpents f<^ with their brains. At lengthSECRET aOCIETIEB.Itwo of the tyrant's cooks dieimixed with thai of aand, ol' the two men who were given to bekilled eat'b day, they always secretly let go one, andthose who were thus delivered became the progenitorsof the Roods who dwell io the mountains west of^ those iinlbrtimale persons who werecondemned to be food for the serpents was the sonof a blacksmith named Gavah. The afflicted fatherwent boldly before the tyrant, and remonstrated withhim on the injustice of his conduct. Zohak heardhim with patience and released his sod. He alsomade him bearer of a letter addressed to all the provincesof the empire, vaunting his goodness, andcalling on all to support him against the youthfulpretender to his throne. But Gavah, instead of executingthe mandate, tore the tyrant's Fetter, and,raising his leathern apron on ^a lance by way ofstandard, called on all the inhabitants of Iron toarise and take arms in support of Feridoon, the right-allheir to the throne of Jemsheed.Meantime Peridoon, who had attained the age oftwice eight years, came down from Elburx, and,going lo his mother, besought her to tell him fromwhom he derived his birth. Faranuk related to himhis whole history, when the young hero, in greatemotion, vowed to attack the tyrant, iind avenge onhim the death of his father ; but his mother sought,by representing the great power of Zohak, to diverthim from his purpose, and exhorted him to abandonall su<!h thoughts, and to enjoy in quiet the goodthings of this life. But a numerous army, led byGavah in search of the true heir lo the throne, nowcame in sight. Feridoon, joyfully advancing to meetthem, adorned with gold and precious stones theleathern banner, placed upon it the orb of the moon,and, naming it Diiefsh-e-Gavauee (^Gavait'a Apron),Assassins.selected it for the bather of the empire of Iron,Each succeeding; prince, we are told, at his accession,added jewels to it, and Direfeh-e-Gavanee blazedin the front of battle like a sun. Feridoon, thencalling for smiths, drew for them in the sand theform of a club, with a cow's head at the end of it.140 SECRET SOCIETIES.and when they had made it he named it Gawpeigor{Cow- face), in honour of his nurse. Taking leaveof his mother, he marches against the tyrant; anangel comes from heaven to aid the rightful cause ;Zohak is deserted by his troops ; he falls into thehands of t'eridoon, who, by the direction of theangel, imprisons him in a cavern of the mountainDemavend. Feridoon, on ascending the throne ofhis forefathers, governed with such mildness, firmness,and justice, that his name is to the present dayin Persia significative of the ideal of a perfect monarch*.Mazenderan is not less celebrated in Persian romancethan the region at the foot of Demavend. Itwas the scene of the dangers of the light-minded KepKaoos (supposed to be the Cyaxares of the Greeks),and of the marvellous adventures called the SevenFables or Stages of the Hero Roostem, the Herculesof Persia, who came to his aid. When Kej Kaoosmounted the throne of Iran, he exulted in his wealthand in his power. A deep demon) y desirous ofluring him to his destruction, assumed the guise of awandering minstrel, and, coming to his court, soughtto be permitted to sing before the parish emperor).His request was acceded to, — this theme was the praisesof Mazenderan, and he sang to this effect : —*' Mazenderan deserves that the shah should thinkon it ; the rose blooms evermore in its gardens, itshills are arrayed with tulips and jessamines, mild isthe air, the earth is bright of hue, neither cold norheat oppresses the lovely land, spring abides thereFour lines, quoted by Sir J. Malcolm from the Glistenof Saadi, may be thus literally rendered in the measure of theoriginal : —The blest Feridoon an angel was not ;Of musk or of amber he formed was not ;By justice and mercy good ends gained he ;)3e just and merciful, thou 'It a Feridoon be.THE ASSASSINS. .141evermore, the nightingale sings without ceasing inthe gardens, and the deer bound joyously throughthe woods. The earth is never weary of pouringforth fruits, the air is evermore filled with fragrance,like unto rose-water are the streams, the tulip glowsunceasingly on the meads, pure are the rivers, andtheir banks are smiling: ever mayest thou beholdthe falcon at the chase. All its districts are adornedwith abundance of food, beyond measure are thetreasures which are there piled up, the flowers bendin worship before the throne, and around it standthe men of renown richly girded with gold. Whodwelleth not there knoweth no pleasure, as joy andluxuriant pastime are to him unknown."Kej Kaoos was beguiled by the tempter, andseager to get possession of so rich a land, he led alarge army into it. The Shah of Mazenderan wasaided by a potent demon or enchanter named theDeep Suffered (JVhite Deer), who, by his magic arts,cast a profound darkness over the Iranian monarchand Ms host, in which they would have all beendestroyed but for the timely arrival of Roostem, who,after surmounting all the impediments that magiccould throw in his way, slew the Deep Suffered, anddelivered his sovereign.Kej Kaoos, we are afterwards told by the poet,formed the insane project of ascending to heaven,which he attempted in the following manner. Astage was constructed on whkth a throne was set forthe monarch ; four javelins were placed at the corners,with pieces of goat's flesh on them, and fourhungry eagles were tied at the bottom, who, by theirefforts to reach the meat, raised the stage alost intothe air ; but when the strength of the birds was exhaustedthe whole fell with the royal aeronaut in thedesert, where he was found by Roostem and theother chiefs.SECRET SOCIETIES.The history of the Shah-na'iieli king-book),which these 1e(i;end!i ure contained, is one of the mocurious in literature. The fanaticism of the Arabs,who conquered Persia, raged with indisuri minute furyagainst the literature, as well as the religion, of ttiatcountry; and when, iu the time ofAl-Mansoor andTHE ASSASSINS. 143his successors Haroon-er-Rasheed and Al-maroon,the Arabs themselves began to devote their attentionto literature and science, it was the science of Greeceand the poetry of their native language that theycultivated. The Persian literature meantime languishedin obscurity, and the traditional, heroic, andlegendary tales of the nation were fading fast frommemory, when a governor of a province, zealous, asit would appear, for the honour of the Persian nation,made a collection of them, and formed from them acontinuous narrative in prose. The book thus formedwas called the Bostan-n&meh garden-book). It wasin great repute in the northern part of Persia, whereata distance from the court of the khalifs, the Persianmanners, language, and nationality were better^ preserved; and when thejVurkish family of the Sentencefounded mji empire in that part of Persia,sultan Mansion I.y of that race gave orders to a poetnamed Dake^kto to turn the Bastan-nameh intoPersian vcthf .^' Tb^poet undertook the task, but hehad qil made mo than a thousand verses when heperish by assassination. There being no one supposedcapable of continuing Uswork, it was suspendedtill twejDi^ years afterwards, when the celebratedMahmodQ of Ghizni,tlMf conqueror of India, meetingwith the Binrtan-nameh. gave portions of it to threeof the most renowAM||^ts of the time to versify.The palm of excellences adjudged to Anseri, whoversified the tale of Sohrab slain by his own fatherRoostem, one of the most pathetic and affectingnarratives in any language. The sultan made himPrince of the Poets, and directed him to versify theentire work ; but, diffident of his powers, Anserishrank from the task, and having some time afterwardsmet a poet of Too in Khorasan, namedIsaac, the son of Sheriff-Shah, surnamed Ferdoosee144 SECRET SOCIETIES.{Paradiscd*), either from his father's employment asagardener, or iron the beauty of his verses, heintroduced him to the sultan, who gladly committedthe task to him. Ferdoosee laboured with enthusiasmin the celebration of the ancient glories of his country; and in the space of thirty or, as some assert, ofonly eight years, he brought the poem to within twothousand lines of its termination, which lines wereadded by another poet after his death.The Shah-name is, beyond comparison, the finestpoem of the Mohammedan east. It consists of60,000 rhymed couplets, and embraces the history ofPersia, from the beginning of the world to the periodof its conquest by the Arabs. The verses move onwith spirit and rapidity, resembling more the flow ofour lyrical, than that of oui^mmon heroic, lines. CFerdoosee wrote his po«dsi/4n th^jiearly part <Qf theeleventh century from a book: ^^Wch had Ifeen inexistencea long time before, for he^ways calls it anold book, , No proof therefore iM|ee<]jB||^ he didnot invent the tales which com^jWtlJLhefland they have every appearance *pi'* having vffk theancient traditionary lends of tbi Persian nation.But we are able to ffiiw that these legends werepopular in Persia nearly six owhiries l^flApluB time ;and it was chiefly with a ^Sw to staining thisParadise, we are to recollea|^VnroTd of Persian origin,adopted by the Greeks, from wnokn we have received it. AParadise was a place planted with trees, a park, garden, orpleasure-ground, as we may term ittHammer has, in his "Belles Lettres of Persia" (shoneRedekumt Persians), and in the '* Mines de 1* Orient," translateda considerable portion of the Shah-name in the measureof the original. MM. Campion and Atkinson have rendereda part of it into English heroic verse. Gorreshas epitomised it,as far as to the death uf Roostem, in German prose, under thetitle of " Das Heldenbuch von Iran." An epitome of the poemin English prose by Mr, Atkinson, has also lately appeared.THE Assassins. 145curious point that we related the tale of Zohak andFeridoon.Moses of Chosen, the Armenian historian, whowrote about the year 440, thus addresses the personto whom his work is dedicated. " How should thevain and empty fables about Dyrasp Styles gainany portion of thy favour, or why shouldest thouimpose on us the fatigue of elucidating the absunl,tasteless, senseless legends of the Persians abouthim ? to wit, of his first injurious benefit of thedemoniac powers which were subject to him, andhow he could not deceive him who was deception andfalsehood itself. Then, of the kiss on the shoulders,whence the dragons came, and how thenceforward thegrowth of vice destroyed mankind by the pamperingof the belly, until at last a certain Khodones boundhiaL^||^th chains of brass, and brought him to themountain which is called Demavend ; how Byraspegtien dragged to a hill Rhodes, when he fell asleepon the way. but thi.'i last, awaking out of his sleep,brought him to a cavern of the mountain, where hechained him fast, and set an image opposite to lum,so that, (terrified by it, and held by the chains, hemight never more escape to destroy the world''Here ftahave evidently the whole story of Zohakand Peridoon current in Persia in the fifth century ;and any one who has reflected on the nature of traditionmust be well aware that it must have existedthere for centuries before. The very names arenearly the same. Taking the first syllable fromFeridoon, it becomes nearly Rodon, and BiyraspiAidahaki (the words of the Armenian tcKt) signifythe dragon Byrasp: Zohak is e violently nearly thesame with the last word. This fable could hardlyhave been invented in the lime of the Sassaniandynasty, who had not then been more than two centurieson the thi-onc, much) less during the period of146 SECRET SOCIETIES.the dominion of the Parthian Ascites, who wereadverse to everything Persian. We are thereforecarried hack to the times of the Kejanians, the Achesof the Greeks ; and it is by no means impossiblethat the tale of Zohak and Feridoon wasknown even to the host which Xerxes led to the subjugationof Greece.It is well known to those versed in oriental historythat, when the founder of the house of Hassan mountedthe throne of Persia in the year 226, he determinedto bring back everything, as far as was possible, toits state in the time of the Kejanians, from whom heaffected to be descended, and that his successors trodin his footsteps. But, as Persia had been for fivecenturies and a half under the dominion of theGreeks and Parthian, there was probably no authenticrecord of the ancient state of things remgpdng.Recourse was therefore had to the traditional talesof the country ; and, as the legend of Zohak andFeridoon was, as we have seen, one of the mostremarkable of these tales, it was at once adcfiid asagenuine portion of the national history, and abanner formed to represent the Apron of Gavah,which was, as the poet describes it, ad<Mmpd withadditional jewels by each nKHiarch of the louse ofHassan at his accession. This hypothesis will verysimply explain the circumstance of this banner beingunnoticed by the Greek voters, while it is an undoubtedfact that it was captured by the Arabs at thebattle of Kadiseah, which broke the power of Persia,a circumstance which has perplexed Sir JohnMalcolm.We will finally observe that the historian justalluded to, as well as some others, thinks that thedarkness cast by the magic art of the White Deepover Ky Kaoos and his army in Mazanderan coincideswith the eclipse of the sun predicted by Thales,,<rTHE ASSASSINS. 147and which, according to Herodotus, parted the armiesof the Medians and the Lydian when engaged inconflict. Little stress is however, we apprehend, tobe laid on such coincidences. Tradition does notusually retain 'the memory of facts of this nature,though fiction is apt enough to invent them. Theonly circumstances which we have observed in theearly part of the Shah-name agreeing with Grecianhistory, are some relating to the youthful days of ReiKhoosroo, which are very like what Herodotus relatesof Cyrus.We now return to the history of the Assassins.Y.%SECRET SOCIETIES.ClIAPTErt X.DeathofJrf!aI-cJ-aeen— Character of AU-eJ-dcen, hi* successor—The Sheikh Jemal-ud-decn— The Astronomer —TheViiLr Sh.^™f-al-Moolk— Death of Ala-ed-deen — Succession of Kukii-ed-deeii,the last Sheik h-al'Jebal.The reign of Jellal-ed-deen, which, unfortunatelyfor the society, lasted but twelve years, was unstainedby blood ; and we see no reason to doubt the judgmentof the oriental historians, who consider his faithID Islam OS being sincere and pure. It was probablyhis virtue that caused his death, for his life, it Wassuspected, was terminated by poison administered byhis own kindred. Hia son A!a-ed-deen* eminenceof Religion), who succeeded lira, was but nine yearsold ; but as, according to the maxims of the Isma^ea,the visible representative of the imam was, to a certainextent, exempted from the ordinary imperfectionsof humanity, and his commands were to be regardedas those of him whose authority he bore, the youngAla-cd-deen was obeyed as implicitly as any of hiwpredecessors. At his mandate the blood was shedof all among his relatives who were suspected ofhaving participated in the murder of his father.Ala-ed-deen proved to be a weal;, inefficient ruler.Hia delight basin the breeding and tending of sheep,and he spent his days in the cotes among the herdsmen,while the affairs of the society were allowed torun into disorder. All the restraints imposed by hisfather were removed, and every one was left to do• This is the nsmc which, in tli« furni of AIn.hliii, is sotumiVtat h> ui from Ihe story of thu Wonderful LLim|i.TBB ASSASSINS. 149what was right in his own eyes. The weakness ofthis prince's intellect is ascribed to his having, in thefifth year of his reign, had himself most copiouslybled without the knowledge of his physician, theconsequence of which was an extreme degree ofdebility and a deep melancholy, which never afterwardsleft him. From that time no one could ventureto offer him advice respecting either his health or thestate of the affairs of the society, without being rewardedfor it by the rack op by instant death. Everythingwas therefore kept concealed from him, aadhe had neither friend nor adviser.Yet Ala-ed'deen was not without some estimablequalities. He had a respect and esteem for learningand learned men. For the sheikh Jemul-ed-deenChili, who dwelt at Casveen, he testified on all occasionsthe utmost reverence, and sent him annually500 dinars to defray the expenses of his household.When the people of Casveen reproached the learnedsheikh with living on the bound of the Impious, hemade answer, " The imams pronounce it luwfu! toexecute the Ismailites, and to confiscate their goods ;how much more lawful is it for a man to make useof their property and their money when they givethem voluntarily!" Ala-ed-deen, who probablyheard of the reproaches directed against his friend,sent to assure the people of Casveen that it was solelyon account of the sheikh that he spared them, or elsehe would put the earth of Casveen into bags, hangthe bags al^out the necks of the inhabitants, andbring them to Alamoot. The following instance ofhis respect for the sheikh is also related. A messengercoming with a letter lo him from the sheikhwas so imprudent as to deliver it tohim when he wasdrunk, Ala-ed-deen ordered him to have a hundredblows of the bastinado, at the same time crying outO foolish and thoughtless man, to give meSECRET 30CIKTIK8.Ia letter from the sheikh at the time when I wasdniTik 1 Thou ehouMest have waited till 1 was comeout of the bath, and was come to my senses."The celebrated astronomer Nasir-ed-deen (victoryof Religion) had also gained the consideration ofAla-ed-deen, who was anxious to enjoy the pleasureof his society. But the philosopher, who resided atBokhara, testified lite incUnatbn to accept of thefavour intended him. Ala~ed-deen therefore sentorders to the Dai-al-Kebir of Kuhistan to convey theuncourteous sage to Alamoot. As Nasir-ed-deenwas one day recreating himself in the gardens aboutBokhara, he found himself suddenly surrounded bysome men, who, showing him a horse, directed hintto mount, telling him he had nothing to fear if heconducted himself quietly. It was in vain that heargued and remonstrated ; he was far on the road toKuhistan, which was 600 miles distant, before hisfriends knew he was gone. The governor madeevery apology for what he had been obliged to do.The philosopher was sent on to Alamoot to be thecompanion of Ala-ed-deen, and it was while he wasthere that he wrote his great work called the Moralsof Nadir CAkhtaalc-Nasiree)*It was during the administration of Ala-ed-deenthat the following event, so strongly illustrative ofthe modes of procedure of the Assassins, took place.The sultan Je]lal-ed-deen,the last ruler of Khanrisra,so well known for his heroic resistance to Clings- Malcolm's History of Persia, nol. i. In the clever workcalled "TiaitB and Stories of tha Itinh Fuasantiy," which isthe best [picture eye given o( Che language, manner, andmudexoClhinkingofthat class, there is an amusing account(and an undoubtedly true one) gf the " Abduction of MatKaTanagh." one of that cucioiis onler of men called in thatcountry hedge-schoolmaster, which, as indicative uCa passionfor knuwledKC,majba placed in companion with this anecdoteof Ala-ed-deen.1^191 IKhan, had appointed the emir Arkhan governor ofNishaboor, which bordered closely on the iBmailiteterritory of Kuhistan. Arkhan being; obliged toattend the sultan, the deputy whom he left in hisstead made several destructive incursions into Ka-listen,and laid waste the Istnailile districts of Teemand Ken. The Ismailites sent to demand satisfaction,but the only reply made to their complaints andmenaces by the deputy-governor waa one of thosesymbolical proceedings so common in the east. Hecame to receive the Isma'ilite envoy with lus girdlestuck full of daggers, which he flung on the groundbefore him, to signify either his disregard for thedaggers of the society, or to intimate that he couldplay at that game as well as they. The Israeliteswere not, however, persons to be provoked withimpunity, and shortly afterwards three Fedavees weredespatched to Kunja, where Arkhan was residing atthe court of the sultan. They watched till the emircame without the walls of the town, and then fellupon aud murdered him. They then hastened to thehouse of Sheref-'al-Moolk (Nobleness of the Realm),the vizir, and penetrated into his divan. Fortunatelyhe was at that time engaged with the sultan, andthey missed him ; but they wounded severely oneof his servants, and then, sallying forth, paraded theBreeds, proclaiming aloud that they were Assassins.They did uot however escape the penalty of theirtemerity, for the people assembled and stoned themto death.An envoy of the Ismailites, named Bedi'<ed-^een{Fidl Moon of Ri^ligioii) Aimed, was meantime onhis way to the court of the sultan. He stopped shorton hearing what had occurred, and sent to the vizirto know whether he should go on or return. iSheref-al-moola, who feared to irritate the Assassins, directedhim to coiitiime his journey, and, when he was1S«Secret 80C1BT1ES.arrived, showed him every mark of honour. Theobject of Beiir-ed-deen's mission was lo obtain Katis-iiielion for the ravages committed on Ihe Israeliteterritory and the cession of the fortress of Damaghan.The. yi7,ir promised the former demand without amoment's hesitation, and he made as little dilRcultywith regard to the second. An instrument wasdrawn out assigning to the Israelites the fortresswhich they craved, on condition of their remittingannually to the royal treasury the sum of 30,000pieces of golil.When this affair was arranged the sultan set outfor Azerbeijan, and the Israelite ambassador remainedthe guest of the vizir. One day, after asplendid banquet, when the wine, which they hadbeen drinking in violation of the taw, had mountedinto their heads, the ambassador told the vizir, bywayof confidence, that there were several Israelitesamong the pages, grooms, guards, and other personswho were immediately about the sultan. The vizir,dismayed, and at the Sometime curious to know whothese dangerous attendants were, besought the ambassadorlo point them out to him, giving him hisnapkin as a pledge that nothing evil should happento them. Instantly, at a sign from the envoy, live ofthe persons who were attendants of the chamberstepped forth, avowing themselves to be concealedAssassins. " On such a day, and at such an hour''said one of them, an Indian, to the vizir, " I might.have slain thee without being seen or punished ; and,if I did not do so, it was only because I bad no ordersfrom my superiors." The vizir, timid by nature, andrendered still more so by the effects of the wine,stripped himself to his shirt, and, sitting down beforethe fivrf Assassins, conjured them by their lives tospare him, protesting that he was as devotedly theslave of the sheikh Ala-ed-deen as of the sultanJellal-ed-deea.THE ASSASSINS.As soon Qs the sultan heard of the i:Cowardice of his vizir, he sent a messenger to himivith the keenest reproaches, and an order to burnalive the five Ismai'lites without nn instant's delay.The vizir, though loll, was obliged to comply, and,in violation of his promise, Ihe five chamberlains werecash on the flaming pyre, where they died exulting atbeing found worthy lo suffer in the service of thegreat Sheikh-al-Jebal. The master of Ihe pages wasalso put to death for having admitted Ismailitesamong them. The sultan Then set out for Irakk,leaving ic vizir in Azerbeijan. While he was therean envoy arrived from Alamoot, who, on being admittedto nn audience, thus spake, " Thou hast givenfive Ismailites to the flames; to redeem thy head,pay 10,000 pieces of gold for each of these unfortunatemen." The vizir heaped honours on the envoy,and directed his secretary to draw out a deed in theusual forma, by which he bound himself to pay theIsmailites the annual sum of 10,000 pieces of gold,besides paying for them the 30,000 which went tothe treasury of the sultan. Sheref-al-Moolk wasthen assured that he had nothing to apprehend.The preceding very characteristic anecdote rests ongood authority, for it is related by Aboo-'l-Fetah^issavec, the vizir's secretary, in his life of sultanJellaJ-ed-deen.The astronomer Nasir-ed-deen was not the onlyinvoluntary captive of Alamoot. Ala-ed-deen sentonce to Farsistan to the utaheg Mozaffer-ed-deen, torequest that he would send him an able physician.Requests from Alamoot were not lightly to be disregarded,and the atabeg despatched the imam fieha-ed-teen, one of the most renowned physicians of thelime, to the mountains of Jebal. The skill of theimam proved of great benefit to the prince, but whenthe physician applied for leave to return to his familySECRET SOCIETIES.he found that he was destined to pass the remainderof his days in Alainoot, unless he should outlive hispal lent.The imam's release, however, was more speedythan he excreted. Ala-ed-deen, who had schildren, had nominated the eldest them, Ruin-ed'deen support of Religion), 'bile he was yet a child,to be his successor. As Rukn-ed-deen grew up thepeople began ta hold him in equal respect with hislather, and to consider hiR commands as equallybinding on them. Ala-edKleen took offence, anddeclared that he would give the succession to anotherof his children ; but, as this directly contravened oneof the Ismajlile maxims, namely, that the first nominationwas always the true one, it was Utile heeded,Rukn-cd-deen, in apprehension for his life, whichhis lather threatened, retired to a strong castle to waitthere the time when he should be called to the succession.Meantime the tyranny and caprice of Alashad given many of the principal personsabout him cause to be apprehensive for their lives,and they resolved to anticipate him. There was aman at Alamoot named Hassan, a native of Mazeswho, though no Israelite, was of a vile andprofligate character. He was the object of the doatingattachment of Ala-ed-deen, and consequentlyhad free and constant access to him. Him they fixedupon as their agent, and they found no difficulty ingaining him. Ala-ed-deen, whose fondness for breedingand tending sheep had never diminished, hadbuilt for himself a wooden house close by his sheep-comes,whither he was wont to retire, and where heindulged himself in all the excesses in which hedelighted. Hassan of Mazenderan seized the momentwhen Ala-ed-deen was lying drunk in thishouse, and shut him through the neck with an arrow,Jtukn-ed-dcen, who is said to have been engaged inTHE ASSASSINS. 155the conspiracy, assuming the part of the avenger ofblood, the murderer and all his family were put todeath, and their bodies committed to the flames ; butthis act of seeming justice did not free Rukn-ed-deenfrom suspicion, and the bitter reproaches of his motherwere poured forth on him as a parricide.The termination of the power of the Ismailiteswas now at hand. Rukn-ed-deen had hardly ascendedthe throne of his murdered father when he learnedthat an enemy was approaching against whom allattempts at resistance would be vain.156 SECRET SOCIETIES*Chapter XI.The Mongols — Hoolagoo sent against the Ismailites — Rukn-ed-teen submits — Capture of Alamoot — Destruction of theLibrary — Fate of Rukn-ed-deen — Massacre of the Ismailites•»St. Louis and the Assassins — Mission for the Conversionof the People of Kuhistan — Conclusion.Half a century had now elapsed since the voice ofthe Mongol seer on the banks of the Seeing hadannounced to the tribes of that race that he had seenin a vision the Great God sitting on his throne andgiving sentence that Temujeen, one of their chiefs,should be Chingis Khan great Khans and theobedient tribes had, under the leading of Temujeen,commenced that career of conquest which extendedfrom the eastern extremity of Asia to the confines ofEgypt and of Germany. At this time the chiefpower over the Mongols was in the hands of Mango,the grandson of Chingis, a prince advantageouslymade known to Europe by the long abode of thecelebrated Venetian Marco Polo at his court. TheMongols had not yet invaded Persia, though theyhad, under Chingis himself, overthrown and strippedof his dominions the powerful sultan of Khaurism.It was however evident that that country could notlong* escape the fate of so many extensive and power-italstales, and that a pretext would soon be foundfor pouring over it the hordes of the Mongols.We are told, though it seems scarcely credible,that ambassadors came from the Khalif of Bagdadto Nevian, the Mongol general who commanded outhe northern frontier of Persia, requiring safe conductTHE ASSASSINS,to the court of Mangooo. The object of their missionwas to implore the great khan to send his invincibletroops to destroy those pests of society the bands ofthe Ismailites. The prayer of the envoys of the successorof the Prophet was supported by the Judge ofCasveen, who happened to be at that time at thecourt of Mangooo, where he appeared in a coat ofmail, to secure himself, as he professed, from thedaggers of the Assassins. The khan gave orders luassemble an army ; his brother Hoolagoo was appointedto command it, and, as he was setting forth,Mangooo thus addressed him : —With heavy cavalry and a mighty host I sendthee from Tooran to Iran, the lund of mighty princes.It behoves thee now strictly to observe, both in greatand in small things, the laws and regulations of Chin-hisShun, and to take possession of the countriesfrom the 0:ius to the Nile. Draw closer unto theeby favour and rewards the obedient and the submissive; tread the refractory and the rebellious, withtheir wives and children, into the dost of contemptand misery. When thou hast done with the Assassinsbegin the conquest of Irakk, If the Khalif of Bagdadcomes forward ready to serve thee, thoki shalt do himno injury ; if he refuses, let him share the fate of theThe army of Hoolagoo was reinforced by a thousandfamilies of Chinese firemen to manage thebattering machines and Ding the flaming naphtha,known in Europe under the name of Greek fire.He set forward in the month Ramazan of the 651styear of the Hejra (a. d. 1253). His march was soslow that he did not cross the Oxus till two yearsafterwards. On the farther bank of this river hetook the diversion oi' lion-hunting, but the cold cameOH so intense that the greater part of his horsesperished, and he was obliged to wait for tic ensuingISECBST SOCIETIES.spring before he could advance. All the princes ofthe menaced countries sent embassies to the Mongolcamp announcing their submission and obedience.The lend-quarters of Hoolagoo were now in Kboras-san, whence he sent envoja to Rukn-ed-tieen, theIsraelite chief, requiring his submission. By theadvice of the astronomer Nasir-ed-deen, who washis counsellor and minister, Rukn-ed-deen sent toBaissoor Noobeen, one of Hgolagoo's generals, whohad advanced to Hawaiian. declaring his obedienceand his wish to Ive in peace with every one. TheMongol general recommended that as Hoolagoohimself was approaching, Rukn-ed-deen should waiton him in person. After some delay, the latter agreedto send his brother Shahinshah, who accompaniedthe son of Baissoor to the quarters of the Mongolprince. Meantime Baissoor, by the orders of Hoola-goo, entered the Israelite territory and drew near toAlamoot, The troops of the Assassins occupied asteep hill near that place. The Mongols attackedthem, but were repelled each time they attemptedthe ascent. Being forced to eve over the attack,they contented themselves with burning the bousesand ravaging the country round.When Shahinshah reached the camp of Hoolagooand ratified the submission of his brother, orders tothe following effect were transmitted to the mountain-chief:— " Since Rukn-ed-deen has sent his brotherunto us, we forgive him the offences of his fatherand his followers. He shall himself, as, during hisshort reign, he has been guilty of no crime, demolishhis castles and come to us." Orders were sent atthe same time to Baissoor to give over ravaging thedistrict of Roodbor. Rukn-ed-deen began castingdown some of the battlements of Alamoot, and atthe same time sent to beg the delay of a year beforeappearing in the presence of Hoolagoo. But theTHE ASSASSINS. 159orders of the Mongol were imperative ; ' he was requiredto appear at once, and to commit the defenceof his territory to the Mongol officer who was thebearer of Hoolagoo*s commands. Rukn-ed-deenhesitated. He sent again to make excuses and askmore time ; and, as a proof of his obedience, hedirected the governors of Kuhistan and Kirdkoh torepair to the Mongol camp. The banners of Hoola-goo were now floating at the foot of Demavend, closeto the Israelite territory, and once more orders cameto Maimoondees, where Rukn-ed-deen and his familyhad taken refuge: — "The Ruler of the World isnow arrived at Demavend, and it is no longer timeto delay. If Rukn-ed-deen wishes to wait a few dayshe may in the mean time send his son*' Theaffrighted chief declared his readiness to send hisson, but, at the persuasion of his women and advisers,instead of his own, he sent the son of a slave, whowas of the same age, requesting that his brothermight be restored to him. Hoolagoo was soon informedof the imposition, but disdained to notice itotherwise than by sending back the child, saying hewas too young, and requiring that his elder brother,if he had one, should be sent in place of ShakingHe at the same time dismissed Shakingwith these words : — " Tell thy brother to demolishMaimoondees and come to me ; if he does notcome, the eternal God knows the consequences." •The Mongol troops now covered all the hills andvalleys, and Hoolagoo in person appeared beforeMaimoondees. The Assassins fought bravely, butRukn-ed-deen had not spirit to hold out He senthis other brother, his son, his vizir Nasir-ed-deen,and the principal persons of the society, bearing richpresents to the Mongol prince. Nasir-ed-deen Misdirectedto magnify the strength of the Israelitefortresses in order to gain good terms for his master ;160 SECRET SOCIETIES.bat, instead of so doing, he told Hoolagoo not toregard them, assuring him that the conjunction ofthe hears announced the downfal of the Ismailites,and that the sun of their power was hastening to itsnetting. It was agreed that the castle should beiwrwndored on condition of free egress. Rukn-ed-d^n^ his ministers, and his friends, entered the ottinp on the first day of the month Zoo-1-Kaadeh.elis wealth was divided among the Mongol troops.Iliioliigoo took compassion on himself, and spokekuuUy to him, and treated him as his guest. Nasir-ween became the vizir of the conqueror, who built for him the observatory of Meragha.Mongol officers were now dispatched to all theIHiHileH of the Ismailites in Kuhistan, Roodbar, andt*\en in Syria, with orders from Rukn-ed-deen to thel^wernors to surrender or demolish them. Theinner of these strong castles was upwards of onehundred, of which there were forty demolished inRoodbar alone. Three of the strongest castles inthis province, namely, Alamoot, Lamseer, and Kird-koh, hesitated to submit, their governors replying tothe summons that they would wait till Hoolagooshould appear in person before them. In a few daysthe Mongol prince and his captive were at the footof Alamoot. Rukn-ed-deen was led under the walls,und he ordered the governor to surrender. Hiscommand was disregarded, and Hoolagoo, not to .waste time, removed his camp to Lamseer, leaving aWtfps to blockade Alamoot. The people of Lamseerwme forth immediately with their homage, and asow days afterwards envoys arrived from Alamootcreating Rukn-ed-deen to intercede for the inha-Utunta Vrith the brother of Mangooo. The conquerorVMM moderate; he allowed them free egress, and«tt\v Iheiu three days to collect and remove theirkiuilWa uud property. On the third day the MongolTHE ASSABSniS,tTDOpB received permission to enter and plunder thefortress. They rushed, eager for prey, into thehitherto invincible, now deserted, Vulture's Nest, andrifled it of all that remained in it. Aa they hurriedthrough its subterranean recesses in search of treasurethey frequently, to their amazement, found themselvesimmersed in honey, or swimming in wine ; for therewere large receptacles of wine, honey, and com, hewninto the solid rock, the nature of which was such that,though, as we are told, they had been tilled in thetime of Hassan Sabah, the corn was perfectly sound,and the wine had not soured. This extraordinarycircumstance vrai regarded by the Israelites as amiracle wrought by that founder of their society.When Alamoot fell into the bounds of the MongolsAta-Meiek (Kmg's-falher') Jowcduee, a celebratedvizir and historian, craved permission of Hoolagoo toinspect the celebrated library of that place, which hadbeen founded by Hassan Sabah and increased by hisSuccessors, and to select from it such works as mightbe worthy of a place in that of the khan. The permissionwas readily granted, and he commenced hissurvey of the books. But Ata-Melek was too ortho-dona Mussulman, or too lazy an examiner, to makethe best use of his opportunity ; for all he did was tolake the short method of selecting the Koran and afew other books which he deemed of value out of thecollection, and to commit the remainder, with all thephilosophical instruments, to the flames, as beingimpious and heretical. All the archives of Ihe societywere thus destroyed, and our only source pf informationrespecting its doctrines, regulations, and history,id derived from what Ala-Melck has related in hisown history as the result of his search among thearchives and books of the library of Alamoot, previousto his making an auto da Ji of them.The fate of the last of a dynasty, however worthlessSecret Societies.and insignificant Ills character may be, is alwaysinteresting from the circumstance alone at his beingthe last, and thus, as it there, embodying in himselfthe history of his predecessors. We shall thereforepause to relate the remainder of the sloryof the feeblellukn-ed-deen.When Hoolag^oo, alter the conclusion of his campaignagainst Roodbitr, retired to Hampden, wherehe had left his children, he took with biog Ruin-ed'deen, whom he continued to treat with kindness.Here the Assassin prince became enamoured of aMongol maiden of the very lowest class. He askedpermission of Hoolagoo to espouse her, and, by thedirections of that prince, the wedding was celebratedwith great solemnity. He next craved to be sent tothe court of Mangooo Khan. Hoolagoo, though surprisedat this request, acceded to it also, and gavehim a corps of Mongols as an escort. He at thesame time directed him to order on his way the garrisonof Kirdkoh, who stiti held out, to surrender,and demolish the fortress. Rukn-ed-deen, as hepassed by Kirdkoh, did as directed, but sent at thesame time a private message to the governor to holdout as long as possible. Arrived at Kara-Kooroom,the residence of the khan, he was not admitted to anaudience, but the blowing message was delivered tohim:— "Thus sail Mangooo: Since Thou affectedto be obedient to us, wherefore has not the castle ofKirdkoh been delivered up? Go back, and demolishall the castles which remain ; then mayest thou bepartaker of the honour of viewing our imperial countenance."Hukn-ed-deen was obliged to return, and,soon alter he had crossed the Oxus, his escort, makinghim dismount under pretext of an entertainment, ranhun through with their swords.Muugoo Khan was determined lo exterminate thewhole race of the Ismailites, and orders to that electTHE ASSASSINS. 163had already reached Hoolagoo, who was only waitingto execute them till Kirdkoh should have surrendered.As the garrison of that place continued obstinate, heno longer ventured to delay. Orders for indiscriminatemassacre were issued, and 12,000 Ismailitessoon fell as victims. The process was shorfc; wherevera member of the society was met he was, withoutany trial, ordered to kneel down, and his head instantlyrolled on the ground. Hoolagoo sent one ofhis vizirs to Casveen, where the family of Rukn-ed-deen were residing, and the whole of them were putto death, except two (females it is said), who werereserved to glut the vengeance of the princess Bool-than Saloon, whose father Jagatai had perished bythe daggers of the Assassins.The siege of Kirdkoh was committed by Hoolagoo(who was now on his march to Bagdad to put anend to the empire of the khalifs) to the princes ofMazender^n and Ruyan. The castle held out forthree years, and the siege was rendered remarkableby the following curious occurrence : — sit was in thebeginning of the spring when a poet napier Koorbeeof Ruyan came to the camp. He began to sing, inthe dialect of Taberistan, a celebrated popular songof the spring, beginning with these lines ; —When the sun from the fish to the ram doth return,Spring's banner waves high on the breeze of the mom.*'sand Day, with his banner of radiance unfurled,Shines in through the mountainous portal that opesSublime from that valley of bliss to the world,"says Mr. Moore in his ** Alla Rooks," undoubtedly withoutany knowledge of the eastern song. His original was perhapsCampbell's*^ Andes, giant of the western star,His meteor standard to the winds unfurled.Looks from his throne of clouds o'er half the worlds**which was again in all probability, suggested, like Gray'sledSBCHBT Societies.The son; awoke in the minds of princes and soldiersthe recollection of the vernal delights they had leftbehind them ; an invincible longing ater them seizedthe whole army ; tend, without reflecting on the consequences,they broke up the siege, und set forth toenjoy the season of flowers in the fragrant gardens ofMazeniierin. Hoolagoo was greatly incensed whenhe heard of their conduct, and sent a body of troopsagainst them, but forgave them on their making dueapologies and submissions.The Israelite power in Persia was now completelyat an end ; the khalifat, whose detection had beenits great object, was also involved in its ruin, and thepower of the Mongols established over the whole ofIron. The Mongol troops failed in their attemptson the Israelite castles in Syria ; but, at the end offourteen years, what they could not effect was achievedby the great Bears, the Circassian MamSook sultanof Egypt, who reduced all the strongholds of the Assassinsin the Syrian mountains, and extinguishedtheir power in that region.The last intercourse of the Assassins with thewestern Christians which we read of was that withSt. Louis. William of Nangis relates— but the taleis evidently apocryphal— that in the year 1250 two ofthe Araacidte were sent to France to murder thatprince, who was then only twenty-two years of age.The Senex de Monte however repented, and sentothers to warn the French monarch. These arrivingill time, the former were discovered, on which theniign, which, full high odvaiireil.THE ASSASSINS.]ung loaded them all with presents, and dismissedthem nith rich gifts for their master.Rejecting this idle legend, we may safely creditthe account of Joinville, that in 1250, when St. Louisnos residing at Acre, afler ins captivity in Egypt, heWHS waited on by an embassy from the Old Manof the Mountain, the object of which was to procure,through his means, a remission of the tribute whichhe paid to the Templar and the Hospitallers. As ifto obviate the answer which might naturally be madethe ambassador said that his master considered thatit would be quite useless to sacrifice the lives of hispeople by murdering the masters of these orders, asmen as good as they would be immediately appointedto succeed them. It being then morning, the kingdesired them to return in the evening. When theyappeared again, he had with him the masters of theTemple and the Hospital, who, on the propositionsbeing repeated, declared them to be most extravagant,and assured the ambassadors that, were it notlor the sacredness of their character, and their regardfor the word of the king, they would ding them intothe sea. They were directed to go back, and to bringwithin fifteen days a satisfactory letter to the king.'J'hey departed, and, returning at the appointed time,said to the king that their chief, as the highest markof friendship, had sent him his own shirt and hisgold ring. They also brought him draught andchessboard, adorned with amber, an elephant anda giraffe (prafir) of crystal. The king, not to beoutdone in generosity, sent an embassy to Muscatwith presents of scarlet robes, gold cups, and silvervases, for the Israelite chief.speculative tenets will continue and be propagatedlong after the sect or society which hokis them mayIjave lost all temporal influence and consideration,ordinary, seventy years after the description ofRibsSECRET SOCIETIES.^Alamoot, in the reign of Aboo-Zeid, the eighth successorof HooJagoo, it was found that nearly all thepeople of Kuhistan were devoted to the Israeliteopinions. The monarch, who was an orthodox sooner,advised with the governor of the province, andit was resolved to send a niissioii,con]|)osed of learnedand zealous divines, for the conversion of the heretics.At the head of the mission was plated the pious andorthodox sheikh Emad-ed-deen of Bokhara; theother members of it were the sheikh's two sons andfoiir other learned ulemas (Doctors of low), in alleven persons. Full of enthusiasm and zeal for thegood cause which they had in hand, the Missionariesset forth. They arrived Kain, the chief place ofthe province, and foniffwith grief and indignationnone of the ordinary testimonies of Moslem devotion.The moses were in ruins, no morning or evening callto prayer was to be heard, no school or hospital wast« be seen. Emad-ed-deen resolved lo commencehis mission by the solemn call to prayer. Adoptingthe precaution of arraying themselves in armour, heand his companions attended the terrace of thecastle, and all at once from its different sides shoutedforth, " Say God is great ! There is no god but God,and Mohammed is his prophet. Up t^ prayer; togood works!" The inhabitants, lo whom thesesounds were unusual and offensive, ran together, determinedto bestow the erowo of martyrdom on themissionaries ; but these good men, whose zeal was ofa prudent complexion, did not, though armed, aUdethe encounter. They took refuge in an aqueduct,where they concealed themselves till the people haddispersed, when they came forth once more, ascendedthe terrace, and gave the call to prayer. The peoplecollected again, and again the missionaries soughttheir retreat. By perseverance, however, and the^ powerful support of the governor of the province, theyTHE ASSASSINS. 167gradually accustomed the ears of the people to theforms of orthodoxy. Many years afterwards sultanShahrokh, the son of Timor, resolved to send acommission to ascertain the state of religion in Ko-listen.At the head of it he placed Jelalee of Ka'i'n,the grandson of Emad-ed-deen, a man of learningand talent and a distinguished writer. Jelalee deemedhimself especially selected by heaven for this purpose,as his grandsire had headed the former mission, andthe Prophet had appeared to himself in a dream, andgiven to him a broom to sweep the land, which heinterpreted to be a commission to sweep away theimpurity of infidelity out of the country. He thereforeentered on his office v^jja. joy, and, after a peregrinationof eleven months reported favourably ofthe faith of the people of Kohistan, with the exceptionof some dervishes and others, who were addicted toSoofeeism.At the present day, nearly six centuries after thedestruction of the Israelite power, the sect is still inexistenceboth in Persia and in Syria. But, like thatof the Anabaptists it has lost its terrors, and theIsraelite doctrine is now merely one of the speculativeheresies of Islam. The Syrian Ismailites dwellin eighteei^villages around Massyat, and pay anannual sum of 16,500 piastres to the governor ofHama, who nominates their sheikh or emir. Theyare divided into two sects or parties, the Sooweidanee,so named from one of their former sheikhs, and theKhisrewee, so called on account of their great reverencefor Kaiser, the guardian of the Well of Life.They are all externally rigid observers of the preceptsof Islam, but they are said to believe in the divinityof Ali, in the uncreated light as the origin of aUthings, and in the sheikh Rasheed-eddeen Sinan asthe last representative of God upon earth.The Persian Ismailites dwell chiefly in Roodbar,168 SECRET SOCIETIES.but they are to be met all over the east, and evenappear as traders on the banks of the Ganges. Theirimam, whose pedigree they trace up to Isma'il, theson of Jaaffer-es-Sadik, resides, under the protectionof the Shah of Persia, at the village of Khekh, in thedistrict of Room. As, according to their doctrine,he is an incarnate ray of the Divinity, they hold himin the utmost veneration, and make pilgrimages fromthe most distant places to obtain his blessing.We have thus traced the origin, the growth, andthe decline of this formidable society, only to beparalleled by that, of the Jesuits in extent of powerand unity of plan and purpose. Unlike this last,however, its object was purely evil, and its careerwas one of blood : it has therefore left no deeds towhich its apologists might appeal in its defence. Itshistory, notwithstanding, will always form a curiousand instructive chapter in that of the human race.THE Templar.PChapter I.Introduction — The Crusade — Wrong Ideas respecting theirOrigin — True Causes of them — Pilgrimage— Piigrimii(;e ofind— Of the Count of Anjou— Striking DLffetunre.between the Christianity of the Eat quad that of the Wits—Causes of their different Character — Feudalism — ThisFoica of this Principle.Among the many extraordinary phenomena whichIhe middle ages present, none is more deserving ofattention, or more characteristic of the times and theState of society and opinion, than the institution ofthe religio military orders of the Hospitallers, theTemplar, and the Teutonic Knights. Of theseorders, all of which owed their origin to the Crusades,and commenced in the I2th century, the last, afterthe final loss of the Holy Land, transferring thescene of their activity to the north of Germany, anddirecting' their arms against the heathens who stilloccupied the south coast of the Baltic, became thefounders, in a great measure, of the Prussian power;while the first, planting their standard on the Isle ofRhodes, long gallantly withstood the forces of theOttoman Turks, and, when at length obliged to resignthat island, (took their station on the rock of Malta,where they bravely repelled the troops of the greatestof the Ottoman sultans, and maintained at least anominal independence till the close of the Isti ecu-170 SECRET SOCIETIES.turn. A less glorious fate attended the Knights ofthe Temple. They became the victims of the unprincipledrapacity of a merciless prince ; their propertywas seized and confiscated ; their noblest membersperished in the flames; their memory wastraduced £gid maligned ; the foulest crimes were laidto their charge ; and a secret doctrine, subversive ofsocial tranquillity and national independence, wasasserted to have animated their councils. Thoughmany able defenders of these injured knights havearisen, the charges against them have been reiteratedeven in the present day ; and a distinguished Orientalist(Von Hammer) has recently even attempted to bringforward additional and novel proofs of their secret guilt.*To add one more to the number of their defenders, totrace the origin, developed the internal constitution oftheir society, narrate their actions, examine the historyof their condemnation and suppression, andshow how absurd and frivolous were the chargesagainst them, are the objects of the present writer,who, though he is persuaded, and hopes to prove,that they held no secret doctrine, yet places themamong the secret societies of the middle ages, becauseit is by many confidently maintained that they weresuch.As the society of the Templar was indebted forits origin to the Crusades, we will, before enteringon our narrative, endeavour to correct some erroneousnotions respecting the causes and nature of thesecelebrated expeditions.The opinion of the Crusades having been an ema-The principal works on the subject of the Templar areRaynouard Monument historiques reiatifs & la Condemnationdes Temples ; Dupuy Histoire de la Condemnation des Temples; Hunter Statutenbuch des Orders der Tempelherren ;and Wilike Gescbichte des Tempelherrenordens. There isscarcely anything on the subject iu english.THE 'templar. 171nation of the spirit of chivalry is one of the mosterroneous that can be conceived, yet it is one mostwidely spread. Romancers, and those who writehistory as if it were romance, exert all their power tokeep up the illusion, and the very sound of the wordCrusade conjures up in most minds the ideas ofwaving plumes, gaudy surcoats, emblazoned shields,with lady's love, knightly honour, and courteous featsof arms. A vast deal of this perversion of truth isno doubt to be ascribed to the illustrious writer of thesplendid epic whose subject is the first Crusade. Tasso,who, living at the time when the last faint gleam ofexpiring chivalry was fitfully glowing through themoral and political gloom which was overspreadingthe former abodes of freedom and industry in Italy,may be excused if, young and unversed in the philosophyof history, he mistook the character of Europeansociety six centuries before his time, or deemedhimself at liberty to minister to the taste of a courtwhich loved the fancied image of former times, andstimulate it to a generous emulation by representingthe heroes of the first Crusade as animated with thespirit and the virtues of the ideal chivalry. But thesame excuse is not to be made for those who, writingat the present day, confound chivalry and the Crusades,give an epitome of the history of the latterunder the title of that of the former, and venture toassert that the valiant Tancred was the beau ideal ofchivalry, and that the " Talisman" contains a faithfulpicture of the spirit and character of the Crusades.*On the subject of chivalry see Ste. Palace Memoires surla Chevalerie, Sir W. Scott's Essay on the same subject, andMills's and James's histories of chivalry. We do not recollectthat any of these writers has fairly proved that the chivalrywhich they describe ever existed as an institution, and we mustdemur to the principle which they all assume of romanceslike Perceforest being good authority for the manners of theage in which they were composed*Secret Societies.We venture to assert that the Crusades did riotoriginate in chivalry, and that the first Crusade, themost important of them, and that which grave thetone and character to all the succeeding ones, doesnot present a single vestige of what is usually understoodby the term chivalry, not a trace of what theimagination rather than the knowledge of Burkedescribed us embodying " the generous loyalty torank and Bex, the proud submission, the dignifiedobedience, and that subordination of the heart whichkept alive, even in servitude itself, the spirit of anexalted freedom — that sensibility of principle, thatchastity of honour, which felt a stain like a wound,which inspired courage whilst it mitigated ferocity,which ennobled whatever it touched, and under whichvice ilaeif lost habits evil by losing all its grossness,"Lite surely does he know of the lath century andits spirit who can suppose any part of the foregoingdescription to apply to those who marched in arms toAsia to free the sepulchre of Christ ; slightly musthe have perused the Geste Tancred of RadulphuBCadomens, who can conceive that gallant warrior, aahe undoubtedly was, to have been the mirror ofchivalry.Chivalry and the Crusades commenced in thesame century, and drew their origin from the samesource. One was not the cause of the other, butboth were effects of the same cause, and that causewas feudalism. This inculcated "the proud submission,the dignified obedience," &c., &c., whichwere gradually idealised into chivalry; it impressedon the mind of the vassal those principles of regardto the rights and property of his lord whichseemed to justify and sanction the Holy War. Previously,however, to explaining the manner inwhich this motive acted, we must stop to noticeCholer concurring cause of the Crusades, with-theTemplar,out which it would perhaps never have begun looperate.Man has at all periods been led by a strong impulseof his nature to visit those spots which havebeen distinguished as the scenes ol great and celebratedactions, or the abode of distinguished personages.The operation of this natural feeling u. stillstronger when it is combined with religion, and therearises a conviction that the object of his worship isgratified by this act of attention, aud his favour therebysecured to the votary. Hence we find pilgrimage,or the practice taking distant journeys to celebratedtemples, and other places of devotion, to have prevailedin all ages of the world. In the most remoteperiods of the mythic history of Greece, where historictruth is not to be sought, and only manners andmodes of thinking are to be discerned, we constantlymeet the Iberia, or pilgrimage to Delphi, mentionedin the history of the heroes, whence we may withcertainty collect that it formed at all times a portionof the manners of the Greeks. India, at the presentday, witnesses annually the pilgrimage of myriads tothe temple of Ju^emaut, and Jerusalem has beenfor thousands of years the resort of pious Israelites.The country which had witnessed the life and deathof their Lord naturally acquired importance in theeyes of the early Christians, many of whom, moreover,were Jews by birth, and had always viewedJerusalem with feelings of veneration. All, too, confounded— as has unfortunately been too much thecase in later times— the old and the new law, andsaw not that the former was but " beggarly elements"in comparison with the latter, and deemed that thepolitical and economical precepts designed for a singlenation, inhabiting one small region, were obligatoryon the church of Christ, which was intended to comprisethe whole human race. Many of the practicesiHSocieties.%of Judaism were therefore observed by the Christians,and k> this principle ne are perhaps in a great iiiea*sure to ascribe the rapid progress of the practice, andthe belief in the efficacy, of pilgrimage to the HolyCity.The abuses of pilgrimage were early discerned,and some of the more pious Fathers of the Churchpreached and wrote against the practice. But pietyend eloquence were vain, and could little avail to stemthe torrent when men believed that the waters ofJordan had efficacy to wash every sin, though unattendedby sincere repentance. The Church, as sheadvanced in corruption, improved in worldly wisdom,and, taking pilgrimage under her protection, made itapart of her penal discipline. The sinner was nowordered a journey to the Holy Land as a means offreeing his soul from the guilt of his perhaps manifoldenormities. Each year saw the number of the pilgrimsaugment, while the growing veneration forrelics, of which those which came from the HolyLand were esteemed the most efficacious, stimulatedpilgrimage by adding the incentive of profit, as asmall stock of money laid out in the purchase of thegenerally counterfeit relics always on sale at Jerusalemwould produce perhaps a thousand per cent, onthe return of the pilgrim to his native country. Apilgrim was also tteld in respect and venerationwherever he came, as an especial favourite of theDivinity, having been admitted by him to the higtiprivilege of visiting the sacred places, a portion ofwhose sanctity it would be supposed might stilladvice to him.The lath century was the great season of pilgrimage.A strange misconception of the meaning of aportion of Scripture had led men to fancy that ther1000 was to be that of the advent of Christ, torethe world. As the valley of Jehoshaphat wasTHE Templar.believeth to be the spot oii wliicli this awFul eventwould take place, the some feeling which leads peopleat the present day to lay a flattering unction to theirsouls by Supposing that death-bed repentance willprove equivalent in the sight of God to a life passedin obedience to his will and in the exercise of virtue,impelled numbers to journey to the Holy Land, inthe belief that this graciousness, as it were, of hithertonegligent servants would be well taken by their Lord,and procure them an indulgent hearing before hisjudgment sea L Pilgrimage, therefore, increasedgreatly; the failure of their expectations, the appointedtime having passed away without the Son ofMan coming in the clouds of Heaven,' gave it nocheck, but, on the contrary, rather an additionalimpulse; and during this century the caravans of pilgrimsattained to such magnitude and strength as tobe deserving of the appellation of Ths amici of theLord — precursive of the first and greiilest Crusade.In truth the belief in the merit and even the obligationof B pilgrimage to Jerusalem, in the sight ofGod, was now as firmly impressed on the mind ofevery Christian, be his rank what it might, as that ofthe necessity and advantage of one to the Kaaba ofMecca is in the apprehension of the followers of Mohammed; and in the degraded state of (he humanintellect at that period a pilgrimage was deemedadequate lo the removal of nil sin. As a proof ofthis we shall narrate the pilgrimages of two distinguishedpersonages of those times. The first occurredin the 9th, the second in the lath century.In the reign of Lothairee, son of Louis the Debonair,a nobleman of Brittany, named Frotmond, whohadmuideredhisuncle and his youngest brother, beganlo feel remorse for his crimes. Arrayed in the habitof penitent, he presented himself before the monarchand an assembly of his prelates, and inde confession17fi SECRBT BOOIBTIRS.of his guilty deeds. Tbe king and bishops had himstraitly bound in chains of iron, and then commandedhim, in expiation of his guilt, to set forth far the East,and visit all the holy places, clad in hair-cloth, andhis forehead marked with ashes. Accompanied byhis servants and the partners of his crime, the Bretonlord directed his course to Palestine, which he reachedin safety. Having, in obedience lo the mandates ofhis sovereign and of the church, visited all the holyplaces, he crossed the Arabian desert, which had beenthe scene of the wanderings of Israel, and enteredEgj-pt. He thence traversed a part of Africa, andwent as far as Carthage, whence he sailed for Rome.Here the Pope, on being consulted, advised him tomake a second pilgrimage, in order to complete ibispenance, and obtain the perfect remission of bis sins.Frotraond accordingly set forth once more, andhaving performed the requisite duties al the HolyCity, proceeded to the shore of the Red Sea, andthere took up his abode for three years on MountSinai, afler which time he made a journey to Armenia,and visited the mountain on which the ark of Noahhad rested. His crimes being now, according to theideas of those times, expiated, he returned to hisnative country, where he was received as a saint, andtaking up his abode in the convent of Redou, passedthere the remainder of his days, and died deeply regrettedby bis brethren.*Fnik de Terra, Count of Anjou, had. spilt muchinnocent blood ; he bad bad bis first wife burnt alive,and forced bis second wife to seek retire from hisbarbarity iu the Holy Land. The public odium pursuedhim, and conscience asserting her rights presentedto his disturbed imitation the forms of thosewho had perished by him issuing from their tombs,and reproaching him with his crimes. Anxious toAf icliBud, Histoire cas Cioisadf^j I., p. 59.THE Templar. ^^Jescape from his invisible tormentors, the count puton him the habit of a pil^i^riiii, and set forth forPalestine. The tempests which he encountered inthe Syrian seas seemed lo his p:»ilty soul the instrumentsof divine vengeance, and augmented the fervourof his repentance. Having reached Jerusalemin safety, he set heartily about the work of penance.He traversed the streets of the Holy City with acord about his neck, and beaten with rods by his servants,while he repeated these word". Lord, havemcTcy on a faithless and perjured Christian, on asiTiTicr wandering far from his home. During ^'^abode in Jerusalem he gave abundant alms, relievingthe wants of the pilgrims, and leaving numerousmonuments of bis piety and munificence.Deep OS was the penitence of the Count of Anjou,it did not stand in the way of the exercise of a littlepious fraud. By an ingenious device he deceivedthe impious malignity of the profane Saracens, whowould have made him defile the holy sepulchre ; andthe chroniclers tell us that as he lay prostrate beforethe sacred tomb he contrived to detach from it aprecious stone, which he carried back with him lothe West. On his return to his duchy he built, at thecastle of Loches, a church after the model of that ofthe Resurrection at Jerusalem, and here he every dayimplored with tears the divine forgiveness. Hismind, however, could not yet rest; he was stillhaunted by the same horrid images; and he oncemore visited the Holy Land, and edified the faithful bythe austerity of his penance. Returning home bythe way of Italy, he delivered the supreme pontifffrom a formidable enemy who was ravaging his territory,and the grateful pope conferred on him in returnthe full absolution of al! his sins. Fulk brought withhim to Anjou a great quantity of relics, with which headorned the churches of Loches and Angers; and hischief occupation thenceforward was the building oftowns and monasteries, whence be acquired the nameof The Great Builder. His people, who blessedheaven for his conversion, honoured and loved him ;the gfuiltof hia sins had been removed b; the meanswhich were then deemed of sovereign efficacy; yetstill the monitor placed by God in the human breast,and which in a noble mind no power can reduce toperfect silence, did not rest ; and the Holy Land beheld,for the third time, the Count of Aiijou wateringthe sepulchre of Christ with his tears, and groaning;afresh over his transgressions. He quitted Jerusalemtor the last time, recommeiidinghis soul to the prayersof the pious brethren whose office it was to receivethe pilgrim!, and turned his face homewards. ButAnjou he was never more to behold; death surprisedhim at Metz. His body was transferred to Lochee,and buried in his church of the Holy Sepulchre.These instances may suffice to slow what theopinion of the efficacy and merit of pilgrimage to theHoly Land was at the time of which we write. Wehere find convincing proof that in the minds of princesand prelates, the highest and most enlightened orderof society, it was confidently believed to avail toremove the guilt of crimes of the deepest die. Andlet not any one say that the clergy took advautaii^e ofthe ignorance of the people, and made it the instrumentof extending their own power and influence;for such an assertion would evince ignorance both ofhuman nature in general and of the temper and of the Romish hierarchy at that, and we mightalmost say at all periods of its existence. Howeverprofligate the lives of many of the clergy may havebeen, they never called in question the tnith of thedogmas of Llieir religion. Even the great and daringGregory VII., in the midst of what appear to us hissrrc^ant and almost impious assumptions, never foresTHE TBMPtARB.1»moment doubted of the course which he was pursuingbeing the right one, and agreeable to heaven. Theclergy, as well as the Iwty, were firmly persuaded of ithe efficacy of pilgrimage, and in both the persuasionwas naturally stronger in proportion to the ignoranceof the believer. We accordingly find that vast numbersof all ranks, and both sexes, clergy as well aslally, annually repaired to the tomb of Christ.It remains to be explained what the principle waswhich gftve origin to the idea of the right and justiceof recovering the Holy Land, which was now in thehands of the fanatic Turks, instead of those of the 1tolerant Saracens. This cause was, as we have aboveasserted, the feudal spirit, that is, the spirit of theage, and not that emanation of it termed chivalry.Religion, whatever its original nature and character,will always lake a tinge from the manners andtemper of those who adopt it. Nothing can be more ■illustrative of the truth of this observation than the \history of the Christian religion. Any one who \opens the Gospel, and reads it without preconception |or prejudice, cannot fail at once to recognise therational and fervent piety, the active benevolence, ]the pure morality, the noble freedom from the ttam- jmelts of the word, joined with the zealous dischargeof all the social duties, which every page of it inculcates.Yet we find this religion in the East degene- |rating into abject grovelling superstition and metphysical quibbling, pursued with all the rancour ofthe odium theological, v\ii\e in the West it assumeda fiery fanatic character, and deemed the sword aninstrument of conversion superior to reason and argument.This difference, apparently so strange, arosefrom the difference of the social state and politicalinstitutions of the people of the East and of the Westat the time when they embraced Christianity.The free spirit had long since fled from GreeceSECRET SOCIETIES.when the first Christian missionaries preached thefaith among its people. But the temper of the Greekwas still lively, and his reasoning powers acute.Moreover, he had still the same leaning towards asensible and material religion which has at all timesdistinguished him, and the increasing despotism ofthe empire depressed and enfeebled more and moreevery day the martial spirit which he had displayedill the days of his freedom. No field remained forhie mental activity but that of philosophy and religion.The former, which had long been his delight behail contrived, to subtilize into an almost unintelligiblemysticism ; and in this form it speedily spreadits infection through his new faith, which was besidesfurther metamorphosed and changed in character byan infusion from the dualistic system of Persia.Meantime the ascetic spirit which had come fromthe East joined with the timidity engendered by thepressure of despotism to make him mistake the spiritnf the Gospel, and convert Christianity into a crouchingcowardly superstition. When the emperor Nice-chorusPhocis sought to infuse a martial and fanaticspirit into his subjects, and to rouse them to vigorousexertion against the Saracens, his bishops replied tohis exhortations by citing a canon of St. Basil, whichdirected that he who tied slain an enemy in battleshould abstain during tlu^ee years from participationin the holy sacraments. The priest of a little townin Cilicia was engaged one day in saying mass whena hand of Saracens burst in, and began to plunderthe town. Without waiting lo take oil' his sacerdotalvestments, he seized the hammer, which in thecurtsies of the East frequently serves the purpose ofa bell, and, flying among the infidels, pled his weaponIn such effect that he forced them to a precipitateflight, and saved the low. What was the rewardof the gallant priest ? He was censured by his dio-theTemplar.ISlce.san, interdicted the exercise of his ghostly functions,and so ill-treated in. other respects, that heflimif off his robes and joined the Saracens, whosomore martial and enei^tic creed accorded betterwith his manly sentiments. When the pilgrims ofthe first Crusade begun to arrive in such terrific numbersat Constantinople, the Greek emperor and hissubjects could hardly persuade themselves of thepossibility of religion hein the actuating canse. ofstich a portentous movement — so little did religionand deeds of arms accord in their minds !But with the nations of the West the case wasdiR'erenL In these the ruling portion, that whichgave tone to the whole, were of the Gothic and Germanicraces, whose hardy bands had dashed to piecesthe worn-out fabric of the Western empire. Worshippersin their native forests of Thor and Odin,and the other deities of Valhalla, who submitted nonttbut the valiant dead to share in the celestial pork andniead which each day crowned the board in their lucidabode, their manners, their sentiments, their wholebeing was martial, and they infused this spirit intothe religion which they adopted from their Romansubjects. In making this change in its tone theyderived aid from the Jewish portion of the sacredvolume, which has been in all ages abused, by menignorant of its character and original use, to purposesof fanaticism and persecution ; and the religion ofChristian Europe, from the fifth century downwards,became of a martial and conquering character. By;the sword Charlemagne converted the pagan Saxons;his successors employed the sword against the heathenVends; and by fire and sword 0!of Trigger-son spread'Christianity throughout the North, In former timesthis mode of conversion had been in a great degreeforeign to the Western church ; and persuasion hud■ISSCRKT BDOIETIKS.been chiefly employed in the dissemination {)f thefaith amnii the heathen natiotiH.The religion of the West we thus see was martial;but this spirit alone would not have stifh^^ed to producethe Crusade which was to interest and appear as a dutyto ail orders of men. Here the feudal principle cameinto operation, and gave the requisite impulse.In the 11th century the feudal system was completelydeveloped in Evince and Germany, and themodes of thinking, speaking, and acting derived fromit pervaded all the relations of life. From the lopto the bottom of society the mutual obligations uflords and vassals were recognised and acted upon,and each vassal deemed It a most sacred duty to defendby arms the honour and property of his superiorlord. There was also a kind of supreme temporalchief of the Christian world acknowledged in the personof the Emperor of Germany, who was viewed asthe successor of Charlemagne, and the representativeof the Roman emperors. The feudal ideas extendedeven to the hierarchy, which now put forth such exorbitantclaims to supremacy over the temporal power.The head of the church was an acknowledged vicegerentof Him who was styled in scripture Lord ofall the kingdoms of the earth. .lesuK Christ was,therefore, the apex of the pyramid of feudal Society ;he was the great suzerain and lord paramount of allprinces and peoples, and al! were equally under obligationto defend his rights and honour. Such wereevidently the sentiments of the age.It is hardly necessary to remind the reader thatIhe religion of the period which we treat of was of uIgroGS and material character, and that the passionsand infirmities of human nature were freely bestowedon the glorified Son of God. He was deemed toea peculiar interest in the spot of land where heTHB TBMPLARS. shadsojourned when on earth, and more especially inthe tomb in which his body had been deposited, andwith grief and indignation to see them in the handsof those who contemptuously derided his divinity, andtreated with insult and cruelty those of his faithfulvassals who underwent the toils and dangers of adistant journey to offer their homage at his tomb.Nothing could, therefore, be more grateful to hisfeelings than to behold the sacred soil of Palestinefree from heathen pollution, and occupied and defendedby his faithful vassals, and no true son of thechurch could hesitate a moment to believe that it washis bounden duty to arm himself in the cause of hislord, and help to reinstate him in his heritage. Here,then, without having recourse to the romantic principleof chivalry, we have an adequate solution of thephenomenon of the first Crusade. Here we have amotive calculated to operate on the minds of allorders, equally effectual with men of piety, virtue, andwealth, like Godfrey of Bouillon and Stephen ofChartres, who looked for no temporal advantages, aswith the meanest and most superstitious of the vassalsand serfs who might be supposed to have only soughta refuge from misery and oppression by assumingthe cross. We would not by any means be supposedto deny that many other causes and motives were inoperation at the same time ; but this we deem thegrand one. This was the motive which gave dignityto and hallowed all others, and which affected themind of every Crusader, be his rank or station in societywhat it might.Pilgrimage then was esteemed a duty, and a powerfulmean of removing guilt and appeasing the wrathof the Almighty ; the spirit of the age was martial,and its religion, tinged by the ancient system of theNorth of Europe, was of the same character; thefeudal principle was in its vigour, and extended evenm2184 Secret SOCIETIES.to the relations of man with the deity ; the rude andbarbarous Turks had usurped the heritage, the verycrown-lands, as we may say, of Jesus Christ, and insultedhis servants, whose duty it plainly was topunish them, and free the tomb of their lord ; — thenatural result of such a state of circumstances andopinion was the first Crusade.TKB TBHPLARS.Chapter II.Fiat Hospital ii Jerusalem— Church of Santa Quia daLatina— Hospital of St. John— The II aflpilatlui— Origin o!the Templar— Their original Poverty— The acquire Con.liberation— St. Bernard— His Character of the TemplarThe Oriler appeared of and Confirmed by the Council ofTroyes— Proof of the Esteem in which they were held.In consequence of the resort of pil!;rinis anti tradersfrom the West to Jerusalem it had been found necessaryto build there, with the consent of (be Saracens,hospilia, or plot-es of entertainment for them duringtheir abode in the holy city. For they could nut,consistently with the religious animosity which prevailedbetween them and the Moslems, seek the hospitalityof these last, and the Christiana of the Greekchurch who dwelt in the Holy City, besides that theylead no very friendly feeling towards their Catholicbrethren, were loth to admit them into their houses,on account of the imprudent language and indecorousacts in which ttiey were ton frequently in the habit ofindulging, and which were so likely to compromisetheir hosts with their Saracen lords. Accordinglythe monk Bernard, who visited Jerusalem in the year870, found there, in the valley of Jehoshaphat, nearthe church of the Holy Virgin, a hospital consistingof twelve mansions, for western pilgrims, which wasin the possession of some gardens, vineyards, andconi'Relds. It had also a good collection of books,the gift of Charlemagne. There was a market heldin front of it, which was much resorted to, and everyf86 SECRBT SOClEtlKS.dealer paid two pieces of gold to the overseer for permissionto have a stand there.In the 11th century, when the ardour of pilgrimagewas inflamed anew, there was a hospital within thewalls of Jerusalem for the use of the Latin pilgrims,'which had been erected by Italian traders, chiefly ofAmalfi. Near this hospital, and within a stonecastof the church of the Holy Sepulchre, they erected,with the permission of the Egyptian khallf, a churchdedicated to the Holy Virgin, which was usually calledSta. Maria de Latina. In this hospital abode anabbot and a good number of monks, who were of theLatin church, and followed the rule of St. Benedict.They devoted themselves to the reception and entertainmentof pilgrims, and gave alms to those whowere poor, or had been rifled by robbers, to enablethem to pay the tax required by the Moslems forpermission to visit the holy places. When the numberof the pilgrims became so great that the hospitalwas incapable of receiving them all, the monks raisedanother hospitium close by their church, with a chapeldedicated to a canonized patriarch of Alexandria,named St. John Lemon, or the Compassionate.This new hospital had no income of its own ; themonks and the pilgrims whom they received derivedtheir support from the bounty of the abbot of theconvent of the Holy Virgin, or from the alms ofpious Christians.At the time when the army of the crusaders appearedbefore the walls of Jerusalem the Hospital ofSt. John was presided over by Gerard, a native ofProvence, a man of great uprightness and of exemplarypiety. His benevolence was of a truly Christiancharacter, and far transcended that of his age ingeneral ; for during the period of the siege he reJieved all who applied to him for succour, and notmerely did. tti0] •ebiimal&c Gt«e\L «hAxe W& bounty,TUB Templar. 187even the unbelieving Moslem was not repelled whenhe implored bis aid. When the city was taken,number of the wounded pilgrims were received, andtheir wounds tended in the hospital of St. John, andthe pious Duke Godfrey, on visiting them some daysafterwards, heard nothing but the praises of the goodGerard and his monks.Emboldened by the universal favour which theyenjoyed, Gerard and his companions expressed theirwish to separate themselves from the monastery ofSta. Maria de Latina, and pursue their works ofcharily alone and independently. Their desire metno opposition : they drew up a rule for themselves,lo which they made a vow of obedience in presenceof the patriarch, and assumed as their dress a blackmantle with a white cross on the breast. The humilityof these Hospitallers was extreme. They styledthe poor and the sick their lords and themselves theirservants ; to them they were liberal and compassionate,to themselves rigid and austere. The finestflour went to compose the food which they gave tothe sick and poor; what remained after they weresatisfied, mingled nth clay, was the repast of theAs long OS the brotherhood were poor they continuedin obedience to the abbot of Sta. Maria deLatina, and also paid tithes to the patriarch. But atide of wealth soon began' to flow in upon them.Duke Godfrey, enamoured of their virtue, bestowedon them his lordship of Montbnire, in Brabant, withallits appurtenances i and his brother and successor,Baldwin, gave them a share of all the booty takenfrom the infidels. These examples were followed byother Christian princes ; so that within the space ofa very few years the Hospital of St, John was inpossession of numerous manors both in the East andin Euru|>e, which were placed under the mau^e-SBCRBT Societies.Pment of members of their society. The Hospitallers1 total remission of all the burdens towhich they were subject, and they found no difficultyiu obtaining all that they desired. Pope Paschal II.,in the year 1113, confirmed their rule, gave thempermission, on Ihe death of Gerard, to elect theirown head, without the interference of any temporalor spiritual power whatever, freed them from the obligationof paying tithes to the patriarch, and confirmedall the do oat ions made or to be made to them.The brotherhood of (he Hospital was now greatlyadvanced in consideration, and reckoned among itsmembers many gallant knights, who laid aside theirarms, and devoted themselves to the humble office ofministering to the sick and needy.The worthy Gerard died in the same year withKing Baldwin I. (1118), and Raymond Dupuy, aknight of Dauphine*, who had become a brother ofthe order, was unanimously elected to succeed him inhis office. Raymond, who was a man of great vigourand capacity, drew up a series of rules for the directionof the society, adapted to its present state of consequenceand extent. From these rules it appearsthat the order of St. John admitted both the clergyand the laity among its members, and that both werealike bound to yield Ihe most implicit obedience tothe commands of their superior. Whether Raymondhad any ulterior views is uncertain, but in the regulationswhich he made we cannot discern any traces ofthe spirit which afterwards animated the order of St.John.Jii.st, however, as Raymond had completed hisregulations there sprang up a new society, with differentmaxims, whose example that of St. John founditself afterwards obliged to adopt and follow. TheHoly Land was at that time in a very disturbed anduiKjuiet slate ; the Egyptian power pressed it on theTBE TBMPLARS. 1S9SDUtfa, the Turkish on the north and east; the Arabtribes indulged in their usual predatory habits, andinfested it with hostile incursions ; the Mussulman inhabitantswere still numerous ; the Syrian Christianswere ill affected towards the Latins, from whom theyfrequently experienced the grossest ili-treat men;the Latins were few and scattered. Hence the pilgrimwas exposed to numerous danger ; peril besethim on his way from the port at which he landed tothe Holy City, and new perils awaited him when hevisited the banks cis the Jordan, or went to pluck hisbranch of cunsec rated palmin the gardens of Jericho.Many a pilgrim had lost his life on these occasions.Viewing these evils, nine valiant and pious knightsresolved to form themselves into an association whichshould unite the characters of the monk and theknight, by devoting themselves to a life of chastityand piety at the tomb of the Saviour, and by employingtheir swords in the protection of the pilgrims ontheir visits to the holy places. They selected as theirpatroness the suet Mother of God (La done Merede Dieu), and their resolution, according so perfectlywith the spirit of the Crusades, which combined pietyand valour, gained at once the warm approbation ofthe king and the patriarch. In the presence of thelatter they took the three ordinary vows of chastity,poverty, and obedience, and a fourth of fighting incessanlly in the cause of pilgrims and the Holy Landagainst the heathen. They bound themselves to liveaccording to the rule of the canons of St. Augustine,and elected as their first master Hugh de Parens.The king, Baldwin II., assigned them a portion ofhis palace for their abode, and he and his baronscontributed to their support. As the palace stoodclose by the church and convent of the Temple, theabbot and canons gave them a street leading from itto the palace, for keeping their magazines and equip5190 SBCRST Societies.merits in, and hence they styled themselves thSoldiery of the Temple (Militia Temple and Tern*plans. They attracted such immediate consideration,owing in great part, no doubt, to the novelty of theirplan, that the very year aliter their establishment(1120), Fulk, Count of Anjou, who was come onpilgrimage to Jerusalem, joined their society as amarried brother, and on his return home annuallyremitted them thirty pounds of silver in furtheranceof their pious objects, and the example of the Countof Anjou was followed by several other princes andnobles of the West.The English historian, Brompton, who wrote inthe 12th century, asserts that the founders of theorder of the Temple had originally been members ofthat of St. John. We know not what degree ofcredit this may be entitled to *, but it is certain thatthere had been as yet nothing of a military characterin this last, and that its assumption of such a characterwas an imitation of the society of the Temple ;for, urged by the praise which they saw lavished onthe Templar for their meritorious conduct, the Hospitallersresolved to add the task of protecting to thatof tending and relieving pilgrims, and such of theirmembers as were knights resumed their arms, joyfulto employ them once more in the cause of Grot. Theamplitude of their revenues enabled them to take anumber of knights and footmen into their pay — ^a practicein which they had probably been preceded by theTemplar, who thus employed the money which wasremitted to them from Europe. But during the lifetimeof Raymond Dupuy the order of the Hospitaldid not become completely a military one ; he always^ * The other writers of that century agree in the accountgiven above. Brompton's authority has been preferred bysome modern writers, who probably wished to pay their court/p tete order of Malta,bore the simple title of director (procumlnr) of theHospital, and it was not till some time afterwards thatthe head of the society was, like that of the Templar,styled master, and led its troops to battle. At alltimes the tendency of the poor and the sick formed apart of the duties of the brethren of the Hospital, andthis was always a marked distinction between themand the rival order of the Temple, whose only taskwas that of lighting; against the infidels.During the hrs nine years which elapsed ager theinstitution of their order the knights of the Templelived in poverty, religiously devoting all the moneywhich was sent to them from Europe to the advantageof the Holy Land, and the service of pilgrims. Theybad no peculiar habit, their raiment was such as theBBCBET Societies.charity of the fuithAil bestowed upon them ; andthough knights, and engaged in constant warfareagainst the infidels, their poverty and moderationwere such that Hugh des Payens and his companion,Godfrey, of St. Omer, hail but one war-horse betweenthem — a circumstance which they afterwards, in theirbrilliant period, commemorated by their seal, whichrepresented two knights mounted on the one boise,a device chosen with a view to inculcating humilityon the brethren, now beginning lo wax haughty andinsolent.A chief cause of the extraordinary success of thefirst Crusaders had been Ihe want of union amongtheir enemies. The Saracens and Turks mutuallyhated each other, and would not combine lor a commonobject, and the Turks were, moreover, at enmityamong themselves, and one prince frequently alliedhimself with the Christians against another. Butthey were now beginning to perceive the necessity ofunion, and were becoming every day more formidableto their Chrisiiftu neighbours. King Baldwin II.,who had been a prisoner in their hands, made everyeflbrt v\'hea he hud obtained his freedom lo strengthenhis kiugdoui, and, among other means for this purpose,he resolved to gain for the Templar, whosevalour, humility, and single-mi needless were thetheme of general applause, additional consideration,by obtaining from the Holy Father the confirmationof their order. With this view he despatched, in theyear 1 1 27, two of [heir members,nanieU Andrews andGundemar,(o Rome, with this request to the Pope, towhom they were also to make a strong representationof the perilous state of the Holy J^and. Theking, moreover, finished them with a letter of recommendationlo St. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaus,whose influence was then all-powerful in the ChristianWorld, and who was nephew of the envoy Andrews.THE Templar. )93Shortly afterwards Hugh de Payenn himself arrivedin Europe with five others of the brethren.Nothing; could he more advantageous to the recorderthan the favour and countenance of the illustriousA hot of Clairvau^i, who had been for ninetime past an admirer of its objects and deeds. Threeyears before this time he had written a letter to theCount of Champagne, who had entered the order ofthe Templar, praising the act as one of eminentmerit in the sight of God. He now, on occasion ofthe visit of the Master", wrote, at his request, aneloquent work, exhorting the brethren of the neworder to persevere in their toilsome but highly laudabletask of fighting against the tyranny of theheathens, and commending their piety to the attendlion fall the faithful, setting in strong opposition tothe luxury of the knights of his time the modesty andsimplicity of these holy warriors. He extolled theunlimited obedience of the Templar to their Master,both at home and in the field. " They go and come,"says he, " at a sin from their Master ; they wear theclot>iinir which he gives them, and ask neither foodnor clothing from any one else : they live cheerfullyand temperately together, without wives and children,and, that nothing; may he wanting for evangelicalperfection, without property, in one house,endeavouring to preserve the unity of the spirit inthe bond of peace, so that one heart and one soulwould appear to dwell in them all. They never sitidle, or go about gaping after news. When they areresting from ,Warfare against the infidels, a thingwhich rarely occurs, not to eat the bread of idleness,they employ themselves in repairing their clothes andanne, or do something which (he command of theMaster or the common need enjoins. There is with• Wiilteii r. S8, glvts 1 135 as alio jeer ill which this pi^cnwwittta.IISSCRKT SOCIETIES.shem no respect of persons ; the best, not the noblest,are the most highly regarded; Ihey endeavour tianticipate one another in respect and to lighten eachother's burdens. No unseemly word or \xghi mocking,no murmur or immoderate laughter, is let to passun reproved, if any one should allow himself to in such. They avoid games ol' chess andtables; they are adverse to the chase, and equally soto hawking', in which others so much delight. Theyhate all jugglers and mountebanks, all wanton songsand plays, us vanities and follies of this world. TheyLilt their hair in obedience to these words of the apostle,it is not seemly in a man to have long hair;* noone ever sees them dressed out; they are seldom everwashed ; they are mostly to be seen with disorderedhair, and covered with dust, brown from their corsletand the heat of the sun. When they go forth to warthey arm themselves within with faith, without withiron, but never adorn themselves with gold, wishingto excite fear in the enemy, and not the desire ofbooty. They delight in horses which are strong andBwifi, not in such as are handsomely marked andrichly caparisoned, wishing to inspire terror ratherthan admiration. They go not impetuously and headlongin to battle, but with care and foresight, peacefully,as the true children of Israel. But as soon as the fighthas brun, then they rush without delay on the foes,esteeming them but as sheep ; and know no fear, eventhough they should he few, relying on the aid of theLord of Sabaoth. Hence one of them has often puta thousand, and two ol' them ten thousand, to flight.Thus they ure, in union strange, at the same timegentler than lambs and grimmer than lions, so thatone may doubt whether to call them monks or knights.But both names suit them, for theirs is the mildnessof the monk and the valour of the knight. Whatremains to be said but tttat (his is the Lord's doing,THB TEM7I.AR8.1^19S Iand it ia wonderful iu our eyes ? Such are theywhom God has chosen out of the bravest in Israel,that, watchjiil aad true, they may guard the holy sepulchre,armed with swunis, and well skilled in war''Though in these expressions of St. Bernard theremay be perceived some marks of rhetorical exaggeration,they prove incontestably the high character andsincere virtue of the founders of the society of theTemplar, and that it was organized and regulatedwith none but worthy objects in view. They alsooffer, if such were required, an additional proof thatthe crusade was no emanation of chivalry ; for thoseto whom St. Bernard throughout sets the Templarin opposition were the chivalry of the age.This epistle of the Abbot of ClairvauK had beencirculated, and every other just and honest meanemployed to conciliate the public favour for the Templar,when, on the 31st January, 1128, the Master,Hugh rie Payens, appeared before the council ofTroyes, consisting; of the Archbishops of Rheims andSens, (en bishops, and a number of abbots, amongwhom was St. Bernard himself, and presided over bythe Cardinal of Albany, the papal legate. The Masterhaving given an account of the principles and the Templar, the assembled fathers Bjrprovedof the new order, and gave them a new rule, containingtheir own previous regulations, with severaladditions drawn from that of the Benedictines, andchiefly relating to spiritual matters. The validity ofthis rule was made to depend on the approbation ofit by the Holy Father and by the Patriarch of Jerusalem,neither of whom hesitated to confirm it. Bythe direction of the Pope Honoris, the synod appointeda white mantle to be the distill fishing dressof the brethren of the Temple, that of those of thehospital being black. This mantle was plain, withoutany cross, and such it remained till the ponLih-SKCJtST Societies,cale of Pope EugeniusITI., nho, in 1146, appointedthe Tempers to wear a red cross on Ihe breast, as ttHyinbol of the martyrdom to which they stood constantlyexposed t the crois worn ou their black man'ties, by the knigbtsofSt. John, was, as we have seen*,tchite. The order now assumed, or were assigned, apeculiar banner, tbrmcd of cloth, striped black andwhite, called in old French, Baiiseanlf, which wordbecame the battle-cry of the knights of the 'Temple,and often struck terror clothe earls of the infidels.It bore on it the ruddy cross of the order, and thepious and humble inscription, Anon nobis, Domine,non nobis, sed tiomwi two, da gloria, (Not to us,O Lord, not lo us, but to thy name give the glory !)Several knights now assumed the habit of theorder, and in a progress which Much de Fayens,accompanied by some of the brethren, made throughFrance and England, he acquired lor it universalfavour. Ue did not neglect the charters, committed tohim by the king of Jerusalem, of invoking aid forthe Holy Land. now so hard bested, and his esorations were not without effect. Fulk, Count of• S»p.lg7. Sir. Scott describe hisTEmpIar in Ivanhoe,u wuariii|f a wbitd mojilltj with a b/acA craft of eij^ht paint*.The origiiiul cross of alia Hospitallers, we may olwi-rve, hadnot eight points. Tint of the order of Malta vas of Ilia fiiim,t autant, Di BauianI, was, b oil French, a. piebald bone,or a hone marked white and block. During. Roc[uefort. Thaword is still preserved wiib its Original meeting in the Scotchdialect, ill thu form BawsenI:'• His huuest, sunsie, baws'nt faceAye gat him friend in illa place,"sityii Burns, deacribia); Ir " ploughman's collie," in bis taleof the " Twa l)o){B ;" and in the Gloii8iry,Dr. Currie explain*Batei'nt as roeaniog " having a white fclnpe down Ihe face."appeanore seems to tie involved in thu epithet, Autant, oitrnvnanl, may possibly be merely an oUltr foi of the presentJVtuch word, Bienseant.THE TEUFLARS, 197Anjou, BOW rejoined his Master and brethren ; but ashehad gotten an invitation to repair to Jerusalem,and espouse the only daughter of the King, he set outbefore them to the East.Hugh de Payens would admit no knight into theorder who did not terminate ail his feuds and enmities,and amend his ife. Thus, when a knight, namedHugh amboise, who had oppressed the people ofMarnioutier, and had refused obedience to the judicialsentence of the Count of Anjou. was desirous toenter the order, he refused to admit him to take thevows (ill he had given perfect satisfaction to thosewhom he had injured.Honour and respect awaited the Templar whereverthey appeared, and persons of all ranks wereeager to do what might he grateful to them. Whenthe Templar who came with the seal of Godfrey ofSt. Omer, as his credential to the governor of thatplace, to demand hiag^oods which Godfrey had giventhe order, he met with a most favourable reception,not only from the governor, but from the bishop ; andon their applying, as was necessary in this case, tothe Count of [islanders and Alsatia, that prince was sofur from Throwing any impediments in the way, that,in a very short space of lime, the buildings which hadbelonged to Godfrey were converted into a churchand a temple house. Many Flemish gentlemen followedthe example of Godfrey, and bestowed a partof their property on the Templar. King Henry I.of England, who met and conversed vtilh HughiePayens in Normandy, was an pleased with his accountof the new order, that he presented him with manyrich gills, and gave him strong recommendations tothe principal of the English barons. The EmperorLothairee bestowed in 1130 on the order a large partof his patrimony of Supplinbiirg. The old CountRaymond Berenger, of Barcelona and Provence,weary ol' the word and of the l^iU ut ^«\««v\bs.-&V,became r Templar, and took up his abode in thetemple-house at Barcduoa ; and, us he could not gopersonally to combat the infidels in the Holy Land,he continually sent rich gifts to the brethren at Jera-rHale, and he complied rigorously with all the otherduties of the order. In 1133 Alfonso, king ofArragon and Navarre, a valiant and warlike monarch,who had been victor in nine and twenty battles agcuDstthe Moors, finding himself old and without children,made a will, by which he appointed the knights ofthe Temple and of the Hospital, together with thecanons of the Holy Sepulchre, to be its Joint-heirs,deeming, perhaps, that the most gallant defenders ofthe Holy Land would best prosecute his favouriteobject of breaking the power of the infidels. Theaged nioaurch fell the following year in the battle ofFragft, against the Moors; and, negligent of hisdisposition of the realm, the nobles of Arragon andNavarre met and chose sovereigns outof hia family.The orders were not strong enough to assert theirrights ; and this instance, therefore, only serves toshow the high degree of consideration to which theyhad Eu early attained.THB TBMPLARS. I OftChapter HI.Return of the Templar io the East — Exoneration and Refutationof the Charge of a Connection with the Ismailites— »Actions of the Templar — Crusade of Louis VII.— Siege ofAscalon — Sale of Nassir-ed-deen — Corruption of the Hospitallers— ^ThebuU, Omne Datum Optimum — Refusal of theTemplar to march against Egypt — Murder of the IsraeliteEnvoy.In the year 1129 Hugh de Payens, accompaniedby 300 knights of the noblest families in Europe,who had become members of the order, and followedby a large train of pilgrims, returned to the HolyLand. Shortly after his arrival, the unlucky expertedition to Damascus above narrated, was undertaken,and the Templar formed a portion of the troopswhich marched, as they fancied, to take possession ofthat city. As has been observed, this is the firstoccasion on which we find the Christians in allianceand connection with the Ismailites; and asHammer, the historian of the last, makes the gravecharge against Hugh de Payens, of having modelledhis new society on the plan of that deadly association,and of having been the chief planner and instigatorof the treacherous attempt on Damascus, wewill suspend the course of our narration, to discussthe probability of that opinion, though in so doingwe must anticipate a little respecting the organisationof the Order of the Temple.Hammer argues an identity between the twoSee p. 88.ISECRET SOCIETIES.orders, as he styles them, or Ic Israelite and theTemplar, from the similarity of their dress, their internalorganisation, and their secret doctrine ; andas the two societies existed in the same country, andthat of the Israelites was first instituted, he infersthat this was the original, and that of the Templarthe copy.First, with respect to the outward habiliment, theiof the order. Nothing, as appears to us, canbe weaker than lo lay any stress on so casual a circumstanceas similarity of forms or colours, moreespecially when a true and distinct cause for theassumption of them on either side can be assigned.The colour of the khalifs of the house of Ommiyahwas white; hence the house of Abbas, in their contestwith them, adopted black, as their distinguishing' hue ;and hence, when the Abbasides were in possessionof the supreme power, all those who, under pretenceof supporting the rights of the family of AU, or on anyother pretext, raised the standard of revolt againstthem, naturally selected white, as the sign of theiropposition. Hassan Sabah,iherefore,onlyrelained theuse of the colour which he found already established.When he harmed the institution of the Fedavee, orthe Denoted to Death, what more suitable mark ofdistinction could he assisi them than a red girdle orcap, which indicated their readiness to spill their ownblood or that of others? With respect to the Templar,the society of the Hospitallers was alreadyexisting when Hugh de Payers and his companionsresolved to form themselves into a new association.The mantle worn by the members of the Hospitalwas black: what colour then was so natural for themto adopt as its opposite, JcAife? and when, nearlythirty years after their institution, the pope appointedfern or gave them permission lo wear u cross ontheir iiiaiiile, like the real ovdev, uo colour couldTSR TBHPtAKS.present itself so well suited to those who daily andhourly exposed themselves to martyrdom, ita that ofblood, in which there was so much of what wassymbolical.With respect to internal organisation, it will, weapprehend, be always found that this is, for the mostpart, the growth of time and the product of circumstances,and is always nearly the same where theselast are similar. The dominion of the Assassins extendedover large tracks of country; hence arose thenecessity of appointing' lieutenants. In like manner,when the Templar got large possessions in the Westand tile East, they could not avoid, after the exampleof the Hospitallers, appointing persons to managethe affairs of the society in different countries.Hence, then, aa the Ismailites had their Sheikh-al'Jebal, with his Uais-al-Kebir of Kuhistan and Syria,so the Templar had their Masler and their Priors ofdifferent provinces. The resemblance is so far exact,but, as we see, easily accounted for. That whichHammer goes on to draw between the componentparts of each society is altogether fanciful. To theKefeek, Fedavee and Lazik of the Israelites, he setsas counterparts the knights, esquires, and serving-brethrenof the Templar. It is needless to pointout the arbitrariness of this comparison. The chaplainsof the Templar, we may see, are omitted, andit wa, perhaps, they who bore the greatest resemblanceto the Refers, while neither knights noresquires had the smallest similarity to the Fedavee.As to a secret doctrine, we shall hereafter discussthe question whether the Templar had one ornot. Here we shall only observe, that the proofof it, and of the ultimate object of the Templarbeing the same with that of the Ismailites, namely,the acquisition of independent power, adduced byHamilcar, is by no means satisfactory, He says$09 8S0ABT 80G1BTIBS.that it was the object of both societies to makethemselves masters of the surrounding country, bythe possession of fortresses and castles, and thus becomeformidable rivals to princes ; and he sees, in thepreceptories or houses of the Templar, the copies ofthe hill-forts of the Ismailites. That such was thedesign of this last society is quite apparent from thepreceding part of our work ; but what resemblance is.there between such formidable places of defence asAlamoot and Lamseer, and the simple structures inwhich a few knights and their attendants dwelt in thedifferent parts of Europe, and which were hardly, ifat all, stronger than the ordinary baronial residences ?and what resistance could the Temple of Londonor that of Paris offer to the royal strength, if putforth ? Hammer has here again fallen into his usualerror of arguing too hastily from accidental resemblances.The preceptories of the Templar were, aswe shall show, the necessary consequence of theacquisition of property by the order, and had nothinghostile to society in their nature.When we reflect on the character of the first crusaders,and particularly on that of the first Templar,and call to mind their piety, ignorance, and simplicity,nothing can appear more absurd than to ascribe tothem secret philosophical doctrines of impiety, imbibedfrom those whose language they did not evenunderstand, and whose religion and manners theyheld in abhorrence, and to suppose that the first poorknights of the Temple could have hed visions of thefuture power of their order, and have looked forwardto its dominion over the Christian world, '' But thisis a common mistake with ingenious men, who are foreverascribing to the founders of empires, religions,and societies, that attribute of divinity which sees fromthe beginning the ultimate end, and forms all its plansand projects with a view to it. It is thus that someTHI! Tempter.would fain persuade us thai Mahomet, iu his solitarycave at Mecca, saw clearly and distinctly theI'ulure triumphs of Islam, and its banners floating' atthe Pyrenees and the Oxus ; that Cromwell, whenan obscure individual, already in fancy grasped thesceptre of England ; and that Loyola beheld themembers of his order governing the consciences ofking's', and niUng an empire in Paraguay All suchresults are in fact the slow and gradual growth ol'time ; one step leads to another, till Ihe individual orthe society looks back with amazement to (he feebleThe Templar and the Ismailites are mentionedtogether by history in only one more relation, that is,on occasion of the tribute paid to the turner by theSyrian branch of the latter, and the murder of theIsma'ilite ambassador above related*. As this actwas very probably committed by onler of the Masterof the Temple, who, it might be, doubted the abilityor the future inclination of the king to pay the 3000banana a j'ear, it testifies but little for any veryfriendly feeling between the Templar and thelamail-iles. Yet Hammer opines that the 3000 byzantawere paid, not as the tribute of the weaker to thestronger, but by way of pension for the secret serviceswhich the Templar were in the habit of renderingtheir cause; such, for example, us refusing on oneoccasion to join in the expedition against the khalifof Egypt, the great head of the society of theAssassins.To narrate the various exploits of the knights ofthe Temple, would be to write the history of the Crusades;for, from the time that the order acquiredstrength and consistency, no action with the Infidelsever was taught iu which the chivalry of the TemplePt^fi lie.3MBSCRET 80CIBT1E5.did not bear a distinguished part. Their war-cry wasever heard in the thickest of the fray, a.ndrj.rely wclsBauseanl seen to waver or give back ia the conflict.Tie knights of St. Juhit fougiil with emulative valour;the example of the rival orders stimulated allparts of the Christian army ; and to this influencemay be, in great measure, ascribed many of the mostwonderful triumphs of the Cross during the twelfthcentury,lit the year 1147, when Pope Genius HI. cameto Paris to arrange the proposed crusade with LouisVII., both the pope and the king honoured with theirpresence a general chapter of the order of the Temple,which was holden at that place. It was probablyon this occasion that the supreme pontiff conferredon the order the important privilege of having masssaid once a year in places lying under interdict. Thenewly-elected Master of the Temple. Bernard deBar, and 130 knights, accompanied the kin on hismarch for the Holy Land ; and their valour and theirskill greatly contributed towards the preservation ofthe crusading army in their unfortunate march throughLesser Asia. The siege of Damascus, which wasundertaken after the arrival of the French and Germankin In the Holy Land, miscarried, as is wellknown, through treachery. The traitors were doubtlessthe PiUlaiiit as the Listens of Syria were called,who were al this time capable of every thing that isbad. Some writers most unjustly charge the Templarwith this guilt; but those who are the bestinformed on the subject make no accusation againstthem. The charge, however, while it shows thepower and consideration of the Templar at thattime, ma '(legefor otheirhal ■e been made.could nn army laid siege in 1153 to the townTRB TBUPLASS.of Ascalon, which the Saracens still held, and wouldhave taken it, but for the cupidity of the Templar.A large heap of wood had been piled by the besiegersagainst a part of the wall, and set tire to. The windblew strong towards the town during an entire night,carrying the smoke and heat into the town, so thatthe garrison was forced to retire from that quarter.The Christians ted the flames with pitch, oil, andother inf]un:)mable substances, and the wall next thepile, cracked by the heal, fell down, leaving a considerablebreach. The army was preparing to enter atthis opening when Bernard de Tremelai, the Masterof the Temple, taking his station at it with his knights,refused all ingress. It was the law of war in those days,among the crusaders, that whatever house or spoilany one took when a town was stormed, became hisproperty. The Templar, therefore, were eager tohave the first choice ; and having kept off all others,Tremelai, with forty of his knights, boldly entered aStrongly-garrisoned town. But they paid the penaltyof their rashness and cupidity; for the garrison surroundedand slew them all, and then closed up thebreach.One of the most disgraceful acts which stain the 'annals of the Templar occurred in the year 1155,when Bertrand Blanchard, whom William of Tyrecalls a " pious and God-fearing man," was Masterof the order. In a contest for the supreme powerin Egypt, which the viziers, bearing the proudtitle of Sultan, exercised under the jihantom-klialifs,Sultan Abbas, who had put to death the khulif hismaster, found himself obliged to fly fi'om before thevengeance of the incensed people. With his harem,and his own and a great part of the royal treasures,he took his way through the Desert. A body ofChristians, chiefly Templar, lay in whit for thefugitives near Ascalon ; the resistance ollJjred by thetW SECRET societies.Moslems was alight and intellectual ; Abbas himselfwas either slaui ur fled, ind liit^ sou Nu!:isir-e{l-deenand the treasures became the prize of the victors.The far Larger part of the booty of course fell to theTemplar; but this did uot satisfy their avarice; andIhiiugh Nassir-ed-deen hid professed his desire tobecome a ChriaUaii, and had hegim, by way of preparationfor that change, to learn the Latin langthey sold lira to his lather's enemies for60,000 pieces of gold, and stood by to see himbound band and foot, and placed in a sort of cage orirou-Jatticed sedan, on a. camel, to be conducted toEgypt, where a. death by protracted torture awaitedlira,Time hospitallers were at this time become as corrupt0!! the Templar; and in this same year, whenthe patriarch demanded from them the tithes whichthey were bound to pay him, they treated the demandwith scorn; raised, to how their superior wealth,stately and lofty building, before the humble churchof the Hilly Sepulchre ; and whenever the patriarchentered it to exhort the people, or pronounce the absolutionof sins,tliey rang, by order of their Master, thebells of the Hospital so loud, that, with the utmostefforts, he could not succeed iu making himselfheard. One day, when the congregation was assembledin the church, the Hospitallers rushed into it inarms, and shot arrows among them as if they wererobbers or infidels. These arruwa were collected andhung up on Mount Calvary, where Christ had beencrucified, to the scandal of these recreant knights.On applying to the Pope Adrian IV. for redress, theSyrian clergy found him and his cardinals so prepossessedin favour of their enemies, — bribed by them, aswas said, — that they had no chance of relief, Theinsolence of the Hospitallers became in consequencegreater thstn ever.■'tHE Templar.In feet, as &n extremely Judicious writer* observes,valiantly as the knights of the spiritual orders foughtagainst the heathens, and great as was their undoubtedmerit in the defence of the helpless pilgrims,it cannot be denied thai these knight were, if not theoriginal promoters, at least active participators in ailthe mischiefs which prevailed in the Holy Land, andthat they were often led to a shameful dereliction oftheir duties, by avarice and thirst alter booty.The year 1163 is conspicuous in the annals of theTemplar, as the date of the bull Omne Datum Optimum,the Magna Charta of the order, and thegreat key-stone of their power. On the death ofAdrian IV. two rival popes were elected, — AlexanderIII. by the Sicilian,— Victor III. by the Imperialparly. The Templar at first acknowledged the latter ;but at a synod, held at Nazareth, in 1 1 G I, they tookthe side of bis rival. Alexander, who came off victor,was not ungrateful ; and on the 7th January, of the followingyear, the aforesaid bull was issued. By thisdocument, which would almost appear to be the dictationof the order, the Templar were released from allspiritual obedience except to the Holy See ; they wereallowed to have peculiar burial-grounds at their houses,and to have chaplains of their own ; they were freedfrom the obligation to pay tithes, and could, with theconsent of the bishop, receive them. It was also prohibitedto any one who had once entered the order,to leave it, unless it were to enter into a stricter one.These great privileges necessarily awakened the envyand enmity of the clergy against the Templar andthe Hospitallers, which last were equally favoured bythe pontiffs ; but these artful prelates, who were nowaiming ut universal jmwer, knew well the advantagewhich they might derive from attaching firmly to themSilken Geschichlo dur Kieuizilge, Vol. iiii. r- 39.I8BCRBT societies,these asBoeiotiona, which united the valour of (heknight to the obedience of the monk, whose member?of the noblest families in Europe, and whoseextensive and spread over all partsof the Christiania world.In 1167 occurred one of the few instances of cowardice,or rather, we raiglit say, treachery, which theannals of the Templar present, America, king ofJerusalem, had committed lo the Tempers the chargeof guarding one of those strong fortified tavernswhich were on the other side of the Jordan. Herethey were besieged by the Turks, and, though theking was hastening to Iheir relief, they capitulated.:;ensed at their conduct, though he was agreat friend of the order, and particularly of theMaster, Philip of Naploos, instantly had twelve of thecowardly or treacherous knights hanged, and he experiencedno opposition whatever on the part of theorder. Philip, we may observe, was the first Masterof the Temple who was a bora Syrian ; hut he appearslo have been a man of fair and honourable character.He was lord of the fortresses of Krak and Montrealin the Stony Arabian, which he had obtained with hiswife. It was not till after her death that he becamea Templar. Alter holding the dignity of Master forthree years he resigned it. The cause of his resignationis unknown ; but he was highly honoured andrespected during tete remainder of his life, and wasemployed on various important occasions.It was during the mastership of PliiUp of Naploos,that King Almeida, at the instigation of the Master ofthe Hospital, and in violation of a solemn treaty,undertook an unprosperous expedition into Egypt.The Templar loudly protested against this act ofperiods, and refused to take any share in the war,either, as William, the honest Archbishop of Tyre,observes, " because it wis against their conscience, orTHE Templar. 209because the Master of the rival order was the authorand projector of it." The prelate seems to regardthe more honourable as the true cause. Perhaps weshould express ourselves correctly if we said that inthis, as in many other cases, duty and prejudice happilycombined, and the path which was the mostagreeable was also the most honourable.In the mastership of Ado of St. Amanda, the successorof Philip of Naploos, occurred the treacherousmurder of the Israelite envoy above narrated * — anact which brought the Templar into great disreputewith pious Christians, as it was quite manifest thatthey preferred money to winning souls to Christ.Page 116.Hei210 SECftBT Societies.'Chapter IV.heroism of the Templar and Hospitallen—Baitle of HittingCrusade of Richard of England and Philip of France—Corruption of the Order — Pope Innocent III. writes a Letterof Censure — Frederic II.— Great Slaughter of the Templar— Henry III. of England and the Templar — Power ofthe Templar in Moravia— Slaughter of them by the Hospitallers— Fall of Acre.The fall of the Christian power in the East wasnow fast approaching, and it was not a little hastenedby the enmity of the rival orders. The truth of theold sentence, that the Deity deprives of sense thosewhom he will destroy, was manifested on this as onso many other similar occasions ; and while the greatand able Saladin was consolidating his power andpreparing for the accomplishment of the object which,as a true Moslem » lay nearest his heart, the recoveryof the Holy City, discord, enmity, and animosity,prevailed among those who should have been actuatedby one soul and by one spirit.Yet the two orders of religious chivalry had notderogated from their original valour, and the lastdays of Jerusalem were illumined by some noblefeats of prowess. On the 1st of May, 1187, whenMalek-el-Afdal, the son of Saladin, was returningfrom an expedition into the Holy Land, which he hadundertaken with the consent of the Count of Tripolis,regent of the kingdom, the Masters of the Templeand of the Hospital, having collected about 140knight and 500 footmen, met the Moslems, who wereTHE TBMFLASS,7,000 in number, at the celebrated root Vision.They iiiimed lately charged them nith the utmost impetuosity;the Turks, according to custom, turnedand fled ; the Christian knighls pursued, leaving theirinfantry unprotected. Suddenly a large body of theTurks emerged from a valley, and fell on and slaughteredthe footmen. Their cries brought back theknights lo their aid, but. impeded by the narrownessof tile ground, they could neither lay their lance inrest nor run llieir horses against the enemy, and allfell beneath the weapons of the Turks, with the exceptionof the Master of the Temple and three ofhis knights, who were saved by the fleetness of theirhorses. The Master of Ihe Hospital was among theslain. In this unfortunate light, James De Mainly,the marshal of the Templar, and a Hospitaller,named Henry, especially distinguished themselves.After all their brave companions had been slainaround them, they still maintained the convict ; theTurks, tilled with admiration of their valour, repeatedlyoffered them quarter, but in vain; and they fellat last, overwhelmed with darts flung from a distance,no one venturing to approach them. The historian,Vinisauf, tells us that De Mainly was mounted on awhite horse, which, juiiied with his relucent arms andwhite mantle, made him appear to the infidels to beSt. George, and they exulted greatly in having slainthe tutelar saint of the Chrbiians. He aids, whatis not an unlikely circumstance, that the Turks coveredLis body with dust, which they afterwards powderedon their heads, thinking Thereby to acquire some portionof his valour.At Ihe fatal battle of Hilton, where 80,000 Christianslost (heir lives, where the king and all hisprinces became captives, and where the Latin powerin Uie East was bmkeii for ever, the Master of theTemple, Gerard of Riilelbrl, and several of hisSBCRIT BOblETIES.knights and those of the Hospital, were among: thecaptives. Saladin, who bore a particular hatred tothe Bpiriluul kni^hla, would spare them on do conditionbut that of their renouncing their faith. To aman they gallantly refused ; and, with the exceptionof the Master, the heads of all were struck off. Manywho belonged not to the orders, smit with desire forthe glory of martyrdom, cast the mantles of Templararound tlkem, and went cheerfully to death as such.One Templar, named Niculaus, evinced such joy andimpatience for this glorious late, that, according tothe irleas of those times, heaven was believed to testifyits approbation by a visible sign, and duringthree nights a celestial light illumined the unburiedcorpse of the Christian martyr.It was Indeed rare tor a Templar to renounce his(kith : prejudice, or honour, we may style it, or abetter principle, always kept him steady in it, whateverthe irregularities of his life might be. Werecollect but one instance of a brother of the Templeabjuring his faith, and he was unhappily anEnglish knight, named Robert of St. Albans. Fromsome assigned cause, he flung away Ihe dress ofhis order, broke his vows, went over to Saladin, andbecame a Mussulman. The .<^u1tan gave him oneof his female relatives in marriage, and the recreantknight appeared before Jemsalemn at the head of anarmy of the infidels. He had promised to Saladinto reduce the Holy City; but her hour was not yetcome; and afler wasting all the country from Mont-royalto Jericho with fire and sword, he was forcedto retreat before the chivalry of Jerusalem, who cameforth with the holy cross, and gave him a signal defeat.Thiseventocciirred iniheyear 1184; and theaposla<:y of this Templar caused extreme dismayamong the Christians, and penciled great ill-willaffoinsl the order in general.THE Temples.Jt Ind hitherto been the maxim of the order, notto redeem any of Iheir members out of captivity withany higher ransom than a. girdle, or a knife, or someother insignificant matter, acting; in this on the sameprinciple with the old Romans, who never redeemedprisoners. The Master, Ado de St. Amanda, haddied in captivity; but to redeem Gerard de Ride-fort,no lass a ransom was given thnn the city ofSeaton, — Gerard died of a wound received in battlethe following year.During the memorable crusade of Philip of Franceand Richard of Eufrtand to the Holy Land, whichtheir rivalry and animosity rendered utterly ineffectual,we find the Hospitallers on the side of theking of England, and of course the Templar thewarm partizans of the king of France. Vet, whenRichland was on his return to Europe, he sent for theMasler of the Temple, and said to him, that he knewby many he was not loved, and that !ie ran great riskof hi); life on his way lo his kingdom; he thereforebesought him thut he would permit him to assume Ihedress of the order, and send two of the brethrenwith him. The Master readily granted the requestof so potent a monarch, and the king went on boardin the habit of a Templar. It was probably on accountof the known enmity of the order to him, thatKing Richard adopted this expedient, thinking thatno one woidd ever suspect him of being with theTemplar. His brother John, we may here observe,was, on the contrary, a great favourer of the order.to whom he gave Lund Island, at the mouth of theBristol Channel. Throughout his reign, this odiousprince attached himself to the Templar as the faithfulservants of his lord the pope, reckoning on their aidagainst his gallant barons, who would nut leave theliberties of the nation at the feet of a faithless tyrant.It was now very much the custom for monarchs toSBCRBT SOOISTIBS.deposit their treasures in the Temple houses ; and inr 1213 we Hud King John demanding 90,000marks which he had committed to the TenipUtrs tokeep. We meet with no instance of breach of truston the part of the knights.The Templar shared in thu common dishonestyofthe church with respect to false miracles, and theyfelt no scruple at augmenting' their wealth by deceptionscalculated k> impose on the ignorance and zealof the laity. In the year 1204 it wus given out thatan image of the Virgin, in a convent not far fromDamascus, had become clothed with flesh, and thatthere issued from ita breasts a kind of juice or liquorof wondrous efficacy in removing the sins of piouspilgrims. As the place was distant, and the road besetwith danger, the knights of the Temple took uponthemselves the task of fetching the mirilic fluid lo thepart of the coast still held by the Latins, and accommodatingpilgrims nith it, und the coffers of the orderwere largely replenished by this pious tragic.Though, like all other proprietors in the Holy Land,the order of the Temple hit been losers in consequenceof the conquest of it by Saladin, their possessionsin the West were so extensive that theyhardly felt the loss. At this very time we find thenumber of their possessions of various kinds inEurope, stated at 7050, principally situated in Franceand in England. Their arrogance and luxury naturallykept pace with their wealth ; and, though writersof the twelfth century, and even the Troubadours —the satirists of the age — always speak of the knights ofthe Temple with honour, there was a secret dislike ofthem gaining ground, especially with the clergy, inconsequenceof the great privileges granted to themby the bull Oinne Datum Optimum, and the insolentmanner in which these privileges were exercised.Accordingly we find, in the pear 1208, the greati Templar.IiLtiocetit HI. the most ambitious of popes, and onenho was a steady friend to the order, utter the necessityof passing the first public censure of them, andendeavouring to set, by authority, a limit to theirexcesses. In his epistle to the Master on this occasion,the holy father says that they abused the privilegeof having mass celebrated in places which wereunder interdict, by causing their churches to be thrownopen, and mass to be said every day, with loud ringingof bells, bearing the cross of Christ on their breast,but not caring to follow his doctrines, who forbids togive offence tii any of the little ones who believe onhim. He goes on to state that, following the doctrinesof demons, they affued the cross of their orderon the breast of (i. e. aj^liated) every kind of scoundrel,asserting thai whoever, by pang two or threepencea year, became one of their fraternity, c-ouldnot, even though interdicted, be deprived of Christianburial; and that hence, known adulterers, usurers,and others who were lying under sentence of inter-diet,were honourably interred in their cemeteries;Olid thus they themselves, being captive to the devil,cease not to make captive the souls of the faithful,seeking to make alive those whom they know to bedead." The pontiff laments, that instead of, likereligious men, using the world for the sake of God,they employed their religious character as a tneaiis ofindulging in the pleasures of the world. Though, onaccount of these and such abuses, they deserved tobe deprived of the privileges which bad been conferredon them, the holy father will not proceed toextremity, relying on the exertions of the Master toeffect a reformation.In this epistle we have all the charges, which, aswill hereafter appear, could be at any time broughtwith justice against the order, whose corruption pro5lG SECRET SOCIETIES.Needed in the ordinary course of human nahire,Ho otherwise, — privileges and exemptions producinginsolence and assumption, and weultli generatingI luxury and relaxation of morals. It was the lavishgenerosity of popes, princes, and nobles, that causedhe ruin of the Templar.Tie Templar bore a distinguished part ti the petitio to egypt and siege of Damietta, in 1219, asthe chief commander on that occasion was Uie papalagate, whose conduct, under show of obedience,they chiefly directed. But when, in 122S, the emperorFrederic II., then under the sentence of thechurch, undertook the crusade which he had vowed,he found nothing but opposition and treachery fromthese staunch adherents of the pope. Consideringthe spirit of the a<i;e, their opposition is, perhaps, notso much to be blamed ; but no principle will excuse(he act of their writing to inform the Egyptian sultanof the plans of the emperor. The generous Moslem,instead of taking advantage of this Treachery, sentthe letter to Frederic, to the confusion of its authors.Frederic checked his indignation at the time, but onhis return to Europe he took his satisfaction on thosewho were most guilty, and he seized the property ofthe order in Sicilian his Italian dominions. ThoughI Be was excommunicated again for so doing, Fredericpersisted in his enmity both to them mid the Hospitallers; and though, perhaps, the least given to superstitionand illiberality of any man of his age, hedid not disdain to make Friendly intercourse withthe Moslems a serious charge i^inst them. " Thehaughty religion of the Templar," writes he, " rearedon the pleasures of the native barons of the land,waxes wanton We know, on good authority, thatSultans and their trains are received with pompousL^Bcrity within the gates of the Temple, and that theTemplar suffer them to celebrate secular plays, andto perfbnn their superstitious rites with invocation ofMahomet."The hostility between the Templar and the Hospitallersstill continued, though the Christian powerowns now nearly restricted to the walls of Acre. TieTemplar were in alliance with the prince of Damascus: the Hospitallers were the friends of the sultanof Egypt. The Templar extended their enmityagainst the emperor to the Teutonic knights, whomthey deprived of their possessions in Syria. Theappearance of a new enemy, however, brought concordfor a time among them. The Turks of Kbau-rim, on the east of the Caspian, were now in flightbefore the hordes of the Mongols, and 20,000 of theirhorsemen burst Into the Holy Land. They tookand plundered Jerusalem, which was unfortified andopen, and then united themselves with the troops ofEgypt, The Christians applied lo the prince of Damascusfor aid, who forthwith sent the required troops,and their combined forces went in quest of the foes.In the battle the Templar and the militia occupiedthe centre ; the Hospitallers were posted on the leftwing, the light horse on the right. The battle lastedtwo days, and ended in the total defeat of the Christians,a result which is ascribed, though probably withinjustice, to the treachery of the Damascenes. TheMaster of the Temple and the whole chapter, withthe knights, in all 300, were slain ; only four knightsand fourteen esquires escaped.The improvident and needy Henry III. of England,in general such a dutiful son of the holy father,who, for a share of the spoil, usually aided him in thepotts work of robbing his subjects, summoned couragein 1252 to speak of seizing some of the propertyof the church and the military orders. " Touprelates and religious," said he, " especially youITempers and Hospitallers, have so many libertiesand charters, that your enormous possessions makeyou rave with pride and haughtiness. What wasimprudently given, must be therefore prudently revoked;and wlmt was inconsiderately bestowed mustbe considerately recalled I will break this andother charters which my predecessors and myself haverashly granted." But the prior of the Templar immediatelyreplied, " What sayeat thou, O king ? Farbe it that thy mouth should utter so disagreeable andsilly a word. So loug as thiiu dost exercise justicethou wilt reign ; but if thou infringe it, thou wiltcease to be a king !" These bold words appear to havechecked the feeble king, who text year besought thetwo orders to become Us security for b large sum ofmoney which he owed. They refused bis request,and Henry thenceforth did them ail the injury in hisThere occurred an event in Moravia in 1252, whichmay see to show the power of the order in Europe.A nobleman, names Vratisluf, who had been obligedto fly from that country, became templar in France.He made over all his properly, among which wasthe castle of Eichhorn in Moravia, 1^ the order.But his elder brother, Burian, took possession of hisproperty, as having fallen to himself as head ofthe fdniily. King Tinsel, on being applied to, decidedin favour of the order. Burian, however, stillkept possession. The nest year the Templar collectedsome thousands of men, and marched, underthe command of their Great Prior, to take the castle.Julian, assembling 6000 men, 000 of whom heplaced in the castle, advanced in give think battle.The engagement was bloody ; 1700 mien, amongthem the Real Prior of the Templar, lay slain, whenuiglit terminated the conflict. A truce was made forthree days, at the end of which Burian and his menL, becameJ took upTu Templar. 219were driven into the castle, which they defendedbravely, till king Attica sent to threaten them witthis wrath if they did not give it up. Burian surrenderedit, and Vratislaf, returning to MoraviaPrior of Eichhorn, in which thirty Templartheir abode.Though the Templar were so extremely nin Europe, they were little disposed to go out to theEast to encounter toil and danger, in the performanceof their duties. They preferred living in ease andluxury on their rich possessions in the West and themembers of the chapter alone, with few knights, andother persons attached to the order, abode in Syria.It would even seem that the heads of the society weremeditating a heal retreat from the East, where theyprobably saw that nothing of permanent advantagewas to be achieved. The Hospitallers, on the otherhand, whatever may have been the cause, Hppe;ir tohave been more zealous in their calling, and to havehad a greater number of their members in Syria;and it is, probably, to this cause, that we are to assignthe total defeat whelp ihey were enabled to give theirrivals in 1259 : for the animosity between the ordershad come to such a height, that, in this year, theycame to open war. A bloody battle was fought, inwhich the Tempers were defeated, when, such wasthe bitterness of their enmity, that the victors madeno prisoners, but cut to pieces every Templar who fellinto (heir hands, and scarce a Templar remained tocarry the intelligence to Europe.Prom this period till the capture of Acre and finaldestruction of the Latin power in the East in 1291,afler a continuance of nearly two centuries, the annalsof the Templar are bare of events. The rivalrybetween them and the other orders still continued ;and in the opinion of some historians, it was theirjealousy that hastened the fall of that last remnant oft20 Secret Societies.the Christian dominion in the East. Not more thanten knights of the Temple escaped in the storm ofthe town, and these, with the remnants of the otherorders, and the garrison, sought a retreat in Cyprus.We have now traced the history of the order fromits institution to within a few years of the period ofits suppression. Of this most important event weshall delay the consideration for some time, andshall occupy the intervening space with an account ofthe intend organisation of the society, its officers,its wealth, and various possessions. This will, wetrust, prove no slight contribution to our knowledgeof one of the most curious portions of the history ofthe world — that of the middle ages — and gratify thereader by the display of manners and institutionswhich have long since passed away*.The organisation and the rules of the Hospitallers weresimilar to uiose of the Templar ; but as that order existeddown to modern times, the nues, &c., given by Vertot^ containa great number of modern additions.THE TBMPL&BB.Cluster V.Close ot the 1\jmp]]in— The Knights— Their QuatiScitioniMile of Reception — Drew and Arms of the Knight —rhode of Burial— Tho Chaplains— Mode of Reception—.press Dutioa and ' Privileges— The Serving-Brethren—todd of Receplion—Theii Duties The Affiliated— CnuaeiBDd Advantages of Affiliation— The Unnoted and OblateH.The founders of the order of the Templar were,LIS we have seen, knights ; and they were the firstwho conceived the novel idea, and happy one, as wemay call it in accordance with the sentiments ofthose times, of uniting in the same person the twocharacters held in highest estimation — the nightand the monk. The latter added sanctity to the former,the former gave dignity and consideration tothe latter, in the eyes of a martial generation. Hence,the Templar naturally regarded himself as the firstof men ; and the proudest nobles of the Christianworld esteemed it an honour to belong to the order.The knight were, therefore, the strength, the flower,the ornament of the society.The order of the Templar, when it was fully developed,consisted not of degrees, but of distinct andseparate classes. These were the knights, the chaplains,and the serving-brethren ; to which may beadded the affiliated, the donates, and the relates, orpersons attached to the order without taking theI, Tie Knights. — Whoever presented himself tobe received as a knight of the order must solemnlyBeset Societies,aver that he vas sprung from a knightly family, andthat his father was or might have been a knight Hewas further to prove, that he nas born in lawful wedlock,for, like the church in general, the Templarexcluded bastards from their society. In this rulethere was prudence, though, possibly, it was merelyestablished in accordance with the ideas of the time;for, had a king of France or an emperor of Germanybeen able to get his natuiikl child into the order, andshould he then have been chosen Master of it, as heprobably would, it might have lost its independence,and become the mere tool of the monarch. The candidatewas, moreover, to declare that he was free fromall previous obligations ; that he was neither marriednor betrothed ; had not made any vows, or receivedany consecration in another order; and that he wisnot involved in debt He had finally to declare himselfto be of a sound and healthy couatittitiou, and freefrom disease. When the order was grown great and]powerful, and candidates for admission were numerousand of (he highest families, it became the custom torequire the payment of a large fee on admission.It was necessary that the candidate for admissionamong the knights of the Temple should already be aa knight ; for as knighthood was a secular honourableorder would have regarded it as derogating from itsdignity if any of its numbers were lo receive it. leeI Hospitallers and Teutonic knights thought differently,and with them the aspirant was knighted on his admission.If the candidate Templar, therefore, had notbeen knighted, he was obliged to receive knighthood,in the usual manner, from a secular knight, or abishop, previous to taking his vows.A noviciate forms an essential and reasonable partof the course of admission Auto the spiritual orders ingeneral ; for it is but right that a person should become,in some meaBU.tc,iic(\wa.\n\.ii'!i\Nvv.\.\Vhft rules andTHE Templar. 223of a society before he cnUrs it. Bui, thoughIhe original rule of the Templar enjoined a novJeiale,It was totally neglected in practice; a matter whichwas afterwards made one of the charges against theorder. Perhaps there was in llieir case little necessityfor this preparatory process ; the Templar were so muchin the world, and those who joined them had been ingeneral so frequently among them, and were consequentlyso well acquainted with their mode ol' life, thatthey hardly required any such preliminary discipline tofamiliarize them with their duties. The neglect ofthe practice at the same time gave the Templar anadvantage over the rival orders who enjoined it; forayoung nobleman would, in all likelihood, feel mostdie-posed to join the society into which he could beadmitted at once ; and perluips no small part of thecorruption of the Templar, in which they undoubtedlysurpassed their rivals, may be ascribed to thefacility which was thus afforded to unworthy personsentering among them.With respect to the Edge at which persons were admitted,it is plain, from the previously required receptionof knighthood, that it must have been that ofadolescence or manhood. All that is said by thestatutes is, that no child could he received; and thatthe parents or relatives of a child destined In be amember of the order, should keep and breed him tillhe could manfully and with armed hand extirpateike enemies of Christ out of the land. This formeda marked distinction between the Templar and themere religious orders, who, even at the present day,we believe, admit children, taking the charge of theirrearing mid education ; whereas, children could onlybe destined to the order of the Temple, and could notbe presented for admission, till able [o hear arms, thatusually in the twenty-first year of their age.pftSBCSET SO OIK Ties.The reception of a knight took place in one of thechapels oi' the order, in presence of the assembledchapter. It was secret, not even the relatives of thecaniliijate being allowed lo he present. The ceremonycommenced by the Master • or prior, who presided,saying, " Beloved brethren, ye see that the majorityare ag-reed lo receive this man as a brother. Ifthere be any amon you who knows any thing ofhim, on account of which he cannot lawfully becomea brother, let him say it ; for it is better that thisshould be signified beforehand than after he isbrought before us''The aspirant, if no objection was made, was thenled into a chamber near tie chapter-room ; and twoor three reputable knights of the oldest in the housewere sent to lay before him what it was needful forhim to know. They commenced by saying, " Brother,are you desirous of being associated to theorder?" If he replied in the affirmative, they statedto him the whole rigour of the order. Should hereply that he was willing to endure everythingfor God's sake, and to be all his life long the servantand slave of the order, they asked him if hehad a wife or was betrothed ? if he had made professionor vows in any other order ? if he owed to anyman in the world more than he could pay ? if he wasof sound body, and had no secret infirmity, and if hewas the servant of any one ? Should his answers be inthe negative, the brethren went hack to the chapter andinformed the Master or his representative of the resultof the examination. The latter then asked once more,if any one knew any thing to the contrary. If allwere silent, he said " Are yoti willing that he shouldbe brought in in God's name? " The knights thenWhen we vte ike word " Matters' we would always be uo-quod to mean thu Muter or his representative.iTHE TBHFLABS. USsaid, " Let him be brought in in God's name."Those who had been already with him then went outain, and asked him if he persisted in his resolution.If he said that he did, they instructed him in whathe was to do when suing for admission. They thenled him back to the chapter, where, casting himselfon his knees, with folded hands, before the receptor,he said, " Sir, I am come, before God, and beforeyon and the brethren, and pray and beseech you, forthe sake of God and our dear Lady, to admit me intojour society, and the good deeds of the order, as onewho will be, all his life long, the servant and slave ofthe order." The receptor then replied, " Belovedbrother, you are desirous of a great matter, for yousee nothing but the outward shell of our order. Itit is only the outward shell when you see that we havefine horses and ride caparisons, that we eat and drinkwell, and are splendidly clothed. From this you concludethat you will he well oiT with us. But youknow not the rigorous maxims which are in our interior.For it is a hard matter for you, who are yourown master, to become the servant of another. Youwill hardly be able to perform, in future, what youwish yourself. For when you may wish to be on thisside of the sea, you will be sent to the other side;when you will wish to be in Acre, you will be sent tothe district of Antioch, to Tripoli, or to Armenia ; oryou will be sent to Apulia, to Sicily, or to Lombardy,or to Burgundy, France, England, or any othercountry where we have houses and possessions. Whenyou will wish to sleep you will be ordered to watch ;when you will wish to watch, then you will he orderedto go to bed; when you will wish to eat, then youwill be ordered to do something else. And as bothwe and you might autfei' great inconvenience fromI that you have, mayhap, concealed from us, look hereSSfi SBCRBT SOClBTtES.on the holy Evangelists and the word of God, andanswer the truth to the questions which ^^e shall putto you ; for if you lie you will be perjured, and maybeexpelled the order, from which God keep you!"He was now asked over again, by the receptor,the same questions as before ; and. moreover, if hehad made any simoniacal contract with a Templar orany other for admission. If his answers proved satisfactory,the receptor proceeded. " Beloved brother,take good care that you have spoken the truth to us ;for should yoii have !ipaken false in any one point,you might be put out of the order, from which Godkeep you Now, beloved roller, attend strictly towhat we shall ssiy unto you. Do you promise to God,and our dear Lady Mary, to be, all your life lone,obedient to the Master cf the Temple, and to theprior who shall be set over you?"Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"'' Do you promise to God, and our dear LadyMary, to live chaste of your body all your life loug ?"Yea, Sir, with the help nf God !"Do you promise to God, and our dear LadyMary, to observe, all your Hie long', the laudablemanners and customs of our order, both those whichare already in use, and those which the Master utdknights may add?"Yea, Sir, with the help of God !"Do you promise to God, and our dear LadyMary, that you will, with the strength and powerswhich God has bestowed on yoii, help, as long as youto conquer the Holy Land of Jerusalem ;that ywill, with allquid to keep and(luaril lliat which the Christians possess?"\ea. Sir, with the help of God !"Do you promise to God, and our dear Ladyiry, never to held this order for stronger or weaker.THE Templar. 227"■*>r better or worse, than with permission of the Muster,or of the chapter which has the authority "?''Yea, Sir, with the help of God !"Do you finally probe to God, and our dearLady Mary, never to be present when a Christian isunjustly and unlawfully despoiled of his herilaite, andthat you will never, by counsel or by act, take parttherein ?'"Yea, Sir, with the help of God !"'* In the name, then, of God, and our dear LadyMary, and in the name of St. I'eter of Rome, andof our father the pope, and in the name of all thebrethren of the Temple, we receive to all the foodworks of the order which have been performed fromthe beginning, and shall be performed to the end,you, your father, your mother, and all of your familywhom you will let have share therein. In like mannerdo you receive us to all the good works which youhave performed and shall perform. We assure youof bread and water, and the poor clothing of theorder, and labour and toil enow,"The Master then took the distinguishing habit ofthe order, namely, the white mantle with the redcross, and putting it about the neck of the candidate,clasped it firmly. The chaplain then repeated theI32d psalm, Ecce quam boiium, and the prayer ofthe Holy Ghost, Dew qui cordajlddiutn, and eachbrother repeated a Pater neater. The Master andthe chaplain then kissed him on the mouth; and hesat down before Ihe Master, who delivered to him adiscourse, of which the following; is the substance.He was not to strike or wound any Christian ; trotto swear ; not to receive any service or attendancefrom a woman vn'thout the permission of his superior;not on any account to kiss a woman, even if• Tlia.t is, never la quit the Older,SBCBET Societies.she was his mother or his sister ; to hold do child atthe baptismal font, or be a gold-father; to abuse noMan or call him foul names; but to be always courteousand polite. He was to sleep in a linen sturt, drawers,and those, and girded with a small girdle. He wasto attend divine service punctually, and at table hewas lo commence and conclude with prayer ; duringthe meal he was to preserve silence. When the Masterdied, he was, be he where he might, to repeat 200Paler nosters for the repose of his soul.Each knight was supplied with clothes, arms, andequipments, out of the funds of the order. His dreg'swas a long white tunic, nearly resembling; that ofpriests in shape, with a red cross on the back andlitmt of it; his girdle was under thb, over his linenshirt. Over all he wore his white mantle with its redcross of four arms (the under one being the longest,so that reassembled thatoii which the Saviour suffered)on the left breast. His head was covered by a cap ota hood attached to his mantle. His arms were shield,sword, lance, and mace; and, owing to the heat ofthe East, and the necessity of activity in combatswith the Turks and Saracens, his arms and equipmentsin general were lighter than those used by the.secular knights. He was allowed three horses andan esquire, who was either a serving-brother of theunder or some layman who was hired lor the purpose.At times this office was performed by yoiiihs of noblebirth, whom their parents aid relatives gladly placedin the service of distinguished knights ot' the Temple,that they might have an opportunity of acquiringthe knightly virtues ; and these otlen became afterwardsmembers of the order.When a knight lead become, from age or wounds,incapable of service, he took up his abode in one ofthe temple-houses, where he lived in ease, and waswith the utmost respect and consideration.SnCBBT Societies.These merit knights are frequently mentioned underthe name of pTodomes (Good men) ; they werepresent at all deliberations of importance ; and theirexperience and knowledge of the rules of the ordere highly prized and attended to.\\ hen the Templar died, he was placed in a coffinin his habit, and with his legs crossed, and thus buried.Masses were said lor his soul his arms and clotheswere partly given Lack to the marshal or draper ofthe order — partly distributed among the poor,Jl. The Chaplains, ^ — The orders the Templar,being purely military in its commencement, consistedthen solely of laymen. That of the Hospital, on thecontrary, on account of its office of attending thesick, had, necessarily, priests in it from its origin.This advantage of Ihe latter society excited thejealousy of the Templar, and they were urgent withthe popes to be allowed a similar privilege. But thepolitics were loth to give offence tn the orientalprelates, already displeased at the exemption fromtheir control granted in this case to the Hospitallers;and it was not till the year 1162, that is, four yearsafler the founding of the order, when their greatfavourer, Alexander III., occupied the papiil throne,that the Templar attained their object.The bull, Omne Datum Optimum, issued on thisoccasion, gave permission tn the Templar to receiveiiilo llieir houses spiritual persons, in all countries,who were not bound by previous vows. If they wereclergy of the vicinity, they were to ask them of thebishop ; and if he refused hb consent, they were empowered,hy the bull, to receive them without it. Theclergy of the Temple were to perform a noviciate ofa year — a practice which, as in the case of the knights,was dispensed with in the days of the power andcorruption of the order. The reception of the clergywas (he same us that of the knights, with theTHB TSMPIABS,of such questions as did not apply lo them. Theywere only required lo take the three vows of poverty,chastity, and obedience. The ritual of their receptionwas in Latin, and was almost precisely the same withthat of the Benedictines. Like that of the knight,their reception was secret. When the psalms hadbeen sung the Master put on the recipient the dressof the order and the girdle, and, if he was a priest,the cap called baret.The habit of the chaplains of the order was awhite close-fitting tunic, with a red cross on the leftbreast. Though, according to the statutes, theywere to have the best clothes in the order, they werenot permitted to assume the white mantle as long asthey were mere priests. But should one of them,as was not unfrequently the case, arrive at the episcopaldignity, he was, if desirous of it, cheerfullygranted that privilege. It was a further distinctionbetween the knights and the chaplains, that the formerwore their beards, while the latter were close-shaven.The chaplains were also to wear gloves, outof respect to the body of the Lord.All who had received 'Hit first tonsure were eligibleto the office of chaplain to the order. When thosewho were only sub-deacons and deacons were tobe raised to the rank of priests, the Master or hisdeputy sent them with letters dimissory to a bishop ofthe vicinity, who was bound to confer the requiredorder.The clergy were, like all other members of theorder, bound to obey the Master and the chapter. TheMaster and the chief officers of the order had alwayschaplains in their train to celebrate mass and other religiousoffices, as also to act as secretaries, the knightsbeing in general as illiterate as their secular brethren.It was by this last office that the chaplains acquiredtheir chief influence in the society; mind and superiors;i4SECRET SOCIETIES.knowledge vindicating, as they always do, their naturalrights. For though it was specially providedthat the clei^y should take no share in the governmentof the society without being invited thereto bytheir superiors, the opinion of the secretary wasnaturally take in general, and if he was a man ofsense and talent, it was most commonly followed*.The duties of the clergy of the order were nearlythe same as those of monks in general. They per-fiirnied all religious slices, and officiated at all thecerciiiunies of the order, such as the admission ofmembers, the installation of a Master, &c. Theirprivileges were very unimportant ; they had merelythe best clothes, sat ucKt the Master in the chapterand in the refectory, and were first served at table;when they committed any offence, they were also morelightly punished them others. They could, however,if it so pleased the heads of the order, arrive at highrank in it ; and we find that they were not unfrequentlyamong the preceptors. The alto rey-generalof the order at Home, who was always a person ofconsiderable importance, was most probably apriestofthe order; at least we know that Peter de Bonnie,the last of them, was such.It worthy of notice, thaleven in the most flourishingperiod of the order it never had a sufficient numberof chaplains, and was always obliged to haverecourse lo the ministry of .secular priests. The causesof this were probably the circumstance of the orderhaving attained its full form and consistency longbefore the clergy formed a part of it, and they convenientlyhad not an opportunity of arranging it so askai^Ulsgeadnat hy Uieadminiunof Veiune&niemWa.''Templar.to give themselves their due share of power andimportance. It must have been filing to the prideof those, who were used to rule, obeying only theirspiritual superiors, to find themselves subject to thecommand of mere laymen, as they esteemed theknights of the order. Further, though they shared iuthe good things of the order and enjoyed the advaa-tau of the consideration in which it stood, yet theyhad no dignities to look forward to; whereas an entranceinto a benedictine order held out lo theambitious a prospect of rich priories, abbacies, andbishoprics, and, at the leiist, a voice in the chapter.It may well be supposed that the pride of the knightsof the Temple refused to admit into their sadetfsuch persons as those who afterwards joined the me'disant orders — peasants and others who preferred a lifeof ease and idleness lo the labours of the plough andthe workshop. The number consequently of thosewho presented themselves for admission urns small.But the knights felt no disadvantage thereby ; enowof secular priests were to be had, who were willing tohave the master of the Temple as their ordinary, andto share in the good things of the order, and as neitherparty was bound to the other, they could easilypart if they disagreed,III. The SEHviNo-BftETHREN. The order, consistingat first of only knights and men of noble birth,had no serving-brethren in it. The knights probablyhound esquires for a limited time among those whofought under their banner and received their pay. TheHospitallers seem to have set the example of introducinginto theonler the chess of serving-brethren, whichis nol lobe found with theTemplars till some time afterthe council of Troyes. The advantage of this alterationwas very apparent. Hitherto only knights and nobleswere interested in the fate of the society to whichtheir relatives belonged ; Ihe regards of burghers and•S36 SECRET SOCIBTms.traders would now be obtained by the formation ofthis class, to admission into which their sons and brotherswere eligible. They felt themselves honouredb; their relatives coming into contact with kiught^and were Therefore liberal in the admission-fee and inother contributions to the quHei of the order.We should be wrong in supposing the serving-brethrento have been all persons of mean birth. The highconsideration in which the order stood induced manymen of wealth, talent, and valour, but who were notof noble birth, to join it. We thus find among theserving-brethren William of Arteblay, almoner tothe king of France ; Radulf de Nisi, collector ofthe taxes in Champagne ; John de Folkay, an eminentlawyer. Bartholomew Bartholin gave propertyto the amount of 1,000 livre 7'ournoi« to be admitted;William of Liege gave 2(i^ iivrea Tournoin a. year.The serving-brother, indeed, could never arrive atthe dignity of knight (for which he was disqualifiedby birth), and consequently never exercise any of thehigher offices of the order, but in other respects heenjoyed the same advantages and privileges as theknights and priests.The reception of the serving-brethren was the sameas that of the two higher classes, the necessary differencebeing made in the questions which were asked.As the order would receive no slave into their body, thecandidate was required to aver that he was a free-boraman : he was moreover obliged to declare that hewas not a knight. This last condition may causesurprise, but it was probably justified by experience,as it is not unlikely that evil may have been felt orapprehended from men of noble birth, out of humility,or by way of atoning for the sins of their youth, orfrom some other of the causes which might operateon the minds of superstitious men, or even from poverty,if, as is likely, the admission-fee was lower forTHE Templar,a serving brother thun for » knight, concealing theirbirth, and entering the order as serving-brethren.Aa Ihe more disagreeable duties of the order probablyfell to their share, the general duties and obligationswere laid before them in stronger and moreexplicit terms than were thought necessary in thecase of knights and priests.In the times of the poverty of the order, theclothing of the serving brethren was the ca-st-ofT garmentsof the knights. But this custom did not longcontinue, and as some abuses arose from all themembers of the order being clad in white, the serving-brethrenwere appointed to wear black or brownkirtles, with the red cross upon them, to indicate thatthey belonged to the order. In battle, their armswere nearly the same as those of the knights, but ofa lighter kind, as they had frequently to jump downfrom their horses, and fight on foot. A serving-brotherwas allowed but one horse by the order, butthe Master was empowered to lend him another if hethought it expedient, which horse was to be afterwardsreturned.The serving-brethren were originally all of onekind; they fought in the field; they performed themenial offices in the houses of the order; but, inafter-times, we find them divided into two classes —the brother-in-arms (Frees sermons des armes), andthe handicraft-brethren ( Frees »ervon» dea mester).These last, who were the least esteemed of the two,dwelt in the houses and nn the lands of the order,exercising their various trades, or looking afler theproperty of the society. We read in the statutes ofthe smiths and bake s of the order, and we hear ofpreceptors (as was the phrase) of the mares, cows,swine, &c. of the order. These handicraft-brethrenpractised the usual religionis duties of the order, andwere even allowed to be present at cheers. Thefurrier, who was &lsn armourer, enjoyed a muchhigher degree of consideration thnn the other hands*craft-brethren, for this profession was highly prizedby the martial generation of the middle ages*.The other class were more highly regarded. Theknights associated with them on afootingof equality.They ate in the same refectory with the knights andpriests, although at separate tables, und with alwaysone dish less than the higher classes. They were,however, strictly subordinate to the knights: themaster and all the gjeatoflieersof the order hod eachseveral serving-brethren to attend him, and eachknight had some of the serving-brethren among hisesquires. The statutes provided carefully againsttheir being tyrannised over or otherwise il-treated bythe knights.The statutes make a distinction between theserving-brethren who were armed with iron andthose who were not. The former were the properlight-horse of the order; they were chiefly intendedto Btipport the knights in the action, and were usuallyplaced in the second rank. The place of the unarmedwas with the baggage; and as they wereexposed to little danger, thi-y wore only linen corslet.The others were enjoined to fight, without flinching',as long as a Christian banner flew on the field: itwas matter of praise to these Inst if they managed tocome safe out of the fight. When the troops of theTemple were on their march, the esquires rode beforethe knights with their baggage. When the knightswere going to action, one esquire rode before eachwith his lance, another behind with his war-horse.There were various offices in the society, hereafterto be noticed, which were appropriated to the serving-brethren,or to which they were eligible.• Sir W. Scott is perfectly correct in making the smith 80important a chatter in tus St, VaUollae's EvbiJTHE Temples. 239The knights, the chaplains, and Ihe serving-brethren,were the proper members of the order, andit is to them alone that Ibe name Templar applies.But both the Templar and the Hospitallers devised amode of attaching Secular persons to their interest,and of deriving advantages from their connexionwith them, in which they were afterwards imitatedby the mendicant orders of the Franciscans and Dominicansthe Jeiiiiils also, who were always bo keenat discerning what might be for the advantage oftheir society, adopted it; and it is, we believe, stiltpractised in Catholic countries. This system ia styledaffirmation.The affiliated were persons of various ranks insDciety,aiul of bath sexeit, who, without giving up theirsecular mode of life, or wearing any peculiar habit,joined the order, with a view to the advantages, bothspiritual and temporal, which they expected to derivefrom it. These advantages will appear to have beenvery considerable when we recnIJect that all whojoined the order were admitted lo a share in themerits of its good works, which were what thosetimes esteemed of the highest order. Nothing couldhave more contributed lo the extent of palliation thanthe exemption which the Templar enjoyed from theelects of interdict. At a time when it was in the]xiwer of every bishop to lay entire towns underthis formidable sentence it must have been highlyconsolatory to pious or superstitious minds (o belongto a society who disregarded this spiritual thunder,and win could afford them an opportunity of utieastoccasionally hearing mass and receiving the sacraments,and secured them, if they should die while theinterdict continued, the advantage of Christian burial.In those day also, when club-law prevailed so universally,and a man's safety depended not so muchon hia innocence or the justice of bis cause aa on thestrength of his part;, it was a mailer of no smallconsequence lo bulonc: to so powerful a body as theTcniplurs, and il must have been highly gratifying |to both the secular and spiritual pride of a lawyer oraburgher to be n member of the same body with thehigh-born soldier-monks of the Temple.These important advantages were not conceded bythe Templar without equivalent considerations. Thisambitious and covetous order required that he whosought the honour of alienation with them shouldbesides taking the three voss, pledge himself to leada reputable life, to further the interests of the orderto the best of his power, and leave it the entire of hisproperty at his death. If he was married, and diedbefore his wife, he might leave her a competent provisionfor life ; but from the day of his admissioninto the order he was to abstain from her bed, thoughhe might continue to reside in the same house withher; for were he lo have children, lie might providefor them to the disadvantage of the order, or ou hiadeath they might give trouble lo it by claiming hisproperty. For a similar reason the affiliated wereForbidden to be sponsors, lest they might covertly oropenly give some of their property to their god-children.They were not even permitted to giveofferings the clergy. If they dared to violate theseinjunctions, a severe punishment — in general, confinementfor life — awaited them.All orders of men were ambitious of a union withthis Honourable and powerful society. We find amongthe alhliaied both sovereign princes and dignifiedprelates; even the great Pope Innocent III., in oneof his bulls, declares himself to stand in this relationto the order. Many of the knights who dwelt withtile Templar, and fought under their banner, werealso affiliated, and the history of the order more thanonce niAkes mention of the siskrs — that i^, womenTHB Temples. 841who were affiliated to it, for there were no nuns ofthe Temple similar to thoi^ of the order of Malta inlater times.In less intimate connexion with the order than theaffiliated stood those who were styled Donates andRelates. These were persons who, as their titlesdenote, were given or presented to the order. Theywere either children whom their parents or relationsdestined to the service of the order when they shouldhave attained a sufficient age, or they were full-grownpersons who pledged themselves to serve the orderas long as they lived without reward, purely out ofreverence to it, and with a view to enjoying its protection,and sharing in its good works. Persons ofall ranks, princes and priests, as well ns others, wereto be found among the relates of the Temple.ISECitT societies.Chapter VI,Pratincei of the Order — Eastern Provinces — Jemsoleia—Houses uf His Province — Tripoli — Antioch — Cyprus —Western Provinces — Putlujjal— Castile nnd Leon — AisgnnFiance bdiI Auver|piB — Nurmaiidy — Aquitaine — Province— England — Gtrmuiy — Upper and Central Italy —Apulia aud Sicily.Wb have thus seen what a number of persons of allranks were more or less intimately connected withthe order of the Temple, and how powerful its intushave been throughout the Christian world.To enable the reader to form some conception of itswealth and power, we shall, previous to explainingits system of internal regulation, give a view of itspossessions in various countries.The extensive possessions of the order of theTemple, in Asia and in Europe, were divided intoprovinces, each containing numerous preceptories ortemple-houses, andeach under its appointed governor.'I'hese provinces may be classified under the headsof Eastern and Western.1'he eastern provinces of the order were, —I. JERUSALEM. — This province was always regardedas the ruling one; the chief seat and capitalof Ihe order. The Master and chapter resided here aslong as the Holy City was in the hands of the Christians.This being the province which was first established,its regulations and organization served as amodel for all others, fts provincial Ma.'iler, or, ua heistyled, the Preceptor of the Land and KingdomTHE TBMPLAHS. 243of Jerusalem, took precedence of all others of IheThe bailiwick, or commaiideries, in this province,1. The Temple of Jerusalem, the cradle of theorder, and (he original residence of the Master anilthe chapter.2. Chateau Pdlerin, or the Pilgrim's Castle, renownedin the history of the crusades. This castlewas built by the Templar in 1217, in order that itniJghl be their chief seat aflcr the loss of Jerusalem.It was situated on the east side of Mount Carmel,which runs out into the sea between Caipha andCaesarea. The Templar bad long tied a lower ata pass of this mountain, called Destruction, at theTower of the i'ass, for the defence of pilgrims againstthe robbers who lurked in the gorges of the mountains.The; were aided in building the castle, whichwas also designed to be a defence to Acre, by WallerDemesnes and by Ibe German knights and pilgrimswho were at that lime in the Holy Land, and hence,perhaps, they called it Chateau T^lerin. The Cardinalde Vitry, who was at that time bishop of Acre,thus describes it. It was built on the promontory,three sides of which were washed by the sea. Asthey were sinking the foundation, they came tn twowalls of ancient masonry', and lo some springs of remarkablypure water; they also found a quantity ofancient coins with unknown inscriptions, given, asthe bishop piously deems, by God to his belovedsons and warriors, to alleviate the toil and expensewhich they were at The place had probably beenfortified in former throes by Ihe Jews or the Romans.The builders raised two huge towers oflarge masses of rock on Ihe landward side, each100 feet high, and 74 broad; these were unitedby a iofly wall, broad enough at its summit forSECRET SOCIETIES.I armed knight to stand at his ease upon it. Itparapet and battlements, with steps leadingup to them. In the spice within this wall were achapel, a palace, and several houses, with fish-ponds,salt-works, woods, meads, gardens, and vineyards.Lying at a distance of six miles I'rom Mount Tabor,it commanded theinterjacentplain and the sea-coast toAcre. There the Master and the chapter took up theirfinal abode, after having dwelt from 1118 to 11B7 atJerusalem, from 1187 to ll&l at Antioch, and fromthis last year till 1217 at Acre. " The chief use,"says Devilry, " of this edifice is, that the whole chapterof the Templar, withdrawn from the sinful city ofAcre, which is full of all impurity, will reside underthe protection of this castle till the walls of Jerusalemare rebuilt." A prophecy never lobe fulfilled ! Onthe fall of Acre, in 1391, Chateau PtSlerin was abandonedby the knights, and its walls were levelled bythe infidels.3. The castle of Safat, at the footof MountTabor.This strong castle eras taken by Saladin. It wasdemolished in 1230, by Coran, but afterwards rebuiltby the Temples, who then held it till 1266,when they lost it finally.4. The temple at Acre, a remarkably strongbuilding, the last place taken in the capture of that5. The hill-fort, Dok, between Bethel and Jericho.6. Fab, the ancient Aphek, not far from litre,in the territory of the ancient tribe of Asbur.7. Some small castles near Acre, mentioned in thehistory of the war with Saladin, such as La Cave,Marie, Citerne-Toiigc, Ctutd-blanc, La Sommelteriedu Temple.8. The house at Gaza.9. The castle of Jacobus-ford, at the Jordan, builtin 1178 by King Baldwin IV., to check the incur*1 took thiscastle, he treated the Templar whom he found in iteth great cruelty.10. The house at Jaffa.1 1. The castle of Assure, near (his town.12. Geriiivm parv'tm.13. The easlle of Beaufort, near Sidon, purchasedby the order, in I3C'0, from Julian, the lord of thatWe may observe that most of these abodes ofthe Templar were strong castles and fortresses. ItwuB only by means of such that possession could beretained of a country lille Palestine, subject to Iheconstant inroads of the Turks and Saracens. TheTemplar possessed, besides these strongholds, largefarms and tracts of land, of which, though their namesare unknown, frequent mention is made in the historyof the order.il. TaiPOLis. — The principal houses of the orderin this province were at Tripoli itself ; Tortoise, theancient Apparatus ; Castel-blanc, in the same neighbourhood;Laodicea, Tyre, Sidon,and Brutus.III. Antioch. — Ofthis province but little is known.There was a house at Aleppo ; and the jurisdiction ofthe prior probably extended into Armenia", wherethe order had estates to the value of 20,000 byz^nts.IV. C'vpnus. — As long as the Templar maintainedtheir fooling: on the continent, Cyprus, it would appear,formed no distinct province, but belonged eitherto that of Tripolis or of Antioch. At the time whenRichard, King; of England, made the conquest of (hisisland, he sold the BOvevcii;nty of it for :ib,000 marksof silver to the Templar, who had already extensivepo.sscBBions in it. The following year, with the consentof the order, who were, of course, reimbursed, he• The Armcninof Io candles was a part of Cilicia.Secret SOCIETIES.transferred the dominion to Guy de Lusignan, Kin;of Jerusalem. On Ihe capture of Acre the chief seatof the order was fixed at Limeaai, also called Limitsand Nemesis, in this island, which town, having anexcellent harbour, they strongly fortified. They hadalso a house at Nicnsia, and one at the ancientPaphos, named Castra, and, at the same place, theimpregnable castle of Colossal.Some idea "f the value of the possessions of theTemplar in Cyprus may be formed from the circumstance,that when, in 1316, after the suppression ofthe order, the Pope directed the Bishop of Limitsto transfer their property there to the Hospitallers,there were found, in the house in that town, 26,000tyrants of coined money, and silver plate to the valueof 1,500 marks. As the last Master, when settingout for Prance ten years before, had carried with himthe treasure of the order, this property must havebeen accumulated during that lime out of the surplusrevenue of the possessions of the order in the island.The Western provinces of the order were —I. PoHTUosL. — So early as the year 1130 (strongproof of the rapid increase of the order) Galton Paz,the first provincial master ol' the Temple in Portugal,built the castles of Tamar, Consent, and Idaiina.The Templar had also settlements at Castromarin,Admiral, and Langrovia. Tamar was the residenceof the great-prior.II. Castile and Leon. — In this province the possessionsof the order were so extensive as to formtwenty four bailiwicks in Castile alone. It is needlessto enumerate their names *.III. Aragon. — In this province, which aboundedin castles, several belonged to the Templar; and thebailiwick of Majorca, where they were also settled.p. 4U.They will be fbuml iu GoiiiponiiD, UDil Minister,THE Templar. 947Was under the jurisdiction of the great-prior ofAragon.It is to be observed that most of the castles possessedby the order in Spain and Portugal were onthe borders of the Moorish territory. Some of thesehad been given to the Templar as the inveterate foesof the infidels ; others had been conquered by themfrom the Moors.France, where the possessions of the order wereso considerable, was divided into four provinces,namely —IV. France and Auvergne, including Flandersand the Netherlands.V. Normandy.VI. Aquitaine, or Poitou.VII. Provence.The residences of the great-priors of these fourprovinces were, for France, the capacious and statelyTemple at Paris, which was, as we are informed byMatthew Paris, large and roomy enough to containan army; for Normandy, as is supposed. La vileDieu en la Montague; for Poitou, the Temple atPoitiers ; for Provence, that at Montpellier.VIII. England. — ^"rhe province of England includedScotland and Ireland. Though each of thesetwo last kingdoms had its own great-prior, they weresubordinate to the great-prior of England, who residedat the Temple of London.The principal bailiwicks of England were — I. London;2. Kent; 3. Warwick; 4. Waesdone; 5. Lincoln; 6. Lindsey ; 7. Bolingbroke ; 8. Whine ;9. Agerstone; 10. York. In these were seventeenpreceptories ; and the number of churches, houses,farms, mills, &c., possessed by the order was veryconsiderable *.The possessions of thoTemplart in England will be foundin the works of Dundalk and Tanner.THB 1e chief seat of the order in Scotland appears tobeen Blancradox, lis possessions were notextensive in that poor and turbulent country ; and inIreland the Templar seem to have been few, andconfined to the Pale. We hear of but three of theirhouses in tlmt country — namely, Glaukhorp, in thediocese of Dublin; Wilbride, in that of Ferns; andSewer, in that kildare.IX. Gebjianv. — It is difflcuk to ascertain how theorder was regulated in Germany, where its possessionswere very extensive. We hear of three great-prints: those of Upper Germany, of Brandenburg,sod of Bohemia and Moravia ; one of whom, but itcannot be determined which, had probably authorityover the others. Though the Templar got lands inGermany as early as the year 113U, their acquisitionswere not lar in that country till the thirteenthcentury. Poland .was included in the province ofGermany. Great-prior in Aiemaniu and Slaviu was ausual title of the great-prior of Germany. Thoughthe possessions of the Templar in Hungary werevery considerable, there are uo grounds for supposingthat it formed a separate province : it was probablysubject to the great-prior of Germany.X. X7pPEa AND Central ItaIiV. — There was notown of any importance in this part of the Italianpeninsula in which the Templar had not a house.The principal was that on the Aventine Hill at Home,in which the great-prior resided. Its church stillremains, and is called li Prioratus, or the Priory.XI. ApULtA AND Sicily. — The possessions of theTemplar in Sicily were very considerable. They hadhouses and lands at Syracuse, Palermo, Trapnni,Bitter, Letting, &c. ; all of which were dependent onthe principal house, which was in Messina. Thegreat-prior resided either at Messina or at [icncventoin Alicia. Possibly the seat waa removed to this lastISBCRBT Societies,place, after the Emperor Frederic 11. bad seized somuch of the property of the order in Sicily.Id Denmark, Norway, ail Sweden, the order hadno possessions whittier. Though the people of thesecumitrie^i Mok some share in the crusades, and were,therefore, not deficient in religious zeal, their poorand little-known lanius offered no strong' inducementsto the avarice or ambition of the knights of theTemple, and they never sought a settlement inthem.We tiuiB see thai, with the exception of the northernkingdoms, there was no part of Europe in which theorder of the Temple was not established. Everywherethey had churches, chapels, tithes, farms, villages,mills, rights of pasturage, of fishing, of venery, andof wood. They had also, in many places, the right ofholding annual fairs, whii;li were managed, and thetolls received, either by some of the brethren of thenearest houses or by their donates and servants. Thenumber of their precepluries is, by the most moderatecomputation, rated at 9,000; and the annual incomeof the order at about six millions sterlings — an enormoussum for those times ! Masters of such arevenue, descended from the noblest houses of Christendom,uniting in their persons the most esteemedsecular and religious characters, regarded as thechosen champions of Christ, and the flower of Christianknights, it was not possible for the Templar, insuch lax times as the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,to escape falling into the vices of extravagant luxuryand overweening pride. Nor are we to wonder attheir becoming objects of jealousy and aversion to boththe clergy and the laity, and exciting the fears andthe cupidity of an avaricious and faithless prince.THE Templar. 253Chapter VII.Officers of ^^The Order — ^^The Master— Mode of Election— HisRights and Privileges — Restraints on, him — ^^The Seneschal—The Marshal— The Treasurer— The Draper— The Turn— Great-Priors — Commanders — Visitors — Sub-marshal— Standard-bearer.An order consisting of so many members, and whosewealth and possessions were of such extent, mustnecessarily have had numerous officers and variousranks and dignities. The elucidation of this branchof their constitution is now to engage our attention.At the head of the order stood the' Master, or, ashewas sometimes called, the Great aster * of theTemple. This personage was always a knight, andhad generally held one of the higher dignities of theorder. Though, like the Doge of Venice, his powerwas greatly controlled by the chapter, he enjoyed verygreat consideration, and was always regarded as therepresentative of the order. In the councils, theMasters of the Temple and the Hospital took precedenceof all ambassadors, and sat next the prelates.All monarchs conceded princely rank and place to theMaster of the Temple.A situation which offered so much state and consignMaistrCf is the almost invariable expression inthe historians, the statutes of the order, and most documents.Magnus Magister was, however, early employed. Terriers,the Master of the order, thus styles himself when writing toHenry II. of England. The term Grand-Master is apt toconvey erroneous ideas of pomp and magnificence to the mindsof many readers.Q251 SECRET Societies,deration miisl, of necessity, have been an abject ofambition ; but the scitiity records remaining of thesociety do not enable iislu point out any specific casesnf intrigue employed for the attainment of it. Thatof the last Master, hereafter to be mentioned, is somewhatprolilematic.The election of a Master of the Temple was asfollows : —When the Masler was dead, bd event which alwaysoccurred in the East, as he was bound to reside there,if it took place in the kingdom of Jerusalem, and themarshal of the order was on the spot, he took uponhim the exercise of the vacant dignity till, with theaid of the chapter and of all the bailiffs on this sideof the sea (i.e. iu the East), he had appointed a great-priorto represent the Master. But this election didnot take place till afler the funeral. Should the deathof the Master have occurred in (lie province of Tripolis,or that of Antioch, the prior of the provincetook the direction of the order till the great-prior wasappointed.Owing to the constant state of war which prevailedin the East, and to other causes, a considerablespace of time occasionally intervened between thedeath of one Master and the appointment of hissuccessor. During the mierregmim the society wasdirected by the great-prior who bore the seal of theMasler.When the day appointed for the election was arrived,the great officers of the order and all the bailiffwho were invited to be present assembled in the placeselected lor holding the election — generally the chapelof the order. The great-prior, taking several ofthe knight aside, consulted with them ; and theythen made two or three or more of the knightswho were most highly-esteemed retire, 'i've great-priortook the voices oi t.\vose ^rcseut on the meritsTlIE Temples. 235of Ihe absent knights ; and he who bad moat in hisfavour was declared the electing prior. The knightswere then called in, and the choice of the assemblyratified to them. A knight, ]>0Esesfiing the samevirtues of piety, love of peace, and impartiality withhimself, was then assigned for an assistant to theelecting-prior : and the whole assemblage withdrew,leaving the two alone in the chapel, where they passedthe eutiie night in prayer.Early next morning, afler performing their usualdevotions and hearing the mass of the Holy Ghost,the chapter re-assembled. The great-prior then exhortedthe two electing brethren to perform theirduty truly and honestly. These, then retiring, thosetwo other brethren ; these four choice two more, andso on, till the number amounted to twelve, in honourof the apostles. The twelve then chose a brother-chaplainto represent the person of Jesus Christ, andmaintain piece and concord. It was necessary thatthese thirteen should be of different provinces — eightof them knights, four serving brethren, and onepriest. The thirteen electors then returned to thechapter, and the electing-prior besought all presentto pray for them, as a great task had been laid onthem. All then fell on their knees and prayed ; andthe great-prior solemnly reminded the electors oftheir duty, and conjured them to perform it truly anduprightly. Having again implored the prayers ofthe assembly, the electing-prior and his companionsretired to the place appointed for their deliberations.If the electors, or the majority of them, declared forany knight oil this or the other side of the sea, hewas appointed J if they were divided into parties, theelecting-prior came with one of the knights, and, informingthe assembly of the circumstance, askedtheir prayers. All fell on their knees, and the twoi256 SECRET SOCIETIES.electors returned to their companions; if they nowagreed, the person whom they chose was declaredMaster.Should the object of their choice be, as was notunfrequently the case, actually present in the chapter,the thirteen came in ; and the electing-prior speakingin their name, said, " Beloved sirs, give praiseand thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to ourdear Lady, and to all the saints, that we are agreed,sand have, according to your command, chosen, inthe name of God, a Master of the Temple. Are yecontent with what we have done?" All then replied," In the name of God !" " Do ye promise toyield him obedience as long as he lives?" " Yea,with the help of God'* The electing-prior thenturned to the great-prior, and said, " Prior, if Godand we have chosen thee for the Master, wilt thoupromise to obey the chapter as long as thou live, andto maintain the good morals and good usages of theorder*' and he answered, " Yea, with the aid ofGod !" The same question was then put to some ofthe most distinguished knights ; and if the personelected was present, the electing-prior went up tohim, and said, " In the name of the Father, theSon, and the Holy Ghost, we have chosen you brother,N. N., for Master, and do choose you !'' Hethen said, " Beloved sirs and brethren, give thanksunto God ; behold our Master' The chaplains thenchanted aloud the Te Deem laudanum the brethrenarose, and, with the utmost reverence and joy, takingthe new Master in their arms, carried him into thechapel, and placed him before the altar, where hecontinued kneeling while the brethren prayed, thechaplains repeating Kyrie Ellison, Pater noster andother devotional forms.The election of the Master of the Temple requiredTriB TBMPLARS. 33?DO papal confirmation : the choice of the chapterwas conclusive. Two knights were assigned to himas his companions.The allowances and train of the Master were suitableto the rank which he was to support in theworld, and to the dignity of the order which !ie represented.He was allowed four horses, and an esquireof noble birth. He had a chaplain and two secretariesi one for managing his Latin correspondence,whom he might, after a, time, admit to become aknight of the order ; the other, who was called hisSaracenic secretary, and who was probably an easternChristian, for canning on his Arabic correspondencewith the Infidels. He had, moreover, a farrier,a cook, and a Tnrcopole*, two footmen, and aTurcoman % to serve as guide. On a inarch, theTurcoman rode on a horse behind an esquire : duringthe lime of war he was led by a cord, to prevent hisescape. On any ordinary journey, the Master mighttake two beasts of burden with him ; but in war-time,or in case of his going beyond the Jordan, or theDog's Pass, he might extend the number to four,which the statutes thriftily direct to be put into thestable when he arrives at the house where he is goingto stop, and to be employed in the service of thehouse. The Master was finally commander-in-chief• The Tutcopolea wbm the offspring of a Turkish father,by a Christian mother; ur also these who hail been rentedumoii); thu Turks, ai hod learned their motu of iij^htiag.The Chriglianiieinpluyed them as light cavity; and UwTem-pliira had always a number of them in their pay.f The TurconUinE were, a> their name denotes, born Turks.The Christiana used them as guides ou their expeditions.I Le pah lie eaten. Minister (p. TiG^ declares his iguoiBUeeof where it lg.y. It WM evidently the dangerous pass at theMahi-el-Kelb, ( Dvg'i River), near the tea, on the wKf to258 SECRET SOCIETIES.of the order in the field ; and then, like the Spartankings, he could act in some degree unfettered by thechapter. When he died, he was buried with greatsolemnity and pomp, by the light of torches and waxtapers — an honour bestowed by the order on no otherof its members. All the knights were required toattend the funeral ; and the prelates were invited togive their presence at it Each brother who waspresent was to repeat 200 Pater nosters within sevendays, for the repose of the soul of the deceased ; and100 poor persons were fed at home in the evening,with the same design.On the other hand, the Master was bound to obeythe chapter ; and he could do nothing without consulting:some of the brethren. He could not nominateto any of the higher dignities of the order; but hemight, with the advice and consent of some of themost reputable knights, appoint to the inferior prioriesand preceptories. He could not sell, or in any otherway dispose of, any of the lands of the order, withoutthe consent of the chapter ; neither could he makepeaceor truce without their approbation. Their consentwas also required to enable him to make anyalteration in the laws of the society, to receive anyperson into it, or to send a brother beyond sea. Hecould take no money out of the treasury without theconsent of the prior of Jerusalem, who was thetreasurer of the society. In fact, the Master of theTemple was so curbed and restrained in every way,and his office made so much an honorary one, thathis dignity may best be compared with that of aSpartan king or a Venetian doge. It is rather curiousthat the Master of the Temple should be thus limitedin authority, when the abbot of the Benedictines,whose rules the Templar in a great measure adopted,enjoyed monarchical power.Tir Templar. 239Next in rank to Ihe Master stood the Fenescliiil, ivlio,Bs his name defiles*, was the Muster's reiircsonla-live and lieutenant. He had ii right to be ]presentat all chapters of [he orders and to be acquaintedwith all Injections of consequence. He was allowedthe same number of horses as the Master ; but, in-steal of « muse, he wits to have o palfrey : he badtwo esquires, and was assigned a knight us his com-paniim ; ai deacon acted as bis chaplain and Latinsecretary; he had also a Saracenic secretary and aTurcopole, with two footmen. Lilies the Muster, liebore the seal of ibe order.The marshal was the general of the order; hehad charge of the banner, and led the brethren(o battle. All the arms, equipments, and stables ofthe order were under his superintendence. It washe who nominated the sub-marshal anil the standardbearer.Like all the other great officers, he wasappointed by the Master and the chapter. As wehave seen, when the Master died in the kingdom ofJerusalem, the marshal occupied his place till a great-priorwus chosen. Time marshal wis allowed fourhorses, two esquires, a seeing brother, and a TurnThe office of treasurer of the order was alwaysunited with the dignity of preceptor of the kingdomof Jerusalem. This officer had the charge of allthe receipts and expenditure of the order, of whichhe was hound to give an account, when required, tothe Master and the chapter. The wardrobe of theorder was also under him ; and the draper was assignedas his companion, without whose knowledgehe could not dispose of any of the clothes. As theships, though few in number, which theTemplurspossessed, were under him, he may be regarded as,Beneficial U one qui aUeriui rici-m peril. CharpcnlierSupple, od Dufreane Ulosi. iii. p. 759.i260 Secret SOCIETIES.also, in some sort, the admiral of the order ; and onthis account the preceptor of Acre was subordinateto him. The treasurer had the same allowance ofhorses, &c. as the seneschal.The draper had charge of the clothing of theorder : he was to see that each brother was decentlyand properly dressed. His allowance was four horses,two esquires, and a pack-servant.The Turcopilar was the commander of the lighthorse. All the armed serving-brethren and the Turnwere under his command. He was himselfsubordinate to the marshal. When he was goinginto action, some of the knights were sent with him.These were under his orders ; but if their numberamounted to ten, and they had with them a bannerand a knight-preceptor, the Turcopilar became subordinateto this officer ; which proves that the officeof Turcopilar was not one of the higher dignitariesof the order. The Turcopilar was allowed fourhorses.Besides these offices of the order in the East,there were the great-priors, great-preceptors, or (for the terms are synonymous) ofthe three provinces of Jerusalem, Tripolis, and Antiochand the preceptors, who were subordinate tothem.The great-prior of the kingdom of Jerusalem wasalso treasurer. His office has been already noticed.The great-priors of Tripolis and Antioch had thesuperintendence over the brethren and the possessionsof the order in these provinces. They had the sameallowances of attendants and horses as the seneschal.The prior of Antioch, when on a journey to Armenia,which bordered on his province, and in whichthe order had possessions, was allowed to takewith him a chaplain and a portable chapel, as theArmenians were monoph^svt^ heretics with whomTHE Templar. 2BIthe orthodox brethren of the Temple could not joinin worship.The prior of the town of Jerusalem had peculiarduties to perform. It was his office, with ten knightswho stood under his command, to escort the pilgrimson their way to and from the Jordan— one of theprincipal objects of the institution of the order. Onthis occasion he had with him the banner of the orderand a round tent, into which he might take any personswhom he should Rod sick when he encamped ;he was also to take with him provisions, and beastsof burden on which to place such of the pilgrims asmight be fatigued on the return.When the true cross was brought forth on any expedition,it was the duty of the prior of Jerusalemto keep by it, with his len knighls, night and day,and to guard it ; he was to encamp close to it ; andtwo brethren were to watch it every nigh.All the secular knights who associated themselvesto the under in Jerusalem were under his orders, andfought beueulh his banner. All the brethren of theorder who were in Jerusalem were, in the absence ofthe marshal, under his command. One half of thebooty captured beyond the Jordan fell to him, theother h^' to the prior of the kingdom.As we have seen above, the West was, like theEast, divided into provinces of the order. Each ofthese provinces was presided over by a lieutenant ofthe master, named the provincial-master, great-prior,or great-preceptor, with bis chapter and officers correspondingto those of Ihe kingdom of Jerusalem.He was appointed, ss it would appear, by the Masterand chapter; and when entering on his office, hebound himself by oath to defend the Catholic religion,not only with his hips, but with arms aud allhis strength ; to follow the rules drawn up by St. Bernard; to obey the Master; to come over the sea to hisSECRET SOCIETIES.ail whenever it was necessary ; to defend him n^inatall unbelieving kings and princes; not to fly beforethese unbelieving foes; not to [alienate the goods ofthe order; to be loyal lo the prince of the country;to be chaste ; and to aid all spiritual persons, especiallythe Cistercians, by wordii and by deeds.Under the provincial-masters stood the priors,bttililfs, «■ masters, who governed larjre district ofthe provinces, and had under their inspection severalof the houses of the order and their preceptors.They dwelt in large temple-houses, with a goodnumber of knights ; they had the power of holdingchapters, and of receiving members into the order.The preceptors were subordinate to the priors ;they presided over one or more houses. They weregenerally knights, but they were sometimes priests.They were of two kinds — ho use-preceptors andknight-preceptors ; the former, as their name defiles,merely presided over the houses, and might priestsor serving-brethren; the latter, who were probablyonly to be found in the East or in Sown, led eachten knights in the battle.Another office to be fotuid among the 'Templarwas that of visitors. These were knights, who, aathe representatives of the Master, visited the differentprovinces of the order, especially in the West, to reformabuses, make new regulations, end terminatesuch disputes and law-suits as were usually reservedfor the decision of the Master and the chapter. Allthe provincial officers, even the great priors, were subjectto the visitors, as the representatives of the Master.The powers of the visitors ceased as soon aathe business ended for which they were sent, or whenthey were recalled.Besides the foregoing offices, which were almostexclusively confined to the kiiighls, there were someinferior ones appropriated lo the serving-brethren.264 SECRET SOCIETIES.These oflBoM were five in number — namely, those ofsub-matehfti) lilandard-bearer, farrier, cook, and preceptorof tbfe coast of Acre. Each of dies wasallowed two horses.The isub-marshai had the charge of all the inferiorsort of accoutrements {Je petit harnbU) of the order,in which the horse-furniture s^ifettiB to halm heisk included.All the handlcraflsiheti df the ordeal #^reunder him, and were dbli^d to account to him fortheir work. He supplied them with the needful toolsand materials; could send them where he pleasedon the service of the house ; and on holidays givethem permission to go from one house to another toamuse themselves. The sdb-marshal and the standard-bearerwere each the representative of the otherin his absence.The standard-bearer hud the command over allthe esquires of the house ; that is, those who were engagedfor a limited time in the service of the order,whom he was bound to make acquainted with therules to which they were subject, and the punishmentsto which they were liable in case of disobedience ;he was also to pay them their wages. Wheneverthe esquires took the horses out to graze, he wasbound to precede them with a standard of the order.He always presided at the table of the serving-brethrenand esquires. When the order was marchingto battle, it was his task to ride before the standard,which was borne afler him by an esquire, or carriedon a wain*; he was to lead whithersoever the marshaldirected him. When the battle commenced,those esquires who led the horses of the knightswere to combat behind their masters ; the otherswere to take the mules on which their masters rode,and remain with the standard-bearer, who was toThe Carroccio ol tie Italian republics.THE Templar. 265have a banner rolled about his lance, which, whenhe saw the marshal engaged in action, he was tounfurl, and draw up the esquires in as handsomeorder as possible behind the combatants, in order tosupport them.The serving-brethren were eligible td the office ofhouse-preceptor; but there was this distinction madebetween them and knights who held that office, that,the serving-brethren being allowed but one horse,their esquire was a serving-brother. As Acre wasthe sea-port at which all the shipments of the orderto and from Europe took place, the preceptory therewas necessarily an office which entailed a good dealof toil and business on the person who held thatsituation, and required a knowledge of commerceand of the affairs of the world. It was thereforenot considered suitable to a knight, and was alwaysgiven to a serving-brother. The serving-brethrenwere also set over the various farms and estates of theorder. These were named the brother-stewards, — inLatin, grangiarii and preceptors grangiaruTriy —and were probably selected from the craftsmen ofthe order. They were allowed two horses and anesquire.SECRET Societies.Such as we have described them were the members,the possessions, and the various tiffiucs of the powerfulsociety of the Temple.' In order to complete nileview, it only remains to trncc its internal governmentand most important regulations. We shall thereforecommerce with ati account of the chapters, fromwhich all the acts nnd rules of the society emanated.It is frequently declared in the states, that theMaster was in Ihe place of God; and that all hiscommands were to be obeyed as those of God. Butthese expressions, which were borrowed from therule of the Benedictines, are, as we have alreadyseen, not to be understood too literally; for Iheconstitution of the order of the Templar was aristocratic,and not monarchic; and the Master wasanything hot absolute. In every matter he was to beguided by the opinion of the majority of the chapter.The general chapter, or high legislative assemblyof the order, consisted of all the great officers, of the(ireiit-priors of the provinces, and the most distinguishedof the koighlB who could atieiid. Everybrother, even the lowest of the serving-brethren, wasat liberty to be present as a spectator ; but only theproper members of the chapter had the privilege ofspeaking. The place of holding (he choler was undetermined,and was left to the choice of the Master.All laws and regulations were made or confirmed inTHE Tempters,the general chapter : there brethren were received —the fiireai officers appointed — visitors chosen to besent to the different provinces. It is remarkable,that a papal legate never seems to have been presentat a chapter of the Templar ; though the legates frequentlyassisted at those of the other orders. Thisis, most probably, to be ascribed to the secrecy inwhich the Templar were pleased fo envelope theireouneilfi and proceedings; and as they rarely heldgeneral chapters, a suitable pretest could not well bewanting for freeing themselves from the presence ofthe legate when they desired it. Those who imputeto the Templar the holding of a secret doctrinenaturally regard this as the cause oF their not admittinglo their chapters those who were not initiatedin it.A general chapter was not often assembled — a circumstanceeasily to be accounted for. Though theorder was wealthy, it might not be well able lo bear,without inconvenience, the expense of deputies fromall the provinces journeying to the kingdom of Jerusalem,where the chapters were in general held ; andfurther, it was obviously the interest of the Masterand the great officers to avoid assembling a bodywhich would at once assume the powers which theywere in the habit of exercising.In the intervals between the meetings of generalchapters, the powers of the. order "ere exercised bythe chapter of the Temple at Jerusalem. This wascomposed of the Master, the dignitaries of the order,such of the provincial masters as happened lo bepresent, the two assistants of the Master, and suchknights as he chose lo invite to it. This last proveaa the great source of the Master's power ;ind, when he was a man of talent aud address, he[ould, by managing to get his friends and thosen he could depend ou into the different offices,268 SECRET Societies.and by summoning to the chapter such knights aswere attached or looked up to him, contrive to carryany matters that he desired. The laws, however, bywayof check upon him, made it imperative that thehigh officers of the order should have seats in thechapter; and as these were not appointed by theMaster, and were independent of him, it was sunposed that they would not be his creatures. Thischapter could decide on all matters relating to theorder, some important affairs, such as war andpeace, excepted ; make laws, and regulations whichwere binding on the whole society ; and send visitorsto the different provinces. All public documents,such as papal bulls, were addressed to it and theMaster ; all decisions in matters of importance camefrom it ; and all the brethren who were received inthe West were sent to it to be distributed wherethey might be wanting. The declaration made by aFrench knight on his examination, that the receptionsin the chapter of Jerusalem were rare, as themembers could be seldom brought to agree respectinga candidate, gives a hint that it was not in generala scene of the greatest harmony and unity. It is,indeed, but natural to suppose, that, as it was the chiefseat of the power of the order, it was also the greattheatre of intrigue and cabal.Each province of the order had its general chapter,and also a smaller one, presided over by thegreat-prior, and composed of the principal officersand such knights of character and estimation as theprior chose to call to it. In like manner every preceptoryand every large house of the order had itschapter, at which all the brethren were required toattend. The commander was president, and eachquestion was decided by the majority of voices. Thechief transactions in it consisted in the reception ofnew brethren, and the making up of quarrels anddisputes, which must have frequently fallen outamon men like the Templar, who were almost allsoldiers. It was holden early on a Sunday morning ;and the strictest secrecy, as to what took place, wasenjoined on all present, for secrecy was ike soul ofike order.The ordinary chapters were held in the followingmanner. Each brother, as he entered, made the signof the cross, and, unless he was bald, took off his cap.The president then rose and said, " Stand up, belovedbrethren, and pray lo God to send his holy graceamong us to-day." Each member repeated & paternoster, and, if there was a chaplain present, he saida prayer. Search was then made to see that therewas no one present bnt those who belonged to theorder. The president then delivered a discourse,exhorting the brethren to amendment of life. Duringthis discourse no one was on any account to leavethe room. When it was ended, any one who hadtransgressions to acknowledge weil up to the presidentand made confession. He then retired out ofsight and hearing, and the sentiments of the assemblywere taken, which were afterwards signified to him.The brethren were also to remind each other oftheir transgressions, and exhort to confession andpenitence. If any one accused a brother falsely, hewas severely punished for it : while the inquiry wasgoing on the accused was obliged lo retire from thechapter. The discipline was usually administered inpresence of the assembled chapter, with a scourgeor with a girdle. Those who were sick were ncpunished till they were recovered.When these matters were over, the president eiplanned a portion of the statutes, and exhorted allpresent to live suitably thereto. He then said,Beloved brethren, we may now close our chapterfor, praise be to God, all is well; and may God andSECRET SOCIETIES.our dear Lady grant that it may so continue, findgoodness be every day increased. Beloved brethren,ye must know how it is with pardon in our chapter,and who has not part (herein ; know, then, that (hosehave no pari either in the pardon of our chapter,or in the other ;sod works of ths chapter; wholive as they should not; who depart from the righteousnessof the order; who do nut acknowledge theiroffences and do penance in the mode prescribed byIhe order; who treat the alms of the order as theirown properly, or in any other way contrary to law,and squander them in an unrighteous, scandalous.and foolish manner. But those who honestly acknowledgetheir faults, and conceal nothing out ofslime or fear of the punishment of the order, andare right sorry for their transgressions, have a largeshare in the forgiveness of onr chapter, and in thegood ivorks which take place in our order. And losuch, in virtue of my authority, I dispense forgivenessin the name of God and of our dear Lady, in thenames of the apostles Peter and Paul, of our fatherthe pope, and of youallwhohave given me authority ;and pray to God thai, according to his mercy, hewill, for the merjis of his mother, and of himself,and all the saints, forgive you your sins, as he bravethe famous Mary Magdalene." He then imploredthe forgiveness of those to whom he mighthave given any oti'ence or done any injury ; and prayedfor peace, for the church, for the holy kingdom ofJerusalem, for the older and all its houses andpeople, for the brethren and sisters of Ihe order, andfor its living and dead benefactors; finally, for allthe dead who waited for the mercy of God, especiallythose who lay buried in the Temple burial-grounds,and for the souls of the fathers and moliere of theTemplar. The chaplain, if present, repeated a confessionof sin, in which all followed him, and thenITTHS TEMFLABS.pronounced an absolution. If there was no chaplainpresent, each brother repealed u jiaier and an ave,and so the chapter ended,The statutes of the order are full of the mostminute directions respecting the equipment, clothing,and mode of living of the various members of theorder. They were obliged to attend divine servicepunctually each day at all the different hours atwhich it was celebrated, and regularly to observe allthe fasts of the church; they were also to have attheir houses both public and private devotions. Theirmeals were also strictly regulated. They assembledby sound of bell; if there was a priest in the househe said grace for them, if not, each brother repeateda pali before he began to eat. During the meal aclergyman read out something edifying for them,and when it was over no one was to speak till gracewas said. There was no difference made in thei|Uidily of the food; all, both high and low, faredalike, and they ate two off one plate, 'ITiey hadtlcsh-meat hut three times a week, unless when festivaldays occurred. On days when they had no flesh-meatthey had but two dishes. When the order werein the field a server regulated the supply and distributionof provisions. Before giving out the provisionshe was to direct (he serving brethren to notify it tothe superiors of the order, that ihey might come andselect the best for themselves; he distributed theremainder without any other distinction than that ol"giving the beat to the sick. The plate given to everytwo of the brethren was su large that what reuiaiued(when they were done was sufficient ta satisfy two ofthe poor. Two brethren were allowed as much foodas three Turcopoles, and two of these as much asthree of the servants. The brethren were not allowedto seek for any food elsewhere thnn from the servir,vegetables, game, and venison excepted. But as hyiSBCRBT SOCIETIES,he rules of the order the chase was prohibitedo tticiu, they could not procure these themselves.Aniuscmenls could not be rigorously prohibited tonen who were Semi-secular, and bad to mingle somuch in the world as the Templar. They weretherefore allowed to tilt, but only with headlesslances; whether only ainong themselves, or also atpublic tournaments, is uncertain*. They were permittedto run races with their horses, but for nohigher wager than a headless cross-bow bolt, orother trifle. Chess and draughts were prohibitedframes; nor were they allowed to play atany other game whatever ibr a stake, Hawkinswas absolutely forbidden lo Ihe Templar, probablyon aecoiint of the high price of hawks, and ofthis being the favourite amusement of the secularknights. The reason assigned by the Statutes is. —Because it is not seemly in the members of anorder to play sinfully, but willingly to hearken to thecommands of God, to pray open, and daily in theirprayers before God lo bewail their sins with weepingand tears." A Templar might not even accompanyone who was going out a-hawking. Moreover, asshouting and bawling were unseemly in a memberof an order, he might not go a-hunting in a woodwith bow and crossbow, nor accompany any one thusengaged, except to protect him against the heathen.In fine, every species of chase was forbidden to [heTemplar, except that of the lion ' who goes aboutseeking whom he iiiaydevour, whose tend is againstevery one, and every one's hand against him't,''The battle was the Templar's scene of glory, andSLrW.Scolt would probably find some difficulty in justifyinghJH makiDgh^B Templar accept the combat a outrage atIa " gentle und feu jiaHiage of Tabby de U Boucher."It Ib not clem whmhei this a lo be uiideistooil literalmetaphorically, -THE Templar. 273consequently every thing relating to the conduct ofthe order in war was strictly regulated. On themarch the Templar, as the guardians of the holycross, formed the vanguard of the Christian army;in the array they were in the right wing. TheHospitallers usually formed the rear-guard, and inthe field were posted on the left. The Templarmounted and set forward at the voice of their marshal,the standard-bearer preceding them with thestandard of the order. They moved in a walk or asmall trot. The march usually took place by night,on account of the heat of eastern climes, and everyprecaution was adopted to prevent confusion or inconvenience.When the standard halted for encampment,the marshal .selected a place for his owntent and the chapel, which was to contain the truecross ; the tents of the server, and of the great-priorof the province, had also their places marked out.It was then cried out, " Brethren, pitch your tentsin the name of God !" on which each Templar forthwithraised his tent in his rank. All the tents werearound the chapel, outside of its cords. The heraldpitched by the standard. No brother was allowed,on any account, to go out of hearing of the war-cry,or to visit the quarters of any others than the Hospitallers,in case these last should be encampedbeside them. The place for encamping was selectedby the prior of the province in which the warwas, who was therefore in some sort quartermaster-general; the marshal assigned the different quarters,and over each he set a knight-preceptor to governand regulate it.When the battle commenced, the marshal usuallytook the standard out of the hands of the sub-marshaland unfurled it in the name of God. Hethen nominated from five to ten of the brethren tokat SECHBT Societies.Bumiund and guard it ; one nf these he mode aknight-preceptor, who was to keep close by him witha lanner furled oil a. spear, that, in case of that welchthe marshal carried being torn, or having' fallen, ormet with any other mishap, he might display it. Ifthe marshal was wounded or surrounded, this knightwas to raise the banner in his stead. Nu one was tolower a banner, or thrust with it, on any account,forbear of causing confusion. The brethren were tofight on all sides, and in every \yay in which iheycould annoy the foe, but still tu keep near enough tobe able to defend the banner of the order, if needftiJ,But if a Templar saw a Christian in imminent danger,he was at liberty to follow the dictates of his conscience,and hasten to his relief. He was to returnto his place as speedily as possible ; but if the Turkshad gotten between him and the banner, he was tojoin the nearest Christian squadron, giving the preferenceto the Hospitallers, if they were at hand.Should the Christians meet with defeat, the Templar,under penalty of expulsion from the order, was not toquit the field so long as the banner of the order flew;and, should there be no red-cross slag to be seen, hewas to join that of the Hospitallers, or any other.Should every Christian banner have disappeared, hewas to retreat as well as he could.Such were the military principles of the order ofthe Temple — principles which,instead of rage,Dclibcote valour breathed, firm aod unmovedWith iliad uf death la flight oi foul retreat ;and never, unquestionably, was more unflinchingvalour displayed than by the Templar, Where allwere brave and daring as the fabled heroes of romance,the Templar was still regarded as prominent,and the Cardinal of Vitry could thus speak of them iuTHE Templar. 275the early part of the thirteenth century, when theymay be regarded as somewhat declined from theiroriginal elevation : —'^ They seek to expel the enemies of the cross ofChrist from the lands of the Christians, by fightingmanfully, and by moving to battle at the signal andcommand of him who is at the head of their forces,not impetuously or disorderedlyy but prudently andwith all caution — the first in advance, the last inretreat; nor is it permitted to them to turn theirbacks in flight, or to retreat without orders. Theyare become so formidable to the adversaries of thefaith of Christ, that one chases a thousand, and twoten thousand ; not asking, when there is a call toarms, how many they are, but where they are : lionsin war, gentle lambs at home ; rugged warriors onan expedition, like monks and eremites in thechurch." The language of the worthy cardinal isno doubt declamatory and rhetorical, and some deductionmust consequently be made from it; butstilt enough will remain to prove that the chivalry ofthe Temple must still have retained no small portion•of the virtues for which they had been originally renowned.si276 SECRET SOCIETIES.Chapter IX.Molay elected Master — last attempt of the Christians inSyria — Conduct of the Three Military Orders — ^Kiilip theFair and Pope Boniface VIII. — Seizure of the Pope —Election of Clement V. — The Papal See removed to France—Causes of Philip's enmity to the Templar — Arrival ofMolay in France — His interviews with the Pope — Chargesmade against the Templar — Seizure of the Knights — proceedingsin England — Nature of the Charges against theOrder.We have, in what precedes, traced the order of theTemplar from its institution to the period when theLatin dominion was overthrown for ever on the coastof Syria, and have described, at some length, its internalorganisation, and exhibited its power and extentof possessions. It remains for us to tell how thismighty order was suddenly annihilated, to examinethe charges made against it, and, as we have promised,to establish the falsehood and futility of them —a task far from ungrateful, though not unattendedwith pain ; for it is of advantage to strengthen our loveof justice and hatred of tyranny and oppression, byvindicating the memory even of those who perishedtheir victims centuries agone. It is also of use tofurnish one instance more to the world of the operationof the principle which will be found so generallyThe proceedings against the Templar have been publishedfrom the original documents by Mowdenhaler, in Germany; but the work has been bought up by the freemasons,who fancy themselves descended from the Templar, so thatwe have been unable to procure a copy of it. Wilike has,however, extracted largely from ittTHE Templar. 277to prevail, that, let falsehood and sophistry exerttheir utmost to conceal the truth, means will alwaysremain of refuting them, an(l,of displaying vice, howeverhigh seated, in its true colours.In the year 1297, when the order had establishedits head-quarters in the isle of Cyprus, James deMolay, a native of Besan^on, in the Tranche Comte,was elected Master. The character of Molay appearsto have been at all times noble and estimable ;but if we are to credit the statement of a knightnamed Hugh de Travaux, he attained his dignity byan artifice not unlike that said to have been employedby Sixtus V. for arriving at the papacy. Thechapter, according to De Travaux, could not agree,one part being for Molay, the other, and the stronger,for Hugh de Defraud. Molay, seeing that he hadlittle chance of success, assured some of the principalknights that he did not covet the office, and wouldhimself vote for his competitor. Behaving him, theyjoyfully made him great-prior. His tone now altered.The mantle is done, now put the hood on it. Youhave made me great-prior, and whether you will ornot I will be great-master also." The astoundedknights instantly chose him.If this account be true, the mode of election atthis time must have differed very considerably fromthat which we have described above out of the statutesof the order. This election, moreover, took place inFrance, where, in 1297, Molay, we are told, held thefourth son of the king at the baptismal font.One feeble attempt, the last military exploit of theTemplar, was made by the Christians to acquireonce more a footing on the continent of Asia duringthe mastership of Molay. In 1300, the Mongolchief Gaza came to the aid of the king of Armenia,against the Turks. As it was the policy of theTartars, who had not as yet embraced Islam, to stirup enemies to the Mohammedanss, Gaza, after SHCBET SOCIETIES.running the country om fur ^s Damascus, sent anembassy to the Pope, Boniface VIII., inviting theChristians, particularly the three military orders, tocome and take possession of the Holy Land. TheTempers, Hospitallers, and Henry, king of Cyprus,forthwith manned seven galleys and live smallervessels. America de Lusignnn, Lord of Tyre, andthe Masters of the two ordered!, landed at Tortoise,and endeavoured to maintain that islet against theEgyptian sultan, but were forced to yielrl lo numbers.The Templar fought gallantly to nii purpose,aud a. few of them, who defended a lower Into whichthey hail tlirowu themselves, surrendered, and werecarried prisoners to Egypt.The Hospitallers, in the year I30G, renewed theirattacks on the isle of Rhodes, where they finallysucceeded in expelling the Turks, anil planting thestandard of their order. The Teutonic knights transferredthe sphere of their warfare to Russia, and theadjacent country, whose inhabitants were still heathens.The Templar meantime remained inactivein Cyprus, and seem even to have been meditating a.retreat to Europe.France was at this time governed by Philip theFair, son of St. Louis. Philip, who had come to thethrone at the early age of seventeen years, had beeneducated by Giles ile Colonia, afterwards archbishopof Bourges, a man distinguished for his learning audfor the boldness of his opinions. One of his favouritemaxims was, " that Jesus Christ had not given anytemporal dominion to his church, and that the kingof France has his authority from God alone." Suchprinciples having been early instilled into his mlntl,the young monarch was not likely to be a verydutiful son of the Church, and the character of BonifaceVIII., who, without possessing the talents orthevirtues of a Gregory or o.i\ Innocent, attempted tostretch the papal prelen3\u\\9r to ftieu ^tenisai. t^\Kft\,Th TBMPL&RS,279^^^soon roused him to resistance. In the plenitudenf his fancied authority, the pope issued a bulls Forbidding'the clergy to give any subsidies to lay-powerswithout permission from Rome. Philip, in return,issued an order prohibiting the exportation of gold,silver, or merchandize from France, thereby cuttingofFa great source of papal revenue. In the course ofthe dispute, Boniface maintained that princes weresubject to him in temporal also. Philip's reply was," Philip, by the grace of God, king of the French, toBoniface, acting as supreme pontiff', little or no health.Let your extreme folly know, that in temporis wcare not subject to any one." Shortly afterwards bepublicly burned a bull of the pope, and proclaimedthe deed by sound of tramjwt in Paris. Boniface,raving with indign<i lion, summoned the French clergyto Rome, to deliberate on the means of preservingthe liberties of the Church. Philip convoked a nationalassembly to Paris, in which, for the first time,there appeared deputies of the third estate, who readilyexpressed their resolution to stand by theirmonarch in defence of his rights, and the clergy willinglydenied the temporal jurisdiction of the pontiff.Several prelates and abbots having obeyed the summonsof the pope, the king seized on their temporalities.The pope menaced with deprivation allthose who had not attended, and, in his famous bullof Una aaiictant, asserted that every human beingwas subject to the Roman pontiff. Another bulldeclared that every person, be his rank what it might,was bound to appear personally when summoned toRome. Philip forbade the publication of these bulls ;and the states general being again convoked appealedto a council against the pope. Commissarieswere sent through France to procure the adhesion ofthe clergy to this act, which was given in some cases'summarily, in others obtained by means of a littlewholesome rigour. The king, his wife, and his sourSOCIETIES.pledged themselves to .stand by those wiio adhered latheresistance made by France to pu,pal usurpation.£oQirace next excommunicated the king, who interbull, and prevented its publication, "reposefinally offered the crown of Prance to the emperorAlbert of Austria, Matters were now come toan extremity, and Philip ventured on one of theboldest acts that have ever been attempted in theChristian world.Philip had afforded an asylum at his court to somemembers of the Colonia family, the personal enemiesof the pope. His chancellor and fast adherent wasWilliam de Nogaret, who had been his agent in theaffair of appealing to a general council, by presentingto the stales general a charge of simony, magic, andthe usual real or imaginary crimes of the day againstthe pontiff. This man, and sumeof theologian exiles,attended by a body of 300 horse, set out for Italy,and took up his abode at a castle between Florenceand Sienna, under pretext of its being a convenientsituation for carrying on negociations with Rome.The pope was meantime residing at Anugni, his nativetown. Nogaret having, by a liberal distributionof money, acquired a sufficient number of partisans,appeared before the gate of Anagni early on themorning of the 7th September, 1303. The gatewas opened by a traitor, and the French and theirpartisans ran through the streets, crying Live the kingof France, die Boniface. They entered the palacewithout opposition ; the French ran here and thereinsearch of plunder, and Sierra Colonia and hisItalians alone came in presence of the pope. Boniface,who was now eighty-six years of age, was clad inhifi pontifical vestments, and on his knees before thealtar, in expectation of death. At the sight of himthe conspirators, whose intention had beethim, stopped short, filled with involuntarydid not dare to lay a iiani wv<jii\iv.vi\. ■D\jivQ55,*nTHB Templar,days they kept him a, prisoner; on the fourth thepeople of the town rose and expelled them, and re-lea.'ied the pontiff. Boniface returned to Rome ; butranee at the humiliation which he had undergone derangedhia intellect, and in one of his paroxysms hedashed his head against the will of his cliamfaer, anddied in consequence of the injury which he received*.Benedict XI., the successor of Boniliice, absolvedI'hjiip, and his ministers and subjects, from the sentenceof excommunication. As he felt his power, hewus proceeding to more vigorous measures to avengethe insulted dignity of Ihe holy see, when he died ofpoison, administered, as a contemporary historianasserts, by the agents of Philip. During ten mouldsthe conclave were unable to agree on his successoramong the Italian cardinals. It was then proposedby the partisans of the king <if France, that oneparty in the conclave should name three ultramontaneprelate, from among whom the other party fihoutdselect one. The choice fell on Bertrand de Motte,archbishop of Bordeaux, who had many serious causesof enmity lo Philip and his brother Charles of Valois.Philip's friend, the cardinal of Prato, instantly sentoff a courier with the news, advising the king to ncqui- ,esse in the election as Moon as he Ind secured him tohis interest, Philip set out for Gascony, and hit aprivate interview with the jMintiff elect, in an abbeyin the midst of a forest near St. Je^jn d'Angcly.Having sworn mutual secresy, the king told the prelatethat it was in his power to make him pope oncondition of his granting him six favours. He showedhim his proofs, and the ambitious Gascon, falling athis feel, promised everything. The six favours demandedby Philip were a perfect reconciliation withthe Church ; admission to the communion for liim-Sismondi Rtpubltquea Ilj.|iei.,i p.i«.282 SfiCRBT SOCIETIES.self and friends ; the tithes of the clergy of Francefor five years, to defray the expenses of his war inFlanders ; the persecution and destruction of the memoryof Pope Boniface ; the conferring the dignityof cardinal on James and Peter Colonia. " The sixthfavour," said he, " is great and secret, and I reservethe asking of it for a suitable time and place." Theprelate swore on the host, and gave his brother andtwo of his nephews as hostages. The king then sentorders to the cardinal of Prato, to elect the archbishopof Bordeaux, who took the name of Clement V.Whether urged by the vanity of shining in the eyesof his countrymen, or by dread of the tyranny exercisedby the cardinals over his predecessors, or, whatseems more probable, in compliance with the wishesof Philip, or in consequence of impediments thrownby that monarch in the .way of his departure, Clement,to the dismay of all Christendom, instead ofrepairing to Rome, summoned the cardinals toLyons for his coronation. They reluctantly obeyed,and he was crowned in that city on the 17th December,1305, the king, his brother, and his principalnobles, assisting at the ceremony. Clement forthwithcreated twelve new cardinals, all creatures of Philip,whose most devoted slave the pope showed himself tobe on all occasions. His promises to him were mostpunctually fulfilled, with the exception of that respectingthe memory of Boniface, which the cardinalof Prato proved to Philip it would be highly impoliticand dangerous to perform ; but Clement cheerfullyauthorised him to seize, on the festival of St. Made*laine, all the Jews in his kingdom, to banish them,and confiscate their property in the name of religion.What the sixth and secret grace which Philip requiredwas is unknown. Many conjectures havebeen made to little purpose. It is not at all improbablethat the king had at the time no definite objecttai Templar.in view, and that, like the fabled tyrant of NeptuneTheseus, it was to be claimed wheneverof Sufficient importance should present itself.Such as we have described them were Philip andthe sovereign pontiff; the oneable,daring,rapacioua,ambitious, and unprincipled; the other mean, submissive,and little scrupulous. As it was the objectof Philip to depress the papal power, aud make itsubservient to his ambition, he must naturally havedesired to deprive it of support The Templar,therefore, who hud been on all occasions the staunchpartizans of the papacy, must on this account alonehave been objects of his aversion ; they had, moreover,loudly exclaimed against his repeated adulterationof the coin, by which they sustained so much injury; and they were very urgent in their demands forrepayment of the money which they had lent him onthe occasion of the marriage of his daughter Isabellawith the son of the king of England. Their wealthwas great ; their possessions in France were most extensive; they were connected with the noblest familiesin the realm ; they were consequently, now thatthey seemed to have given up all idea of making anyfarther eSbrts in the East, likely to prove a seriousobstacle in the way of the establishment of the absolutepower of the crown. They were finally verygenerally disliked on account of their excessive prideand arrogance, and it was to be expected that in anattack on their power and privileges the popularfavour would he with the king. These motives will,we apprehend, sufficiently account for PhiUp'a anxietyto give a check to the order, beyond which, as itwould appear, bis plans did not at first extend. Wecannot venture to say when this project first enteredthe mind of king Philip; whether: he had the Hospitallersalso in view, and whether he impelled thepope to invite the Masters of the two orders toFrance,284 SECRET SOCIETIES.As the rivalry and ill-feeling between the twoorders had long been regarded as one of the principalcauses of the little success of the Christians inthe East, the idea of uniting them had been conceived,and Gregory X. and St. Louis had striven,but in vain, at the council at Lyons, to effect it.Pope Boniface VIII. had also been anxious to bringthis project to bear, and Clement now resolved toattempt it. On the 6th June, 1306, only six monthsafter his coronation, he wrote to the Masters of thetwo orders to ^^The following effect ; — ^^The kings ofArmenia and Cyprus were calling on him for aid ;he therefore wished to confer with them, who knewthe country well, and were so much interested in it,as to what were best to be done, and desired that theywould come to him as secretly as possible, and witha very small train, as they would find plenty of theirknights on this side of the sea ; he directed them toprovide for the defence of Limits during theirabsence.The Master of the Hospital, William de Village,was, when the letter arrived, engaged in the attackon Rhodes, and, therefore, could not obey the summons.But De Molay, the Master of the Temple,having confided Limits and the direction of theorder to the marshal, embarked with sixty of his mostdistinguished knights, taking with him the treasureof the order, consisting of 150,000 florins of gold,and so much silver, that the whole formed the ladingof twelve horses. When they arrived in France, heproceeded to Paris, where the king received him withthe greatest marks of favour and distinction, and hedeposited the treasure in the Temple of that city.Shortly afterwards he set out for Poitiers, where hehad an interview with Clement, who consulted himon the affairs of the East. On the subject of a newcrusade, Molay gave it as his opinion that nothingbut a simultaneous effort of all the Christian powersTHE Templar, 2S5would be of any avail. He objected to the union ofthe orders ou the following grounds, which were,nn the whole, sufficiently frivolous. He said, 1st.That what is uew is not always the best ; that theorders, as they were, had done good service in Palestine,and, in short, used the good old argument ofanti-reformists. It works well. 2dly. That as theorders were spiritual as well as temporal, and manya one had entered them for the weal of his soul, itmight not be a matter of indifference to such to leavethe one which he bod selected and enter another.3r!ly. There might be discord, as each order wouldwant its own wealth and influence, and seek to gainthe mastery for its own rules and discipline. 4thly. TheTemplar were generous of their goods, while theHospitallers were oily anxious to accumulate — a differencewhich might produce dissension. 5thly. Asthe Templar received more gifts and support fromthe laity than the Hospitallers, they would be thelosers, or at least be envied by their associates,flthly. There would probably be some disputing betweenthe superiors about the appointment to the dignitiesin the new order. He however candidlyacknowledged, that the new order would be strongerthat the old one, and so more zealous to combat theinfidels, and that many commanderies might be suppressed,and some saving effected thereby. Havingthus delivered his sentiments, Molay took leave ofthe pope, and returned to Paris. Vague rumours ofserious charges made, or to be made, against theorder now beginning to prevail, Molay, accompaniedby Riband de Caro, preceptor of Outre-mer,Jeffrey de Greville, preceptor of Aquitaine, andHughdePerando, preceptor of France, re-pored oncemore to Poitiers, about April, 1307, to justify himselfand the order in the eyes of the pope. Clement,we are told, informed them of the serious charges of2^ SECRET SOCIETIES.tjift QQittinission of various crimes which had beenmm3» against them ; but they gave him such explanationsas appeared to content him, and returned toPais, satisfied that they had removed all doubts fromhis mind.The following was the way in which the chargeswere made against the Templar.There was lying in prison, at Paris or Toulouse,for some crime, a man named Squin de Flexian, anative of Betters, who had been formerly a Templar,and prior of Mantfaucon, but had been put out of theorder for heresy and other offences. His companionin captivity was a Florentine, named Noffo Dei — ^" aman (says Villany) full of all iniquity." These twobegan to plan how they might best extricate themselvesfrom their present hopeless state; and, asit would appear, aware of the king's dislike to theTemplar, and hating them for having punished himfor his crimes, Squin de Flexian resolved to accusethem of the most monstrous offences, and thus obtainhis liberation. Accordingly, calling for thegovernor of the prison, he told him that he hada discovery to make to the king, which would bemore for his advantage than the acquisition of a newkingdom, but that he would only reveal it to the kingin person. Squin was immediately conveyed to Paris,and brought before the king, to whom he declaredthe crimes of the order; and some of the Templarwere seized and examined by order of Philip.Another account says that Squin Flexian andNoffo Dei, who were both degraded Templar, hadbeen actively engaged in an insurrection of the peoplesome time before, from which the king was obligedto take shelter in the Temple. They had been taken,and were lying in prison without any hope of theirlives, when they hit on the plan of accusing their formerassociates. They were both set at liberty ; butTHE Templar. 287Squin was afterwards hanged, and Noffo Dei beheaded,as was said with little probability, by the Templar.It is also said, that, about the same time, CardinalCantiluf)o, the pope's chamberlain, who had been inconnexion with the Templar from his eleventh year,made some discoveries respecting it to his master.The charges made by Squin Flexian against theorder were as follows : —1. Each Templar, on his admission, was swornnever to quit the order ; and to further its interests,by right or by wrong.2. The heads of the order are in secret alliancewith the Saracens; and have more Mahometaninfidelity than Christian faith ; in proof of which,they make every novice spit and trample on the crossof Christ, and blaspheme his faith in various ways.3. The heads of the order are heretical, cruel, andsacrilegious men. Whenever any novice, on discoveringthe iniquity of the order, attempts to quit it,they put him to death, and bury him privately bynight. They teach the women who are pregnant bythem how to procure abortion, and secretly murderthe new-born babes.4. The Templar are infected with all the errorsof the Frantically; they despise the pojje and theauthority of the Church ; they contemn the sacraments,especially those of penance and confession.They feign compliance with the rites of the Churchmerely to escape detection.» 5. The superiors are addicted to the most infamousexcesses of debauchery; to which, if any one expresseshis repugnance, he is punished by perpetualcaptivity.6. The temple-houses are the receptacles of everycrime and abomination that can be committed.7* The order labours to put the Holy Land intothe hands of the Saracens; and favours them morethan the Christians.288 SECRET SOCIETIES.8. The installation of the Master takes place insecret, and few of the younger brethren are presentat it ; whence there is a strong suspicion that he deniesthe Christian faith or promises, or does somethingcontrary to right.9. Many statutes of the order are unlawful, profane,and contrary to the Christian religion ; themembers are, therefore, forbidden, under pain ofperpetual confinement, to reveal them to any one.10. No vice or crime committed for the honour orbenefit of the order is held to be a sin.Such were the charges brought against the orderby the degraded prior of Montauban — charges ingeneral absurd, or founded on gross exaggeration ofsome of the rules of the society. Others, still moreincredible, were subsequently brought forward in thecourse of the examinations of witnesses.Philip and his ministers, having now what theyregarded as a plausible case against the Templar,prepared their measures in secret; and on the 12thSeptember, 1307, sealed letters were sent to all thegovernors and royal officers throughout France,with orders to arm themselves on the 12th of thefollowing month ; and in the night to open the lettersand act according to the instructions containedtherein. The appointed day arrived; and,on the morning of Friday, the 13th October, nearlyall the Templar throughout France saw themselvescaptives in the hands of their enemies. So wellhad Philip taken his measures, that his meditatedvictims were without suspicion ; and, on the veryeve of his arrest, Molay was chosen by the treacherousmonarch to be one of the four pall-bearersat the funeral of the Princess Catherine, wife of theCount of Valois.The directions sent by the king to his officers hadbeen to seize the persons and the goods of the Templar; to intermediate, torture, and obtain confessionsTIIB TBUPL&Rg.2S9from them ; to {fessed ; and to nOn the day of the arrest of the Muster and hisknights, the king took possession of the Temple atParis; and the Master and the preceptors of Aquitaine,France, and beyond sea, were sent prisoners toCoheir The following day the doctors of the Universityof Paris and several canons assembled withthe royal ministers in the church of Notre Dame, andWilliam de N»^aret, the chancellor, stated to themthat the knights had been proceeded against onaccount of their heresies. On the lath the Universitymet in the Temple; and some of the heads ofthe order, particularly the Master, were examined,and are said to have made some confessions of theguilt of the order fur the last forty years.The king now published an act of accusation, conceivedin no moderate or gentle terms. He calls theaccused in it devouring wolves, a perfidious and idolatroussociety, whose deeds, whose very words alone,are enough to pollute Ihe earth and infect the air,&c. &c. The inhabitants of Paris were then assembledin the royal gardens; and the king's agents sjwke,and some monks preached to them a^inst the accused.Philip, in his hostility to the order, would be contentwith nothing short of its utter ruin. Almostimmediately after his clip d'etat of the I3th October,he despatched a priest, named Bernard Peleus,to his son-in-law, Edward II., king of England,inviting him to follow hia example. Edward wrote,on the 30lh of the same month, to say that thecharges made i^inst the Templar by Philip andhis agent appeared to him, his barons, and his prelates,to be incredible ; and that he would, therefore,summon the seneschal of Agen, whence this rumourhad proceeded, to inform him thereupon, before proceedingany farther.3M SBC«8r W01BTIKB.Clement had been at first offended at the hastyand arbitrary proceed] ng;s of the king of franceagniiiBt the Templar ; but I'liiiip easily managed (oappease him; and on the 22d November the popewrote to the king of England, assuring him thatthe Master of the Temple had spontaneously confessedthut the brethren, on their admission, deniedChrist ; and that several of the brethren in differentparts of France had acknowledged the idolatry andother crimes laid to the charge of the order ; and thata knight of the highest and inst honourable character,whom he had himself' examined, had confessedthe denial of Jesus Chrtet to be a part of the ceremonyof admission. He therefore calls on the kingto arrest all the Templar within his realms, and toplace their lands and goods in safe custody, till theirguilt or innocence should be ascertained.Edward, in a letter, dateil November 26, inquiredparticularly of the seneschal of Agen, In Guienne,respecting the charges ernst the Templar. On(he 4th December he wrote lo the kings of Portugal,Castile, Aragon, and Sicily, telling them of what behad heard, and adding that he had given no creditlost; and begging of them not to hearken to theserumours. On the 10th, evidently before he had received[he bull, he wrote tu the pope, stating hisdisbelief of what he hud heard, and praying of hisholiness to institute au inquiry. But when die papalbull, so strongly asserting the guilt of the order,arrived, the good-hearted king did nut venture torefuse compliance with it ; and he issued a. writ onthe 1 5th December, appointing the morn of Wednesdayafter Epiphany, in the following month, forseizing the Templar and their property, but directingthem to be treated with all gentleness. Similarorders were forwarded to Scotland, Wales, and ,on the 20th; and on the 36th he wralc toTBI Templar. 291assure the pope that his mandates would be speedilyobeyed. The arrests took place accordingly ; andthe Templar and their property were thus seized inthe two countries in which they were mostpowerfiil*.The reluctance of the king of England and hisparliament to proceed to any harsh measures againstthe Templar affords some presumption in their favour,and would incline us to believe that, had Philipbeen actuated by a similar love of justice, the orderwould not have been so cruelly treated in France.But Philip had resolved on the destruction of thesociety, and his privy councillors and favourites werenot men who would seek to check him in his career ofblood and spoliation. These men were WilliamImbert, his confessor, a Dominican monk, one of anorder inured in Languedoc to blood, and deeplyversed in all inquisitorial arts and practices ; WilliamNogaret, his chancellor, the violator of the sanctity ofthe head of the church ; William Plain, who hadshared in that daring deed, and afterwards sworn, inan assembly of the peers and prelates of France,that Boniface was an atheist and a sorcerer, and hada familiar demon. ' The whole order of the Dominicansalso went heart and hand in the pious workof detecting and punishing the heretics. We mustconstantly bear in mind that the charges made againstthe Templar, if they may not all be classed underthe term heresy, were all such as the Church was inthe habit of making against those whom she persecutedas public heretics. And in this, Philip and hisadvisers acted wisely in their generation; for treason,or any other political charge, would have sounded dulland inefficient in the ears of the people, in comparisonwith the formidable word heresy,The arrests were made in England in the same secret4lld sudden manner m in France. Bymor iii 34« 43.s 2THE Templar.Chapter X.Examination of the alive Kni|;lil9 — Divinest kinds of torture—CniUKS of Confession— What Confeubna wcro made—Templar brought befpru the Pope— Their DBcliirnlioua—Papal Commission — Molly brought before it — Forward deGisi- Defended of the Older— Act of Accusations Headof Defence— Witnesses against the Order— Fifty-four Templarcommitted (o the flames at Paris— EBiraikable words ofAyineric ie ViUars-U-due— Templar burnt in other PlacesFurther Examinations — The Head worshipped by theTemplar— John de Pollincourt- Peter de hi Pale.The charge of conducting (he inquiry against thesociety was committee by Philip, without askiiif? orwaiting for the Pope's approbation, to Imbert, wholost no time in proceeding to action. He wrote toall the inquisitors of his order, directing Ihem toproceed against the Templar, as he had alreadydone himself; and, incase of ascertaining the truth ofthe charges, to communicate it to the Minorite Friars,or some other order, that the people might take nooffence at the procedure ; and to send the declarationsas soon as possible to the king: and himself. Theywere to use no cruelty towards the prisoners ; but, ifnecessary, they might employ the torture. On the19th October, six days after their seizure, Imbertcommenced his examinations at the Temple of Paris.Otic hundred and forty prisoners were examined;-' i"n, by promises and by the aid of the torture, connabundance were procured. Thirty-six of'•jhts expired under the gentle method em-socketSOCIETIES.played to extract the truth from them. The zealousImberl then proceeded to Bayeux, Mete, Toul, andVerdun ; io all which places examinations were heldand confessions extorted in tir same way. It was,however, carefully slated in each deposition, that thewitness had spoken without any constraint.As nur readers fortunately cannot be supposedfamiliarly acquainted with the mild and gentle modesemployed by the brethren of St. Dominic, for excitingthe lruth,we will present ash^ht sketch of someof them, that Ihey may be able to form some idea ofthe value of rack-entered testimony.Sometimes the patient was stripped naked, hishands were tied behind hies back, heavy weights werefastened to his feet, and the cord which confined fabhands passed over a pulley. At a given signal hewas hoisted into the air, where he hung suspendedhy his arms, which were thus drawn out of theirnatural position : then suddenly the coi would belet run, but checked before the patient reached theground, and thus a tremendous shock given to hisframe. Another mode of torture was to fasten thefeet of the patient on an instrument, which preventedhis drawing there back; they were then rubbed withsome unctuous substance, and set belbre a flaminglire; a board was occasionally placed between hisfeet and the fire, and withdrawn again, in order toincrease his pain by intervals of cessation, Theheel of the patient was at times enclosed in an ironheel, which could be tightened at pleasure, and thuscaused excruciating pain. What was regarded as avery gentle mode, and only indulged to those whohad not Strength to undergo the preceding tortures,was to place round sticks between their lingers, andcompress them till the bones of the fingers werecracked. The teeth of Ihe Templar were occasionallydrawn, their fect^oasted, weighs suspendedTHH TBHPI.ARB.from all parts of their bodies; and lliua they gavetheir testimony without const rei i ii t '.What IB understood as testimony or confession, byinquisitors, is an affirmative answer to such questionsas they ask, They usually assume the guilt of theaccused ; and no witnesses for the defence are heard.It is useless to prove the absurdity and unreasonablenessof the charges ; for that would be impugning thesense and judgment of those who gave ear to them ;and promises are always held out that, if full andfree confession is made, the criminal will he gentlydealt with. The accused is, moreover, always confinedin a solitary cell ; he has none to console andcheer him ; he feet abandoned by the whole world;conscious innocence is of no avail ; his only hopeis in the mercy of his judge. The Templar, wemust recollect, were seized towards the commencementof winter ; and at that season u dungeon of themiddle ages must have been cheerless beyond description.They were barely allowed the necessariesof life ; they were stripped of the habit of the order,and denied the consolations of religion, for they weretreated as heretics; and they were shown a real orpretended letter of their Master, in which he cou-vesselthe crimes of the order, and exhorted them todothe same. Enthusiasts in religion or politics aresupported by the consciousness of rectitude, aud bearup against privations or torture in firm reliance onthe favour of the Divinity, or the praise and esteemof a grateful and admiring posterity. But the greatmajority of the Templar were far from beiujn; suchcharacters; they were illiterate knights, who had longlived in luxury and indulged in arrogance ; they knewthemselves to be objects of dislike to many, and feltthat their power was gone. Need we then be surprisedthat, beguiled by the hopes held out, immersionthem readily acknowledged all the charges madeMS EBCBST fiOCIBTIBS.against their order? and must we not so much themore admire the constancy of those who, seducedby flattering hopes, and undismayed by menaces andtorture, yielded up llieir breath rather that confess a.falsehood?At Paris the knights who confessed acknowledgedthe denial of Christ (this tis the point which theinquisitors were most anxious to establish), but in anuncertain, contradictory manner. as what was saiduti one examination was retracted on another, or waseular<i;ed or diminished. It was also confessed thatan idol was adored in their chapters, .^t Names, inNovember, 1307, forty-five knights confessed the(built of the order. They afterwards retracted ; but in1311 the torture made them revert to their originaldeclaration. At Troyes two knights confessed everythingthat was required of them. At Pont de Marcheseven confessed. These and six others were againexamined at Caen ; they terminated (heir declarationsimploring the mercy of the Church, and entreatingwith tears lo be spared the torture. Those examinedat Carcassonne all deposed to the worship of theimage ; but some of them afterwards retracted thatadmission, and died maintaining the innocence ofthe order. Sin Templar at Bigotry * and seven atCohors confessed ; but several of them afterwardsretracted.Philip and his creatures were at this stage oftheir career, when the pope began to testify somelittle dissatisfaction at the irregularity of the proceedings.The king instantly wrote to upbraid him■ In the church of the romantic hamlet of GaTaraie, afew leagues from Barges, on the road to Spain, in the heartof the Hautes Vp^ai^a, are sliuwa twelve skulls which aresaid to have been Ihoae of Templar who vere beheaded inthat place. The tradition ta, in all probability, incorrect ;but the Templar had poiieinoEu in Bigotry.THE Templar. 297with his lukewarmness in the cause of reh'fpon. Hestated that the bishops, who were his (the king's)helpers in the ijoverrinient oi' the Church, were thefittest persons to carry on the business, on account oftheir local Knowledge ; and added that neither henor they could comply with the desires of the pope :'' he acted'' he said, " as the servant of God, andmust render to God his account." Clement couldnot venture to impede the pious labours of such a.jealous servant of the Lord ; he cancelled the bulltvhicli he had prepared on the subject, only requiring;that each bishop's inquisitors should be confirmed bya provincial council, and that the examination ofthe heads of the order should he reserved for himself.Philip then condescended to offer to put the captivesinto the hands of the papal judges, and to devotethe goods of the order to the profit of the HolyLand. The clergy declined taking charge of thelinighis, and Ihe king and pope managed the propertyof the order in common.In the beginning of the year 1308, we are told",the Master of the Templar, the preceptor of Cyprus,the visiter of France, and the great-priors of Aquitaineand Normandy, were brought before the popeat Chiron, where they voluntarily, and without theapplication of any torture, confessed the truth of theenormities laid to the charge of the order. Theyabjured their errors, and the cardinals implored theking in their favour.M. Haynouardf, we know not on what authority,positively denies that the Master and his companionswere ever brought before the pope He says that, ivthe month of August following, they were on Ibeir way ■to Poitiers, in order to be examined by the pontiff |This is mentioned in a. private letter from Clement toPhilip, af the SOthDec^ember, 13(18.■f Monument Ilistoci^ueu, &c. [h 4G.Iin person ; but (hat, under pretext of some of thembeing; flick, they were dtitaiimd at Chignon, justest ofbeing' brought on to I'oiliers, where the pope remained,and were finally conducted back to Pariswithout having seen him. He does not give the datenf this occurrence, but it it would seem to have beenin Ihe following autumn.The proceedings against the Templar were somanifestly contrary to the interest of the pope, thatPhilip deemed it necessary to keep a strict eye overhim. Having, in May, 1308, convoked an assembly ofIhe states at Tours, and obtained from them a. declarationof his right to punish notorious heretics withoutasking the consent of the pope, and in which he wascalled upon to act with rigour against the Templar,he proceeded with it himself to Poitiers, and presentedit to Clement. Duringthenegociationawhichtook place at tluit time, the pope attempted to makehis escape to Bordeaux, but his ba^o'^e and histreasures were stopped by the king's orders at thegat of the town, and Clement remained in effect aprisoner.While the supreme pontiff was thus in fia power,Philip, who still remained at Poitiers, by way of removingall his scruples, had, on the 29th and 30thJune, and 1st July, seventy-two of the Templar,who had confessed, brought before Clement andexamined. As was to be expected, the greater partrepeated their former declarations of the impiety,idolatry, and licentiousness of the order. Fromthese depositions it appears clearly that the torturehad been employed to extract the former confessions.Pierre de Broil said that he had been stripped andput to the torture, but that be had said readier morenor less on that account. He added that those whotoi'lLiri'd him were all drunk.Guillaume de Laymen had not been tortured, but,THB TBMPLARS. aahe had been kept a month in military confine men t onbread and water before he made ajiy confession.Gerard de St. Martial, who confessed to havingdenied Christ, and smitten betide the cross, said thathe had been cruelly tortured, being at first ashamedto acknowledge these facta, although they were true.Deodat Janet had been tortured, but it was the inspirationof God and the blessed Virgin Mary, and uolthe rack, which had made him confess. He acknowledgedevery crime imputed tu the order. Speakingof the idol, he said, " I was alone in a chamber wltlithe person who received me : he drew nut of a box ahead, or idol, which appeared to me to have threefaces, and said, Thou Khoiddst adore it as thy Saviourand that of the order of the Temple. We thenbent our two knees, and I cried. Blessed be he whoiLnll save my soW.and I worshipped it." Yet Janetafterwards retracted this deposition, and stood Ibrtlias one of the defenders of the order.Iter de Rochefurt, though he said he had confessed,bad been tortured repeatedly, with a viewto extracting more from him. He declared that,having been received in the unlawful way, he hadconfessed himself to the patriarch of Jerusalem,who had wept bitterly at hearing' of such wickedness.As Raynouard very justly observes, thepatriarch, who could hardly he a friend to the Templar,was not very likely to content himself withshedding a few useless tears had the knowledge ofsuch u heresy come to his ears.Pierre de Wonders had confessed at the sight ofthe rack.Raymond de Stiiphani had been severely torturedat Carcassonne. Being asked why he did not thentell the truth, he replied, " Because 1 did nut recollectit; but I pruned the seneschal to allow me toItoo BSCRBT 80CIST1KS.confer with my companions, and when I had deliberatedwith them I reelected."Who can give credit to depositions tike these,most of which were subsequently revoked ? Yet itwBB by these that the pope declared himself h> heperfectly satisfied of Ihe guilt of the order, and justifiedthe rigtirnns measures which he authorizedagainst it. Philip, we are lo observe, was all thistime at Poitiers : the prisoners were examined beforethe cardinals, and only those who had not retractedtheir former rack-extorted confessions were producedin the large concourse of nobles, clergy, and peopleassembled on this occasion'.Clement and Philip now arranged the convocationof Hu cecumenic council at Vienne, to pronounce theabolition of the order. The pope also appointed acommission to take nt Paris a juridical informationagainst it ; and, on the 1st August, he authorised thebishops and his delegates to proceed in their inquiries.On the 12th August, bythebullfaciensmiser/corrfiom,after asserting the guilt of the order, he called uponall princes and prelates Ihroiigliout the Christianworld to assist Jim in making inquiry into this aRuir.The commission appointed by the pope was com-posted of the archbishop of Narbonne, the bishops ofBayeux, Mente, and Limoges; Matthew of Naples,archdeacon of Rouen, notary of the Holy See; Johnof Mantua, archdeacon of Trent ; John of Montlaur,archdeacon of Maguelone; and William Agelin, provostof Aix, which last was prevented by businessfrom giving attendance. They entered on theirhinctiuiis on the Tlh August, 1309, and ordered thatthe brethren of tie 'Temple should be cited beforethem on the first day of business after the festival ofKajnouard, p. 253.THE Templar,cens were to be ^^^|(1 clerici in the ^^^^St. Martin, in November, The citationspublished iii presence of the people and clergycathedrals, ehnrehes. and schools, in the principalhouses of the order, and in the prisons in which theknights were confined. No one appearing, newcitations were issued; and at length the Bishop ofParis was called on by the commission to go 'to the prison where the Master and the heads of theorder were confined, and notify it to them. Havingdone su, he caused the same notification to be madethroughout his diocese. The following circumstancewhich occurred at this time, would seem to indicatethat impediments were thrown in the way of Howwho were disposed to defend the order by the royalministers. The commissioners were informed thatthe governor of the Chalet had arrested and imprisonedsome persons who were presumed to havecome to defend the order. The governor heine; summonedbefore them, declared that, by order of theministers, he had arrested seven persons who weredenounced as being Templar in a lay habit, who hadcome to Paris with money in order to procure advocatesand defenders for the accused. He acknowledgedthat he had put them to the torture, but saidthat he did not believe them to be Templar.On Wednesday, Nov. 26, the commissionMolay, the Master of the Temple, waa brought befitit. He was asked if he would defend the order,speak for himself. He replied by expressingsurprise that the Church should proceed with fprecipitation in this case, when the sentence relyto the Emperor Frederic had been suspendedthirty-two years. Though he had neither knownor talent sufficient to defend the order, he shiconsider himself vile in his own eyes, and in thouothers, if he hesitated to do so; but being thv'heaaa sborxt societies.prisoner of the king and ic jiope, and withoutmoney, he asked fur dd and counsel.The commissioners desired him to reflect on hisoffer, and to consider the confessiutia respecting hit*self and the order which he had made. Ttiey agreed,however, to give him time ; and, that he might notbe ignorant of what was alleged against him, had thedocuments containing their powers read to him inthe vulgar language.During the reading uf the letters which recited hisconfession made to the cardinals at Chiron, hecrossed himself repeatedly, and gave other signs ofindignation and surprise, and said, that, were it notfor the respect due to the envoys of the pope, heshould express himself differently. They said theywere not come there to receive challenges. He repliedthat he spoke not of cartels, he only wishedthey acted in this case as the Saracens and Tartarsdid, who cut oS the head and cut the body in two ufthose who were found to lie guilty.Two circumstances are worthy of note in thisexamination ; one, that William Plain was presentat it, and, as the commissioners expressly declared,without being invited by them ; the other, that theconfessions, which were imputed to Molay, andwhich he evidently intimated to be false, were insertedin the bull Facienii misericordia, which bears thedate of the 12th August, although the festival of theAssumption, that is the 1 6th of August, is givenas the day on which they were made *. It wasthere declared that the heads of the order hadconfessed and been absolved ; yet here we find theIKayaouard, 61. This circumstance wai first remarked b;Fleury, Hill. Eccles., lib. xci. Yet it seems httidly crediblethat the pope and his decretals could hare made so from >iTHE TBHPLAR5,Muster treated as a heretic who ucited.The following day (Nov. 27), Poniard de Nisi,prior of Payers, appeared before the cominiHsioii.Oil being asked if he would defend the order, hereplied, " Yes ; the imputations cast on us of denyingChrist, of spitting on the cross, of authorisingiiifamoui crimes, and all such accusations, are false.If I, myself, or other knights, have made confessionbefore the bishop of Paris, or elsewhere, we havebetrayed the truth — we have yielded to fear, todanger, to violence. We were tortured by Flexionde Betters, prior of Montauban, and the monk WilliamRobert, our enemies. Several of the prisonershad agreed among themselves to make these confessions,in order to escape death, and becausethirty-six knights had died at Paris, and a greatnumber in other places, under the torture. As forme,I am ready to defend the order lit my own name,and in the names of those who will make commoncause with me, if I am assigned out of the goods ofthe order as much as will defray the needful expense,i require to he grunted the counsel of Raynaud ofOrleans and of Peter of Bologna, priests of theorder." He was asked if he had been tortured.He replied that he had, three months before hemade his confession.Next day the Master was brought up again. Hedemanded fo be brought before the pope, appealedlu the valour and charity of the Templar, and theirzeal inadorningchurches, in proof of their piety, andmade an orthodox confession of his own faith. No-garret,who was present, then observed, that it wasrelated in the chronicles of St. Denis that the Masterof the order bad done homage to SakJin; andthat the sultan had ascribed their ill fortune to theirsecret vices and impiety. Molay dec]ai«d that he< 304SECRET 80CIBTIB8.wptioihod never heard of such calumnies; mid gave anins lat ili! of the prudence and food faith of a formerMaster, when himself and some other young menwanted him to break a truce. Molay concluded bypraying the chancellor and the commissioners toprocure him the favour of hearing mass, and beingattended by his chaplain.Orders having been given that all the Templarwho were desirous to undertake the defence of theorder should be conveyed to Paris, they were broughtthither strongly guarded. The commission then renewedits sittings. As the prisoners weieivety brought before it, they, with few tdeclared their readiness to defend their order— tilldeath, cried some; till the end, cried others; becauseI wish to save my soul, added one. Bertrandde St. Paul declared that he never did, ont neverwould, confess the guilt of the order, because it wasnot tie ; and that he believed that God would worka miracle if the body of Christ was administered tothose who confessed and those who denied. Sevenof those who had been examined before the pope,nnd had confessed, now declared that they had lied,and revoked what they then said. John de Val-gellmaintained that he had made no confession onthat occa!iioii. " I was tortured so much, and heldso long before a burning fire," said Bernard de Vade,that the fle.'ih of my heels was burnt, and these twobones (which he showed) came off."In the course of these ex ii mi nations, a Templar,named Laurent de licaune, showed a letter with theseals of Philip de Poet and John Joinville, the personsset by the pope and king over the prisoners,addressed to the 'i'emplars confined at Sens, invitingwas required, and declaringorders that those who did notssiona should be committed toTHE Templar. 30fithe flames. Philip de Poet, on being interrogated,said that he did nut believe that he had sent thatItlter; his seal had often laid in the hands of hissecretary; he had always advised the prisoners Utspeak the trull. Joinville was not examined, neitherwas John Carping, the bearer of the letter. DeBeauue was one of the first afterwards committed tothe flames ; the supposition is natural, that the letterwas a stratagem of the king and his ministers.The Master having been again brought before thecommissioners, and having renewed his demand ofbeing sent to the pope, they promised to write to thepope on the subject, hut there is no proof of theirhaving done so.On the 2Bth March all the Templar who hadexpressed their willingness to defend the order wereassembled in the garden of the bishop's palace.Their number was 346. The Master was not amongthem. The articles of accusation were then readover to them in Latin ; the commissioners orderedthat they should be read again to them in the vulgartongue, but the knights ail cried out that it wasenough, they did not desire that such abominations,which were false and not to be named, should berepeated in the vulgar language. Again, they complainedof the deprivation of their religious habitsand the sacraments of the church, and desired thatthe Master and the heads of the order should becalled thither also. But this reasonable request wasnot complied with. In vain the Master demandedto be brought before the pope ; in vain the knightsrequired to be permitted to enjoy the presence oftheir chief. Neither the one nor the other suitedthe interest or the designs of the king.The number of the Templar in Paris soon amountedto near 900. The commissioners were desirous thatSeCRET Societies,Ithey BhoDid appoint agents in manage their defence ;but this they declined to do, some alleging thatthey euuld not do so without the consent of theirchief, others insisting on defending the order inperson. At length, ater a great dea.1 of argumentand deliberation, seventy-five Templar were chosentn draw np the defence of the order ; and the priestsof the order, Raynaud de Pruino and Peter of Bologna,and the knights, William de Chambonneland Bertrand de Parties, were appointed to bepresent at the deposition of the witnesses.The act of accusation against the Templar, drawnup in the name of the pope, ran thus. At the timeof their reception they were made to deny God,Christ, the Virgin, &c. ; in particular declare thatChrist was not the true God, but a false prophet,who had been crucified for his own crimes, and notfor the redemption of the world. They spat andtrampled on the cross, especially on Good Friday.They worshipped a cat which sometimes appeared intheir chapters. Their priests, when celebrating moss,did not pronounce the words of consecration. Theybelieved that their Master could absolve them fromtheir sins. They were told at their reception thatthey might abandon themselves to all kinds of licentiousness.They had idols in all their provinces,some with three faces, some with one. Theyworshipped these idols in their chapters, believed thatthey could save them, regarded them as the givers ofwealth to the order, and of fertility to the earth;they touched them with corda which they afterwardstied round their own bodies. Those who at the limeof their reception would not comply with these practiceswere put to death or imprisoned. All this, ilwas stated, took place according to the statute* ofthe order; il was a general and ancient custom, andTHE Templar. 307there was no other mode of reception. Tile net ofaccusation stated earlier that the Templar stoppedat no means of enriching the order*.The Templar, in their reply, asserted that allthese imputations were false, and that if any of thenhud confessed them, they had done so under terrorind violence, thirty-sis having expired by torture atParis and several others elsewhere. The forms oftaw had )seen violated with respect to them ; to obbiiiifrom them false depositions letters of the king hadbeen shown them declaring that the order had beencondemned irrevocably, and offering; life, hberly,and pensions, to those who would depose falsely.All these facts, said they, are so public and snnotorious that there are no means or pretexts fordisavowing them." The heads of accusation werenothing but falsehoods and absurdities, and the bullcontained nothing but horrible, detestable, andiniquitous falsehoods. Their order was pure, and iftheir statutes were consulted they would be found tobe the same for all Templar and for all countries.Their belief was that of the Church; parents broughttheir children, brothers each other, uncles theirnephews, into the order, because it was pure and holy.When in captivity to the infidels, the Templar diedsooner than renounce their religion. They declaredtheir readiness to defend their innocence in everyway, and against every person except the pipe andthe king, demanded to be brought personally beforethe general council, required that those who hadquitted the order and deposed against it should beAll these ctimeii had bau acknowledged by vuiuui uCthuiiider. Yet what can be more improbable than thtVFurahip dE thu cat for justice? This chorea, Uy the way,bad already been made against the Beet uf the Catharine, whowere ibid lu have derived their name a callao — cater theirjune gHH urigm to the LnvEatiuD.Ascites Societies.nI Phikept in close custody till their truth or falsehoodshould be ascertain eil, and That no layman should bepresent to intimidate the accused when under fi, rumination.The knights, they maintained, had beenstruck with such terror, that the false cotifessk)nsmade by fume were less matter of surprise than thecourage of those who maintained the truth was ofadmiration. Inquire, said they, of those who werepresent at the last moments of the knights who diedin prison ; let their confessions be revealed, and it willbe seen if the accusations are true. Is it not strange,asked they in conclusion, that more credit should begiven to the lies of those who yielded to tortures orto promises than to the asseverations of those who,in defence of the truth, have died with the palm ofmartyrdom — of the sound majority of those knightswho have suffered and still suffer so much for conanthe 11th April, 1310, the hearing of the witnessesagainst the order commenced. Only twenty-onewere produced, two of whom did nut belong tothe order, the others being principally those whohad persisted in their declarations before the pope.As might be expected, all the crimes laid to thecharge of the order in the papal bull were againdeposed to by these men ; but the commission hadonly got as far as the examination of Lie thirteenthwitness when the impatience of the king; manifesteditself in a barbarous and illegal act, which had apparentlylong been meditated.The Archbishop of Sens, whose suffragan theBishop of Paris was, had died about Easter, 1309,and the pope had reserved the nomination to himself,Philip wrote to him requiring of him to nominatePhilip de Marius, Bishop of Camera, brother toEnquerrand, his prime minister, alleging that hisyouth was no just impediment, and that his actsTHE TBMPLAHS.would prove how much he was beyond hia age. The |pope, though very reluctant, was obliged to consent,an(L^ April, 1310, Mutiny was installed. No timewa^BiW lost in proceeding to operation. On Sunday,May iO, the for defenders of the order learnedthat the provincial council of Sens was convoked atParis in order to proceed against the knights individually.'Ilieytook alarm, and applied to the commission,which, though it did not sit on Sundays,assembled, and Peter of Bologna informed them ofwhat he had heard. He begged that they wouldKuHer him to lead an appeal which he had drawn up.This they declined doing, but said that, if he had anydefence of the order to give in, they would receive itHe forthwith laid down a written paper, stating thedanger which the prisoners were in dread of, appealingto the holy see, and entreating the commissionto stop the proceedings of the archbishop and hissuffragans. The defenders of the order then retired,and the further consideration of the aflUirwas put offtil! after vespers, when they re-appeared and gave inan address to the Archbishop of Sens, containing anappeal to the pope. The commissioners, however,declined interfering for the present.It is to be noticed that the defenders of the orderprayed on this occasion of the commission lo nominateone or more of his notaries to draw up their actof defence, because they could find no notary whowould act for them, owing probably to fear of the royaldispleasure, or to the want of funds by the accused.On Monday and Tuesday two mure of the witnesseswere heard. One of them named Hubertde Puy declared that, having refused to acknowledgethe crimes laid to the charge of the order, he hadbeen tortured three limes and kept for thirty-sixweeks on bread and water in the bottom of au infectedtower, by order of John de Joinville.SECBBT SOCieTlffS.While tliUB enraged, the commission ones loomeda their flimsy that the count was about to commits fifty-iViur of the knights who had ate^i-led forth as the defenders of the onler. TIteyinstantly sent one of their iiot»Ties and one of thekeepers of the prison of the Templar to entreat thearchbishop to act with caution, as lliere were strongreasons for doubting the truth of the charges; andrepresenting thai the witnesses were so terrified atwhat they had heard of the intentions of the council,that they were incapable of giving their evidence;ih&t moreover the Templar had delivered in asappeal to the pope.The archbishop, who was paying the price of hiselevation to a hard creditor, was not to be stoppedby these considerations. He was making short workof the business. On the Monday he had a numberof those who had undertaken the defence of the orderbrought before the council and he interrogated themonce more himself. Those of them who, having possessed,had afterwards retracted, and now persistedin their retractation, were declared to he relapsedheretics, and were delivered over to the secular armand condemned to the flameiii; those who, had notconfessed, and wonid not, were sentenced to imprisonmentas unreconciVfd Templar ; those who persistedin their confession of the enormities laid lo the churp^eof the order were set at liberty, and called reconciledTemjilars.The next morning the fifty-four Templar whohad been declared relapsed were taken from theirprison, placed in carts, and conducted to ^e placei»f execution, where they beheld the piles prepared,and the executioners standing with flaming torchesin their hands. An envoy from the court was present,who proclaimed liberty and the royal favour forthose who would even then retract theirdeclaralionsTHE Templar. 311snA confess the silt of Hie onler. The friends andrelatives of the unhappy victims crowded round them,with tears and prayers, imploring of them to makethe required acknowledgment and save their lives.In vain. These galant knights, who, yielding to theanguish of torture, and worn down by solitude andprivations, had confessed to the truth of the mostabsurd charges, now that they beheld the certainlimit of their sufferings, disdained to purchase byfalsehood a prolongation of life to be spent in infamyand contempt. With one voice they re-asserted theirown innocence and that of their order. They calledon God, the Virgin, and all the saints to aid and supportthem, raised the hymn of death, and expiredamidst the tears and commiseration of the by-flanders.Felons convicted on the clearest evidence will, asis well known, die asserting their innocence ; but thisis when they have no hope of escape remaining.Here life and liberty were offered, and the victimswere implored by those whom they most loved toaccept of them. May we not then assert that themen who resisted all solicitations were sincere andspoke the truth, and were supported by their confidenceof being received as martyrs by that Godwfiom they devoutly adored according to the doctrinesof their church?On Wednesday, America de Villars-le-Duc, agedabout fifty years, was brought before the coniniia-sinners. He was quite pallid, and seemed terrifiedSicyon measure. On the articles to which he wasto depose being explained lo him, he asseverated inthe strongest manner his resolution to speak thetruth; then striking his breast with bis clenchedhands, he bent his knees, and stretching his handstowards the altar, spake these memorable words: —I persist in maintaining that the errors imputedto the Templar are absolutely false, though 1 have3iiSECRET SOCtBTIES,confessed some oflhem myself. overcome by the tortureswhich G. de Marcillac and Hugh de Celle, theking's knights, ordered to be inflicted on me. Ihave seen the fifty-four knights led in earls to becommitted to the flames because they would notmake the confessions which were required of them.I have heard that they were burnt ; and I doubt if Icould, like them, have had the noble constancy tobrave the terrors of the pile. 1 believe that, if I werethreatened with it, I should depose on oath before thecommission, and before any other persons who shouldinterrogate me, (hat these some erriira imputed to theorder are true. / would kiU God himself if it waiTeqjiired oftne."He then earnestly implored the commissioners andthe notaries who were present not to reveal to theking's officers, and lo the creepers of the Templar,the words which had escaped him, lest they shoulddeliver him also to the flames.Ought not these simple honest words, the veryaccents of truth, to prevail with us against all theconfession procured by torture, or by promises orthreats, and satisfy us as to their value ?The commissioners, whose conduct throughoutthe whole affair was regulated by humanity andjustice, declared that the evening before one of thewitnesses had come to them and implored of themto keep his deposition secret, on accoutitof the dangerwhich he ran if it should be known ; and, judging thatin their present state of terror it would not be justto hear the witnesses, they deliberated on proroguingtheir session to a future period. .We thus see that even the papal commission couldnot protect against the king such of the witnesses aswere honest and bold enough tn maintain the innocenceof the order. Strict justice was therefore outof the question, Philip would have the order guiltyTHE Templar. SISof the most incredible crimes, and death awaited thewitness who did riot depose as he wished. Mean-limehis agents were busily engaged in tampering;with the prisoners; and by threats and promises theyprevailed on forty-four of them to give up theirdesign of defending the order.On the 21st May the 'commissioners met, in theabsence of the Archbishop of Narbonne and theArchdeacon of Trent, and, declaring' their labourssuspended for the present, adjourned to the 3dNovember.In the interval the conduct of the council of Senshad been imitated in other provinces. The Archbishopof Rheims held a council at Senlis, by whosesentence nine Templar were committed to the flames.Another council was held at Pont-de-rArche by theArchbishop of Rouen, and several knights wereburnt. The Bishop of Carcassonne presided at acouncil which delivered many victims to the seculararm. On the isti August the Archbishop of Sensheld a second council, and burned four knights.Thibaull, Duke of Lorraine, the close friend ofKing Philip, put many Temples to death, andseized the property of the order.On the 3d November three of the papal commissionersmet at Paris : they asked if any one wished todefend the order of the Templar. No oue appearingIhey adjourned to the 27th December. On resumingtheir sittings they called on William de Chambonnetand Berlin de Sortie to give their presence atthe hearing of the witnesses. These knighls requiredthe presence of Raynaud de Pruino and Peter ofBologna, but were informed that these priests hadsolemnly and voluntarily renounced the defence ofthe order, and revoked their retractation ; that thelatter had escaped from his prison and fled, and thatthe former could not be admitted to defend theories.3MSEOitST Societies.US he bad been degraded at the count of Sens.The knights reiterated their revisal and retired.The commissioners then proceeded in their labourswithout them, and continued the examination ofwitnesses till the 26tta Mny, I'll.Tile whole number of persons examined before thecommission amounted to 231. for the tar greater partserving-brethren. 01" these about two-thirds acknowledgedthe truth of the principal charges againstthe order, lee denial of Christ and spitting on thecross were very generally confessed, but many saidthey had smitten beside it, not onit.and also that ihejhad denied God with their lips, not with their hearts.With respect to the head which the Templar weresaid to worship, as it was of some importance to provethis offence, in order to make out tete charge ofheresy, it was testified to by a. few. Some said itwas like that of a man with a long white beard,others thai it was like that of a woman, and that itwas said to be the head of one of the ] 1,000 virgins.One witness gave the following account of it, whichbe said he had had from a secular knight at Limisao,in Cyprus,A certe nobleman was passionately in love witha maiden. Being unable, however, to overcome herrepugnance to him, he took her body, when she wasdead, out of her grave, and cut off her head, andwhile Ibua engaged lie heard u voice crying — Keepit safe, whatever looks on it will be destroyed. Hedid as desired, and made the first trial of it on theGrisons, an Arab tribe, which dwelt in Cyprus quidthe neighbouring country, and whenever he uncoveredthe head and turned it towards any of theirtowns, its walls instantly fell down. He next embarkedwith the bead for Constantinople, being resolvedto destroy thai city also. On the way hisse, oulofenriosily, opened the box which containedTHB TBHPtARa. 315the head. Instantly there came on it terrific storm,the ship went to pieces, and nearly all who were onboardperished. The very fish vanish Iron thatpart of the sea.Another if the witnesses had heard the same story.The common tradition of the East, he said, was, thatin old times, before the two s|Mritiial orders of knighthoodwere founded, a head used to rise in a certainwhirlpool named Stadia, the appearance of whichwae very dangerous tor the atiipa which happened tobe near it. We are to suppose, though it does notappear that the witnesses said so, that the Templarhad contrived to get possession of this formidable head.We are to observe that the witnesses who thus deposedbad been picked and culled in all parts ofFiance, by the king's officers, out of those who hadconfessed before the different prelates and provincialcouncils, and who were, by threats and promises, engagedto persist in what they had said. The terrorthey were under was visible in their countenances,their words, and their actions, Many of them beganby saying that they would not vary from what theyhod deposed before such a bishop or such a council ;yet even among these some were bold enough torevoke their confessions, declaring that they had beendrawn from them by torture, and asserted the innocenceof the order. Others retracted their confession))when brought before the commissioners, but shortlyafterwards, having probably in the interval been wellmenaced or tortured by tt king's officers, returnedand retracted their retractation.The case of John dePoUencourt, the thirty-seventhwitness, is a remarkable instance. He bt^an in theusual way, by declaring that he would persist in hisconfession made before the Bishop of Amiens,touching the denial of Christ, &c. The commissioners,observing his paleness and agitation, told him to tell31S sbchet societies.the truth, and save his soul, iind not to persist in hisconfession if it had nut been sincere, assuring himthat neither they nor their notaries would reveal anythingthat he said. After a pause he replied: —I declare then, on peril of my soul, and on theoath which I have taken, that, at the time of my reception,I neither denied God nor spat upon the cross,nor committed any of the indecencies of which weareaccused, and was not required so to do. It istrue that I have made confession before the inquisitors;but it was through the fear of death, and becauseGiles lie Rotaugi had, nith tears, said to me,and many others who were with me in prison atMontreuil, that we should pay for it with our lives,if we did not assist by our confessions to destroy theorder. I yielded, and afterwards I wished to confessmyself to the Bishop of Amiens; he referred me to aMinorite friar; laccusedmyself of this falsehood, andobtained absolution, on condition that I would makeno more false depositions in this alluir. I tell youthe truth; I persist in attesting it before you; comewhat may of it, I prefer my soul to my body.' 'Nothing can bear more plainly the character oftruth than this declaration ; yet three days afterwardsthe witness came back, revoked it all, spoke of theeat which used to appear in tile chapters, and saidlliat, if the order had not been abolished, he wouldhave quitted it. Had he not been welt menaced andtortured in the interim ?The examination of Peter de la Fall, a bachelorin theology of the order of the preachers, the 201stwitness, brought from him these remarkable words :I have been present at the examination of severalTemplar, some of whom, confessed many of thethings contained in the said articles, and some otherstotally denied them ; and for many reasons it appearedto me that greater credit was to be given tothose who denied i\\an to \kt)se. Wi caafc^ed,"TKB TBHFLARS,CHAPTER XI.Examinations iiiEiiglaud — GennaDf — Spain — Italy — Naplesand Proi'iina; — Sicily — Cypnis — Meeting of the Council ofVienne — Suppression of the order— Fata of its Members —Dtiuth of Malay.The time fined for the meeting of the council atVienne was now at hand, in which the fate of theorder was to be. decided. Before we proceed tonarrate its acts we will briefly state the result nf theexaminations of the Templar in other countries.The pope sent, as his judges, to England, ,abbot of Lagny, and Picard de Vaux, canonof Narbonne; and the examination commenced atYork, London, Lincoln, and other places, on the25th November, 1309. The inquiry continued tillthe council held in London in 1311; the number ofTemplar examined was two hundred and twenty-eight;that of the witnesses against the order wasseventy-two, almost all Carmelite, Minorities, Dominicans,and Augustinian, the natural foes of theorder. The Templar were treated with great mildness;and in England, Ireland, and scotland, theywere unanimous and constant in their assertion ofthe innocence of the order. The evidence againstthe order was almost all hearsay : its^ture will beshown by the following specimens.John de General, a Minorite, had heard thatfilbert de Raxat, a Templar, had once gone abouta meadow crying "' Wo, wo is me ! ihul ever Iwas born. I have been pierced to deny God, andgive myself up to the devil."8BCBBT Societies,A TcmplHT had said to William de Berne, in thepresence ofseverBl respectable people, at the fuQemli)f the parish-priest of Duxvmrlh, near Cambridge.that a man has no Tore a soul, afler death, that) adoff'.John Demure, n secular knight, said that heeinvited the prior William de Fence to dine withhim. After dinner the prior took from his bosom abook, and gave it to the knight's lady lo read. Shefound on a paper which was fastened into the bookHie Following words, " Christ was not the Son of God,nor born ol" a virgin, but conceived by Mary, the wifeof Joseph, in the same way aa all other men. Christwas not a true but a false prophet, and was crucifiedfor his own crimes and not for the redemption ofmankind, &c." The lady showed this paper to hethusband, who spoke lo the prior, who only laughedat it ; but, being brought before a court of justice, heconfessed the truth, excusing himself on the groundsof his being illiterate and ignorant of what the bookcontained.Robert of Nottingham, a Minority, said, "Oneevening my prior did not appear at table, as relicswere come from Palestine which he wished to showthe brethren. About midnight i beard a confusednoise in the chapel ; I got up, and, looking through,the keyhole, saw that it was lighted. In the mom-inn;I asked a brother who was the saint in whosehonour they had celebrated the festival during thenight ? He turned pate with terror, thinking ( hadseen sumethiM;, and said " Ask me not; and if youbaiae jour lift say nothing of it before the superiors."Another witness said that the son of a Templarhad peeped through the slits of the door into thechapter-room, and seen a new member put to deathfor hesitating lo deny Christ. Long afterwards.THE TBUPLARS.being asked by his sallier lo become a Templar, herefused, telling what he had seen: his father instantlyJohn of Bertha, a Minorite, was told by a womannamed j\.g>ies Lovecote, who said she had it IromEnvalethus. prior in London, that when m one of thechapters a brother had refused to spit on the cross,they suspended him in a well and covered it up.This witness also deposed to some other enormitieswhich he said he had heard of from the same woman,herself speaking from hearsay. .In June, 1310, the pope wrote to King Edward,blaming his lenity and calling on him to employ thetorture in order to elicit the truth. The council ofLondon, after a long discussion, ordered it to be employed,hut BO as not to inutile the limbs or causean incurable wound or violent effusion of blood.The knights persisted in asserting their innocence.In Germany the different prelates examined theTemplar in their respective dioceses, Nothingselicited. At Mente the orders pronounced innocent.The Wildgraf Frederic, preceptor on theRhine, offered to undergo the ordeal of glowingiron. He had known the Master intimately in theEast, and belieVed him lo be as good a Christian 09The Templar in the Spanish peninsula were examined,and witnesses heard for and against them inCastile, Leon, Aragon, and Portugal, and nothingwas proved against them. The council of Tarragonain Aragon, after applying thojorlure, pronouncedthe order free Irom the stain of heresy. A tthe council of Medina del Caq|ipo in Leon, one witnesssaid that he had heard that, when some Mil*rites visited the preceptor at Villalpando, they foundhim reading a little book, which he instantly lockedup in three boxes, saying, " This book might fallGBCRET BOOIKTIES.into hands where it may be very dmigeroiiB to theThe influence of the pope may be supposed tohave been stronger ia Italy than in the countriesabove mentioned, and accordingly nc find that declarationssimilar to those made in France weregiven there. Yet it was at Florence that the adorationof the idols, the cal, &c., was most Tolly acknowledged.Ill the patrimony of St. Peter some confessionsto the same effect were made; but atBologna, CfBCoa, and Ancona, nothing transpired.Nine Templar maintained the innocence of theorder before the council of Ravenna. It was debatedwhether the torture should be employed. Two Dominicaninquisitors were for it, the remainder of thecouncil declared against it. It was decreed that theinnocent should be absolved, the guilty punishedaccording lo law. Those wko had revoked the made under torture, or through fear of it,were to be regarded as innocent — a very differentrule from that acted on by King Philip.Charles II. of Anjou, the relation of King Philip,and the enemy of the Templar, who were on theside of Frederick, king of Sicily, had the Templarseized and examined in Provence and Naples. Thoseexamined in Provence were all serving-brethren, andHome oi'them testified to the impiety and idolatry ofthe order. Two Templar were examined at Brin-diei,ill the kingdom of Naples, in June, 1310; onehad denied the cross in Cyprus, he said, six yearsaller he hud entered the order; the other had trampledon the cross at the time of his reception. He,as well as others, had bowed donald worshipped a^y cat in the chapters.In Sicily six Templar, the only ones who werearrested, deposed against the order. One of themsaid he bad been received in the unlawful way innTHE Temples. 32VCatalonia, where, »s we have just seen, the innocenceof the order was fully recognised. His evidencewas full of absurdity. He said the cat hadnot appeared for a long time in the chapters butthat the ancient statutes of Damietta said that itused to appear and be worshipped.In Cyprus 110 witnesses were examined; 75belonged to the order and maintained its innocence; the testimony of the remainder was also infavour of it. ^We thus find that, in every place^eyond thesphere of the influence of the king of France andhis creature the pope, the innocence of the order wasmaintained and acknowledged; and undoubtedly thesame would have been the case in France if theproceedings against it had been regulated by justiceand the love of truth.The time appointed for the meeting of the genera!council was now arrived. On the Isl October, 1311,the pope came to Vienne, which is a short distancefrom the city of Lyons, and found there 114bishops, besides several other prelates, already assembled.On the 13lh, the anniversary of the arrestof the Templar four years before, the council commencedits sittings in the cathedral. The pope, inhis opening speech, stated the grounds of its havingbeen convoked, namely, the process against the Templar,the support of the Holy Land, the reformationof the Church. The bishops of Soissons, Mente,Leon, and Aquila, who had been appointed to drawup a report of the result of the different examinationsrespecting the order, read it before the assembledfathers, who then once more invited any Tea*pears who wished to defend the order to appear.Though the order was now broken up andpersecuted, and numbers of its ablest members deador languishing in dungeons with their superiors, yetISECRET BOGIETIBS.nine knight had the courage to come forward in defenceof their order, and preReiit Themselves before thecouncil as the representatives of from 1500 to 2000Templar, who were still dwelling rather lurking' inLyons and its vicinity. The pope was not presentwhen they appeared, but his letter of the lllh Novembershows how he acted when he heard that defendersof the order had presented themselves. Clementhad these brave knights arrested and throwninto prison, ud, in real or affected terror at the numberof Tempnira at large, he took additional precautionsfor the security of hia person, and counselledthe king to do the same,To the honour of the assembled fathers, they refusedto sanction this fiugraiit act of injustice. Theprelates of Spain, Germany, Denmark, England,Ireland, and Scotland, without exception ; the Ila-hans, all but one ; the French, with the exception ofthe archbishops of Rheims, Sens, and Rouen, declared,but in vain, for admitting the Templar andhearing their defence. Instead of complying withthis demand of justice and humanity, Clement suddenlyput an end to the session. The winter passedaway in arguments and negociations.Philip, whose practice it was always to look afterhis affairs himself, deeming his presence necessary atVienne, set out for that place, where he arrived earlyiu February, accompanied by his three sons, hisbrother, and several nobles and men-at-arms. Theeffect of his presence was soon perceptible ; the popeassembled the cardinals and several other prelacyin a secret consistory, and abolished the order, by hia■9le authority, on the 2-2d March, 1313.The second session of the council was opened onthe 3d April, with great solemnity; the king ofFrance, his sons, and his brother, gave their presenceat it, and the royal guards appeared fur honour.THS Templar. 323i'oT protection, nr for intimidation. The pope readhis bull of aboliiiiHi. All present listened in silence.No one Ventured lo raise his voice in the cause ofjustice. The wealthy and powerful order of theknights of the Temple was suppressed. On the 2dMay the bull was published, and the order as suchcensed to exist.The order being suppressed, persecution betimesneedless, and it consequently ceased in a great measure.The king and the pope conveyed to theirownuse the moveable properly of the order in France.Its other possessions were, sorely ag-ain't the will ofiheking.assignedtotheorderoi'the Hospitallers, whowere, however, obliged to pay such large fines to theking and pope as completely impoverished 1 them.This extended to all countries, except the [spanishpeninsula and Majorca, The property of the Templarin Aragon was given to the order of Our Ladyof Montes, which was founded in 1317. Its > (estimationwas to combat the Moors ; its habit wassimilar to that of the Templar; audit might, ii re-fore, be almost called the same order. Diniz, theable and enlightened king of Portugal, did not suppressthe order, whose innocence his prelates hadrecognised. To yield a show of obedience lo thepapal will, he made it change its name, and thegreat-prior of the Templar in Portugal became themaster of the Oriler of Christ, which has continuedto the present times.With respect to the remaining Templar, whowere in prison, it was ordered in council that thosewho should be found guiltless should be set at liberty,and maintained out of the property of the order ; thatthe guilty, if they confessed and lamented theiroffences, should he treated with mildness ; if theydid not, dealt with according to Ihe ecclesiasticallaw, and kept in custody in the Partner temple-houses3ii SECRET S0CIIBT18S. }aiiJ ill the convents. Those who had escaped were,if they did not appear within a year before thecouncil or their diocesan, to be excommunicated.Must of the knights were immediately set atliberty : but the property of the order was all gone,and uo means of support remained for them :they were, therefore, reduced to the greatest distress,and many of them obliged to submit to the mostineniiil employment in order to gain a livelihood.A great number were received into the order of St,Johii,onthesamefootingaa they had stood on in theirown order — ^a strong proof trial the guilt of theorder of the Templar was not, by any means, regardedas proved. Gradually, us the members diedoff, or merged into other orders, the name of theTemplar fell into oblivion, or was only recollectedwith pity fur their unmerited fate.While the noble order over which he had presidedwas thus suppressed, its members scattered, its propertybestowed ou others, the Muster, James deMolly, with his three companions, the great-priorof Formality, Hugh de Defraud, visiter of France,and Guy, brother to the Dauphin of Auvergne. stilllanguished in prison. Molay had there but oneattendant, his cook ; the allowance made to him wasLately sufficient to procure him common necessaries,and life had now lost all its value in his eyes. Thepope at length determined to inform the captives ofthe fate destined for them.A papal commission, composed of the bishop ofAlba and Iwo other cardinals, proceeded to Paris, notto hear the prisoners, but, taking their guilt for proved,to pronounce their sentence. To give al! publicityto this act, probably in accordance with the desire ofthe Ifing, a stage was erected in front of the churchof Notre Dame, on which the thrive commissioners,with the archbishop of Sens and several other pre-theTemplar.hates, took their places, on the Isti March, 1314.An immense concourse of people stood around.The four noble prisoners were conducted tVuoi theirdniigeons, and led up on the stage. The cardinalof Alba read out their former confessions, and pronouncedthe sentence of perpetual imprisonment.He was then proceeding (o expose the guilt of theorder, when the Master interrupted him, and thusspoke, taking all Ihe spectators lo witness ; —It is Just that, in so terrible a da;, and in the lustmoments of my ife, I should discover all the iniquityof falsehood, and make the truth to triumph. I declare,then, in the face of heaven and earth, andacknowledge, though to my eternal shame, that Ihave committed the greatest of crimes ; but it baabeen the acknowledging; of those which have beenso foully charged on the order. I attest, and truthobliges me to attest, that it is innocent. I made thecontrary declaration only tn suspend the excessivepains of torture, and to mollify those who made meendure them. I know the punishments which havebeen inflicted on all the knights who had the courageto revoke a similar confession ; hut the dreadfulspectacle which is presented lo me is not able tomake me confirm one lie by another. The lifeoffered me on such infamous terms I abandon with-mollywas followed by Guy in his assertion ofthe innocence of the order ; the other two remainedsilent. The commissioners were confounded, andstopped. The intelligence was conveyed to theking, who, instantly calling his council together,without any spiritual person being present, condemnedthe two knighls to the flames.A pile was erected on that point of the islet in theSeine where afterwards was erected the statue ofHenry IV,, and the following day Molay and hisSECRET aOCIETIRS.companion were brought ibrih and placed upon iLthey Still persisted in their assertion oi' the intocpQce of the order. The flames were first applied titheir feel, the to their more vital parts. The (slidsmell cit' their burning flesh infected the Surmounting'air, and added tii their torments; yet still they perseveredin their declarations. Al length death terminatedtheir misery. che spectators shed tears atthe view of their constancy, and during the sighttheir ashes were gathered up to be preserved ia tradition b) some historians,[i la ere he enpirvri Summoned f meat toHill m ioLi} dues belie the buprerae Judge,THE Templar. 327and Philip to the same tribunal within the space of ayear. The pontifF actually did die of a cholic onthe night of the 19th of the following month, and,the church in which his body was laid taking fire,the corpse was half consumed. The king, beforethe year had elapsed, died of a fall from his horse.Most probably it was these vents which gave riseto the tradition, which teaches the general belief ofthe innocence of the Templar. It was also remarkedthat all the active persecutors of the orderperished by premature or violent deaths.It remains to discuss the two following points: —Did the religio-military order of the Knights Templarhold a secret doctrine subversive of religion andmorality .? Has the order been continued down toour own days ?We have seen what the evidence against theTemplar was, and it is very plain that such evidencewould not be admitted in any modern court of justice.It was either hearsay, or given by persons utterlyunworthy of credit, or wrung from the accused byagony and torture. The articles themselves areabsurd and contradictory. Are we to believe that •the same men had adopted the pure deism of theMahometan, and were guilty of a species otidolatry* almost too gross for the lowest superstition? But when did this corruption commenceamong the Templar? Were those whom St. Bernardpraised as models of Christian zeal and piety,and whom the whole Christian world admired andrevered, engaged in ^a secret conspiracy againstreligion and government ? Yes, boldly repliesHammer, the two humble and pious knights whofounded the order were the pupils and secret allies ofAlmost every charge brought against the Templar hadbeen previously made against the Albigenses, with how muchtruth every one is aware.u 2SECRET Societies.the Mahometan Israelites. This was goia^ toofar for Wilike, and he thinks that the guilt of introducingthe secret doctrine lies on the chaplains ;i'cr he could discern that the doctrines of gnosticism,which the Templar are supposed to haveheld, were beyond the comprehension of illiterateknights, who, though Ih^ could tight and pray, werebut ill qualified to enlemnto the mazes of mysticmetaphysics. According, therefore, to one party,Ihe whole order was corrupt from top to bottom ;according to another, the secrets were confined to atew, and, contrary to all analogy, the heads of theorder were frequently in ignorance of them. Neitheroffer any thing like evidence in support of theirassumption.The real guilt of the Templar was their wealthand their pride* ; the last alienated the people fromthem, the former excited the cupidity of the king ofFrance. Far be it from us to maintain that themorals of the Templar were purer than those of theother religious orders. With such ample means asthey possessed of indulging all their appetites andpassions, it would he contrary to all experience tosuppose that they always restrained them, and wewil! even concede that some of their members wereobnoxious to charges of deism, impiety, breaches ofIheir religious vows, and gross licentiousness. Weonly deny that such were the rules of the order.Had they not been so devoted as they were to theHoly See they would perhaps have come down to us• Our readers will call to mind tha wbll-kDova auvcclote ofKiufc Rjchutil I. When unpunished by the zealous Fulk, ofNelly, to get rid of hi three favourite daughli^ta, pride,voice, ami Voluptuousness, — "You colonel will," said theliliig, " and I hereby dispose of the first to the Templar, ofIt second to the BencflicliuBs, and of the third to my ."THE Templar.329 Ias unsullied as the knights of St, John* ; hut theysided with Pope Boniface against Philip the Fair,and a subservient pontiff sacrificed to his own avariceand personal ambition the most devoted adherentsof the court of Home t-We make little doubt that any one who coolly andcandidly considers the preceding account of themanner in which the order was suppressed willreadily concede that the guilt of its members wasanything but proved. It behoves their modernimpugners to furnish some stronger proofs thanany they have as yet brought forward. The chiefadversary of the Templar at the present day is awriter whose veracity and love of justice are beyondsuspicion, and who has earned for himself enduringfame by his labours in the field of oriental literature,but in whose mind, as his most partial friends mustallow, learning and imagination are apt to overbalancejudgment and philosophy J. He has beenreplied to by Raynouard, Minister, and other ableadvocates of the knights.We now come to the question of the continuanceof the order to the present day. That it has in somesort been transmitted to our times is a matter of no■ Similar change aie laid to have been brought against theHospitallers ia the yet 1-238, but without effect. There wasno Philip the Fair at that lunae in France.f Clement, iu a. ball dated but four days after that of theoppression, acknowledged that the whole o£ the evidenceanoint the order amounted only to suspicion IX We mean the illustrious Jos. von Manner, vrhotie essayon the subject is to be found in the sixth volume of the Milesde orient, where it will be seen that he regard Sir W. Scott,in his Ivanhoe, at a competent witness against the Tempers,on account of his correct ind faithful picture of the mannersand opinions of the middle ages. We apprehend that peopleare beginning now to aolerlain somewhat different ideas onthe subject of our great romancer's fidelity, ut' which the piesent page present u * ' ~330 SBCRBT SOCIETIES.doubt ; for, as we have just seen, the king of Portugalformed the Order of Christ out of the Templar inhis dominions. But our readers are no doubt awarethat the freemasons assert a connexion with theTemplar, and that there is a society calling themselvesTemplar, whose chief seat is at Paris, andwhose branches extend into England and othercountries. The account which they give of themselvesis as follows : —James de Molay, in the year 1314, in anticipationof his speedy martyrdom, appointed Johannes MarcusCornelius to be his successor in his dignity.This appointment was made by a regular well-authenticatedcharter, bearing the signatures of thevarious chiefs of the order, and it is still preservedat Paris, together with the statutes, archives, banners,&c., of the soldiery of the Temple. There hasbeen an unbroken succession of grand-masters downto the present times, among whom are to be foundsome of the most illustrious names in France. Bertranddu Guesclin was grand-master for a numberof years ; the dignity was sustained by several of theMontmorency ; and during the last century theheads of the society were princes of the differentbranches of the house of Bourbon. Bernard RaymondFabrt^ Falaprat is its head at present, at leastwas so a few years a^*.This is no doubt a very plausible circumstantialaccount ; but, on applying the Ithuriel spear of criticismto it, various ugly shapes resembling falsehoodstart up. Thus Molay, we are told, appointed hissuccessor in 1314. He was put to death on theSee Manuel des Temples. As this book is only sold tomembers of the society, we have been unable to obtain a copyof it. Our account has been derived from Mills's History ofChivalry. That this writer should have believed it implicitlyis, we apprehend, no proof oC its truth.THE Temples. 33118th March of that year, and the order had beenabolished nearly year tenore. Why then did he delayso long', and why was he become so apprehensive ofmartyrdom at that time, especially when, as is wellknown, there was then no intention of putting him todeath? Again, where were the chiefs of the societyat that time ? How many of them were living ? andhow could they manage to assemble in the dungeonof Molay and execute a formal instrument ! Moreover,was it not repugnant to the rules and customs ofthe Templar for u, Master to appoint his successor?These are a few of the objections which we thinkmay be justly made ; and, on the whole, we feelstrongly disposed to reject the whole story.As to the freemasons, we incline to think that it wasthe accidental circumstance of the name of the Templarwhich has led them to claim a descent from thatorder; audit is possible that, if the samefate had fallenon the knights of St. John, the claim had never beenset up. We are very far from denying that at the timeof the suppression of the order of the Temple therewas a secret doctrine in existence, and that the overthrowof the papal power, with its idolatry, superstition,and impiety, was the abject aimed at by thulewho held it, and that freemasonry may possibly bethat doctrine under another name*. But we areperfectly convinced that no proof of any weight hasbeen given of the Templar' participation in thatdoctrine, and that all probability is on the other side.We regard them, in fine, whatever their sins mayhave been, as martyrs — martyrs to the cupidity,blood hastiness, and ambition of the king of France.This has, ve Ihiak, been fully jiroirdd by Sr. KusKi^tti, Itmust iiiit b<^ cunCHSleil tliut Ilia writer attungly assert BatIbe 1% iiinlua aura a branch uf Ibis uuciely.332 SECRET SOdSTUS.THESECRET TRIBUNALS OF Westphalia*Chapter !•Introduction — The Original Westphalia— Conquest of theSaxons by Cbademag^ — His Regulations — Dukes <ifSaxony — State of Germany — henry the Lion — His Outlawry— Consequences of it — Origin of German Towns—Origin of the Fehm-gerichte, or Secret Tribunals — Theoriesof their Origin — Origin of their Name — Synonymous Terms.We are now arrived at an association remarkable initself, but which has been, by the magic arts ofromancers, especially of the great archimage of thenorth, enveloped in darkness, mystery, and awe, farbeyond the degree in which such a poetical investiturecan be bestowed upon it by the calm inquirerafter truth. The gloom of midnight will rise to themind of many a reader at the name of the SecretDr. Berck has, in his elaborate work on this subject(Geschichie der WettpKdIiKhen Femgerichte, Bremen, 1815),collected, we believe, nearly all the information that is nowattainable. This work has been our principal guide; for,though we have read some others, we cannot say that we havederived any important information from them. As the subjectis in its historical form entirely new in English literature,we have, at the hazard of appearing occasionally dry, tracedwith some minuteness the construction and mode of procedureof these celebrated courts.SECRET TRIBUNALS OF westphalia. 333Tribunals of Westphalia: a dimly lighted cavernbeneath the walls of some castle, or peat! ventureSwiss kottelrie, wherein sit black-robed judges insolemn silence, will be present to his imagination,and he is prepared with breathless anxiety to perusethe details of deeds without a name *.We fear that we cannot promise the full gratification(if these high-wrought expectations. ExtraordinaryBS the Secret Tribunals really were, we canonly View them as an instance of that compensatingprinciple which may be discerned in the moral aswell as in the natural empire of the Deity ; for,during the most turbulent and lawless period of thehistory of Germany, almost the sole check on crime,in a large portion of that country, was the salutaryterror of these Fehm-Gerichte, or Secret Tribunals.And those readers who have taken their notions ofthem only from works of fiction will learn with surprisethat no courts of justice at the time exceeded,or perhaps we might say equalled, them ill the equityof their proceedings.Unfortunately their history is involved in much obscurity,and we cannot, as in the case of the twopreceding societies, clearly trace this association fromits first formation to the time when it became evanescentand faded from the view. While it flourished,the dread and the fear of it weighed too heavily onthe minds of men to allow them to venture to pryinto its mysteries. Certain and instantaneous deathwas the portion of the stranger who was seen at anyplace where a tribunal was sitting, or who dared soThe romantic account* of the Secret Tribimola will befound in Sit W. Scott translation of Goelbn's Gijii von ,and in his Hogue of Aspen and Anne uf Gtientein.From various passage in Sir W. Sc^utt's hiugniphiral nndother easnyi, it is plain that he believed iucb to be the trkiuchafBclec of the Secret Tribunal.i334 SBCRBT Societies.much as to look into the books which contained thelaws and ordinances of the society. Death was alsothe portion of any member of the society whorevealed its secrets ; and so strongly did this terror, oraprinciple of honour, operate, that, as iBneas Sylvius(afterwards Pope Pius II. )> the secretary of the EmperorFrederick III., assures us, though the number ofthe members usually exceeded 100,000, no motivehad ever induced a single one to be faithless to histrust. Still, however, sufficient materials are to befound for satisfying all reasonable curiosity on thesubject.To ascertain the exact and legal sphere of theoperation of this formidable jurisdiction, and to pointout its most probable origin, are necessary preliminariesto an account of its constitution and its proceedings.We shall therefore commence with theconsideration of these points.Westphalia, then, was the birth-place of this institution,and over Westphalia alone did it exerciseauthority. But the Westphalia of the middle agesdid not exactly correspond with that of the latertimes. In a general sense it comprehended the countrybetween the Rhine and the Weser ; its southernboundary was the mountains of Hesse; its northern,the district of Friesland, which at that time extendedfrom Holland to Schleswig. In the records and law-booksof the middle ages, this land bears the mysticappellation of the red earthy a name derived, as onewriter thinks, from the gules, or red, which was thecolour of the field in the ducal shield of Saxony ;another regards it as synonymous with the bloodyearth; and a third hints that it may owe its origin tothe red colour of the soil in some districts of Westphalia.This land formed a large 'portion of the country ofthe Saxons, who, after a gallant resistance of thirtySECRET TRIBUNALS ny WESTPHALIA, 335years, were forced to submit to the sway of Charlemagne,and to embrace the religion of their conqueror.The Saxons had hitherto lived in a stale ofrude independence, and their dukes and princespossessed Utile or no civil power, being merely thepresidents iu their assemblies and their leaders inwar. Charlemagne thought it advisable to abolishthis dignity altogether, and he extended to thecountry of the Sa sons the French system of countsand counties. £each count was merely a royal officerwho exercised i[i the district over which he wasplaced the civil and military authority. The mimdominici or reg-ji were despatched from the court tohold their habitations in Saxony, as well as in theother dominions of Charles, and at these persons ofall classes might appear and prefer their complaintsto the representative of the king, if they thoughtthemselves aggrieved by the count or any of theinferior officers.In the reign of Louis the German, the excellentinstitutions of Charlemagne had begun tu fall intodesuetude; anarchy and violence had greatly increased.The incursions of the Northmen hadbecome most Formidable, and the Vends * also gavegreat disturbance ,to Germany. The Saxon landbeing the part most immediately exposed to invasion,the emperor resolved 1o revive the ancient dignity ofdukes, and to place the district under one head, whomight direct the energies of the whole people againstthe invaders. The duke was a ro]-al lieutenant,like the counts, only differing from them in theextent of the district over which he exercise authority.The first duke of Saxony was Count Rudolf,the founder of Gandersheim; on his death the dignitywas conferred on his son Bruno, who, being336 SECRET SOCIETIES.slain in the bloody battle of Ebsdorf fought againstthe Northmen, was succeeded by his youngerbrother Otto, the father of Henry the Fowler.On the failure of the German branch of the Carlovingians,the different nations which composed theGermanic body appointed Conrad the Franconian tobe their supreme head; for a new enemy, the Magyars,or Hungarians, now harassed the empire, andenergy was demanded from its chief. Of this Conradhimself was so convinced, that, when dying, aftera short reign, he recommended to the choice of theelectors, not his own brother, but Henry the Fowler,Duke of Saxony, who had, in his conflicts with theVends and the Northmen, given the strongest proofsof his talents and valour. Henry was chosen, andthe measures adopted by him during his reign, andthe defeat of the Hungarians, justified the act of hiselevation.On the death of Henry, his son Otto, afterwardsjustly styled the Great, was unanimously chosen tosucceed him in the imperial dignity. Otto conferredthe Duchy of Saxony on Herman Billing. Fromtheir constant warfare with the Vends and theNorthmen, the Saxons were nov esteemed the mostvaliant nation in Germany, and they were naturallythe most favoured by the emperors of the house ofSaxony. This line ending with Henry II. in 1024,the sceptre passed to that of Franconia, under which 'and the succeeding line of Swabia, owing to thecontests with the popes about investitures and tovarious other causes, the imperial power greatlydeclined in Germany ; anarchy and feuds prevailedto an alarming extent ; the castles of the noblesbecame dens of robbers; and law and justice werenowhere to be found.The most remarkable event of this disastrousperiod, and one closely coonec^d with our subject,,SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 3SJis the outlawry of Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxonyand Bavaria. Mag-nus, the last of the Billung-a ofSaxony, died, leaving only two daughters, of whom(he eldest was married to Henry the Black, Duke ofBavaria, who consequently had, according to themaxima of that age, a right to the Duchy of Saxony;but the Emperor Henry V, refused to admit hisclaim, and conferred it on Lothair of Supphnburg-,As, however, Henry the Black's son, Henry theProud, was married to the only daughter of Lothair,and this prince succeeded Henry V. in the empire,Henry found no difficulty in obtaining the Duchy ofSaxony from his father-in-law, who also endeavouredto have him chosen his successor in the imperialdignity. But the other princes were jealous of him,and on the death of Lothairee they hastily electedConrad of Swabia, who, under the pretext that noduke should possess two duchies, called on Henry toresign either Saxony or Bavaria. On hia refusal,Conrad, in conjunction with the princes of the empire,pronounced them both forfeited, and conferredBavaria on the Margrave of Austria, and Saxony onAlbert the Bear, the son of the second daughter ofDuke Magnus of Saxony.Saxony was, however, afterwards restored byConrad to Henry the Lion, son of Henry the Proud,and Conrad's successor, Frederick Barbarossa, gavehim again Bavaria. Henry had himself carried ibisarms from the Elbe to the Baltic, and conquered aconsiderable territory from the Vends, which heregarded as his own peculiar principality. He wasnow master of the greater part of Germany, and itwas quite evident that he must either obtain theimperial dignity or fall. His pride and his severitymade him many enemies ; but as he had no child butadaughter, who was married to a cousin of theemperor, his power was regarded without muchi^rebensiou. It was, however, the ambition ofHenry to be the father of a race of heroes, and, afterthe fasfainn of those times, he (divorced his wife &n<iespoused Matilda, daughter of Henry II. of Dng^luid,by whom he leaad four sons. Owing to this aadother circumstances all friendly feeling ceased betweenHenry and the emperor, whom, however, heuccuiDpanied on the expedition lo Italy, which terminatedin the battle of Legnano. But he suddenlydrew off his forces aud quilted the imperial army onthe way, and Frederick, imputing; the ill successwhich he met with in a great measure lo the conductof Ihe Duke of Saxony, was, on his return to Germany,in a mood to lend a ready ear to auy chargesagainst bim. These did not fail bdou to pour in : theSaxon clergy, over whom he had arrogated a rightof investiture, appeared as his principal accusers.Their charges, which were partly true, partly tile,were listened to by Frederick and Ihe princes of theempire, and the downfall of Henry wis resolvedupon. He was thrice summoned, but in vain, toappear and answer the charges made against hit.He was summoned a fourth time, but to as littlepurpose ; the sentence of outlawry was then formallypronounced at Wiirizburg. He denied the legalityof the sentence, and attempted lo oppose its execution;several counts stood by bim in his resistance ;but be was forced to submit and sue for grace atErfurt. The emperor pardoned him and permittedhim to retain his allodial property on condition ufhis leaving Germany for three years. He wasdeprived of all his imperial fiefs, which were immediatelybestowed upon others.In the division of the spoil of Henry the LionSaxony was cut up into pieces ; a large portion of itwent to the Archbishop nf ColcH^ne; and UemhardofAnhalt, son of Albert the Bear, obtained a consider-secretTRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA-339able part oFthe remainder ; the supremacy over Holstein,Meckleiibm-g, and Pome rani a, ceased ; and Lfl-faeck became a free imperial city. All (he archbishops,bishops, counts, and herons, seized as much as theycould, aud became immediate vassals of the empire.Neither Bernhard uor the Archbishop of Colognewas able completely to establish his power over theportion assigned him, and lawless violence everywhereprevailed. " There was no king in Israel, and everyonedid that which was right in his own eyes'' is thelanguage of the Chronicler *.We here again meet an instance of the competitorsprinciple which prevails in the arrangementsof Providence. It was the period of turbulenceand anarchy succeeding the outlawry of Henry theLion which gave an impulse to the building or enlargingof towns in the north of Germany. Thefree Germans, as described by Tacitus, scorned to bepeut up within walls and ditches ; and their descendantsin Saxony would seem to have inherited theirsentiments, for there were no towns in that countrytill the time of Henry the Fowler. As a securityagainst the Northmen, the Slaves, and the Magyars,this monarch caused pieces of land to be enclosed byearthen walls and ditches, within which was collecteda third part of the produce of the surroundingcountry, and in which he made every ninth man ofthe population fix his residence. The courts of justicewere held in these places lo give them consequence ;and, their strength augmenting with their population,Ihey became towns capable of resisting the attacksof the enemy, and of giving shelter and defence tothe people of the open country. Other towns, suchas Munster, Osnabriick {pgnabiirgfi), Paderborn,andMinded, grew up gradually, from the desire of the•ArnuW of Lubsck, Chronic Stadium, 1. iii. r. 1., apudLeibnitz Scripture Rerum BnuuTicirum, I. ii p. 653.BECRBT Societies.]protection from theA third class of towsperiod of which we iopen country, the viilieth to where theypeople to dwell close lo abbeys, churches, and episcopalresidences, whence they might obtain succourin time of temporal or spiritual need, and der'reverence shown to thi; church.)wed their oran to the stormyK write; for the people of thems of oppression and tyranny,might. in return for their benedegree of protection, anderected their houses at the foot of the castle of somepowerful nob letnan. These towns gradually increasedin power, with the favour of the emperors, who, likeother monarchs, viewing in them allies against theexcessive power of the church and the nobility, gladlybestowed on them extensive privileges; and fromthese originated the celebrated Hanseatic League, towhich almost every town of any importance in Westphaliabelonged, either mediately or immediately.But the growth of cities, and the prosperity andthe better system of social regulation which theypresented, were not the only beneficial effects whichresulted from the overthrow of the power of Henrythe Lion. There is every reason to conclude that itwas at this period that the Fehm-gerichle, or SecretTribunals, were instituted in Westphalia; at least,the earliest document in which there is any clear andexpress mention of them is dated in the year 1267,This is an instrument by which Engelberl, Count ofthe Mark, frees one Mervin of Kinkenrode from thefeudal obligations for his inheritance of Broke, whichwas in the county of Mark ; and it is declared to havebeen executed at a place named Belle, the courtbeing preaidefl over by Bernhard of Henedorp, andthe Fehmcnoles being present. By the Fermentedwere at all misunderstood the initiated in the secretsof the Westphalian tribunals; so that we have herer and decisive proof of the existence of theseSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WBSTPHAtI*.341 1tribunals at that time. In another document, dated1'280, the Fehmeiiotes ain appear as witnesses, andafter this time the mention of them becomes frequent.We thus find that, in little more than half a centuryafter the outlawry of Henry the Lion, the Fehm-g^richte were in operation in Westphalia; and thereis not the slightest allusion to them before that date,or any proof, at all convincing', to be produced infavour of their having been an earlier institution.Are we not, therefore, justified in adopting the opinionof those who place (heir origin in the first half ofthe thirteenth century, and ascribe it to the anarchyand confusion consequent on the removal of thepower which had hitherto kept within bounds theexcesses of the nobles and the people? And is it a.conjecture altogether devoid of probability that somecourageous and upright men may have formed a secretdetermination to apply a violent remedy to theintolerable evils which afflicted the country, and tohave adopted those expedients for preserving the publicpeace, out of which gradually grew the SecretTribunals? nr that some powerful prince of thecountry, acting from purely selfish modes, devisedthe plan of the society, and appointed his judges tomake the first essay of it*?Still it must be confessed that the oriiiiu of theFehm-gerichte is involved in the same degree of obscurityvfhich hangs over that of the Hansealicleague and so many other institutions of the middleages ; and little hopes can be entertained of this obscurityever being totally dispelled. Conjecture will,therefore, ever have free scope of the subject ; andthe opinion which we have just expressed ourselvesas inclined to adopt Is only one of nine which havebeen already advanced on it. Four of these carry• Berck, pp. 23a, 250.SB CBBT Societies.back the origin of the Fehm-trerichte to the time ofCharlemagne, making ihein ti) have been either directlyinstituted by that great prince, or to bave graduallygrown out of Rome of his other institutionsfor the better governing of his stales. A tiflh placestheir origin iii the latter half of the eleventh center;,and regards them as an invention of ia Westphaliaclergy for forwarding the views of the popes intheir attempt to arrive at dominion over all temporalprinces, A sixth ascribes the institution to St. En-gilbert.Archbishop of Cologne, to whom the thnpe-or Frederic II. committed the administration ofaffairs in Germany during his own absence in Sicily,and who was distinguished for his zeal in the persecutionof heredes. Ue modelled it, the advocates ofIbis opinion say, on that of the Inquisition, which hadlately been established. The seventh and eighththeories are undeserving of notice. On the otherswe shall make a few remarks.The first writers who mention the Fehm-gerichteare Henry of llervorden, a Dominican, who wrotea^nst them in therein of the Emperor Charles IV,,about the middle of Ihe fourteenth century; and£near Sylvius, the secretary of Frederic Iii a centurylater. These writers are among those who referthe origin of the Fehm-gerichte to Charlemagne, andsuch was evidently the current opinion of the time —an opinion studiously disseminated by the membersof the society, who sought to give it consequence inthe eyes of the emperor and people, by associating itwith the memory of the illustrious monarch of theWest There is, however, neither external testimonynor internal probability to support that opinion.Egiuhajl, the secretary and biographer of Charlemagne,and all the other contemporary writers, aresilent on the subject ; the valuable fragments of theancient Saxon laws collected in the twelfth centurySECRET TRIBUNALS 09 Westphalia. 343make not the slightest allusion to these courts ; and,in fine, their spirit and mode of procedure are utterly'at variance with the Carlovingian institutions. As tothe hypothesis which makes Archbishop Ethelbert theauthor of the Fehm-gerichte, it is entirely unsupportedby external evidence, and has nothing in itsfavour but the coincidence, in point of time, of ethelbert'sadministration with the first account which wehave of this jurisdiction, and the similarity which itbore in the secrecy of its proceedings to that of theHoly Inquisition — a resemblance easy to be accountedfor, without any necessity for having recourse to thesupposition of the one being borrowed from the other.We can therefore only say with certainty that, inthe middle of the thirteenth century, the Fehm-gerichtewere existing and in operation in the country whichwe have described as the Westphalia of the middle£ses. To this we may add that this jurisdictionextended over the whole of that country, and wasoriginally confined to it, all the courts in other partsof Germany, which bore a resemblance to the WestphaliannFehni-gerichte, being of a different characterand nature*It remains, before proceeding to a description ofthese tribunals, to give some account of the origin oftheir name. And here again we find ourselves involvedin as much difficulty and uncertainty as wheninquiring into the origin of the society itself.Almost every word in the German and cognate languages,which bears the slightest resemblance to thewordFe^mf, has been given by some writer or other asSee Berck, L i. c. 5, 6^ 7.f Spelt also Fern, Fdm, Ftm, Fehm, In German / and vare pronounced alike, as also are a and e. The words fromwhich Farm has been derived are FahnCf a standard ; Semen,to skin; Fekde, feud; Feme (i. e. v» mihi), wo is me; Fe orFarm, which Dryer says signifies in th northern languages,BBC BET BOCIBTTBS.ils true etymon. It is unnecessary, in the presentsketch of the history of the Fehm-geri elite, to discussthe merits of each of the claimants: we shallcontent ourselves with remarking that, among thosewhich appear to have most probability iii their favour,is the Latin Fama, which was first proposed by Leibnitz.At the time when we have most reason for supposing'these tribunal to have been instituted theGermans were familiar with the language of the civiland canonical laws; the Fehm-gerichte departed fromthe original maxim of German law, which was — noacciiier, no judge, and, in imitation of those foreignlaws*, proceeded on common fame, and without anyformal accusation against persons suspected of crimeor of evil courses. Moreover, various tribunals, notin Westphalia, which proceeded in the same manner,on common report, were also called Fehm-gerichte,which may therefore be interpreted Fa me-tribunals,or such as did not, according lo the old German rule,require a formal accusation, but proceeded to the investigationof the iTuth of any charge which commonfame or general report made against any person — adangerous mode of proceeding, no doubt, and oneliable to the greatest abuse, but which the lawlessslate of Germany at that period, and the consequentimpunity which great criminals would else haveenjoyed, from the fear of them, which would havekept back accusers and witnesses, perhaps abundantlyjustified. It is proper to observe, however,that/em appears to be an old German word, ; nile (old German), prudence; Fetid, punishment; teteFimmiha of the Salic Uw; Swedish Ffm, Island Fimnt,Bve, Such being erroneously supposed tu be Ibe Dumber ofjudges in a Fehm, or court. Finally, Mdier ileduee<i it fromFaun, which he says is employed in Austria and some othercountries for Rata, cream.Common fame vas a sufficient ground of arraignment iaEngland, also, in Uie Anglo-saxon p«rbd.SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. easingcondemnation ; and it is far from being unlikely,at^erall, that the FehiD-gericlite may mean merely thetribunals of condemnation —-in other words, courtsfor the punishment of crime, or what we should callcriminal courts.The Fehm-gerichte was not the only name whichthese tribunals bore J they were also called Fehm-diiig, the word ding* being, in the middle ages,equivalent to jericho, or tribunal. Thfty were alsocalled the Westphalian tribunals, as they could onlybe holden in the Red Land, or Westphalia, and onlyWeiitphalians were amenable to their jurisdiction.They were further styled free-seats (PVei-iiuAfe,ftuhl also being the same as jericho), free-tribunals,&c., as only freemen were subject to them. AFrei-gericht, however, was not a convertible termwith a Westphalian Fehm-gericht ; the former wasthe genus, the latter the species. They are in therecords also named Secret Tribunals, {HeimiicheGerichle), and Silent Tribunals {Stillgerichte), fromthe secrecy of their proceedings ; Forbidden Tribunals{Ferboteiie Gerichfe), the reason of which nameis not very clear ; Carolinian Tribunals, as havingbeen, as was believed, instituted by Charles theGreat; also the Free Bank, which last word wasequivalent to jurisdiction. A Fehm-gericht wasalso termed a Heinrich Achi, and a Heinrichbeacklosaene Act (secret and secret-closed tribunal);act also being the same as jericho, or tribunal.• In the Northern languages, Tmg ; hence (he Store Ting Cmour j,.uriials usually wtitti;aS*or(AiBy),Le.(;rm(71i^,0[P«l-ailment utNorwny.346 SECRET SOCIETIES.Chapter II.The Tribunal-Lord— The Count— The Schfippen— The Messengers— The Public Court — The Secret Tribunal — Extentof its Jurisdiction — Places of holding the Courts — time ofholding them — Proceedings in them — Process where thecriminal was caught in the fact — Inquisitorial Process.Having traced the origin of the Fehm-gerichte andtheir various appellations, as far as the existing documentsand other evidences admit, we are now todescribe the constitution and procedure of thesecelebrated tribunals, and to ascertain who were thepersons that composed them ; whence their authoritywas derived ; and over what classes of persons theirjurisdiction extended.Even in the periods of greatest anarchy in Germany,the emperor was regarded as the fountain of alljudicial power and authority, more particularly whereit extended to the right of inflicting capital punishment.The Fehm-pgerichte, therefore, regarded theemperor as their head, from whom they derived allthe power which they possessed, and acknowledgedhis right to control and modify their constitutionand decisions. These rights of the emperors weshall, in the sequel, describe at length.Between the emperor and the Westphalian {Stuhlherren)^ as they were styled, that islayand ecclesiastical territorial lords, there was nointermediate authority until the fourteenth century,when the Archbishop of Cologne was made the im-secretTribunals OF WHSTPHAUA.peril lieutenant in Westphalia. Each tribunal-lordha(lhiapeculiardistrict,within which he had the powerof erectiiifj Tribunals, and beyond which his authoritydid not extend. He either presided In person inhis court, or he appointed a count (Freigraf) to supplyhis place, The rights of a stuhiherr* had someresemblance to those of the owner of an advowsonin this country. He had merely the power of nominating'either himself or anotherpersou as count; theright to inflict capital punishment was to be conferredby the emperor or his deputy. To this end, when aTribunal-lord presented a count for investiture, hewas obliged to certify on oath that the person sopresented was truly and honestly, both by father andmother, born on Westphalian soil ; that lie stood inno ill repute i that he knew of no open crime he hadcommitted ; and that lie believed him to be perfectlywell qualified to preside over the county.The count, on being appointed, was tower thathe would judge truly and justly, according to the lawand the regulations of the emperor Charles and thedosed tribunal ; that he would be obedient to the emperoror kin^r, and his lieutenant ; and that be wouldrepair, at least once iu each year, to the generalchapter which was to be held on Ihe Westphalianland, and give an account of his conduct, &c.The income of the free-coimt arose from fees anda share in fine; he had also a fixed. allowance iumoney or in kind from the stuhlherr. Each free-scruplewho was admitted made him a present, torepair, as the laws express it, ha courtly hat. If.the person admitted was a knight, this fee was amark of gold ; if not, a mark of silver. Every oneof the initiated who cleared himself by oath from'■dSecret SOCIETIES.any charge paid the count a cross-penny. He had a,share of all the fines imposed in his court, and a feeon ciLstioiis, &c.There was in general but one count to eachtribunal ; but instances occur of there beings b3many as seven or eight. The count presided in thecourt, and the citations of the accused proceededNext to the count were the assessors or(^Schoppeii)*. These formed the main body andstrength of the society. They were nominated bythe count with the approbation of the tribunal-lord.Two persons, who were already in the society, wereobliged to vouch on oath fur the fitness of the candidateto be admitted. It was necessary that heslnmld be a German by birth ; born in wedlock offree parents ; of the Christian religion ; neither excommunicatenor outlawed ; not involved in anyFehm-gericht process; a member of no spiritualThese shipped were divided into two classes, theknightly, and the simple, respectable assessors; for,as the maim that every man should lie judged byhis peers prevailed universally during the middleages, it was necessary to conform to it also in theFehm-tribunals.Previous to their admission to a knowledge of thesecrets of the society, the schoppen were namedIgnorant; when they had been initiated they werecalled Knowing (IVissende) or Fermented, It wasonly these last who were admitted lo the secret-thisword, which cannot be adeqiiHlely translated, is thelow-Latin Scakim, the French Eckcvias. Vie shall tattlelilJeny of uainx it throughout The suhoppea were calledfrei</ret) chipped, as the count was called frei-^rqf, thecourt frtt-alakl, on account uf the juribdirfioa of the tribunal*being cognac to freemen.secret TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 349tribunal. The initiation of u schijppe was attendedwith a good deal of ceremony. He appeared bareheadedbefore the assembled tribunal, aid wasthere questioned respecting his qualifications. Then,kneeling down, with the thumb and forefinger of hisright. hand on a naked sword and a halter, he pronouncedthe following oath after the count : —I promise, on the holy marriage, that I will,from henceforth, aid, keep, and conceal the holyFinis, from wile and child, from father and mother,from sister and brother, from fire and wind, fromall that the sun shines on and the rain covers, fromall that is between sky and ground, especially fromthe man who knows the law, and will bring beforethis free tribunal, under which I sit, all that belongsto the secret jurisdiction of the emperor, whether 1know it to be true myself or have heard it fromtrustworthy people, whatever requires correction orpunishment, whatever is Fehm-free (i. e. a crimecommitted in the county), that it may be judged, or,with the consent of the accuser, be put off in grace ;and will not cease so to do, for love or for fear, forgold or for silver, or for precious stones ; and willstrengthen this tribunal and jurisdiction with all myfive senses and power; and that I do not take on methis office for any other cause than for the sake ofright and justice ; moreover, that I will ever furtherand honour this free tribunal more than any other treetribunals; and what I thus promise will I steadfastlyand firmly keep, so help me God and his HolyHe was further obliged to swear that he wouldever, to the best of hia ability, enlarge Ihe holy empire; and that lie would undertake nothing with uti'righteous hand against Ihe land and people of theBtuhiherr.The count then inquired of the officers of theSBORBT Societies.court (the Frohnboint) ir the candidate had g«ae- through all the formalities requisite to reception, andspied that officer had answered in the affirmative, thecount revealed (o the aspirant the secrets of the tribunal,and communicated to him the secret sij^n bywhich the initialed knew one another. What thiss)p;n was i.s utterly unknown : some say that whenthey met at table they used to turn the point oftheir knife to themselves, and the hast away fromthem. Others take the letters S S GG, which wereBund in an old MS. at Hereford, to have been thesign, and interpret them Stock Sein, Gras Green.These are, however, the most arbitrary conjectures,without a shadow of proof. The count then wasbound to enter the name of the new member in hisregister, and henceforth he was one of the powerfulbody of the initiated.Princes and nobles were anxious to have theirchancellors and minister corporate towns to havetheir magistrates, eiuong' the initiated. Many princessoui^lit to be themselves members of this formidableassociation, and we are assured that in the fourteenthand fifteenth centuries which are the only ones ofwhich we have any particular accounts) the numberof the initiated exceeded 100,000.Tile duty of the initiated was to' go through thecountry to serve citations and to trace out and denounceevil-doers; or, if they caught them in thefact, to execute instant justice upon them. Theywere also the count's assessors when the Tribunalsat. For that purpose seven at least were requiredto be present, all belonging to the county in whichthe court was held; those belonging to othercounties might attend, but they could not act asassessors ; they only formed a part of the bystandersof the court. Of these there were frequently somehundreds present.SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 351All the initiated of every degree might go on footand on horseback through the country, for daring wasthe man who would presume to injure them, ascertaindeath was his inevitable lot. A dreadfulpunishment also awaited any one of them who shouldforget his vow and reveal the secrets of the society ;he w4s to be seized, a cloth bound over his eyes, hishands tied behind his back, a halter put about his 'neck ; he was to be thrown upon his belly, his tonguepulled out behind by the nape of his neck, and hewas then to be hung seven feet higher than any otherfelon. It is doubtful however, if there ever was anecessity for inflicting this punishment, for eneasSylvius, who wrote at the time when the society haddegenerated, assures us that no number had everbeen induced, by any motives whatever, to betray itssecrets ; and he describes the initiated as grave menand lovers of right and justice. Similar languageis employed concerning them by other writers of thetime.Besides the count and the assessors, there wererequired, for the due holding a Fehm-court, the officersnamed Frohnboten^^ or Serjeants, or messengers, anda clerk to enter the decisions in what was called theblood-book (Liber sanguinis). These were, of course,initiated, or they could not be present. It was requiredthat the messengers should be freemen belongingto the county, and have all the qualificationsof the simple schoppen. Their duty was to attendon the court when sitting, and to take care that theignorant, against whom there was any charge, wereduly cited.Frohnhote is interpreted a Holy Messenger, or a Servant ofNod,t When a person was admitted into the society he paid, besidesthe fee to the count already mentioned, to each scopeI352 Secret Societies.The count was to hold two kinds of courts, the onepublic, named the Open or Public Court (OffmbareDing), to which awry freeman had axxess ; the otherprivate, called the Secret Tribunal {Hdmliche Achs),at which no one who was not initiated could ventureto appear.Tie former court was held at stated periods, andat least three times in each year, it was announcedfourteen days previously by the messengers (Frownsand every householder in the county, whetherinitiated or not, free or servile, was bound under a,penalty of four heavy shillings, to appear attend declareon oath what crimes he knew to have beencommitted in the county.When the count held the Secret Court, the clergy,who had received the tonsure and ordination, womenand children, Jews and Meatheiis *, and, as it wouldappear, the higher nobility, were exempted from itsjurisdiction. The clergy were exenipled, probably,from prudential motives, as it was not deemed safeto irritate the members of so powerful a body, byencroaching on their privileges; they might, however,voluntarily subject themselves to the Fehm-geriehte if they were desirous of partaking of theadvantages of initiation. Women and children wereexempt on account of their sex and age, and theperiod of infancy was extended, in the citations, tofourteen, eighteen, and sometimes twenty years ofage. Jews, Heathens, and such like, were exemptedon account of their un worthiness. The higher nobilitywere exempted (if such was realty the case) incompliancewith the maxim of German law thatwho was assisting there, and to each frohnbate, four livethTuuingis.• Ths natives of Prawift were still heathens at that time.BBCRBT Tribunals OP Westphalia.'each person should be judd by his i)eGrs, as itwas scarcely possible that in any county there conicbe found a count and seven assessors of equal rankwith accused persons of that class.In their original constitution the Fehm-gerii;hle,agreeably to the derivation of the name from Fern,condemnation, were purely criminal courts, and hadno jurisdiction in civil matters. They took cognizanceof all offences against the Christian faith, theholy gospel, the holy ten commandments, the publicpeace, and private honour — a category, however,which might easily be made to include almost everytransgression and crime that could be committed.We accordingly find in the laws of the Fehm-sferichte, sacrilege, robbery, rape, murder, apostacytreason, perjury, coining, &c., &c., enumerated; andthe courts, by an astute interpretation of the law,eventually managed to make matters which had noteven the most remote appearance of criminality FeAm-bar, or within their jurisdiction.But all exceptions were disregarded in cases contumacy.orofaperson being taken in the actual commissionof an offence. When a person, after being dulycited, even in a civil case, did not appear to answerthe charge against him, he was outlawed, and hishence htcame fehtnbar ,- every judge was then authorizedto seize the accused, whether he belonged to hiscounty or not; the whole force of the initiated wasnow directed against him, and escape twas hardly possible.Here it was that the superior power of theFehni-gerichte exhibited itself Other courts couldoutlaw as well as ihey, but no other had the samemeans of putting its sentences into execution. Theonly remedy which remained for the accused wasto offer to appear and defend his cause, or lo sueto the emperor for protection. In cases where aperson was caught ^-ag'ran(i de/ic(o, the WestphaliaBKCRBT B0CIBTIB3.tribunals were competent to proceed to instantpunishment.Those who derive their knowledge of the Fehm-gerichte from plots and romances are apt to imaginethat they were always held in subterranean chambers,or in the deepest recesses of impenetrable forests,while night, by pouring her deepest gloom over then,added to their awfulness and solemnity. Here, aselsewhere, we must, however reluctantly, lend our aidto dispel the illusions of fiction. They were notheld either in woods or in vaults, and rarely evenunder a roof. There is only one recorded instanceof a Fehm-gericht being held under ground, viz.,at Heinbei^, under the house of John Menkin. AtPaderborn indeed it was held in the lown-house;there was also one held in the castle of Wulften. Butthe situation most frequently selected for holding &court was some place under the blue canopy ofheaven, for the free German still retained the predilectionof his ancestors for open space and expansion.Thus at Nordkirchen and Sildkirchen Qiorlh, andsouth church) the court was held in the churchyard ;at Dortmund, in the market-place close by thetown-house. But the favourite place for holdingthese courts was the neighbourhood of trees, as in theolden time: and we read of the tribunal at Arens-her in the orchard of another under the hawthorn;of a third under the pear-tree ; of a fourth under thelinden, and so on. We also hid the courts denominatedsimply from the trees by which they were held,such as the tribunal at the elder, that at the broadoak, &c.The idea of their being held at night is also utterlydevoid of proof, no mention of any such practice beingfound in any of the remaining documents. It is muchmore analogous to Germanic usage In infer that,8 lie Public Court, and the German courts in ge-secretTribunals OF WESTPHALIA. 351iipral, were held in the morning, soon after the breakof'daj', such was also the rule, with the Secret Court.When an affair was brought before a Fehm-court,the first point to be determined was whether it wasa matter of Fehm-jurisdiction. Should rich proveto be the case, the accused was summoned to appearand answer the chaise before the Public Court. Allsorts of persons, Jews and Heathens included, mightbe summoned before this court, at which the uninitiatedscbOppen also gave attendance, and whichwas as public as any court in Germany. If the accuseddid not appear, or appeared and could notclear himself, the ailiiir was transferred to the SecretCourt. Civil matters also, which on account of adenial of satisfaction were brought before the Fehm-court, were, in like manner, iu cases of extreme contumacy,transferred (hither.The Fehm- tribunals had three different modes ofprocedure, namely, that in case of the criminal beingtaken in the fact, the inquisitorial, and the purelyaccusatorial.Two things were requisite in the first case ; thecriminal must be taken in the fact, and there mustbe three schuppen, at least, present to punish him.With respect to Ihe first particular, the legal languageof Saxony gave great extent to the term takenin Ihe fad. It applied not merely to him who wasseized in the instant of his committing the crime, butto him who was caught as he was running away. Incases of murder, those who were found with weaponsin their hands were considered as taken in the fact; asalso, in case of ihefl, was a person who had the keyof any place in which stolen articles were found, unlesshe could prove that they came there without hisconsent or kn(iwieda;e. The Fehm-law enumeratedthree tokens or proofs of guilt in these cases; theHabendc Hand (Having H(pid),oT having the proof35GSGOSBT SOCIETIES.in his hand; the Biickentie Stein (tooiw"' ffp/jcfflr-once). such as Ihe wound ia the budyol une who wasslain ; aod the Gichiige Miiiid (florins ■mouUi'), orcoiiles-'ioQ uf the crimiuikl. Still, under all these circumstances,it wuE necessary tha( he should betakenimmediately ; for if he succeeded in making hisescape, and was caught again, as he was not this timetaken in the fact, he must be proceeded against beforethe tribunal with all the requisite formalities.The second condition wag, that there should be atleast three initiated persons together, to entitle themto seize, try, and execute a person taken in the fact.These then were at the same time judges, accuser,witnesses, and executioners. We shall in the sequeldescribe their mode of procedure. It is a matter ofuncertainty weller the rule of trial by peers wasobserved on these occasions : what is called theArensberg Reformation of the Fehm-law positivelyasserts, that, in case of a person being taken Jla-granli delicto, birth formed no exemption, and thenoble was to be tried like the commoner. The cases,however, in which three of the initiated happened tocome on a criminal in the commission of the factmust have been of extremely rare occurrence.When a crime had been committed, and the criminalbad not been taken in the fact, there remainedtwo ways of proceeding against him, namely, theinqvvdtorial and the acnaaiorial processes. It dependedon circumstances which of these should beadopted. In the case, however, of his being initiated,it was imperative that he should be proceeded againstaccusatorially.Supposing the former course to have heed chosen,wluch was usually done when the criminal hadbeen token in the fact, but had contrived to escape,or when he was a man whom common fame charged(^uJ/aiid distinct] with a crime, — he was not citedSECRET Tribunals OF WESTPHALIA, 337to appear before the court or vouchsafed a hearing.He ns9 Usually denounced by one of the initiated;the court then examined into the evidence of hisguilt, and if it was found sufficient he was outlawed,or, as it was called, yoj/eAmtd*, and his name wasinscribed in the blood-book. A sentence was immediatelydrawn out, in which all princes, lords, nobles,towns, every person, in short, especially the initiated,were called upon to lend their aid lo justice. Thissentence, of course, could originally have extendedonly to Westphalia ; but the Fehm-courts graduallyenlarged their claims; their pretensions were Favouredby the emperors, who regarded them as a support totheir authority ; and it was soon required that theirsentence should be obeyed all over the empire, asemanating from the imperial power.Unhappy now was he who w ass forfeited ; thewhole bodily of the initiated, that is 100,000 persons,were in pursuit of iii. If those who met him weresufficient in number, they seized him at once; if theyfelt themselves too weak, they called on their brethrento aid, and every one of the society was bound, whenthus called on by three or four of the initiated, whoaverred to him on oath that the man vas fortified,to help to take him. As soon as they had seized thecriminal they proceeded without a moment's delay toexecution ; ihey hung him on a tree by the road-sideand not on a gallows, intimating thereby that theywere entitled to exercise their office in the king'sname anywhere they pleased, and without any regardto territorial jurisdiction. The halter whichthey employed was. agreeably to the usage of themiddle ages, a withy; and they arc said lo have hadso much practice, and to have arrived at such expertsIn (Persian FerfrhmL Wehaieveutureci to cuinlhc wonin the text The Engliiti/br HnsweiB ta the Germiu vtr; is /ergd i vtrhrtHiiferlarn,ISecret SOCIETIES.nessin this business, that the word Fe^Tnenat last beganto signify simply to haiig, as execution has came to domEnafli-'h. It is more probable, however, that this, orSomething very near it, was the original signification ofthe word from which the tribunals took their same.Should the malefactor resist, his captors were authorisedtoknoclihimdownandlciilhim. luthiscase they boundthe dead body to a tree, and stuck their knives beside it,to iiilimaie that he had not been slain by robbers, buthad been executed in the name of the emperor.Were (he person whowasyoj/eAmeduiiinitialed,hBhad no means whatever of knowing bis danger til]the halter was actually about his neck; for the severepenalty which awaited any one who divulged thesecrets of the Feb-courts was such as utterly topreclude the chance of a friendly hint or warning tobe on bis guard. Should he, however, by anycasually, such, for instance, as making his escapefrom those who attempted to seize him, becomeaware of low he stood, he might, if he thought hecould clear himself, seek the protection and aid ofthe Sluhlherr, or of the emperor.it' any one knowingly associated with or entertaineda person who was forfeited, he became involvedin his danger. It was necessary, however, toprove that he had done so knowingly — a point whichwas to be determined by I lie emperor, or by the judgeof the district in which the accused resided. Thisrule iirijmally had extended only to Westphalia, butthe Fehm-judges allerwanls assumed a right ofpunishing in any part of the empire the person whoentertained one who was/or/eAined.Nothing can appear more harsh and unjust thanthis mode of procedure lo those who would apply theideas and maxims of the present to former times.But violent evils require violent remedies ; and thedisorganized state of £europe in general, and of GermTRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 3S9many in particular, during the middle ages, was suchas almost lo exceed uur conception. Might it not thenbe argued that we ought lo regard as a benefit, ratherthan as an evil, any institution which set some boundsto injustice and violence, by infusing into the bosom ofthe evil-doer a salutary fear of the consequences?When a man committed a crime he knew that therewas a tribunal to judge it from which his power, howevergreat it might be, would not avail to protect him ;he knew not who were the Initialed, or at what momenthe might fall into their hands ; his very brothermight be the person who had denounced him ; his intimateassociates might be those who would seize andexecute him. So strongly was the necessity of sucha power felt in general, Chat several cities, such asNuremberg, Cologne, Strasbourg, and others, appliedfor and obtained permission from the emperors, toproceed to pass sentence of death on evil-doers evenunheard, when the evidence of common fume againstthem was satisfactory to the majority of the town-council.Several counts also obtained similar privileges,so that there were, as we may see, Fehm-courts in other places besides Westphalia, but theywere far inferior to those in power, not having anumerous body of scliuppen at their devotion.It is finally to be observed that it was only whenthe crime!) were of great magnitude, and the voicefame loud and constant, that the inquisitorial processcould be properly adopted. In cases of a minornature the accused had a right to be heard in hisown behalf. Here then the inquisitorial processhad its limit : if report was not sufficiently strongand overpowering, and the matter was still dubious,the offender was to be proceeded against atotally. If he was one of the initialed, such wundoubted right and privilege irSEOBBT SOCIETIES.Accnaatorial process — Persona liable to it — Mud of citation —Mud of puncture — Hight of appeal,Ab we have stated above, the First inquiry when amatter was brought before a Fehm-court was, did itcome within its jurisdiction, and, on its being' foundto do so, the accused was summoned libre the PublicCourt, and widen he did 'not appear, or could notclear himself, the cause was transferred to the Secret ,Court. We shall now consider the whole procedurespecially.The summons was at the expense uf the accuser ;it was to be written on good new parchment, withoutany erasures, and sealed with at least seven seals,to wit, those of the count and of six assessors. Theseals of the different courts were different. The Isummonses varied according to whether the accusedwas a free-count, a firee-schOppe, or one of the ignorantand uninitiated, a community, a noth-schOppe, oramere vagabond. In all cases they were to beserved by schflppen. They were to have on themthe name of the count, of the accuser, aud of the accused,the charge, and the place where the court wasto be holden. The sluhlherr was also to be previouslyinformed of it.For a good and legal service it was requisite thattwo EchCppen should either serve the accused personallyor leave the summons openly or clandestinelyat his residence, or at the place where he had takenrefuge. If he did not appear to answer the chargeSECRET TRIBUNALS 07 WESTPHALIA.within six weeks aad three Says, tie was a^iii summonedby four persons. Six weeks was the leastmm set fur appearing to this summons, and it wasrequisite that a piece of imperial coin should be givenwith it. Should he still neglect appearing, he wassummoned for the third and last time by six choppedand a count, and the term set was six weeks aadthree days as before.If the accused wys not merely initiated but also a,count, he was treated with corresponding respect.The first summons was served by seven schoppen,the second by fourteen and four counts, and the thirdby twenty-one and six counts.The uninitiated, whether bond or free, did not sharein (he preceding advantages. The summons wasKernel on themselves, or at their residence, by a. messenger,and only once. There is some doubt as tothe period set for their appearance, but it seems tohave been in genera! the ordinary one of sii weeksand three days.The summons of a town or community wasusually addressed to all the male inhabitants. lageneral some of them were specially named in it ; theArensberg Reformation directed that the names ofat least thirty persons should be inserted. The termwas six weeks and three days, and those who servedthe summons were required to be true and uprightschoppen.The noth-sclifjppe, that is, the person who hadsurreptitiously become possessed of the secrets of thesociety, was summoned but once. The usual timewas allowed him for appearing to the chaise.Should the accused be a mere vagabond, one whohad no fixed residence, the course adopted was tosend, six weeks and three days before the day thecourt was to sit, and post up four summonses at across-road which faced the four cardinal points, placeSICBET Societies.hog a piece of imperial money with each. Thisesteemed good and Valid service, and if the accuseddid not appear the court proceeded to act upon it.Notwithstanding the privileges which the membersof the society enjoyed, and the precautions whichwere employed to ensure their safety, and moreoverthe deadly vengeance likely to be taken on any onewho should aggrieve them, we are not to suppose theservice of a summons to appear before a Fehm-courtto have been absolutely free from danger. Thetyrannic and self-willed noble, when in his own strongcastle, and surrounded by his dependents, might notscruple to inflict summary chastisement on the audaciousmen who presumed to summon him to answerfor his crimes before a tribunal ; the magistrates ofa town also might indignantly spurn at the citationto appear before a Fehm-court, and treat its messengersas offenders. To provide against these casesit was determined that it should be considered goodservice when the summons was affixed by night tothe gate of a town or castle, to the door of the houseof the accused, or to the nearest alms-house. Theschoppen employed were then to desire the watchman,or some person who was going by, to informthe accused of the summons being there, and theywere to take away with them a chip cut from the gateor door, as a proof of the service for the courtIf the accused was resolved to obey the summons,he had only to repair on the appointed day to theplace where the court was to be held, the summonsbeing his protection. Those who would persuade usthat the Fehm-courts were held by night in secretplaces say that the mode appointed for the accusedto meet the court was for him to repair three-quartersof an hour before midnight to the next cross-roads,where a scruple was always waiting for him, whobound his eyes and led him to where the court wasSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 363sitting. This, however, is all mere fiction ; for theplace where the court was to be held was expresslymentioned in every summons.The Fehm-courts (like the German courts ingeneral) were holden on a Tuesday*. If on thisday the accused, or his attorney, appeared at the appointedplace, and no court was holden, the summonsabated or lost its force ; the same was the case whenadmission was refused to him and his suite, a circumstancewhich sometimes occurred. But shouldhe not appear to the first summons, he was fined thefirst time thirty shillings, the second time sixty, thethird time he vfasforfehmed. The court had howeverthe power of granting a further respite of sixweeks and three days previous to passing this lastsevere sentence. This term of grace was called theKing's Dag, or the Emperor Charles's Day of Grace.The plea of necessary and unavoidable absencewas, however, admitted in all cases, and the Fehm-law distinctly recognised four legal impediments toappearance, namely, imprisonment, sickness, the serviceof God (that is, pilgrimage), and the public service.The law also justly added the following cases : —inability to cross a river for want of a bridge or aboat, or on account of a storm ; the loss of his horsewhen the accused was riding to the court, so that hecould not arrive in time ; absence from the country onknightly, mercantile, or other honest occasions ; andlastly, the service of his lord or master. In short,any just excuse was admitted. As long as theimpediment continued in operation all proceedingsagainst the accused were void. If the impedimentarose from his being in prison, or in the public service,or that of his master, he was to notify the sameby letter sealed with his seal, or else by his own oathIn German Deeming, probably Dining, i. e. CourUday,y2364 SECRET SOCIETIES.and those of two or three other persons. The otherimpediments above enumerated were to be sworn tobyhimself alone.If the accused neglected answering the two firstsummonses, but appeared to the third, he was requiredto pay the two fines for non-appearance ; butif he declared himself too poor to pay them, he wasobliged to place his two fore-fingers on the nakedsword which lay before the court, and swear, by thedeath which God endured on the cross that such wasthe case. It was then remitted to him, and the courtproceeded to his trial.When a Fehm-court sat the count presided ; beforehim lay on the table a naked sword and a withy-halter; the former, says the law, signifying the crosson which Christ suffered and the rigour of the court,the latter denoting the punishment of evil-doers,whereby the wrath of God is appeased. On his rightand left stood the clerks of the court, the assessors,and the audience. All were bare-headed, to signify,says the law, that they would proceed openly andfairly, punish men only for the crimes which theyhad committed, and cover no right with unright.They were also to have their hands uncovered tosignify that they would do nothing covertly andunderhand. They were to have short cloaks on theirshoulders, signification of the warm love which theyshould have for justice ; for as the cloak covers allthe other clothes and the hody^ so should theirlove cover justice. They were to wear neitherweapons nor harness, that no one might feel any fearof them, and to indicate that they were under thepeace of the emperor, king, or empire. Finally,they were to be free from wrath and sober, thatdrunkenness might not lead them to pass unrighteousjudgment, for drunkenness causes much wickedness.If one who was not initiated was detected in theSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA, 365assembly, his process was a brief one. He was seizedwithout any ceremony, his hands and feet were liedtogether, and he was hung on the next tree. Shoulda noth-scope be caught in the assembly, a hallerof oaken twigs wsg put about his neck, and he wasthrown for nine days into a marli dungeon, at theend of which time he was brought to trial, and, ifhe foiled in clearing himself, he was proceeded withaccording to law, that is, was hanged.The business of the day commenced, as inGerman courts in general, by the count asking of themessengers if it was the day and time for holding acourt under tile royal authority. An affirmativeanswer being given, the count then asked how manyassessors should there be on the tribunal, andhow the seat should be filled. When these questionswere answered, he proclaimed the holding of theEach party was permitted to bring with him asmany as thirty friends to act as witnesses and compurgators.Lest, however, they might attempt to impedethe course of justice, they were required to appearunarmed. Each party had, moreover, the rightof being represented by his attorney. X''* personso employed must be initiated ; he must also be thepeer of the party, and if he had been engaged oueither side he could not, during any stage of theaction, be employed on the other, even with the permissionof the party which had just engaged him.When he presented himself before the court, his credentialswere carefully examined, and if found strictlyconformable to what the law had enjoined, they weredeclared valid. It was necessary that they shouldhave been written on good, new, and sound parchment,without blot or erasure, and be scaled by theseals of at least two frei-schi3ppen.The attorney of a prince of the empire appeared366 SECRET SOCIETIES.with a green cross in his right hand, and a goldenpenny of the empire in his left. He was also to havea glove on his right hand. If there were two attorneys,they were both to bear crosses and pence. Theattorney of a simple prince bore a silver penny. Theold law, which loves to give a reason for every thing,says, " By the cross they intimate that the princewhom they represent will, in case he should be foundguilty, amend his conduct according to the directionof the faith which Jesus Christ preached, and beconstant and true to the holy Christian faith, andobedient to the holy empire and justice."All the preliminaries being arranged, the trialcommenced by the charge against him being madeknown to the accused, who was called upon for hisdefence. If he did not wish to defend himself inperson, he was permitted to employ an advocatewhom he might have brought with him. If it was acivil suit, he might, however, stay the proceedings atonce by giving good security for his satisfying theclaims of the plaintiff, in which case he was allowedthe usual grace of six weeks and three days. Hemight also except to the competence of the court, orto the legality of the summons, or to anything elsewhich would, if defective, annul the proceedings.If the accused did not appear, the regular coursewas for the prosecutor to overseer him ; that is,himself to swear by the saints to the truth of whathe had stated, and six true and genuine frei-schijp-pen to swear that they believed him to have spokenthe truth.The older Fehm-law made a great distinctionbetween the initiated and the ignorant, and one verymuch to the advantage of the former. The accused,if initiated, was allowed to clear himself from thecharge by laying his two fore-fingers on the nakedsword, and swearing by the saints " that he wasSECRET TRIBUNALS OP WESTPHALIA. 367innocent of the things and the deed which the courthad mentioned to him, and which the accuser chargedhim with, so help him God and all the saints'He then threw a cross-penny (Kreutzer?) to thecourt and went his way, no one being permitted toletor hinder him. But if he was one of the uninitiated,he was not permitted to clear himself in thismanner, and the truth of the fact was determined bythe evidence given.It is plain, however, that such a regulation as thiscould properly only belong to the time when none butpersons of irreproachable character were initiated.As the institution degenerated, this distinction wasgradually lost sight of, and facts were determined byevidence without any regard to the rank of the accused.The accuser could prevent the accused from clearinghimself thus easily, by offering himself and sixcompurgators to swear to the truth of his charge.If Ihe accused wanted to outweigh this evidence, hewas obliged to come forward with thirteen or twentycompurgators and swear to his innocence. If hecould bring the last number he was acquitted, forthe law did not allow it to be exceeded ; but if hehad but thirteen, the accuser might then overpowerJim by bringing forward twenty to vouch Ibr hisveracity.If the accuser had convicted the accusewith prayed the count to grant him aThe count never took on himself thethe verdict; he always directed oito perform it. If the assessor thydifficult for his judgment, h(such was the case, and the Cjto another, who might freenobility in the same mi368 SECRET SOCIETIES.assessors be able to come to a decision, the matterwas put off till the next court-day.But if the assessor undertook the finding of theverdict, it lay with himself whether he should do soalone, or retire to take the opinion of the other assessorsand the bystanders. To give the verdict dueforce it must be found sitting, otherwise it might beobjected to. Whether or not the assessor was boundto decide according to the majority of voices is uncertain.When the verdict had been found the assessorappeared with his colleagues before the tribunal,and delivered it to the count, who then passed sentence.What the penalties were for different offenceswas a secret known only to the initiated ; but, if theywere of a capital nature, the halter, as was intimatedby the one which lay before the count, was the instrumentof punishment.Should the accused not have appeared, and beenin consequence outlawed, he was forfeited by thefollowing awful curse ; it was declared that •* heshould be excluded from the public peace, fromall liberties and rights, and the highest un-peaceun-graces and halter be appointed for him; thathe should be cut off from all communication withany Christian people, and be cursed so that hemight wither in his body, and neither become anymoreverdant, nor increase in any manner; that hiswife should be held to be a widow, and his childrenorphans; that he should be without honour andwithout right, and given up to any one ; that hisneck should be left to the ravens, his body to allbeasts, to the birds of the air and the fishes in thewater ; but his soul should be commended to God,"&c. &c.If he continued a year and a day under the sentenceof outlawry, all his goods then fell to theSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 369emperor or king. A prince, town, or community,that incurred the sentence of outlawry, lost therebyat once all liberties, privileges, and graces.Should the sentence passed be a capital one, thecount flung the halter over lys head out of the inclosureof the tribunal, the schoppen spat on it, andthe name of the condemned was entered in the blood-book.If the criminal was present he was instantlyseized, and, according to the custom of the middleages, when, as in the East, no disgrace was attachedto the office of executioner, the task of executing himwas committed to the youngest schoppe present,who forthwith hung him from the nearest tree. Thequality of the criminal was duly attended to ; for ifhe was initiated he was hung seven feet higher thanany other, as being esteemed a greater criminal. Ifthe accused was not present, all the schoppen were,as wc have already described, set in pursuit of him,and wherever they caught him they hanged himwithout any further ceremony.The sentence was kept a profound secret from theuninitiated. A copy of it, drawn up in the usualform, and sealed with seven seals, was given to theaccuser.We thus see that the proceedings in the Fehm-courts were strictly consonant to justice, and evenleaned to the side of mercy. But this was not all :the right of appeal was also secured to the accusedin case the schoppen who consulted about the verdictdid not agree, or that the witnesses did not correspondin their evidence; or, finally, if the verdictfound was considered unjust or unsuitable ; which lastcase afforded a most ample field of appeal, for itmust have been very rarely that a sentence did notappear unjust or over-severe to the party who wascondemned. It was, however, necessary that theappeal should be made on publication of the sent5370 SECRET SOCIETIES.hence, or at least before the court broke up. Theparties were allowed to retire for a few minutes, toconsult with their friends who had accompanied them.If they did not then say that they would appeal, thesentence was declared absolute, and they were forbidden,under ;heavy penalties, to oppose it in anyother court. If they did resolve to appeal, bothparties were obliged to give security de lite prose-quanta.Should either party, being poor or astranger, be unable to give security, his oath washeld to be sufficient, that, as the law humanely andjustly expresses it, " the stranger or the poor manmay be able to seek his right in the Holy RomanEmpire as well as the native or the rich man."The appeal lay to the general chapter of the Secretclosed Tribunal of the Imperial Chamber, which usually,if not constantly, sat at Dortmund ; or it lay tothe emperor, or king, as the supreme head of thesetribunals. In case of the monarch being initiated,he could examine into the cause himself; otherwisehe was obliged to commit the inquiry to such of hiscouncillors as were initiated, or to initiated commissioners,and that only on Westphalian soil. Of thisspecies of appeal there are numerous instances.Finally, the appeal might be made to the imperiallieutenant, who then inquired into the matter himself,with the aid of some initiated schoppen, orbrought it before the general chapter of which hewas president. There was no appeal to the emperorfrom his sentence, or from that of the chapter.There were, besides the right of appeal, othermeans of averting the execution of the sentence ofa Fehm-court. Such was what was called replacingin the former state, of which, however, it was onlythe initiated who could avail himself. Sentencehaving been passed on a person who had not appeared,he might voluntarily and personally repair toSECRET TRIBUNALS OP WESTPHALIA. 371where the secret tribunal was sitting, and sue forthis favour. He was to appear before the courtwhich had passed the sentence, accompanied by twofrei-schoppen, with a halter about his neck, withwhite gloves on him, and his hands folded, with animperial coin and a green cross in them. He andhis companions were then to fall down on their knees,and pray for him to be placed in the condition whichhe was in before the proceedings commenced againsthim. There was also what was called the complaintof nullity, in case the prescribed form of the proceedingshad been violated. Some other means shallpresently be noticed.372 SECRET SOCIETIES./ »Chapter IV,The General Chapter — Rights of the Emperor — Of his Lieutenant— Of the Stuhlherrn, or Tribunal-Lords.To complete the sketch of the Fehm-tribunals andtheir proceedings, we must state the rights andpowers of the general chapter and of the emperor,his lieutenant, and the tribunal-lords.The general chapter was a general i assembly ofthe Westphalian tribunal-lords, counts, and schoppen,summoned once a-year by the emperor or his lieutenant.Every count was bound by oath to appearat it. It could only be holden in Westphalia, andalmost exclusively at Dortmund or Arensberg. Noone could appear at it who was not initiated, noteven the emperor himself. The president was theemperor, if present and initiated, otherwise the lieutenantor his substitute.The business of the general chapter was to inquireinto the conduct and proceedings of the differentFehm-courts. The counts were therefore togive an account of all their proceedings during thepast year ; to furnish a list of thames of the choppedwho had been admitted, as well as of the suitswhich had been commenced, with the names of theaccusers, the accused, the forfeited, &c. Suchcounts as had neglected their duty were deposed bythe general chapter.The general chapter was, as we have above observed,a court of appeal from all the Fehm-tribunals.In matters of great importance the decrees of thSBORKT Tribunals OP WESTPHALIA. 373lower courts were, to give them greater weight, confirmed,by the general chapter. It was finally at thegeneral chapter that all regulations, laws, and reformations,concerning the Fehm-law u.n<l courts,The emperor, even when the imperial authoritywas at the lowest, was regarded in Germany as thefountain of judicial authority. The right of passingcapital sentence in particular 'was considered toeinanale either mediately or immediately from him.The Fehm-courts were conspicuous for their readinessId acknowledge him as the source of theirauthority, and all their decrees were pronounced inAs superior lord and judge of all the counts andtribunals, the emperor had a right of inspection andreformation over them. He could summon and presidein a general chapter ; lie might enter any court ;and the presiding count was obliged to give way andallow him lo preside in his stead. He had the powerto make new shipped, provided he did so on West-italiansoil. Every schijppe was moreover boundto give a true answer to the emperor when he askedwhether such a one was forfeited or not, and jnwhat court. He could also depose disobedient counts,but only in Westphalia.The emperor could even withdraw a cause out ofthe hands of the tribunals. The right of appeal tohim has been already noticed ; but, besides this, hehad a power of forbidding tile count to proceed inthe cause when the accused offered himself to himfur honour and right ; and it was at his own riskthen that the count proceeded any further in thebusiness. The emperor could also grunt a safe-conductlo any person who might apply for it under apprehensionof having been forJcltTned, which safe-conductthe aclioppen dared not violate. Even when3UBHCnST 80CIRTIK?.Ia person had been Jbrfekmcd, the emjwrar couldHave him by issuing his command la stay executionof the Sentence for a hundred years, sis weeks, and aIt is plain, thai, to be able to exercise These rights,the emperor must be himself initiated, for otherwisehe could not, for instance, appear where a coiu-t was .sitting:, make alterations in laws with which, if ignorant,he must ueceiiBarily be unacquainted, or extendmercy when he could not know who v/a,sforfehmedor not. In the laws establishing the rights ofthe emperor it was therefore always inserted, providedhe be initiated, and the acH of uninitiatedemperors were by Ihe Fehm-courts frequently declaredinvalid. The emperor had, therefore, hischoice of setting a substitute over the Feb-courts,or of being himself initiated. The latter course wasnaturally preferred, and each emperor, at his coronationat Aix-la-chapelle, was initialed by the hereditaryCount of Dortmund. Though Aix-la-chapellewas not in Westphalia, the law sanctioned this departurefrom the general rule that frei-schoppenshould only be made in that country.The emperor's lieutenant, who was almost alwaysthe Archbishop of Cologne, had the rifiht of confirmingsuch counts as were presented to him by theTribunal-lords, and of investing them with thepowers of life and death. He could also summongeneral chapters, and preside and exercise the otherimperial rights in Ihem. He might decide, with theaid of some schoppen, in cases of appeal to him,without bringing the affair before the general chapter; and he had the power of making schoppen atany tribunal in Westphalia, which proves that, likethe emperor, he had free access to them all. Hence't is clear that he also must have been initiated.The dignity and pre-eminence of the ArchbishopSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 375of Cologne, when this office had been conferred onhim, caused a good deal of envy and jealousy amongthe lords of Westphalia, who had been hitherto hisequals, and who considered themselves equally entitledto it with him. They never let slip an occasionof showing their feelings, and they always had theircounts invested by the emperor, and not by the archbishop;nay, there are not wanting instances of theirhaving such counts as he had invested confirmedand re-invested by the emperor.There now remain only the Tribunal-Lords (Stuhl-herrri) to be considered.The Tribunal-lord was, the lord of the district inwhich there was a Fehin-tribunal. He might himself,if initiated, become the count of it, having previouslyobtained the power of life and death from theemperor, or his lieutenant ; or, if he did not choose todoso, he might, as we have already seen, present acount to be invested, for whose conduct he was heldresponsible ; and, if the count appointed by himmisconducted himself, the Stuhl-herr was liable to aforfeiture of his rights. He was, in consequence,permitted to exercise a right of inspection over theFehm-courts in his territory ; no schoppt^ could bemade, no cause brought into the court, not evena summons issued, without his approbation. Thereeven lay a kind of appeal to him from the sentenceof the count; and he could also, like theemperor, withdraw certain persons and causes fromhis jurisdiction. But as his power did not extendbeyond his own territory, the count might refer thosecauses in which he finished, but was prohibited, toproceed, to the courts in other territories ; he mightalso, if he apprehended opposition from the Tribunal-lord,require him (if initiated) to be present at the.proceedings.The Tribunal-lord, if uninitiated, could, like the376 SECRET SOCIETIES.emperor in the same case, exercise these powers onlyby initiated deputies.The great advantage which resulted from the rightof having Fehm-tribunals induced the high lords,both spiritual and temporal, to be very anxious tobecome possessed of this species of territorial property,and in consequence nearly all the lords inWestphalia had Fehm-tribunals. Even towns, suchas Dortmund, Seest, Munster, and Osnabruck, hadthese tribunals, either within their walls, or in theirdistricts, or their neighbourhood, for it would nothave been good policy in them to suffer this sort ofStatus in States to be independent of their authority.Script TRIBUNALS OF WKSTPHALl.V.Fehm-courls at Celle— At Brunswick— Tribunal of the Knowiii)>iu the Trot— The Contlo of Baden— African Portals.We have now gone thrtiufrh the constitution andmodes of procedure of the Fehm-tribunals of Westphalia,as i'a.T as the imperfect notices of them whichhave reached the present age permit. It remains totrace their history down to the last vestiges of themwhich appear. A matter of some curiosity should,however, be previously touched on, namely, how farthey were peculiar to Westphalia, and what institutionsresembling them may be elsewhere found.Fehm-tribunals were, in face, as we have alreadyobserved, not peculiar to Westphalia. In a MS. lifeof Duke Julius of Celle, by Francis Algerian*. of(he year 1S08, we read the following description ofa Felix-court, which the author remembered to haveseen holden at Celle in his youth; —"When the Fehm-iawl- was to be put in operation,all the inhabitants of the district who were abovetwelve years of age were obliged to appear, withoutfail, on a heal or !:Kime large open place, and sitdown on the ground. Some tables were then setin the middle of the assembly, at which the prince,his councillors, and bailies, took their seats. TheSecret Judges then reported the delinquents and theoffences; and they went round with a white wandBack, p. 231, from Spilllefs History of Huntyimrictil, i.e. Fehm-latu, the Geiinun word, uautliOTjireBEntlf give adiildiih ctymulug}'.iwhich the378 SBGRKT Societies.and smote the offenders on the legs. Whoever thenhad a bad conscience, and knew himself to be guiltyof a capital offence, was permitted to stand up andto quit the country within a day and a night. Hemight even wait till he got the second blow. But ifhe was struck the third time, the executioner was athand, a pastor gave him the sacrament, and awaywith him to the nearest tree.But if a person was struck but once or twice,that was a paternal warning to him to amend his lifethenceforward. Hence it was called Jus Venite becausethere was grace in it, which has been corruptedand made Vim-rich fThere were similar courts, we are told, at placesnamed Wolfe and Rotenwald. Here the customwas for the Secret Judges, when they knew of anyonehaving committed an offence which fell withinthe Fehm-jurisdiction, to give him a private friendlywarning. To this end they set, during the night, amark on his door, and at drinking-parties theymanaged to have the can sent past him. If thesewarnings took no effect the court was held.According to an ancient law-book, the Fehm-court at Brunswick was thus regulated and holden.Certain of the most prudent and respectable citizens,named FehmenoieSf had the secret duty of watchingthe conduct of their fellow-citizens and giving informationof it to the council. Had so many offencesbeen committed that it seemed time to hold a Fehm-court, a day was appointed for that purpose. Somemembers of the council from the different districtsof the town met at midnight in St. Martin's churchyard,and then called all the council together. Allthe gates and entrances of the town were closed ;ail corners and bridges, and the boats both above andbelow the town, were guarded. The Fehm-clerk wasthen directed to begin his office, and the Fehme-^SECRET TRIBUNALS OP WESTPHALIA, 379notes were desired to give their informations to himto he put into legal form if the time should provesufficient.At daybreak it was notified to the citizens thatthe council had resolved that the Fehm-court shouldbe holden on this day, and they were directed torepair to the market-place as soon as the tocsinsounded.When the hell had tolled three times all who hadassembled accompanied the council, through the gateof St. Peter, out of the town to what was called theFehm-ditch. Here they separated ; the council tooktheir station on the space between the ditch and thetown-gate, the citizens stood at the other, side of theditch. The Fermented now mingled themselvesamong the townsmen, inquired after such offences aswere not yet come to their knowledge, and communicatedwhatever information they obtained, and alsotheir former discoveries (if they had not had time todoso in the night) to the clerk, to be put by himinto proper form and laid before the council.The clerk having delivered his protocol to thecouncil, they examined it and ascertained which ofthe offences contained in it were to be brought beforea Fehm-court, and which not ; for matters under thevalue of four shillings did not belong to it. Thecouncil then handed the protocol back to the clerk,who went with it to the Fehm-court, which now tookits seat in presence of a deputation of the council.Those on whom theft had been committed werefirst brought forward and asked if they knew thethief. If they replied in the negative, they wereobliged to swear by the saints to the truth of iheitanswer ; if they named an individual, and that it wasthe first charge against him, he was permitted toclear himself by oath ; but if there was a secondcharge against him, his own oath was not sufficient.ISocieties,und lie was obliged lo bring; six compiirrcalors toiiwear along with hai. Should there be a LhJrdcharge, his only course was to clear himself by theoriginal. He was forthwith to wash his hand in water,and to take in it a piece tif glowing-hot iron, whichthe beadle and executioners had always in read'ties on the left of the tribunal, and to carry it adistance of nine feet. The Fera-count, accordinglo ancient custom, chose whom he would to find theverdict. The council could dissolve the court whenever(hey pleased, Sncli causes as had not come on,or were put wolf on account of sickness, or any otherjust impediment, were, on such occasions, noted andreserved for another session.It is evident, however, that this municipal court,of which the chief object was the punishment oftell, the grand offence of the middle ages, thoughcalled a Fehm-court, was widely different from thoseof the same name in Westphalia.The Tribunal of the Knowing' (GmcA( der Ww-smden), in Tyrol, ha=al3oheen erroneously supposedlo be the same with the Westphalia courts. Themode of procedure in this was for the accuser to layhis finger on the head of the accused, and swear thathe knevf him to be an infamous person, while sixreputable people, laying their fingers on the arm ofLie accuser, swore that they knew him to have sworntruly and honestly. This was considered sufficientevidence against any person, and the court proceededThe ideal Fehm-cnurt beneath the castle of Badenmust not be passed over without notice, as it seemsto be the model afler which our popular novelist describedhis Fehm-tribunal in Switzerland ! A female 'writer in Germany* informs us that beneath theFricJerika Benin. Kpisocli^a au; Bcis^u diiicb cas Sdil-SECRET TRIBUNALS OF Westphalia.sicastle of Baden tile vaults extend (o a considerabledistance in labyrinthine witidini^s, anil were informertimes appropriated to the secret mysteries ofa Fehm-tribunal. Those who were brought beforethis awfiil tribunal were not conducted into the castle-vaultsin the usual way ; they were lowered into theglcmmy abyss by a. cord in a bnsliet, and restored toheight, if so fortunate as to be acquitted, in the samemanner ; so that Obey never could, however inclined,discover where they had been. The ordinary entranceled through a long dark passage, which was dosed 'by a door of a single stone as large as a tombstone.This door revolved on invisible hinges, and fitted soexactly, that when it was shut the person who wasinside could not distinguish it from the adjoiningstones, or tell where it wits that he bad entered. Itcould only be opened on the outside by a secretspring. Proceeding along this passage you reachedthe torture-room, where 'you saw hoots in the wall,Ihiimb-surewH, and every species of instruments oftorture. A door on the left opened into a recess,the place of the Maiden's Kiss. When any personwho had been condemned was led hither, a stonegave way under his feet, and he fell into the arms ofthe Maiden, whin, like the wife of Nabis, crushedhim to death in her arms, which were thick set nithspikes. Proceeding on farther, after passing throughseveral doors, you came to the vault of the Tribunal,'i'his was a long spacious quadrangle hung roundwith black. At the upper end was a niche in whichwere an altar and crucifix. In this place the chiefjudge sat ; his assessors had their seats on woodenbenches along the walls.We need not to observe how totally different fromthe proceedings of a genuine Fehm-tribunal is allthis. That there are vaults under the castle of Badenis L-erlaiii,and the liescriplioH above given is possibly382 SEORBT SOCIETIES.correct. But the Fehm-court which was held inthem is the mere coinage of the lady's brain, aridutterly unlike any things real, unless it be the HolyOffice, whose secret proceedings never could vie injusticeor humanity with those of the WestphalianFehm-courts. It is, moreover, not confirmed by anydocument, or even by the tradition of the place, andwould be undeserving of notice were it not for thereason assigned above.The similarity between the Fehm-courts and theInquisition has been often observed. In the secrecyof their proceedings, and the great number of agentswhich they had at their devotion, they resemble eachother ; but the Holy Office had nothing to correspondto the public and repeated citations of the Fehm-courts, the fair trial given to the accused, the leaningtowards mercy of the judges, and the right of appealwhich was secured.The most remarkable resemblance to the Fehm-tribunals is (or was) to be found among the negroeson the west coast of Africa, as they are described bya French traveller*. These are the Hurrah of theFooUahs, who dwell between Sierra Leone river andCape Monte.There are five tribes of this people, who form aconfederation, at the head of which is a union of warriors,which is called a Purrah. Each tribe has itsown separate Purrah, and each Purrah has its chiefsand its tribunal, which is, in a more restricted sense,also called a Purrah. The general Purrah of theconfederation is formed from the Hurrah of the fivetribes.To be a member of the inferior Hurrah, a manmust be thirty years of age ; no one under fifty canhave a seat in the general Purrah. The candidateGolberry> Voyage en Afrique^ t, i, p. 114>and seq.ISECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA, 383for admission into an inferior Purrah has to undergoa most severe course of probation, in which all theelements are employed to try him. Before he is permittedto enter on this course, such of his relativesas are already members are obliged to pledge themselvesfor his fitness, and to swear to take his life ifever he should betray the secrets of the society. Havingpassed through the ordeal, he is admitted intothe society and sworn to secrecy and obedience. Ifhe is unmindful of his oath, he becomes the child ofdeath. When he least expects it a warrior in disguisemakes his appearance and says, "The greatPurrah sends thee death." Every one present departs; no one ventures to make any opposition, andthe victim falls.The subordinate Hurrah punish all crimes committedwithin their district, and take care that theirsentences are duly executed. They also settle disputesand quarrels between the leading families.It is only on extraordinary occasions that the greatPurrah meets. It then decides on the punishmentof traitors and those who had resisted its decrees.Frequently too it has to interfere to put an end towars between the tribes. When it has met on thisaccount it gives information to the belligerents,directing them to abstain from hostilities, and menacingdeath if a drop more of blood should be spilt. Itthen inquires into the causes of the war, and condemnsthe tribe which is found to have been theaggressor to a four days' plundering. The warriorsto whom the execution of this sentence is committedmust, however, be selected from a neutral district.They arm and disguise themselves, put horrible-lookingvizards on their faces, and with pitch torchesin their hands set out by night from the place ofassembly. Making no delay, they reach the devoteddistrict before the break of day, and in parties of384 . SECRET SOCIETIES,from forty to sixty men, they fall unexpectedly on thedevoted tribe, and, with fearful cries, making knownthe sentence of the great Purrah, proceed to put itinto execution. The booty is then divided : one halfis given to the injured tribe, the other falls to thegreat Purrah, who bestow one half of their share onthe warriors who executed their sentence.Even a single family, if its power should appear tobe increasing so fast as to put the society in fear forits independence, is condemned to a plundering bythe Purrah. It was thus, though under more speciouspretexts, that the Athenian democracy sought to reducethe power of their great citizens by condemningthem to build ships, give theatrical exhibitions, andotherwise spend their fortunes.Nothing can exceed the dread which the Purrahinspires. The people speak of it with terror and awe,and look upon the members of it as enchanters whoare in compact with the devil. The Purrah itself issolicitous to diffuse this notion as much as possible,esteeming it a good mean for increasing its powerand influence. The number of its members is estimatedat upwards of 6000, who recognise each otherby certain words and signs. Its laws and secrets are,notwithstanding , the great number of the members,most religiously concealed from the knowledge of theuninitiated.SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 385Chapter VI.The Emperor Lewis the Bavarian — Charles IV. — WenceslausRnpertiau Reformation — Encroachments of the Fehra-courts — Case of Nickel Weller and the town of Gbrlitz —Of the City of Dantzig — Of Hans David and the TeutonicKnights — Other instances of the presumption of the Free-counts— Citation of the Emperor Frederic III. — Case of theCount of Mecklenburg.tThe history of the Fehm-gerichte, previous to thefifteenth century, offers but few events to detain at-attention.The Emperor Lewis the Bavarian appearsto have exerted his authority on several occasionsin granting privileges in Westphalia according,as it is expressly stated, to the Fehm-law. His successor,the luxurious Charles IV., acted with the samecaprice respecting the Fehm-tribunals as he did inevery thing else, granting privileges and revokingthem just as it seemed to accord with his interest atthe moment. This monarch attempted also to extendthe Fehm-system beyond Westphalia, deemingit perhaps a good mean for bringing all Germanyunder the authority of his patrimonial kingdom ofBohemia. He therefore gave permission to theBishop of Hildesheim to erect two Free-tribunalsout of Westphalia. On the representations of theArchbishop of Cologne and the lords of Westphalia,however, he afterwards abolished them.Wenceslaus, the son of Charles, acted with his usualfolly in the case of tj^ie Fehm-tribunals ; he is said,as lie could keep nothing secret, to have blabbed theirz386 Secret SOGIBTIBS.private sign, and he took on him to make frei-schop-pen, contrary to the law, out of Westphalia. Thesechopped of the emperor's making did not, however,meet with much respect from the genuine ones, asthe answer given to the Emperor Rupert by theWestphalian tribunals evinces. On his asking howthey acted with regard to such schoppen, their replywas, " We ask them at what court they were madeschoppen. Should it appear that they were madechopped at courts which had no right so to do, wehang them, in case of their being met in Westphalia,on the instant, without any mercy." Wenceslaus, littleas he cared about Germany in general, occasionallyemployed the Fehm-courts for the furtherance of hisplans, and, in the year 1389, he had Count Henry ofWernengerode tried and hanged for treason byWestphalian schoppen. The reign of Wenceslaus isparticularly distinguished by its being the period inwhich the Archbishop of Cologne arrived at the importantoffice of lieutenant of the emperor over allthe Westphalian tribunals.The reign of Rupert was, with respect to theWestphalian Fehm-courts, chiefly remarkable by thereformation of them named from him. This reformation,which is the earliest publicly-accredited sourcefrom which a knowledge of the Fehm-law can bederived, was made in the year 1404. It is a collectionof decisions by which the rights and privilegesof a king of the Romans are ascertained with respectto these tribunals.The Rupertian reformation, and the establishmentof the office of lieutenant in the person of the Archbishopof Cologne, which was completed by eitherRupert or his successor Sigismund, form together anepoch in the history of the Fehm-gerichte. HithertoWestphalia alone was the scene of their operations,and their authority was of evident advantage to theSECRET TRIBUNALS OP WESTPHALIA. 387empire. Their power had now attained its zenith ;confidence in their strength led them to abuse it ; and,during the century which elapsed between the Rupertreformation and the establishment of the PerpetualPublic Peace and the Imperial Chamber by the£emperor Maximilian, we shall have to contemplatechiefly their abuses and assumptions.The right of citation was what was chiefly abusedby the Free-courts. Now that they were so formallyacknowledged to act under the imperial authority,they began to regard Westphalia as too narrow atheatre for the display of their activity and theirpower. As imperial commissioners, they maintainedthat their jurisdiction extended to every place whichacknowledged that of the emperor's, and there washardly a corner of Germany free from the visits oftheir messengers ; nay, even beyond the limits of theempire men trembled at their citations.It was chiefly the towns which were harassed bythese citations, which were frequently issued at theinstance of persons whom they had punished or expelledfor their misdeeds. Their power and consequencedid not protect even the greatest: we find,during the fifteenth century, some of the principalcities of the empire summoned before the tribunalsof Westphalian counts. Thus in the records of thosetimes we read of citations served on Bremen, Lubeck,Augsburg, Nuremberg, Erfurt, Gorlitz, and Dantzig.Even Prussia and Livonia, then belonging to theorder of the Teutonic knights, were annoyed by theirinterference.One of the most remarkable cases which thisperiod presents is that of the uneasiness caused tothe town of Gorlitz by means of one of its inhabitantsnamed Nickel Weller. This man, who was aWestphalian schoppe, was accused of having disinterredan unchristened child, and of having made388 (EGRET SOCIETIES.a candle of the bone of its arm, which he had filledwith the wax of an Easter-taper and with incense,and of having employed it in a bam in presence ofhis mother, his wife, and an old peasant, for magicalpurposes. As he could not deny the fact, he was,according to the law of those times, liable to behanged ; but the high-bailiff of Stein, and some otherpersons of consequence, interfering in his favour, themagistrates contented themselves with expelling himthe town and confiscating his goods. As it afterwardsproved, they would have acted more wiselyhad they condemned him to perpetual imprisonmentWeller immediately repaired to Bresslau, and besoughtthe council, the Bishop of Warden, and theimperial chancellor, to advocate his cause. They accededto his desire; but the magistrates of Gorlitzperfectly justified their conduct. Weller, .still indisposedto rest, applied to the pope. Innocent VIII.,asserting that he could not to any purpose bring anaccusation against the council of GOrlitz within thetown of the diocese of Meissen, and that he had nochance of justice there. The pope forthwith namedJohn de' Medici and Dr. Nicholas Touched ofBresslau spiritual commissioners in this affair, andthese desired the high-bailiff of Stein to do his bestthat Weller should recover his rights within the spaceof a month, on his taking his oath to the truth of hisstatements, otherwise they should be obliged themselvesto take measures for that purpose.From some assigned cause, however, nothingcame of this, and Weller once more addressed himselfto the pope, with whom the Bishop of Ostia becamehis advocate. He was re-admitted into the bosom ofthe Church; but the decree of the magistracy ofGrurlitz still remained in force, and the new commissionersappointed by the pope even confirmed it.Finding that he had nothing to expect from papalSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 389interference, Weller had at last recourse to the Fehm-tribunals, and on the 3d May, 1490, John of Hullcount of the tribunal at Brackel, cited theburgomasters, council, and all the lay inhabitants ofGorlitz above the age of eighteen years, before histribunal. This summons was served in rather a remarkablemanner, for it was found fastened to a twigon a hedge, on a farm belonging to a man namedWeasel Enrich, a little distance from the town.As by the Golden Bull of the Emperor Charles IV.,and moreover by a special privilege granted by Sigismund,Gorlitz was exempted from all foreign jurisdiction,the magistracy informed Ladislaus, Kingof Bohemia, of this citation, and implored his mediation.The Bohemian monarch accordingly addressedhimself to the tribunal at Brackel, but GeorgeUackenberg, who was at that time the free-count ofthat court, Hulschede being dead, did not even deignto give him an answer.Meanwhile the appointed period had elapsed withoutthe people of Gorlitz having appeared to thesummons, and Weller, charging them with disobedienceand contempt of court, prayed that they mightbe condemned in all the costs and penalties therebyincurred, and that he might be himself permitted toproceed with his complaint. To this end he estimatedthe losses and injuries which he had sustained at 500Rhenish florins, and made a declaration to that effecton oath, with two joint-swearers. He was accordinglyauthorised by the court to indemnify himselfin any manner he could at the expense of the peopleof Gorlitz. It was farther added that, if any oneshould impede Weller in the prosecution of his rights,that person should ipso facto fall under the heavydispleasure of the empire and the pains and penaltiesof the tribunal at Brackel, and be moreoverobliged to pay ail the costs of the accuser.z 3390 SECRET SOCIETIES.On the 16th August of the same year, the countset a new peremptory term for the people of Goreassuring them that, in case of disobedience,^^ he should be obliged, though greatly against hisinclination, to pass the heaviest and most rigoroussentence on their persons, their lives, and their honours'The citation was this time found on thefloor of the convent church. The council in consternationapplied to the Archbishop of Cologne andto the free-count himself, to be relieved from thiscondition, but in vain ; the count did not condescendto take any notice of their application, and whenthey did not appear at the set time, declared the townof GOrlitz outlawed for contumacy.It appears that Weller had, for some cause or other,brought an accusation against the city of Bresslaualso ; for in the published decree of outlawry againstGorlitz it was included. By this act it was prohibitedto every person, under penalty of similar outlawry,to harbour any inhabitant of either of thesetowns; to eat or drink, or hold any intercourse nththem, till they had reconciled themselves to the Fehm-tribunals, and given satisfaction to the complainant.Weller himself stuck up a copy of this decree on amarket-day at Leipzig; but it was instantly torndown by some of the people of Gorlitz who happenedto be there.The two towns of Gorlitz and Bresslau held aconsultation at Liegnitz, to devise what measures itwere best to adopt in order to relieve themselves fromthis system of persecution. They resolved that theywould jointly and separately defend themselves andtheir proceedings by a public declaration, whichshould be posted up in GOrlitz, Bresslau, Leipzig,and other places. They also resolved to lay theirgriefs before the Diet at Prague, and pray for its intercessionwith the* Archbishop of Cologne and the LandSECRET Tribunals OF WESTPHALIA. 391£rraf of Lessen. They accordingly did so, and theDiet assented to their desire ; but their good officeswere of no avail, and the answer of the landgraveclearly showed, either that he had no authority overhis count, or that he was secretly pleased with whathe had done.The indefatigable Weller now endeavoured to seizesome of the people of Bresslau and Gorlitz, in Heinand other places in Meissen. But they frustrated hisplans by obtaining a promise of protection and safe-conductfrom the Duke George. Weller, however,did not desist, and when Duke Albert came from theNetherlands to Meissen, he sought and obtained hisprotection. But here again he was foiled ; for, whenVie high-bailiff and council of Gorlitz had informedthat prince of the real state of the case, he withdrewhis countenance from him. Wearied out by thisceaseless teasing, the towns applied, through the kingof Bohemia, to the Emperor Frederic III. for amandate to all the subjects of the empire, and aninhibition to the tribunal at Brackel and all the free-countsand schoppen. These, when obtained, theytook care to have secretly served on the council ofDortmund and the free-count of Brackel. By thesemeans they appear to have put an end to their annoyancesfor the remainder of Weller's life. But, in theyear 1.502, his son and his son-in-law revived hisclaims on Gorlitz. Count Ernest of Holsteininterceded for them ; but the council adhered firmlyto their previous resolution, and declared that it wasonly to their own or to higher tribunals that theymust look for relief. The matter then lay over forten years, when it was again stirred by one Guy ofTaubenheim, and was eventually settled by an amicablearrangement.As we have said, the Fehm- tribunals extendedtheir claims of jurisdiction even to the Baltic. We392 Secret SEGIBTIES.find that a citizen of the town of Dantzig, namedHans Follower, who was a free schoppe, was citedto appear before the tribunal of Elleringhausen,under the hawthorn, " because he had spoken whathe ouiiht not to have spoken about the Secret Tribunal."This might seem just enough, as he belongedto the society ; but the town-council were commanded,under a penalty of fifty pounds of fine gold, to castthe accused into prison till he had given security forstanding his trial.Even the powerful order of the Teutonic Knights,who were the masters of Prussia and Livonia, didnot escape being annoyed by the Fehm-tribunals.How little their power availed against that formidablejurisdiction is evinced by the answer made by theGrand Master to the towns which sued to him forprotection. " Beloved liegemen ! you have besoughtus to protect you therefrom ; we would cheerfully doitknew we but ways and means thereto." Andwhen he wrote to Mangolt, the count of the tribunalat Freyenhagen, warning him against summoning beforehim the subjects of the order, tie latter haughtilyreplied, '* You have your rights from the empire,and I have power to judge over all who hold of theempire."The following very curious case occurred in thefirst half of the fifteenth century : —A shopkeeper at Liebstadt died very much indebtedto the two officers of the Teutonic order,whose business it was to keep the small towns inPrussia supplied with mercantile goods, and theyaccordingly seized on the effects which he had leftbehind him. These, however, were not sufficient tosatisfy even the demands of one of them, much lessof both, and they had made up their minds to restcontent with the loss, when, to their surprise, HansDavid, the son of the deceased, came forward withsecret TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA, 393an account against the order of such amount, that,as it was observed, if all the houses in the town weresold, and all the townsmen taxed to the utmost, theproduce would not discharge the one-half of it. Hehowever produced a document purporting to be abond of the order. This instrument bore all themarks of falsification; it was full of erasures and insertions; among the witnesses to it, some were setdown as priors who were only simple brethren of tiporder; there were the names of others who hadnever seen it ; it was asserted to have been attestedand verified by the tribunal at Passer, but in therecords of that court there were not the slightesttraces of it ; the seal of the Grand Master, whichwas appended to every document of any importance,was wanting. Of course payment was resisted, butHans David ^as told to pursue his claim, if hepleased, before the emperor and the pope, whom theorder recognised as their superiors.As Hans David was under the protection of theking of Poland, he had recourse to that prince ; buthe declined interfering any farther than to apply forasafe-conduct for him that he might apply for a newinquiry. The Grand Master, on application beingmade to him, swore on his honour that he owed tothe complainant nothing, and that the bond was aforgery ; he moreover promised to answer the chargein any fit place that the complainant might select ;nay, even in Prussia; and he granted him a safe-conductas before.Jt is not known what course Hans David nowadopted; but nine years afterwards (1441) we findhim addressing .himself to the Free-tribunal atFreyenhagen, whose count, the notorious Mangolt,forthwith issued his citations, " because, as he expressedhimself, the order judges with the swordand gentle murder and burning." The Grand SECRET SOCIETIES.ter, indignant at this piece of arrogance, immediatelybrought the matter before the assembly of thefree-counts at Coblentz, who declared the proceedingsnull, and Mangolt liable to punishment, as theknights were spiritual persons. He moreover appliedto the emperor, who, to gratify him, issued amandate, addressed to all princes of the empire, declaringthe act of Mangolt to be a piece of iniquity,and null and void.Hans David was now cast into prison at Cologne,and, notwithstanding a prohibition of the Free-tribunal,was detained there for two years. Existing documentsattest (though the fact is inexplicable) that theemperor directed the Archbishop of Cologne and theMargrave of Baden to examine anew into the affair,and to send the acts into the imperial chancery, and,finally, to set the complainant free on his oath, or onhis giving bail to appear at Nuremberg. As this proceedingcan only be ascribed to the influence of theSecret Tribunals, bent on annoying the order, itserves to show what their power and consequencemust have been at that time.Two years afterwards it was clearly proved atVienna that the bond had been forged, at the desireof Hans David, by a scholar of Elbingen, namedRothoft^. As the case against the former was nowso plain, it might be supposed that he would bepunished at once. Instead of that, the emperor referredthe parties to the pope, as Hans David hadstruck a prior of the order, and this last was notcontent with the satisfaction accorded by the emperor.The cause of the order was triumphant in Romealso, yet still Hans David found means to keep offthe execution of the sentence already passed on himat Vienna. It was not till after the death of the thenGrand Master that final judgment was formally deliveredby Cardinal Rossi, and Hans David, his com-SECRET TRIBUNALS OP WESTPHALIA. 395rade Paul Franklin, and the Count Mangolt, werecondemned to perpetual silence, and to payment of thesum of 6,000 Rhenish florins to the order, and, in caseof disobedience, they were declared to be outlawed.All this, however, did not yet avail, and two yearsafterwards Rossi was obliged to apply to the emperorfor the aid of the temporal arm for the execution ofthe sentence. The chaplain of the order at Viennaalso found that Hans David had still the art to deceivemany and gain them over to his cause, and heaccordingly took care to have the whole account ofhis conduct posted up on the church-doors.Still the unwearied Hans David did not rest. Henow went to the Free-tribunal at Waldeck, and hadthe art to deceive the count by his false representations.He assured him that the order had offeredhim no less than 15,000 florins and an annuity, ifhe would let his action drop ; that they would havebeen extremely well content if he had escaped outof prison at Cologne, but that he preferred justiceand truth to liberty. The order however succeededhere again in detecting and exposing his arts, andthe count honestly confessed that he had been deceivedby him. He cast him off forthwith, and HansDavid, ceasing to annoy the order, devoted himselfto astrology and conjuring for the rest of his days*.He had, however, caused othe order abundance ofThe following is one of his predictions, delivered by himunder the name of Master Von Dolete, in the year 1457 : ^* Inthe ensuing month, September, the sun will appear like ablack dragon ; cruel winds will blow, the sea will roar, andmen will be knocked to pieces by the wind. The sun will thenbe turned to blood ; that betokened war in the East and West.A mighty emperor will die ; the earth will quake, and fewmen will remain alive. Wherefore secure your houses andchambers ; lay up provisions for thirty days in caverns," &c.,&c. The arts ui' knaves and the language of impostors arethe same in all ages and countries*396 SECRET SOCIETIES. :uneasiness and expense. Existing documents provethat this affair cost them no less than upwards of1580 ducats, and 7000 florins, which must be in agreat measure ascribed to the secret machinations ofthe Free-tribunals, anxious to depress the TeutonicKnights, who stood in their way.In 1410 the Wild and Rhein Gras was summonedbefore the tribunal at Nordernau, and, in 1454, theDuke of Saxony before that at Limburg. TheElector-Palatine found it difficult, in 1448, to defendhimself against a sentence passed on him by one ofthe Fehm-courts. Duke Henry of Bavaria foundit necessary-on the following occasion, actually tobecome a frei-schoppe in order to save himself. OneGaspar, of Porringer, had accused him before thetribunal of Waldeck of " having taken from him hishereditary office of Chief Huntsman; of havingseized and beaten his huntsmen and servants, takenhis hounds, battered down his castle of Porringer,and taken from his wife her property and jewels, indespite of God, honour, and ancient right." Thefree-count forthwith cited the duke, who applied tothe emperor Sigismund, and procured an inhibitionto the count. The duke found it necessary, notwithstanding,to appear before the court ; but he adoptedthe expedient of getting himself made a frei-schoppe,and then, probably in consequence of his rank andinfluence, procured a sentence to be passed in accordancewith his wishes. Gaspar, who was probablyan injured man, appealed to the emperor, who referredthe matter to the Archbishop of Cologne, andwe are not informed how it ended.But the audacity of the free-counts went so faras even to cite the head of the empire himself beforetheir tribunals. The imperial chancery having, forjust and good cause, declared several free-counts andtheir Tribunal-lord, Wallace of Waldeck, to be tlllBtrNAtS Clitwed, three free-counts had the hardihood, in 1470,to cite the emperor Frederic III., with his chancellor,the Bishop of Passa, and the assessors of thechaneevy-courl, to appear before the free-tribunal betweenthe gates of WQnnenbetg in the diocese ofPaderborn, " there to defend his person and highesthonour under penalty of being held to be a disobedientemperor ; " and on his not appearing, they hadthe impudence to cite him again, declaring that, if hedid not appear, justice should take its course. Feeble,however, as was the character of the emperor, he didnot give way to such assumptions.Even robbery and spoliation could fnjd a defencewith the Fehm-courts. Towards the end of thethirteenth century a count of Mecklenburg plunderedand ravaged the diocese of Munster. The bishopassembled his own people and called on his lies toaid him, and they took two castles belonging to thecount and pushed him to extremity. To extricatehimself he accused the bishop, and all those whowere with him, liefoie his Fehm-courl, and thoughthere were among them the Bishop of Paderborn,three counts, and several knights, the free-count hadthe boldness (o cite them all to appear and defendtheir honour. The affair was eventually amicablyarranged and the citation recalled.These instances may suffice to show how far theFera-tribunals had departed from the originalobject of their institution, and how corrupt and iniquitousthey were become.398 SECRET SOCtETflS.Chapter VII.Cause of the degeneracy of the Fehm-courti — attempts atreformation — Causes of their high reputation — Case of theDuke of Nuremberg — Of Kerstiaa Kerkeiink — Causes ofthe decline of the Fehm-jurisdiction.The chief cause of the degeneracy of the Fehm-courts was the admission of improper persons intothe society. Originally, as we have seen, no manwas admitted to become a scruple without producingsatisfactory evidence as to the correctness ofhis character ; but now, in the case of either count orschoppe, a sufficient sum of money availed to supersedeinquiry, and the consequence was that men ofthe most disgraceful character frequently presidedat the tribunals and wielded the formidable powers ofthe society. A writer in the reign of Sigismundsays, " that those who had gotten authority to hangmenwere hardly deserving enough to kep pigs;that they were themselves well worthy of the gallowsif one cast a glance over their course of life ; thatthey left not unobserved the mote in their brother'seye, but overlooked the beam in their own, &c." Andit required no small courage in the writer thus toexpress himself; for, according to his own testimony,people then hardly ventured even to speak of theSecret Tribunals, so great was the awe in which theywere held.The consequence was that justice was not to behad at any tribunal which was presided over by corruptjudges, as they selected assessors, and even by-secretTRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 399slanders, of the same character with themselves, andwhatever verdict they pleased was found. The generally winked at their proceeding's,while the right of appeal to the emperor was treatedwith little respect; for these monarchs had generallyaffairs of more immediate importance to themselvesto occupy their attention. The right of exemptionwas also trampled on ; sovereign princes were, as wehave seen, cited before the tribunals; so also werethe Jews. Purely civil matters were now maintainedlo belong to the Fehm-jurisdiction, and parties insuch cases were oiled before the tribunals, and forfeitedin case of disobedience. In short, the Pehm-Jurisdiction was now become a positive evil insteadtif being, Bes heretofore, a benefit to the country.Various attempts were doubtless made to reform(he Fehm-law and tribunals, such a£ the Arensberg'rerurmation,theOsnaburgh regulation, and others, butto little purpose. The system, in fact, was at variancewith the spirit which was now beginning to prevail,and could not be brought to accord with itBefore we proceed to the decline of the society, wewill pause a moment to consider the causes of thegreat reputation and influence which it obtained andexercised during the period in which it flourished.The (first and chief cause was the advantage whichit was found to he of for the maintenance of socialorder and tranquillity. In the very worst end mostturbulent times a portion of mankind will always befound desirous of peace and Justice, even independentlyof any private interest ; another portion, feelingthemselves the victims of oppression, will gladlycatch at any hope of protection ; even the mighty andthe oppressive themselves will at limes view with)satisfaction any institution which may avail to shieldthem against power superior to their own, or whichthey conceive may be made the instrument of SOCIETIES,lending: and strengthening' their consequence. TheFehm-juriKdiction was calculated to suit all Theseorders vf persons. The fourteenth and firieeathcenturies were the most anarchic periods of Germany;the imperial power was feeble lo control;and the characters of most of the emperors weresuch as to render still more unavailing the little authoritywhich;. as heads of the empire, they possessed.Sensible of their weakness, these monarchs generallyfavoured the Fehm- tribunals, which so freely, andeven ostentatiously, recognised the imperial superiority,a<i long as it did not seek to control them orimpede them in their proceedings. The knowledgewhich, if initialed, they could derive of the crimesand misdemeanors committed in the empire, andIhe power of directing the arms of the society againstevil-doers, were also of no small importance, and theygradually became of opinion that their own existencewas involved in that of the Feb-courts. The noblesof Westphalia, in like manner, found their advantagein belonging to the society, and the office of tribunalswas, as we have seen, one of influence andemolument.But it was the more helpless and oppressed classesof society, more especially the unhappy serfs, thatmost rejoiced in the existence of the Fehm-tribunals ;for there only could they hope lo meet with sure redresswhen aggrieved, and frequently was a cause,when other courts had been appealed to in vain,brought before the Secret 'Tribunal, which judgedwithout respect of persons. The accuser had farthernot to fear the vengeance of the evil-doer, or hisfriends and dependents; for his name was kept aprofound secret if the proofs which he could furnishwere sufficient lo justify the inquisitorial processalready described, and thus Ihe robber-noble, or thefeudal tyrant, often met his merited punishment atSECRET TfttBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 401a time when he perhaps least dreaded it, and when'he held his victim, whose cries to justice had broughtit on him, in the greatest contempt ; for, like theNemesis, or the "gloom-roaming** Erinnys of antiquity,the retributive justice of the Fehm-tribunalsmoved to vengeance with stealthy pace, and caughtits victim in the midst of his security.A second cause was the opinion of these courtshaving been instituted by Charles the Great, amonarch whose memory was held in such high estimationand such just veneration during the middleages. Emperors thought themselves bound to treatwith respect the institution of him from whom theyderived their authority; and the clergy themselves,exempt from its jurisdiction, were disposed to viewwith favour an institution established by the monarchto whom the Church was so deeply indebted, and pfwhose objects the punishment of heretics was one ofthe most prominent.A third, and not the least important cause, wasthe excellent organization of the society, which eU"able it to give such effect to its decrees, and towhich nothing in those times presented any paralleLThe veil of secrecy which enveloped all its proceedings,and the number of agents ready to execute itsmandates, inspired awe ; the strict inquiry whichwas known to be made into the character of a manbefore he was admitted into it gained it respect. Itssentences were, though the proofs were unknownbelieved to have emanated from justice ; and bad mentrembled, and good men rejoiced, as they beheld thebody of a criminal suspended i'rom a tree, and theschoppe's knife stuck beside it to intimate by whomhe had been judged and condemned.The reign of the Emperor Maximilian was aperiod of great reform in Germany, and his establishmentof the Perpetual Public Peace, and ofKCRET SOCIETIES.the Imperial Chamber, Joined with other measures,tended considerably to utter and improve the conditionof the empire. The Fehtn-tribunikls should,as a, matter of prudence, have endeavoured to accommodatethemselves to the new order of things ;but this is a part of wisdom of which societies andcorporate bodies are rarely found capable; and, insteadof relaxing; in their pretensions, ihey even sought toextend them farther than before. Under their usualpretest — the denial of justice — they extended theircitations to persons and places over which they hadno jurisdiction, and thereby provoked the enmity andelicited the active hostility of cities and powerful territoriallords.The most remarkable cases which this period presentsof the perversion of the rights and powers ofthe Fehm-tribunals are the two following : —Duke Ulrich of Wittenberg lived unhappily withhis duchess Sabina. There was at his court youngnobleman named Hans Hutten, a member of anhonourable and powerful family, to whose wife theduke was more particular in his attentions than couldbe agreeable to a husband. The duchess, on her side,testified a particular esteem for Hans Hutten, andthe intimacy between them was such as the dukecould not foi^ve. Hutten was either so vain or soinconsiderate as to wear publicly on his finger nvaluable ring which had been given to him by theduchess. This filled up the measure of the jealousyand rage of the duke, and one day, at hunting-partyin the wood of Being, he contrived to draw Huttenaway from the rest of the train, and, taking; him atunawares, ran him through with his sword; he thelook oti' his girdle, and with it suspended him fromone of the oak-trees in the wood. When the murderwas discovered he did not deny il, but asserted thathe was a free schiippe, and had performed the deedAtS OF WESTPHALIA. 403iu obedience to a mandate of the Secret Tribunal, towhich he was bound lo yield obedience. This tale,however, did not satisfy the family of Butter, andthey were as little content with the proposal made bythe murderer of giving them satisfaction before aWestphalia tribunal. They loudly appealed to theemperor lor justice, and the masculine eloquence ofUlrich viii Hutteii interested the public so stroiijrlyin their favour, that the emperor found himselfobliged to issue a sentence of outlawry against theDuke of Wflrtemberg. At length, through the mediationof Cardinal Lang, an accommodation bothwith the Hutlen family and the duchess was effected;but the enmity of the former was not appeased, andthey some time afterwards lent their aid to effect thedeposition of the dulce and the confiscation of hisproperly.It would seem that the Fehm-tribui[als would havejustified the assassin nation committed by the duke, atleast that all confidence in their justice was now gone ;and, at this period, even those writers who are moatlavish in their praises of the schoppen of the oldentime can find no language sufficiently strong to describethe iniquity of those of their own days. Itwas now become a common saying that the courseof a Fehm~court was first to hang the accused andthen to examine into the charges against him. By asolemn recess of the Diet at Triers, in 1512, it wasdeclared " that by the Westphalia tribunals manyaD honest man had lost bis honour, body, life, audproperty ;" and the Archbishop of Cologne, whomust have known them well, shortly afterwards asserted,among other charges, in a capitulation whichhe issued, that " by very many they were shunnedand regarded as seminaries of villains."The second case to which we alluded affords u stiltstronger proof of their degeneracy.r^^F the (owiSecret Societiesitnamed Kerstiua Kerkerink, nho lived nearthe (own of Minster, was accused, and probably withtruth, of having committed repeated acts of adultery.The Free-tribunal of Minster determined to takecognizance of the oifair, and they sent and had himtaken out of his bed in the dead of the niEfhL Inorder to prevent his making any noise and resistance,the persona who were employed assured hia that bewas to be brought before the tribunal of a respectablecouncillor of the city of Monster, and prevailed onhim to put on his best clothes. They took bim (oa place named Beck man-bush, where they kepthim concealed while one of them conveyed intelligenceof their success to the town-council.At break of day the tribunal-lords, free-count, andschuppen, taking with them a monk and a commonhangman, proceeded to Beckman's-bush, and had theprisoner summoned before them. When he appearedhe prayed to be allowed to have an advocate ; but thisrequest was refused, and the court proceeded forthwithto pass sentence of death. The unfortunateman now implored for the delay of but one singleday to settle his affairs and make his peace with Nod jbut this request also was strongly refused, and it wassignified lo him that he must die forthwith, and thatif he wished he might make his confession, to whichend a confessor had been brought to the place. Whenthe unhappy wretch sued once more for favour, it waireplied to him that he should find favour and be beheaded,not hung. The monk was tien called forward,to bear his confession ; when that was over theexecutioner (who had previously been sworn nevR^to reveaJ.what he saw) advanced and struck off thehead ot the delinquentMeantime, information ol what was going on hadreached the town, and old and young came forth towituisa the l>l>^t act ol the tragedy, ur perhaps toSECRET TRIBUNALS OF Westphalia,interfere in favour of Kerkerink. But this had beenforeseen and provided against; officers were set towatch all the approaches from the town till all wasover, and when the people arrived they found nothingbut the lifeless body of Kerkerink, which was placedin a copia and buried in a neighbouring churchyard.The bishop and chapter of MiinHler expressedgreat indignation at this irregular proceeding and encroachmenton their rights, and it served to augmentthe general aversion to the Fehm-courls.Our readers will at once perceive how much thproceedings in this case, which occurred in the year1580, tittered from those of former times. Thenthe accused was formally summoned, and he wasallowed to have an advocate ; here he was seizedwithout knowing for what, and was hardly grantedeven the formality of a trial. Then the people whocame, even accidentally, into the vicinity of a Fehm-ciiurt, would cross themselves and hasten away fromthe place, happy to escape with their lives; now theyrush without apprehension to the spot where it wassilting, and the members of it thy at their approach.Finally, in severity as well as justice, the advantagewas on the side of the old courts. The criminal sufferedby the halter ; we hear of no father confessorbeing present to console his last moments, and hisbody, instead of being deposited in consecrated earth,was left to be lorn by the wild beasts and ravenousbirds. The limes were evidently altered !The Fehm-tribunals were never formally abolished;but the excellent civil institutions of the EmperorsMaximilian and Charles V., the consequent decreaseof the turbulent and anarchic spirit, the introductionof the Roman law, (he spread of the Protestant religion,and ninny other events of those times, ctm-stirred to give men an aversion for what now appearedto be ii barbarous jurisdiction and only suited9ECR■ SOCIETIES.to such times as it was hoped Bind Relieved nevercould return. Some of ibt courts were abolished ;exemptions and privileges against them were multiplied; they were prohibited all summary proceedings;their power gradually sank into insignificance ;Hud, thau<irh up to the present century a shadow ofthem remained in some parts of Westphalia, theyhave Icing been only a subject of antiquarian icuriosity as one of (he most striking phenomena of themiddle age. They were only suited lo a particular"state of society : while that existed they were abenefit lo the world ; when it was gone they remainedat Variance with the state which succeeded, becamepernicious, were haled and despised, lost all theirSECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA. 407influence and reputation, shared the fate of everythin": human, whose character is instability and decay,and have left only their memorial behind themIt is an important advance in civilization, and a£great social gain, to have got rid, for all public purposes,of Secret Societies — both of their existence andof their use ; for, that, like most of the other obsoleteforms into which the arrangements of society have atonetime or other resolved themselves, some of thesemysterious and exclusive institutions, whether for preservingknowledge or dispensing justice, served, eachin its day, purposes of the highest utility, which apparentlycould not have been accomplished by anyother existing or available contrivance, has beensufficiently shown by the expositions that have beengiven, in the preceding pages, of the mechanism andworking of certain of the most remarkable of theirnumber. But it has been made at least equally evidentthat the evils attendant upon their operation,and inherent in their nature, were also very great,and that, considered even as the suitable remediesfor a most disordered condition of human affairs,they were at best only not quite so bad as the disease.They were institutions for preserving knowledge,not by promoting, but by preventing thatdiffusion of it which, after all, both gives to it its chiefvalue, and, in a natural state of things, most effectuallyensures its purification, as well as its increase ;and for executing justice, by trampling under footthe rights alike of the wrong-doer and of his victim.Mankind may be said to have stepped out of nightinto day, in having thrown off the burden andbondage of this form of the social system, and havingattained to the power of pursuing knowledge in thespirit of knowledge, and justice in the spirit of justice.We have now escaped from that state of confusion40d Secret societies:.and conflict in which one man's gain was necessarilyanother man's loss, and are fairly on our way towardsthat opposite state in which, in everything, as far asthe constitution of this world will permit, the gain ofone shall be the gain of all. This latter, to whateverdegree it may be actually attainable, is the properhope and goal of all human civilization.THE END.London : Printed by W. Cloaks and Sons, Rumford Street