JOURNAL,BYFRANCES ANNE^BUT^LERIN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.PHILADELPHIA:CAREY, LEA & B7:.A>[CHARD^ 1835.i^iiiTHENEWYORKPublic LIBRARY^3953/}^ASTO.^, L€.\OX ANDTILOEf^ F0lP'DATlON8,1397.iSnt^t^^Oj according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1835,by Caret, Lea & Blanchard, in the Clerk's Office of the DistrictCourt for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.\'-v^y:>JOURNAL.Saturday)December 1st*Iaber List* i1833.First day of the last month of the year — go it old fellow! I'm sick of the road, and would be at my journey'send. Got two hundred dollars from my father, and immediatelyafter breakfast sallied forth : paid bills and visits jand came home. Found my father sitting with our kinsman,Mr. , busily discussing the family origin, root,branches, and all. We are an old family, they say, butthe direct line is lost after Charles the Second's reign.Our kinsman is a nice man, with a remarkably fine face,with which I was greatly struck. When he was gone,persuaded my father to come down and take a breathingon the Battery with me. And a breathing it was with avengeance. The wind blew tempestuously, the waters,all troubled and rough, were of a yellow green colour,breaking into short, strong, angry waves, whose glitteringwhite crests the wind carried away, as they sank to thelevel surface again. The shores were all cold, distinct,sharp-cut, and wintry-looking, the sky was black andgloomy, with now and then a watery wan sunlight runningthrough it. The wind was so powerful, we couldVOL. II. 16 JOURNAL.scarcely keep our legs. My sleeves and skirts flutteredin the blast, my bonnet was turned front part behind, mynose was blue, my cheeks were crimson, my hair was alltangled, my breath was gone, my blood was in a glow :what a walk ! Met dear Dr. , whom I love. Camein — dined. After dinner, bethought me that I had notcalled upon Mrs. according to promise. Sent foracoach, and set forth thither ; didn't know the number,so drove up Spring street, and down Spring street, andfinally stopped at a shop, got a directory, and found theaddress. Sat a few minutes with her, and at five o'clockleft her. The day was already gone — the gloamingcome. The keen cutting wind whizzed along thestreets ; huge masses of dark clouds, with soft brownedges lay on the pale delicate blue of the evening sky.The moon was up, clear, cold, and radiant ; the crowd hadebbed away from the busy thoroughfare, and only a fewmen in great coats buttoned up to their chins, and womenwrapped in cloaks, were scudding along in the dim twilightand the bitter wind towards their several destinations,with a frozen shuddering look that made me laugh,I had got perished in the coach, and seeing that the darknesscovered me, determined to walk home, and bade thecoach follow me. How pleasant it was : I walked tremendouslyfast, enjoying the fresh breath of the north,and looking at the glittering moon, as she rode high in theevening sky. How I do like walking alone — being alone ;for this alone I wish I were a man. At half past fivewent to the theatre. The house was crammed ; play,Hunchback. I missed from his accustomed seat,and found that like a very politician he had changed sides.I played abominably ; my voice was weak and fagged.JOURNAL. 7After the play, Katharine and Petruchio. I played thatbetter; my father was admirable — it went off delightfully.When it was over, they called for my father, and with meinhis hand, he went on. The pit rose to us like Christians,and shouted and hallooed as 1 have been used tohear. I felt sorry to leave them : they are a pleasant audienceto act to, and exceedingly civil to us, and I havegot rather attached to them. New York too seems nearerhome than any other place, and I felt sorry to leave it.When we had withdrawn, and were going up stairs, weheard three distinct and tremendous cheers. On askingwhat that meant, we learnt 'twas a compliment to us —thank 'em kindly. Came home : found Mr. hadsent me Contarini Fleming. Began reading it, and couldscarce eat my supper for doing so. * *Sunday, 3d.While dressing, received a "sweet note" from Mrs.accompanied with a volume of Bryant's poetry,which, as I like very much, I am her obliged. Swallowedtwo mouthfuls of bread, and away to church. Itwas very crowded, and a worthy woman had taken possessionof the corner seat in Mr. 's pew, with a fid-gettinglittle child, which she kept dancing up and downevery two minutes ; though in church I wished for thedays of King Herod. What strange thoughts did occurto me to-day during service. 'Tis the first Sunday inAdvent. The lesson for the day contained the history ofthe Annunciation. What a mystery our belief is : how8 JOURNAL.seldom it is that we consider and as it were take hold ofwhat we say we believe, and when we do so, how bewilderedand lost we become, — how lost among a thousandwild imaginations, — how driven to and fro by a thousanddoubts, — how wrecked amidst a thousand fears. Surelywe should be humble : we should indeed remember thatwe cannot know, and not strive for that knowledge whichour souls will lose themselves in seeking for, and our overstrainedminds crack in reaching at. * ************* itAt the end of service they sang Luther's hymn. I criedwith nervous excitement, not at that, but at my recollectionof Abraham's singing it with that terrible trumpet accompaniment,that used to make my heart stand still andlisten. Stayed and took the sacrament. * *Came home : found a whole regiment of men. His honourthe Recorder, who is my especial delight, Mr. ,whom I greatly affection ; to these presently enteredMr. and Mr. . They one by one bademe good-by ; how disagreeable that is, that good-by.Mr. — = — read me a passage out of one of Jeffrey's lettersdescribing an English fine lady. The picture is admirable,and most faithful ; they are, indeed, polished,brilliant, smooth as ice, as slippery, as treacherous, ascold. When they were all gone. Colonel gave meto read the descriptive sketch of the French opera. LaTentation, that has been setting all Paris wild. What anatrocious piece of blasphemy, indecency, and folly — whata thoroughly French invention. Mad people I mad peo-JOURNAL. 9pie ! mad people ! Looked over bills, settled accounts,righted desk, tore up papers; among others, sundryanonymous love letters that I had treasured up as specimensof the purely funny in composition, but which beganto take up too much room. Dressed for dinner.After dinner sat writing journal, and reading ContariniFleming. * * * * *Monday 3d.Rose at half past four. The sky was black as death,but in the night winter had dropped his mantle on theearth, and there it lay, cold, and purely white, against theinky sky. Dressed : crammed away all the gleanings ofthe packing, and in thaw, and sleet, and rain, drove downto the steamboat. Went directly to the cabin. On myway thither, managed to fall down half a dozen steepsteps, and give myself as many bruises. I was picked upand led to a bed, where I slept profoundly till breakfasttime. Our kinsman, Mr. , was our fellow-passenger: I like him mainly. After breakfast returned to mycrib. As I was removing Contarini Fleming, in order tolie down, a lady said to me, "let me look at one of thosebooks," and without further word of question or acknowledgment,took it from my hand, and began reading. Iwas a little surprised, but said nothing, and went to sleep.Presently I was roused by a pull on the shoulder, andanother lady, rather more civil and particularly considerate,asked me to do her the favour of lending her theother. I said by all manner of means, wished her at the1 ^10 JOURNAL.devil, and turned round to sleep once more. Arrived atAmbo, we disembarked and bundled ourselves into ourcoach, ourselves, our namesake, and a pretty quiet lady,who was going, in much heaviness of heart, to see a sickchild. The roads were unspeakable ; the day most delightfullydisagreeable. My bruises made the saltatorymovements of our crazy conveyance doubly torturing; inshort, all things were the perfection of misery. I attemptedto read, but found it utterly impossible to do so.Arrived at the Delaware we took boat again ; and, as Iwas sitting very quietly reading Contarini Fleming, withthe. second volume lying on the stool at my feet, the sameunceremonious lady who had borrowed it before, snatchedit up without addressing a single syllable to me, read aslong as she pleased, and threw it down again in the samestyle when she went to dinner. Now I know that halfthe people here, if they were to read that in Mrs. Trollope,would say, " Oh, but you know she could not havebeen a lady ; 'tis not fair to judge of our manners by thevulgar specimens of American society which a steamboatmay afford." Very true : but granting that she was notalady, (which she certainly was not,) supposing her tohave been a housemaid, or anything else of equal pretensionsto good breeding, the way to judge is by comparingher, not with ladies in other countries, but with housemaids,persons in her own condition of life, and 'tis mostcertain that no person whatsoever, however ignorant, low,or vulgar, in England, would have done such a thing asthat. But the mixture of the republican feeling of equalitypeculiar to this country, and the usual want of refinementcommon to the lower classes of most countries, forms asingularly felicitous union of impudence and vulgarity toJOURNAL. 1 1be met with no where but in America.* Arrived at theMansion House, which I was quite glad to see again. In-In speaking" of the bad and disagreeable results of the politicalinstitutions of this country, as exhibited in the feelings andmanners of the lower orders, I have every where dwelt uponthose which, from my own disposition, and the opinions and sentimentsin which I have been educated, have struck me most, andmost unfavourably. But I should be sorry to be so blind, or soprejudiced as not to perceive the great moral goods which arisefrom the very same source, and display themselves strong-ly inthe same class of people. Honesty and truth, excellencies sogreat, that the most bigoted worshipper of the forms and divisionsof societies in the old world, would surely be ashamed toweigh them in the balance ag-ain't the deference there paid torank or riches, or even the real and very ag-agreeable qualities ofcivility and courtesy. Americans (I speak now o^ i\\e people, notthe gentlemen and ladies, they are neither so honest and true, norquite so rude,) are indeed independent. Every man that willwork a little can live extremely well. No portion of the countryis yet overstocked with followers of trades, not even the Atlanticcities. Living is cheap — labour is dear. To conclude, as theIrish woman said, "It is a darling country for poor folks for ifI work three days in the week, can't I lie in my bed the otherthree if I plase ?'* This being so, all dealings between handicraftsmenand those who employ them, tradesmen and those whobuy of them, servants and those who are served by them, areconducted upon the most entire system of reciprocity of advantage5 indeed, if anything, the obligation appears always to lie onthat party which, with us, is generally supposed to confer it.Thus — my shoemaker, a person with whom I have now dealtlargely for two years, said to me the other day, upon my remonstratingabout being obliged regularly to come to his shop andunboot, whenever I order a new pair of walking boots — " Well,ma'am, we can keep your measure certainly, to oblige you, but asarule we don't do it for any of our customers, it's so very troutsJOURNAL.stalled myself in a room, and while they brought in thepackages, finished Contarini Fleming. It reminded me ofbecome." These people are then, as I said before, most trulyindependent ; they are therefore never servile, and but seldomcivil, but for the very same reason they do not rob you — they donot need to do so; neither do they he to you, for your favour or displeasurein no way affects their interest. If you entrust to theircare materials of any sort to make up, you are sure, no matterhow long' you may leave them in their hands, or how entirelyyou may have forgotten the quantity originally given, 'to haveevery inch of them returned to you : and you are also generallysure that any question you ask, with regard to the quality ofwhat you purchase, will be answered without any endeavour toimpose upon you, or palm upon your ignorance that which isworse for that which is better. Two circumstances, which havecome under my own knowledge, will serve to illustrate the spiritof the people; and they are good illustrations to quote, for similarcircumstances are of daily and hourly occurrence.A farmer who is in the habit of calling at our house on his wayto market, with eggs, poultry, etc., being questioned as to whetherthe eggs were new-laid, replied, without an instant's hesitation,"No, not the very fresh ones, we eat all those ourselves."On returning home late from the play one night, I could notfind my slippers any where, and, after some Useless searching,performed my toilet for bed without them. The next morning,on inquiring of my maid if she knew anything of them, she replied,with perfect equanimity, that having walked home throughthe snow, and got her feet extremely wet, she had put them on,and forgotten to restore them to their place before my return.Nobody, I think, will doubt that an English farmer, and an Englishservant, might sell stale eggs, and use their mistresses' slippers;but I think it highly doubtful, that either fact would havebeen acknowledged with such perfect honesty any where buthere. As to the servants here, except the blacks, and the poorIrish bread-hunters who come over, there are scarcely any to beJOURNAL. 13Combes' book : I wonder whether he is turning phrenologistat all? those physiological principles were the bosomfriends of the Combes' phrenological ones. Stowed awaymy things, made a delicious huge wood fire, dressed myself,and went down to dinner. Our kinsman dined withus. Mr. came in while we were at dinner. Afterdinner came up to my room, continued unpacking andputting away my things till near nine o'clock. Ashen wewent down to tea, my father was lying on the sofa asleep,and a man was sitting with his back to the door, readingthe newspaper. He looked up as we came in : it waswhom I ready rejoiced to see again. During tea,he told us all the Philadelphia gossip. So the ladies areall getting up upon horses, and wearing the *' Kemblecap," as they call Lady 's device. How she wouldlaugh if she could hear it ; how I did laugh when I didhear it. The Kemble cap, forsooth ! thus it is that greatoriginators too often lose the fame of their inventions, andthat the glory of a new idea passes by the head that conceivedit, to encircle, as with a halo, that of some mereimitator ; thus it is that this very big world comes to becalled America, and not Columbia, as it ought to; thusit is — etc. etc. Sc. He sat for some time. Saw poorl^^pc , J , '^ ^ ^ '^ ^She is better, poor thing ; I like her amazingly.found — the very name seems repugnant to an American ; andhowever high their wages, and easy their situation, they seemhardly to be able to endure the bitterness of subserviency andsubordination.14 JOURNAL.Tuesday, with. JAfter breakfast practised for two hours. calledand stayed some time. Came up to my own room ; wrotejournal: while doing so a note containing two cards, andan invitation to " tea," from the Miss • 's was broughtto me. Presently I was called down to receive our kinsman,who sat some time with me, whom I like most especially,who is a gentleman, and a very nice person.Came up and resumed my journal : was again summoneddown to see young Mr. . w^ ■* ********When he was gone, finished journal, wrote to Mrs. ,to my mother, read a canto in Dante, and began to writea novel. Dined at five. After dinner, put out things forthis evening, played on the piano, mended habit shirt,dressed myself, and at a quarter to ten went to the theatrefor my father. I had on the same dress I wore at DevonshireHouse, the night of the last ball I was at in England,and looked at myself in amazement, to think of all thestrangeness that have befallen since then. We proceededto Miss 's, and this tea party turned out tobe a very crowded dance, in small rooiffi, upon carpets,and with a roasting fire. Was introduced to all the worldand his wife. Dr. claimed acquaintance with us,and danced with me : I like his manners very much. Ihave beheld Miss , and should doubtless now departin peace. * * * * ** * * # ** ^ * * ■jfr *Lord ! Lord ! what fools men and women do make themselves.Was introduced to one Mr. , Mr. 'sJOURNAL. 15partner, whom I received graciously for the sake of thegood days on hoard the Pacific. Came away at a littleafter twelve. I never felt anything like the heat of therooms, or heard anything so strange as the questions thepeople ask one, or saw anything more lovely than the fullmoonlight on the marble buildings of Philadelphia.Wednesday, 5tli.After breakfast, practised : Mr. and Mrs. called, alsoDr. . Went and saw poor Mrs. for a littletime ; she interests me most extremely — I like her very,very much. Came up to my own room ; read a canto ofDante. Was called down to see folk, and found the literally thronged. The first face I made outwas Mr. 's, for whom I have taken an especial love :two ladies, a whole load of men, and Mr. , who hadbrought me a curious piece of machinery, in the shape ofa musical box, to look at. It contained a little bird, nolarger than a large fly, with golden and purple wings, anda tiny white beak. On the box being wound up, thislittle creature flew out, and perching itself on the brink ofa gold basin, hew fluttering its wings, opening its beak,and uttering sundry very melodious warbling, in themidst of which — it sank suddenly down, and disappeared,the lid closed, and there was an end. What a pity 'tisthat we can only realize fairy-land through the means ofmachinery. One reason why there is no such thing leftas the believing faculty among men, is because they havethemselves learnt to make magic, and perform miracles.When the coast was once more clear, I returned tomy room, got out things for the theatre, dined tete-astute16 JOURNAL.with D ; my father dined at the public table. Afterdinner, came up stairs, read Grahame, wrote journal, beganmy novel under another shape. I can't write prose,(query: can I anything else?) I don't know how, butmy sentences are the comically things in the world ; theend forgets the beginning, and the whole is a perfect labyrinthof parenthesis within parenthesis. Perhaps, by thebye, without other view, it would be just as well if I exercisedmyself a little in writing my own language, as thegrammar hath it, " with elegance and propriety'" At halfpast five went to the theatre. The play was Romeo andJuliet; the house not good. Mr. played Romeo. ************ *I acted like a wretch, of course ; how could I do otherwise? Oh, Juliet ! vision of the south ! rose of the gardenof the earth! was this the glorious hymn that Shakspearehallowed to your praise ? was this the mingledstrain of Love's sweet going forth, and Death's dark victory,over which my heart and soul have been poured outin wonder and ecstasy ? — How I do loathe the stage !these wretched, tawdry, glittering rags, flung over thebreathing forms of ideal loveliness : th miserable, poor,and pitiful substitutes for the glories with which poetryhas invested her magnificent and fair creations — the glorieswith which our imagination reflects them back again."What a mass of wretched mumming mimicry acting is.Pasteboard and paint, for the thick breathing orange grovesof the south ; green silk and oiled parchment, for the solemnsplendour of her noon of night ; wooden platformsand canvass curtains, for the solid marble balconies, andrich dark draperies of Juliet's sleeping chamber, thatJOURNAL. 17shrine of love and beauty ; rouge, for the startled life-bloodin the cheek of that young passionate woman ; an actress,a raimicker, a sham creature, me, in fact, or any otherone, for that loveliest and most wonderful conception, inwhich all that is true in nature, and all that is exquisitein fancy, are moulded into a living form. To act this !to act Romeo and Juliet ! — horror ! horror ! how I doloathe my most impotent and unpoetical craft ! *In the last scene of the play, I was so mad with the modein which all the preceding ones had been perpetrated, that,lying over Mr. 's corpse, and fumbling for his dagger,which I could not find, I, Juliet, thus apostrophized him,Romeo being dead — " Why, where the devil is yourdagger, Mr. ?" What a disgusting travesty. Onmy return home I expressed my entire determination tomy father to perform the farce of Romeo and Juliet nomore. Why, it's an absolute shame that one of Shakspeare'splays should be thus turned into a mockery. Ireceived a note from young Mr. , accompanied bya very curious nosegay in shells ; a poor substitute forthe breathing, fresh, rosy flowers he used to furnish mewith, when I was last here.Thursday, 6th.The morning was beautifully bright and warm, like aMay morning in England. After breakfast practised fortwo hours : while doing so, was interrupted by Mr. ,who came to bid us good-by. He was going on to NewVOL. II. 318 JOURNAL.York, and thence to England.He sat some time. When he was gone, and I had finishedmy practising, came up to my own room. Was summonedthence to see my kinsman, who sat some timewith me, and whom I like of all things. He makes itout (for he seems a great meddler in these matters) thatwe are originally Italian people, pirates, by name, CampoBello ; the same family as the Scottish Campbell ; thesame family as the Norman Beauchamps : how I onlywish it were true ! I have, and always have had thegreatest love and veneration for old blood ; I would ratherby far have some barbarous Saxon giant to my ancestor,than ail the wealth of the earth to my dower. I partedfrom my friend with much regret ; he has won my heartfairly. When he was gone, came up to my own room.The day was brilliant and unclouded, and as I looked intothe serene blue sky, my spirit longed for wings. *Dr. called this morning, and interested me by a longaccount of Webster, in the course of which, however, hegave me, if possible a stronger distaste than I had before,to the form of government in this country, from variousresults which he enumerated as inevitably belonging to it.Read a canto in Dante : it consoles me to read my Italian,and forget for a time all that is. * * *I sat watching the glorious sunset as it came redly streaminginto my room, touching everything with glory, andJOURNAL. » 1&shining through my hair upon my book. It suggested tomea picture ; and I wrote one for Mrs. , who hadbeen consuming me about a costume in which to sit forher portrait. Dined at five : my father dined out. Afterdinner, sat writing journal till ten, when he returned.The moon was shining soft and full, and he asked me if Iwould take a walk. I bonneted and booted, and we salliedforth to the Schuylkill. The moon withdrew herselfbehind a veil of thin white clouds, but left a grey clearlight over the earth, and through the sky. We reachedthe Fair Mount bridge at about eleven. The turnpikewas fast, and every body asleep, so we climbed over thegate, and very deliberately pursued our way through thestrange dark-looking covered bridge, where the glimmeringlamps, at distant intervals, threw the crossing beams andrafters into momentary brightness, that had a strangeeffect contrasted with the surrounding gloom.* Wereached the other side, and turning off from the road, beganclimbing the hill opposite the breakwater. The roadwas muddy in the valley with the heavy rains, and unwillingto wade through the dirt, we clambered along apaling for several yards, and so escaped the mire. Myfather steered for the grassy knoll just opposite FairMount, and there, screened by a thicket of young cedarbushes, with the river breaking over the broad dam farbelow us, and the shadowy banks on the other side melt-thebridges here are all made of wood, and for the mostpart covered. Those which are so, are by no means unpicturesqueobjects. The one-arched bridge at Fair Mount is particularlylight and graceful in its appearance : at a little distance, itlooks like a scarf, rounded by the wind, flung over the river.20 JOURNAL.ing away in the soft grey light, we sat down on a treetrunk. Here we remained for upwards of a quarter of anhour without uttering a syllable ; indeed, we had notspoken three words since we set out. My father wasthinking, I presume, of something ; I, of the day ofjudgment — when these thick forests, and wide strong waters,like a shrivelled scroll, are to burn to ashes beforethe coming of God's justice. We were disturbed by alarge white spaniel dog, who, coming down from amongthe cedar bushes, reminded me of the old witch stories,and Faust. We arose to depart, and took our way towardsthe Market street bridge, along the banks of the river.The broken notes of a bugle horn came at intervals acrossthe sleeping waters from the opposite shore, where shonereflected the few lingering lights from the houses that hadnot yet shut up for the night. The moon, faintly strugglingthrough the clouds, now touched the dark pyramidsof the cedar trees that rose up into the grey sky, andthrew our shadows on the lonely path we were pursuing,now cast a pale gleam through the rapid clouds that chasedone another like dreams across the sky. The air wassoft and balmy as the night air of mid August. Theworld was still ; and except our footfalls, as we trudgedalong, no sound disturbed the universal repose. We did,not reach home till half past twelve. As we walked downMarket street, through the long ranges of casks, the onlycreatures stirring, except some melancholy night-lovingcat, my father said very Calmly, " How I do wish I hada gimlet—" What for ?" — " What fun it would be topierce every one of these barrels." For a gentleman ofhis years, this appeared to me rather a juvenile promptingof Satan ; and as I laughingly expostulated on the wicked-journal.21ness of such a proceeding, he replied with much innocence," 1 don't think they'd ever suspect me of havingdone it:" and truly, I don't think they would. Camehome, and to bed. That was a curious fancy of my father's.A PICTURE.Through the half open'd casement stream'd the lightOf the departing sun. The golden hazeOf the red western sky fell warm and brightInto that chamber large and lone : the blazeTouch'd slantingly curtain and couch, and threwA glory over many an antique gem,Won from th' entombed cities that once grewAt the volcano's foot. Mingled with themStood crystal bowls, through which the broken rayFell like a shower of precious stones, and layReflected upon marble ; these were crown'dWith blushing flowers, fresh, and glittering yetWith diamond rain drops. On the crimson groundA shining volume, clasp'd with gold and jet,And broken petals of a passion flow'r.Lay by the lady of this silent bow'r.Her rippling hair fell from a pearly roundThat strove to clasp its billowy curls : the lightHung like a glory on their waves of gold.Her velvet robe, in many a violet fold.Like the dark pansy's downy leaf, was boundWith a gold zone, and clasp'd with jewels bright.That glow'd and glanc'd as with a magic flameWhene'er her measur'd breathing stirr'd her frame.Upon her breast and shoulders lay a veilOf curious needle-work, as pure and paleAs a fine web of ivory, wrought with care.Through which her snowy skin show'd smooth and fair.2*22 JOURNAL.Upon the hand that propp'd her drooping head,A precious emerald, like a fairy well,Gleam'd with dark solemn lustre ; a rich threadOf rare round pearls — such as old legends tellTh' Egyptian qi^een pledg'd to her Roman lord,When in her cup a kingdom's price she pour'd,-Circled each soft white arm. A painter wellMight have been glad to look upon her face,For it was full of beauty, truth, and grace ;And from her lustrous eyes her spirit shoneSerene, and strong, and still, as from a throne.Friday, 7tli.A break. Found in the breakfast room. Themorning was very unpropitious, but I settled to ride atone,if it was tolerably fine then. He remained potteringa long time : when he was gone, practised, habited, wentin for a few minutes to Mrs. . At one the horsescame, but mine was brought without a stirrup, so we hadto wait, Lord knows how long, till the blundering groomhad ridden back for it. At length we mounted. " Handsomeis that handsome does," is verity; and therefore,pretty as was my steed, I wished its good looks and itselfat the devil, before I was half way down Chestnut street.It pranced, and danced, and backed me once right upon thepavement. We took the Laurel Hill road. The daywas the perfection of gloom — the road six inches deep inheavy mud. We walked the whole way out : my fathergot the cramp, and lost his temper. At Laurel Hill wedismounted, and walked down to the river side. Howmelancholy it all looked : the turbid rhubarb water, theskeleton woods, the grey sky, and far winding away ofJOURNAL. 23the dark rocky shores ; yet it was fine even in this gloom,and wonderfully still. The clouds did not move, — thewater had not the faintest ripple, — the trees did not stir abranch ; the most perfect and profound trance seemed tohave fallen upon everything. and I scrambled downthe rocks towards the water, expatiating on the capabilitiesof this place, which was once a country-seat, andwith very little expense might be made a very enchantingas well as a very comfortable residence ; always excepting,of course, the chance of fever and ague during thesummer months, when the whole of the banks of theSchuylkill, high and rocky as they are, are considered sounhealthy that the inhabitants are obliged to leave theirhouses until the winter season, when the country naturallyloses half its attractions. At half past three we mounted,and, crossing the river, returned home by a much betterroad. My horse, however, was decidedly a brute, — pulledmy arms to pieces, cantered with the wrong leg foremost,trotted in a sort of scuttling fashion, that rendered it utterlyimpossible to rise in the stirrups, and instead of walking,jogged the breath out of my body. I was fairly done upwhen we reached home. Dressed, and dined ; dinedwith us. After dinner went and sat with Mrs. . Soitseems, Carolina is in a state of convulsion. Reportshave arrived that the Nullifiers and Unionists have had afight in Charleston, and that lives have been lost. " Bidea wee," as the Scotchman says, we talk a good deal onthe other side the water of matters that are far enoughoff ; but as for America, the problem is not yet solved —and this very crisis, (a more important one than has yetoccurred in the political existence of this country,) isthreatening to slacken the bonds of brotherhood between24 JOURNAL.the states, and shake the Union to its centre. The interestsof the northern states are totally different from,and in some respects opposite to those of the southernones. * * * * * *The tariff question is the point in debate ; and the Carolinianshave, it seems, threatened to secede from the Unionin consequence of the policy pursued with regard to that.I was horrified at Dr. 's account of the state of thenegroes in the south. To teach a slave to read or writeis to incur a penalty either of fine or imprisonment.They form the larger proportion of the population, by far ;and so great is the dread of insurrection on the part ofthe white inhabitants, that they are kept in the most brutishignorance, and too often treated with the most brutalbarbarity, in order to insure their subjection. Oh ! whata breaking asunder of old manacles there will be, some ofthese fine days ; what a fearful rising of the black flood ;what a sweeping away, as by a torrent, of oppressionsand tyrannies ; what a fierce and horrible retaliation andrevenge for wrong so long endured — so wickedly inflicted.When I came in to tea, at half past eight, found Dr.there. ************When he was gone, sang a song or two like a crow inthe quinsy. * * * * *Wednesday, 12tb.*After breakfast went to rehearsal, — after rehearsal went toJOURNAL. 25's. It poured with rain. Came home, — put outthings for the theatre, — practised for an hour, — finishedletter to ; wrote journal ; dined at three. After dinnerwent and sat with Mrs. . Sang to her all myold Scotch ballads, — read the first act of the Hunchbackto her. At half past five went to the theatre. Play,King John ; house good : I played horribly. My voicetoo was tired with my exertions, and cracked most awfullyin the midst of " thunder," which was rather bad. *I had finished early, and came home in ray dress in orderto show it to Mrs. . She was just gone to bed, butadmitted me. * * * * ************ #Sat talking to her till my father came home. So " OldHickory" means to lick the refractory southern : whythey are coming to a civil war ! However, the grumblershaven't the means of fighting without emancipating andarming their slaves. That they will not and dare not do ;the consequence will be, I suppose, that they will swallowthe affront, and submit.Thursday, 13tluWhile dressing, had the pleasure of witnessing from mywindow a satisfactory sample of the innate benevolence,gentleness, and humanity of our nature. A child of aboutfive years old, dragging a cat by a string tied to its throatround and round a yard, till the poor beast ceased to useits paws, and suffered itself to be trailed along the ground,26 JOURNAL.after which, the little fiend set his feet upon it, and stampedand kicked it most brutally. The blood came into myface ; and though almost too far for hearing, I threw upthe sash, and at the top of my voice apostrophized thelittle wretch with «' Hollo there ! wicked, naughty boy !"He seemed much puzzled to discover whence this appealproceeded, but not at all at a loss to apply it, for afterlooking about with a very conscience-stricken visage, herushed into the house, dragging his victim with him. Icame down fairly sick to breakfast. After despatching it,I put on my bonnet and walked round to the house wherethis scene had taken place. I inquired for the child, describinghis appearance, and he was presently brought tome,when I sat down at the foot of the stairs in the hall,and spent some time in expatiating on the enormity ofsuch proceedings to the little ruffian, who, it seems, hasfrequently been corrected for similar velocities before. Ifear my preachment will not avail much. Came home,put room to rights, practised for an hour ; got ready, anddawdled about most dreadfully, waiting for D , whohad gone out with my father. At half past twelve set offwith her to the riding school. It was full of women inlong calico skirts, and gay bonnets with flaunting feathers,riding like wretches ; some cantering, some trotting, somewalking — crossing one another, passing one another in away that would have filled the soul of Forward with griefand amazement. I put on a skirt and my riding-cap, andmounted a rough, rugged, besmeared white-brown beast,that looked like an old trunk more than anything else, itscoat standing literally on end, like " quills upon the fretfulporcupine," with heat and ill condition. 'Tis vain attemptingto ride like a Christian on these heathen horses.JOURNAL. 27which are neither broken, bitted, nor bridled properly ;and poor dumb return have no more idea of what a horseought to be, or how a horse ought to behave, than somany cows. My hair, presently, with the damp and theshaking, became perfectly straight. As I raised myhead, after putting it up under my cap, I beheld earnestlydiscoursing to D . I asked for Tuesday'scharger ; and the school having by degrees got empty, Imanaged to become a little better acquainted with its waysand means. 'Tis a pretty little creature, but 'tis not halfbroken, is horribly ill ridden, and will never be good foranything — what a pity ! At two o'clock I dismounted :walked home with us. Went in to see Mrs. ;she seemed a good deal better, I thought,— sat some timewith her. Mr. has sent nie back my book of manuscriptmusic : played and sang half through it. Came tomy room ; tried on dresses for Lady Macbeth, and theWonder, and dressed for dinner. My father dined out.After dinner went in to see Mrs. . Sat some timewith her mother, her chicks, and her young doctor of acousin, who is quite a civilized mortal. Poor Mrs.was too ill to see me. Came to the drawing-room, wrotejournal, played and sang till tea time. After tea read thehistory of Knickerbocker, whereat I was like to havedied, through the greate merriment its rare and excellentepleasantries did cause in me, insomuch that I lay onthe sofa screaming, very much like one lunatic.Friday, lith.After breakfast put out things for the theatre. Practisedfor an hour, read and marked the Comedy of Errors,28 JOURNAL.which is really great fun ; perhaps not funnier than ,but the subject is more agreeable a good deal.Read a canto in Dante ; got ready for the riding school :found and Mr. in the drawing-room. As wewere going out, the gentlemen did not remain long. Whenthey were gone, D and I set off for the riding school.We were hardly there, before made his appearance :I wonder what he'll do for an interest, by the bye, whenwe are gone. * * * * **************The school was quite empty, so we had it all to ourselves.D mounted up upon a detestable shambling brute,that wouldn't go no how. 1 hud a fanny for making mylittle fiery charger leap over the bar, and made Mr.put it down for me. The beast had no idea of such saltatoryproceedings, and jerked himself over it three timesmost abominably. The fourth time I pushed him at it,he jumped, and I jumped, too, out of the saddle on to myfeet, having lighted down very comfortably at the horse'shead with the reins in ray hand, neither hurt nor frightened.This is the first time a horse ever had me off. Igot on again, but declined leaping any more. At a quarterto three we returned home. walked with us.At the corner of Sansom street, met young . Heavenbless from a challenge ! Came home — dined : afterdinner went in and sat with Mrs. till coffee time.Showed her my dresses, and read her a scene or two ofthe Hunchback. Went to the theatre at half past five.Play, the Hunchback — the house was literally crammed.I played very well, except being out in my town scene —an unwonted occurrence with me. After the play, cameJOURNAL. 29home, supped, and read the Wonder, — which I thoughtwondrous dull.Saturday, 15th*If I were to write a history of Philadelphia, according tothe profound spirit of investigation for which moderntourists are remarkable, I should say that it was a peculiaritybelonging to its climate, that Saturday is invariablya wet day. At twelve went to rehearsal, after putting outthings for the theatre. Had a long talk with Mr.about Pasta, the divine, — the only reality that ever I beheldthat was as fair, as grand, as glorious as an imaginarybeing. Shall I ever forget that woman in Medea ?I am thankful I have seen her. After rehearsal called atMr. 's. Saw and carried off his head of me in Juliet.Certainly the resemblance between myself and Mrs.Siddons must be very strong ; for this painting might almosthave been taken, for a copy of Harlowe's sketch ofmy aunt in Lady Macbeth : 'tis very strange and unaccountable.Came home ; wrote journal — went and satwith Mrs. till dinner time. After dinner went andsat with her again till coffee time. Was introduced toDr. , whom I liked very much. * *Showed her my dress and my bracelets. Had a long discussionabout the precedence of one lady before anotheramong the nobility of European courts, whereat her republicanpride seemed highly offended. If Clay did, asDr. describes, pass before titled men, at a dinner inEngland, with his hands in his breeches' pockets, it onlyVOL. II. 330 JOURNAL.follows thence, that he was really ill-bred, and would bethoughtvulgar if he did it unwittingly, and absurd if hedid it intentionally. Went to the theatre at half past five.The house was wonderful considering the weather : theplay was Fazio. I played pretty well — ray dress wassplendid.Sunday, 16tli.Had only time to swallow a mouthful of breakfast, and \off to church ; where I heard about as thorough a cock ■and bull sermon as ever I hope to be edified withal. 'What shameful nonsense the man talked ! and all the time "pretending to tell us what God had done, what he was >doing, and what he intended to do next, as if he went upii^o heaven and saw what was going on there, every fiveminutes. Came home ; sat with Mrs. for a longtime: I am very fond of her. * * * ;^ ^ % ^ ^ ^Came to my own room, and studied Violante till dinnertime. How tiresome this pointless prose is to baiter intoone's head. After dinner went and sat with Mrs.till near tea time, when I came to the drawing-room.Presently Mr. and Mr. called, also Dr. .I went to my father's room to apprize him of this invasionof the Goths, and found him very unwell, and labouringunder a severe cold. He would not come down ;so D and I had to entertain these interesting youthswhat fashion we best might. She gave them tea, and Igave them music, till half past ten, when they departed.JOURNAL. 31Monday, ITtli.It poured with rain like the very mischief: a sort of continualgushing down from the clouds, combining all thevehemence of a thunder shower, with all the pertinacityof one of our own November drizzles — delightful ! Wentto rehearse Macbeth. Had a delightful palaver with Mr.who knows all the music that ever was writ, andall the singers that ever sang, and worships Pasta as I do.Came home ; put out things for the theatre : dined atthree. After dinner went and sat with Mrs. tillcoffee time. At half past five went to the theatre. Inspite of the rain, the house was very full ; and in all mylife I never saw so large an assembly of people so perfectlyand breathlessly still as they were during several ofour scenes. I played like a very clever girl as I am ; butit was about as much like Lady Macbeth, as the GreatMogul. My father laboured his part too much.Tuesday, 18tli.Received letters ; one from dear , and one from .They did, as letters from England always do by me,threw me into a perfect nervous fever. * *After breakfast went to rehearse the Wonder. Called inon my way on Mr. , who is painting a portrait of myfather. Saw one or two lovely women's pictures. Iwish he would go to England ; I think it would answerhis purpose very well. At two went to the riding-school :rode till half past three. The day was bitter cold, with a^32 JOURNAL.piercing wicked wind riding through the grey sky.D r- and I walked to pay sundry calls. Met -,whom we had not seen for two or three days — a most unusualcircumstance. He walked home with us. Dand I dined tete-astute. On returning home I found amost lovely nosegay of real, delicious, fragrant flowers.Sweet crimson buds of the faint breathing monthly rose ;bright, vivid, dark green myrtle ; the honey DaphneDora, with its clusters of pinked-white blossoms ; andthe delicate bells erf the tall white jasmine, — all sweet,and living, and fresh, as at midsummer : I was blissful !After dinner I went in to Mrs. . Came back to thedrawing-room. , who had taken the hint about ourbeing alone in the evening, came in. I began makinghim sing, and taught him the Leaf and the Fountain : hisvoice sounded like when we were nearer home, ^• * * ■^ * * *******Presently Mr. was announced. He was the authorof the flowers. *****Wednesday, 19tluAfter breakfast called. * * *Went to rehearsal, — afterwards to the riding-school. Theschool was quite empty, and I alone. The boy broughtme my horse and I mounted by means of a chair. As Iwas cantering along, amusing myself with cogitations various,came in. He stayed the whole time I rode.JOURNAL. 33I settled with him about riding tomorrow, and caine hometo dinner. After dinner went in to see Mrs. . Dr.'■ was there, who is a remarkably nice man. She isa very delightful person, with a great deal of intellect anda wonderful quantity of fortitude and piety, and a total absenceof knowledge of the world, except through books.Her children enchant me, and her care of them enchantsme, too. She is an excellent person, with a heart overflowingwith the very best affections our nature is capableof, fulfilled, I think, to the uttermost. * ** * * # *Stayed with her till time to go to the theatre. The housewas very full: the play was the Wonder — my first timeof acting Violante. My dress was not finished till thevery last moment, — and then, oh, horror ! was so smallthat I could not get into it. It had to be pinned upon me ;and thus bebundied, with the dread of cracking my bod-dicefrom top to bottom every time I moved, and the utterimpossibility of drawing my breath, from the narrow dimensionsinto which it squeezed me, I went on to play anew part. The consequence was that I acted infamously,and for the first time in my life was horribly imperfect —out myself, and putting every body else out. Betweenevery scene my unlucky gown had to be pinned together;and in the laughing scene, it took the hint from my admirableperformance, and facetiously grinned in an ecstacyof amusement till it was fairly open behind, displaying, Isuppose, the lacing of my stays, like so many teeth, tothe admiring gaze of the audience ; for, as I was perfectly3 *34 JOURNAL,ignorant of the circumstance, with my usual easy nonchalance,I persisted in turning my back to the folk, in spiteof all ray father's pulls and pushes, which, as 1 did notcomprehend, I did not by any means second either. — —was at the play, also Dr. ^, also Henry Clay, whowas received with cheers and plaudits manifold. Camehome in my dress, and went in to show it to Mrs.and her mother, who were both in bed, but marvellouslyedified by my appearance.Thursday, 20th,The day was beautifully brilliant, clear, and cold — winter,but winter in dazzling array of sunshine and crystal ; blueskies, with light feathery streaks of white clouds runningthrough them ; dry, crisp, hard roads, with the delicaterime tipping all the ruts with sparkling jewellery ; and thewaters fresh, and bright, and curling under the keenbreath of the arrow-lie wind. After breakfast called.Walked out with him to get a cap and whip for D r-.The latter he insisted on making her a present of, and avery pretty one indeed it was, with a delicate ivory handle,and a charming persuading lash. Went in for a shorttime to Mrs. — — , who entertained herself with letting allmy hair down about ray ears, and pulling it all manner ofways. At twelve habited, and helped to equip dearD , who really looked exceedingly nice in her jockeyhabiliments. Went to the school, where we found — —waiting for us. Mounted, and set forth. We rode outto Laurel Hill. The road was not very good, but no mud;and the warm, gleesorac sunlight fell mellowly over thelovely undulations of the land, with their patches of greenJOURNAL. 35cedar trees, and threadbare cloak of leafless woods, throughwhich the little birds were careering merrily, as the revivingsunshine came glowingly down upon the world,like a warm blessing. Passed that bright youth, Mr.on the road, riding very like an ass on horseback.When we reached Laurel Hill, we dismounted, tied upthe horses, slacked their girths, and walked first up to thatinteresting wooden monument, where I inscribed my initialson our first ride thither. Afterwards, and Iscrambled down the rocks to the river side, which Ddeclined doing, ^ cause vy ? — she'd have had to climb upagain. The water was like a broad dazzling river oflight, and had a beautiful effect, winding away in brightnessthat the eye could scarce endure, between its banks,which, contrasted by the sunny stream, and blue transparentsky, appeared perfectly black. As I bent over a finebluff, (as they here call any mass of rock standing isolated,)I espied below me a natural rocky arch, overhangingthe river, all glittering with puis long diamond icicles.Thither convoyed me, and broke off one of thesewintry gems for me. Ii measured about two feet long,and was as thick at the root as my wrist. I never sawanything so beautiful as these pendant adornments of thesilver-fingered ice god. Toiled up to the house againwhere, after brushing our habits, we remounted ourchargers, and came home. The river was most beautifultowards the bridge that they are building ; the unfinishedpiers of which have a very pretty effect, almost resemblingtheir very opposite, a ruin. The thin, pale vapourof the steam engine, employed in some of the works, risingfrom the blue water, and rolling its graceful waves faralong the dark rocky shore, had a lovely fairy-like look,36 JOURNAL.which even drew forth the admiration of , who, fromsundry expressions which have occasionally fallen fromhim, I suspect to be rather well endowed with ideality.Reached home at half past four. My father dined out.It was past 's dinner time ; so we invited him tostay and dine with us. After dinner we fell somehow oranother into a profound theological discussion ; suddenlyproposing for my solution the mysterious doctrineof the inherent sin of our nature, and its accompanyingdoom, death, — inherited from one man's sin, and oneman's punishment. I am not fond of discoursing uponthese subjects. 'Tis long since I have arrived at the convictionthat the less we suffer our thoughts to dwell uponwhat is vague and mysterious in our most mysterious faith,and the more we confine our attention and our efforts tothat part of it which is practical and clear as the noon day,the better it will be for our minds here, and our soulshereafter. Surely they are not wise who seek to penetratethe unfathomed counsels of God, whilst their ownnatures, moral, mental, nay, even physical, have depthsbeyond the sounding of their plummet line. spokein perfect sincerity and simplicity of the difficulty hefound in believing that which was so " hard a saying ;"and as there was not the slightest particle of levity or ridiculein his manner, 1 spoke as earnestly as I felt andalways feel upon this subject, — very strenuously advisinghim not to strain his comprehension upon matters whichbaffle human endeavour, which, after all our wanderingsand weary exploring, still lead us back to the wideboundless waste of uncertainty ; concluding by exhortinghim to read his Bible, say his prayers, and go to churchif he could, — or, if he could not, at all events to be asJOURNAL. 37good as he could. While we were at tea, youngand Dr. came in. They put me down to the piano,and I continued to sing until past eleven o'clock, when,somebody looking at a watch, there was a universal exclamationof surprise, the piano was shut down, the candlesput out, the gentlemen vanished, and I came to bed.WINTER.I saw him on his throne, far in the north.Him ye call Winter, picturing" him everAn aged man, whose frame, with palsied shiveFj^Bends o'er the fiery element, his foe.But him I saw was a young god, whose browWas crown'd with jagged icicles, and forthFrom his keen spirit-like eyes there shone a light,.Broad, glaring, and intensely cold and bright.His breath, like sharp-edged arrows, pierc'd the airs.The naked earth crouch'd shuddering at his feet;His finger on all murmuring waters sweetLay icily, — motion nor sound was there;Nature seemed frozen — dead; and still and slowA winding-sheet fell o'er her features fair.Flaky and white, from his wide wings of snowI am sorry to find that I must skip Friday and Saturday,thereby omitting an account of an interesting ball at Mrs.'s, where the floors were duly chalked, the musicvery good, the women very lovely, and where I fell inagain with ray dear kinsman, whom I love devotedly, andwhom I jumped half across a quadrille to greet with extendedhands, which must greatly have edified the wholeassembly. Likewise I must skip a most interesting accountof a second polemical conversation with ; in38 JOURNAL.the course of which, to my great amazement, he managedto introduce a most vehement abuse of Dr. , whoseadmiration of my singing appears to have troubled himfully as much as the doctrine of original sin, — togetherwith many other things worthy of note, which shall nowdie in oblivion, and the times return unenlightened totheir graves.Sunday, 93d.Was only dressed in time to swallow two mouthfuls ofbreakfast, and get ready for church. came to knowat what time we would ride, and walked with us to thechurch door. *****After church, came home, — habited ; went and sat withMrs. till half past one. The villanous servants didnot think fit to announce the horses till they had been atthe door full half an hour, so that when we started it wasnear two o'clock. D— seemed quite at her ease uponher dangling charger, and I had gotten up upon Mr. 'sbig horse to see what I could make of him. The daywas beautifully bright and clear, with a warm blessed sunshinecausing the wintry world to smile. We had proceededmore than half way to Laurel Hill without event,when, driving my heavy-shouldered brute at a bank, insteadof lifting up his feet, he thought fit to stumble, fall,and fling me very comfortably off upon the mound. Isprang up neither hurt nor frightened, shook my habit,tightened my girths, and mounted again ; when we set off,much refreshed by this little incident, which occasioned aJOURNAL. 39world of mirth and many saucy speeches from my companionsto me. At Laurel Hill the master of the housecame bowing forth with the utmost courteousness to meetme, expressing his profound sense of the honour I didhim in deigning to inhale the air around his abode, andhis unspeakable anguish at having been absent, when Ihad so far condescended before. He was a foreigner —French or Italian, or such like — which accounts for hiscivility. Had the horses taken to the stable, and theirgirths slackened. D kept the heights, andand I ran, slipped, slid, and scrambled down to the water'sedge. The river was frozen over, not, however, stronglyenough to bear much, and every jutting rock was hungwith pure glittering icicles that shone like jewels in thebright sunshine. Far down the river all was still andlonely, and bright, yet wintry-looking. The flow of thewater, and its plashing music were still ; there was nobreath of wind stirring the leafless boughs ; the sunlightcame down, warm and dazzling upon the silent sparklingworld, all clad in its shimmering ice robe ; the air wastransparent and clear, and the whole scene was perfectlylovely. Turning to reascend the rocks, I called aloud toD , and the distinctness, loudest echo answered me.So perfect was the reflection of the sound, that at first Ithought some one was mocking me. I ran up a scale asloud, and high, and rapid as I could, and from among thesunny fields, a voice repeated the threaded notes as clearly,as rapidly, only more softly, with a distinctness that wasstartling. I never heard an echo that repeated so muchof what was sung or said. I stood in perfect enchantmentexercising my voice, and provoking the hidden voice ofthe air, who answered me with a far ofl'tone, that seemed40 JOURNAL.as though the mocking spirit fled along the hill tops, repeatingmy notes with a sweet gleeful tone, that filled mewith delight. Oh, what must savages think an echo is ?How many, many lovely and wild imaginations are suggestedby that v.?hich natural philosophers analyze intomere conformations of earth, and undulations of air. Atlength we joined D , and walked to the house, wherepresently appeared the master of the mansion, with cakes,wine, cordial, preserves, or, as Comus hath it, " a tablecovered with all manner of deliciousness." I was at firsta lite puzzled by the epithet cordial applied to threegoodly-looking decanters, full of rosy and golden liquor,and which informed me is the invariable refreshmentpresented to visitors of both sexes who ride or driveup to Laurel Hill. To satisfy my curiosity, I put my lipsto some of it, which proved to be no other than liqueur,an indifferent sort of noyau — that which soberest folks inEngland take but a thimble full of after dinner, by way ofchasse cafe, and drunkenness folk would be ashamed totouch in the morning. It seems that it is otherwise here ;and indeed, generally speaking, Americans swallow muchmore of all sorts of spirituous nauseousness, than we doin our country. The men take brandy, in a way thatwould astound people of any respectability in England, andin this, as well as many other ways, contribute to assist theenervating effects of their climate.* Our host waited himselfmost attentively upon us, and refused all species ofremuneration save thanks, which, indeed' he said he owed• The time of locking of doors at gentlemen's dinner parties,and drinking till the company dropped one by one under the table,has, with the equally disgusting habit of spitting about theJOURNAL. 41me for so far honouring him as to stuff his cakes, anddrink his wine. We mounted again, being refreshed, andfloors, long vanished in England before a more rational hospitality,and a better understanding of the very first rule of goodbreeding, not to do that which is to offend others. Spirituousliquors are the fashion alone among the numerous frequenters ofthe gin palaces of Lowborn, and St. Giles' ; even the old fashionedfavourites of our country gentlemen, port, madeira, and sherry,are found too heavy and strongly flavoured for the palate of ourmodern exquisite, — and the fragrant and delicate wines of Burgundy,Bordeaux, the Rhine, and its tributary streams, are thewines now preferred before all others, by persons of refined tasteand moderate indulgence. This in itself is a great improvement;the gross desire of excitement by a quantity of powerful stimulants,has given place to a temperate enjoyment of things, in themselvescertainly the most excellent in the world. Wine drinkingin England is become altogether a species of dilettante taste, insteadof the disgusting excess it used to be; it is indulged in withextreme moderation, — and so much have all coarse and thick-bloodeddrinks gone out of fashion, that even liqueurs are veryseldom taken after coffee but by foreigners. Our gentlemenhave learnt to consider hard and gross drinking ungentlemanly.I wish I could say the same of American gentlemen. The quantityand the quality of their potations are as destructive of everythinglike refinement of palate, as detrimental to their health.Americans are, generally speaking, the very worst judges of winein the world, always excepting Madeira, which they have in greatperfection, and is the only wine of which they are tolerable judges.One reason of their ignorance upon this subject, is the extremelyindifferent quality of the foreign wines imported here, and stillmore powerful reason, is the total loss of all niceness of taste consequentupon their continual swallowing of mint julaps, gin slings,brandy cock tails, and a thousand strong messes which they takeeven before breakfast, and indifferently at all hours of the day, — apractice as gross in taste, as injurious to health. Burgundy I have,VOL. II. 442 JOURNAL.taking leave of this pearl of innkeepers, continued ourride along the banks of the Schuylkill, until we came tonever seen at an American table; — I believe it will not stand thesea-voyage. Claret they have now in very great perfection,thanks to Mr. , who has introduced it among them, and deservesto be considered a public benefactor therefore. Hock is,generally speaking, utterly undrinkable, and champagne (the onlyforeign wine of which they seem generally fond) though some ofa good quality is occasionally presented to you, is for the mostpart a very nauseous compound, in which sugar is the only perceptibleflavour. Although the American gentlemen do not indeedlock the doors upon their guests, they have two habitsequally fatal to their sobriety, of which I have heard severalEnglishmen complain bitterly. The one is mixing their wines inamost unorthodox manner, equally distressing to the palate, andthe stomach ; i. e., giving you to drink by turns, after dinner,claret, madeira, sherry, hock, champagne, all and each of whichyou are pressed to take as specimens of excellence in theirvarious ways, forming altogether a vinous hatch-potch, whichconfounds alike the taste and the brain. The second ordeal towhich the sobriety of Englishmen dining out here is exposed,is at the close of all these various libations, — which of courselast some time, — an instantaneous removal from the dinner to thesupper-table, where strong whisky punch effectually finishes thewits of their guests, and sends them home to repent for twodays the excess of a few hours. Perhaps, when the real meaningof the word society becomes better understood in this counttry, absurd display and disgusting Intemperance will no more beresorted to as its necessary accompaniments, but of course, thereal material of which society should be formed, must increase alittle first. I have been told the women in this country drink. Inever saw but one circumstance which would lead me to believethe assertion. At the baths in New York one day, I saw the girlwho was waiting upon the rooms, carry mint julaps (a preparationof mint, sugar, and brandy,) into three of them. I was muchJOURNAL. 43Manayunk, a manufacturing place, where they create cottons,and which has the additional advantage of beingmost lovelily situated upon the banks of the river, backedby rocky heights, where the cedar bushes, with their richdark tufts, and the fine bold masses of grey granite, togetherwith a hundred little water-courses, now hanging fromevery ridge they used to flow over in brilliant ice pendants,had a most beautiful effect. It was getting late, however,and we pushed on to the bridge ; but lo ! when we reachedit, it was under repair and impassable. What was to bedone ? — the sun had withdrawn his warm rays from theheavens, — the lower earth was shadowy and dark, — a richsurprised, and asked her if this was a piece of service she oftenperformed for the ladies who visited the baths? — she said " Yes,pretty often." Bar rooms are annexed to every species of publicbuilding, — in the theatres, in the hotels, in the bath-houses, onboardthe steam-boats, — and there are even temporary buildingswhich serve this purpose, erected at certain distances along therail-roads. Though the gentlemen drink more than any othergentknien, the lower orders here are more temperate than withus. The appearance of a drunken man in the streets is comparativelyrare here ; and certainly Sunday is not, as with us, theappointed day for this disgusting vice among the lower classeshere. Fortunately, most fortunately, it is not with them as withus, the only day on which the poor have rest, or drunkenness theonly substitute they can find for every other necessary or comfortof life. Our poor are indeed intemperate. Alas ! that vice oftheirs will surely be visited on others ; for it is the offspring oftheir misery. The effects of habitual intemperance in this countryare lamentably visible in many young men of respectable stations,and easy circumstances ; and it is by no means uncommonto hear of young gentlemen — persons who rank as such here, —destroying their health, their faculties, and eventually their lives,at a most untimely age, by this debasing habit.44 JOURNAL.orange light hung over the brow of the ridge of hills onthe opposite side of the river, vi^hose current, rapid andstrong, flowed darkly between beautiful slabs of granitewhich lay in its path, and round which the water hurriedangrily. What was to be done ? To turn back was disheartening,— to go on for the chance of a bridge was alsoto run the chance of being utterly benighted in paths weknew nothing of, and on horses which were anything butsafe. However, my evident inclination to the latter courseprevailed with my companions. We crossed a narrowbridge, and pursued a sort of tow-path between the canaland the river. The glimmering daylight was fading fastfrom the sky, and the opposite shores of the river werelosing their distinctness of outline, when, from betweentwo beautiful bold masses of rock, which overhung its entrance,the wooden bridge appeared. I should like to havelingered in this spot till nightfall, but this was by no meansthe bargain, either with ray fellow-travellers or my horse.So on we went over the bridge, and, turning to the left,pursued the river's side, — now, close down to its gushingfretful waters, hurrying from between the rocky impedimentsof their path, — now high above its course, in themidst of woods growing to the very edge of the precipitousbank, with rocky ridges rising again above us, crownedwith the black-looking tufts of the cedar, jagged with icicles,and from which descended, at every ten yards, atrickling rill, which, smoothed over by the glassy ice,rendered our horses' footing, particularly in the twilight,very insecure. We were in for it ; and when that is thecase, 'tis vain making lamentations, or piteous retrospection: I therefore pushed on, with as much care as I could,of Mr. 's tumble-down charger, whose headlong mo-journal.45tion kept me in agonies, leaving to take care of dearD , whose bones I feared would ache for this adventuremost bitterly. The road was perfectly beautiful.Broad masses of shadowy clouds hung in the sky, andwere reflected in the waters, together with the pale delicategrey of evening, and the last amber tinge of sunset.We did not reach Philadelphia till it was perfectly dark.To add to my consternation too, when we asked todine with us, he said that he had an engagement, forwhich I began to fear this ill-starred ride would have kepthim too late. * * :«^ * ** * =* * *« ^i^ * *-i^: *I came up to my own room, changed my clothes and wentin to see Mrs. . * * * ************ -^She was completely overpowered with laudanum. Herhead was declined upon a chair. * ^ *She looked very lovely, with her beautiful head bowed,and her dark eyelashes lying on her wan cheeks. Herfeatures were contracted with suffering. I sat watchingher with much heartfelt sadness and interest. I was summonedaway, however, to see some gentlemen who werein the drawing-room, whither I adjourned, and where Ifound Mr. , and Dr. . I was stupid and sleepy ;and the gentlemen had the charity not to keep me up, ormake me sing.4*46 JOURNAL.Monday, 24tli,Christian Eve.After breakfast, put out clothes for to-night. When Icame down, found > in the drawing-room with myfather: paid him his bill, and pottered an immensity.Went to rehearsal, — afterwards paid all manner. of cardswith poor dear D , who puffed and panted throughthe streets in order not to freeze me, which, however, shedid not escape. ****** * * * #*• *-3^ * * * *After dinner went and sat with my poor invalid, whom,in spite of her republicanism, I am greatly inclined to likeand admire. Remained with her till coffee-time. Wentto the theatre : the play vt^as the Merchant of Venice, — myfavourite part, Portia. The house was very full : I playedso-soish. ****** * * * «= #Tuesday, ^5tli, iChristian Day. ^I wish you a merry Christmas, poor child ! away fromhome and friends. Truly, the curse of the old Scriptureshas come upon me ; my lovers and my acquaintance arefar off from me. After breakfast practised for an hour ;went and saw Mrs. ; drove out shopping; sawwalking with my father. Came home, and wrote journal ;went out with D ; bought a rocking-horse for Mrs.-'s chicks, whose merry voices I shall miss most horriblyby and by. Dragged it in to them in the midst ofJOURNAL. 47their dinner. Dined at three. After dinner went and satwith her till coffee-time. When I came into the drawing-room,found a beautiful work-box sent me by that veryyouthful admirer of mine, Mr. . 1 was a little annoyedat this, but still more so at my father's desiring meto return it to him, which I know will be a terrible mortificationto him. Went to the theatre : the house wascrammed with men, and very noisy, — a Christmas audience.Play, Macbeth : I only played so-so. Oh, me !these marks in the stream of time, over which it breaksas over a dam, drawing our attention, which, withoutthem would even less often note its rapid, rapid current!They do but become halting posts for our souls, roundwhich gather the memories of days and hours escaped andgone from us for everett * * * *^ :^ * * ** * 41= Jtf * *f There is a species of home relic-ion, so to speak, which iskept alive by the gathering" together of families at stated periodsof joy and festivity, which has a far deeper moral than most peopleimagine. The merry-making at Christmas, the watching outthe old year, and in the new, — the royalty of Twelfth-night,—the keeping of birth-days, and anniversaries of weddings, arethings, which, to the worldly-wise in these wise times, may savourof childishness or superstition, but they tend to promote and keepalive some of the sweetest charities, and kindliest sympathies ofour poor nature. While we are yet children, these days are setin golden letters in the calendar, long looked forward to, — enjoyedwith unmixed delight, — the peculiar seasons of new frocks,new books, new toys, drinking of healths, bestowing of blessingsand wishes by kindred and parents, and being brought into thenotice of our elders, and, as children used to think in the darkages, therefore their betters. To the older portion of the com-j48 JOURNAL. iWednesday, 36tli. jAfter breakfast put out things for theatre. When I camedown to the drawing-room, I found a middle-aged gentle :unity, such times were times of many mingled emotions, all, all iof a softening if not of so exhilarating a nature. The cares, the :toils of the world had become their portion, — some little of its :coldness, its selfishness, and sad guardedness had crept upon |them, — distance and various interests, and the weary works of !life had engrossed their thoughts, and turned their hearts and \their feet from the dear household paths, and the early fellowship iof home ; but at these seasons the world was in its turn pushed |aside for a moment, — the old thresholds were crossed by those jwho had ceased to dwell in the house of their birth, — kindred iand friends met again, as in the early days of childhood and youth, \under the same roof-tree, — the nursery revel, and the school-day ;jubilee, was recalled to their thoughts by the joyful voices and 'faces of a new generation, — the blessed and holy influences of jhome flowed back into their souls, at such a time, by a thousand :channels, — the heart was warmed with the kind old love and fel ;cowslip, — face brightened to kindred face, and hand grasped the Jhand where the same blood was flowing, and all the evil deeds of jtime seemed for a while retrieved. These were holy and happy ]seasons. Oh, England ! dear, dear England ! this sweet, sacred \worship, next to that of God the highest and purest, was long ]cherished in your soil, where the word home was surely more 'hallowed than any other save Heaven. Far, far off be the day iwhen a cold and narrow split shall quench in you these dear and jgood human yearnings, and make the consecrated earth around jour door-stones as barren as the wide wilderness of life in strange Ilands. In this country I have been mournfully struck with theabsence of everything like this home-clinging. Here are comparativelyno observances of tides and times. Christmas day is ;no religious day, and hardly a holiday with them : New-year's ^day is perhaps a little, but only a little more so. For Twelfth :day, it is unknown; and the household private festivals of birth iJOURNAL. 49man of very respectable appearance sitting with my father.He rose on my coming in, and after bowing to me, continuedhis discourse to my father thus — " Yes, sir, yes ;you will find as I tell you, sir, the winter is our profitabletheatrical season, sir ; so that if anything should take youto England, you can return again at the beginning of nextfall." I modestly withdrew to another end of the room,supposing they were engaged upon business. But mycuriosity was presently attracted by the continuation ofhis discourse. " And recollect, sir, and this lady, yourdaughter, too, if you please ; that what I have said mustnot on any account be repeated out of this room. I ammyself going immediately to England, and from thencedirect to Jerusalem 1^^ I stared. "There, sir, is myreal name, ; the card I sent up to you is not my realname. You see, sir, 1 am an Irishman, that is to say, infact, I am really a Jew. / am one of those of the tribeof Ephraim ivho refused to cross the Bed Sea : we werenot to be humbugged by that damned fellow, Moses — no,days are almost universally passed by uncovered from the rest ofthe toilsome days devoted to the curse of labour. Indeed, theyoung American leaves so soon the shelter of his home, the worldso early becomes to him a home, that the happy and powerful influencesand associations of that word to him are hardly known.Sent forth to earn his existence at the very opening time of mindand heart, like a young green-house plant just budding, thatshould be thrust out into the colder air, the blight of worldliness,of coldness, and of care, drive in the coming blossoms; and if thetree lives, half its loveliness and half its usefulness are shorn fromit. These are some of the consequences of the universal doom ofAmericans, to labour for their bread : there are others and betterones.50 JOURNAL.sh', we there notP^ Here my heart jumped into mythroat, and my eyes nearly out of my head with frightand amazement. '♦ Well," continued the poor madman,I suppose I may deliver this to the young lady herself;"giving me a small parcel which I took from him as if Ithought it would explode and blow me up. " And now,sir, farewell. Remember, remember my words, — in threeyears, perhaps, but certainly in ten. He that will come,will come, and its all up with the world, and the childrenof men !" This most awful announcement was accompaniedwith a snap of his fingers, and a demi-pirouette.He was then rushing out of the room, leaving his cloakbehind him. My father called him back to give it him.He bundled himself into it, exclaimed " God bless youboth ! God bless you both ! — remember what I have saidrequires the profoundest secrecy, as you perceive," anddarted out of the room, leaving my father and myself witheyes and mouth wide open, gaping in speechless astonishment.At last I bethought me of opening the little packetthe madman had left me. It was a small box, on the coverof which was written. To Miss Kemble, with the complimentsof St. George. I then recollected that some timepast, I had received some verses, in which love and religionwere very crazily blended, sighed St. George. But,as I am abundantly furnished with epistles of this sort, Ihad flung them aside, merely concluding the writer to begonea short way from his wits. The box contained amost beautiful and curious ornament, something like a Se-vine,highly wrought in gold and enamel, and evidentlyvery cosily. I was more confounded than ever, and didnot recover from my amazement and fright for a long time.I went in to Mrs. to tell her the event. Thence weJOURNAL. 51began talking about young 's box ; and upon her adviceI again spoke to my father, and obtained his leavenot to send it back ; so I indited him a thankful epistle.Practised for a short time, and then went to the riding-school.It was quite empty : I put on my cap and skirt,and was sitting thinking of many things, in the little ,when I heard the school door open, and Mr.walked straight up to me. * * *Dr. called to-day. I was quite glad to see him : hegave me all the New York news, and brought with him,a gentleman, a friend of his, who nearly made me sick,by very deliberately spitting upon the carpet. Mercy onme ! I thought I should have jumped off my chair, I wasso disgusted. Mr. , too, does this constantly. *After dinner went and sat with Mrs. ; was calledaway to see Mr. , whom I thanked for his present.Went to the theatre at half past five. The house wasvery fair, considering the weather, which was very foul.Play, School for Scandal. They none of them knewtheir parts, or remembered their business — delightful people,indeed ! I played only so-so. supped withus. He is a very gentlemanly, nice person, and I amtold he is extremely amiable. * * *He told me sundry steam-boat stories that made my blood52 JOURNAL. •]curdle ; such as, a public brush, a public comb, and a pub ,lie tooth brush. Also, of a gentleman who was using his iown tooth brush, a man who was standing near him said, '*' I'll trouble you for that article when you've done withit." When he had done with it, the gentleman presented |it to him, and on receiving it again, immediately threw it 'into the river, to the infinite amazement of the borrower,who only exclaimed, " Well, however, you're a queer ifellow"* ■Thursday, 37tli.After breakfast went to rehearsal. Katharine and Petru-clio. After rehearsal went to the riding-school. It wasquite empty, except of Mr. , and Mr. . *Came home : found a letter to me from that strange madman.On opening it, it proved a mere envelope, containinga visiting card with the name St. George upon it.After dinner, wrote journal ; went and sat with Mrs.till coffee-time. I have had a most dreadful side ache alljjg^y^ ■« * * * * ** * * *At half past five went to the theatre. Play, Much Ado jabout Nothing; farce, Katharine and Petruchio. * j* * 5)5 *■ * \This happened on board a western steam-boat, I beg" to observe,if it happened at all.JOURNAL. 53At the end I was so tired, and so overcome with the sideache, that I lay down on the floor perfectly done up.Friday, 28tli.After breakfast called. Settled to ride, if possible,tomorrow. I would give the world for a good shaking.I'm dying of the blue devils : I have no power to rousemyself. ******When was gone, sat down to practise. Tried Mrs.Hemans' Messenger Bird, but the words were too solemn,and too sad : I sobbed instead of singing, and was a littlerelieved. Went in to see Mrs. . She seemed better ;she was en toilette, in a delicate white wrapper, with herfine hair twisted up round her classical head. She is abeautiful person ; she is better — an amiable, a sensible,and a pious one ; I am very deeply interested by her ; Ilike her extremely. At half past one went to the riding-school.I met there a daughter of old Lady 's, whointroduced herself to me, and asked leave to stay and seemeride, which leave I gave her. The bay pony is, however,fairly ruined. A little wretch not twelve years old,had just been riding it: it had fallen from all its paces,and went so lame that I gave up riding, and sat disconsolatelyenough in the little dressing-closet, looking througha window six inches square, at the blessed mild blue heavens,and longing for wings, till my soul was like to faint.*************After dinner wrote journal. Went in and sat with Mrs.VOL. II. 554 JOURNAL.. By the by, that worthy youth, Mr. , dinedwith us. I got rid of some of my vapours by sundryhearty laughs at him. I am sorry to leave Philadelphiaon Mrs. 's account. I am growing to her. Oh,Lord ! how soon, how soon we do this! — how we docling to everything in spite of the pitiless wrenches oftime and chance ! Her dear babies are delightful to me ;their laughing voices have power to excite and make mehappy, — and when they come dancing to meet me, myheart warms very fondly towards them. * *She amuses me much by her intense anxiety that I shouldbe married. First, she wishes would propose tome,— then she thinks Mr. 's estates in Cuba wouldbe highly acceptable ; in short, my single blessednessseems greatly to annoy her, and I believe she attributeseverything evil in life to that same. She seemed surprised,and a little shocked, when I said I would acceptdeath most thankfully in preference to the happiest lot inlife, — and so I would — I would. — Yet death . 'Tisstrange, that Messenger Bird threw more than a passinggloom over me. If the dead do indeed behold those whomthey have loved, with loving eyes and fond remembrance,do not the sorrows, the weariness, the toiling, the despairingof those dear ones rise even into the abodes of peace,and wring the souls of those who thence look down uponthe earth, and see the wo and anguish suffered here ? Or,if they do not feel, — if, freed from this mortal coil, theyforget all they have suffered, all that we yet endure, oh !then what fourfold trash is human love ! what vain andmiserable straws are all the deep, the dear, the graspingJOURNAL. 55affections twined in our hearts' fibres, — mingled with ourblood ! — how poor are all things — hove beggarly is life.Oh, to think that while we yet are bowed in agony andmourning over the dead, — while our bereaved hearts areaching, and our straining eyes looking to that heaven, beyondwhich we think they yet may hear our cries, theyyet may see our anguish, the dead, the loved, the mourned,nor see, nor hear ; or if they do, look down with cold andcareless gaze upon the love that lifts our very souls indesperate yearning towards them. Yet one of the twomust surely be : cither the other life is like this, a life ofpain, though not like this, perhaps, a life of selfishness ;or this earth, and time, and all they hold, are a more hollowmockery than even I sometimes dream they are. Iwill not think any more of it. We went to the theatre athalf past five. Play, Hunchback ; after it Katharine andPetruchio. I thought I should have died of the side acheI was in perfect agony. The people here are morecivil and considerate than can be imagined. I sent, yesterdayevening, for some water-ice : the confectioner hadnone ; when, lo ! to-night he brings me some he has madeon purpose for me, which he entreats my acceptance of.I admired a very pretty fan, Mrs. had in her hand ;and at the end of the play, she had it sent to my dressing-room; — and these sort of things are done by me, not once,but ten times every day. Nothing can exceed the kindnessand attention which has encountered us every wheresince we have been in this country. I am sure 1 ambound to remember America and Americans thankfully ;for, whatever I may think of their ways, manners, orpeculiarities, to me they have shown unmingled good will.56 JOURNAL.and cordial, real kindness. Remained up, packing, tilltwo o'clock.TOMany a league of salt sea rollsBetween us, yet I think our souls.Dear friend, are still as closely tiedAs when we wandered side by side.Some seven years gone, in that fair landWhere I was born. As hand in handWe liv'd the showery spring away.And when the sunny earth was gayWith all its blossoms, still togetherWe passed the pleasant summer weather.We little thought the time would come.When, from a trans-atlantic home.My voice should greet you lovinglyAcross the deep dividing sea.Oh, friend ! my heart is sad : 'tis strange.As I sit musing on the changeThat has come o'er my fate, and castA longing look upon the past.That pleasant time comes back againSo freshly to my heart and brain.That I half think the things I seeAre but a dream, and 1 shall beLying beside you, when I wake,Upon the lawn beneath the brake.With the hazel copse behind my head.And the new-mown fields before me spread.It is just twilight : that sweet timeIs short-lived in this radiant clime, —Where the bright day, and night more bright.Upon th' horizon's verge unite.JOURNAL. 57• Nor leave those hours of ray serene,In which we thyik of what has been :And it is well ; for here no eyeTurns to the distant days gone by :They have no legendary loreOf deeds of glory done of yore, —No knightly marvel-haunted years.The nursery tales of adult ears:The busy present, bright to come,Of all their thoughts make up the sum :Little their little past they heed ;Therefore of twilight have no need.Yet wherefore write I thus. In the short spanOf narrow life dol'd out to every man,Though he but reach the threshold of the track,Where, from youth's better path, strikes out the worse,If he has breath'd so long, nor once look'd back.He has not borne Use's load, nor known God's curse.And yet, but for that glance that o'er and o'erGoes tearfully, where we shall go no more ;Courting the sunny spots, where, for a day.Our bark has found a harbour on its way;O ! but for this, this pow'r of conjuringHours, days, and years into the magic ring,Bidding them yield the show of happiness,To make our real misery seem less.Life would be dreary. But these memories start.Sometimes, unbidden on the mourner's heart ;Unwish'd, unwelcome, round his thoughts they cling, —In vain flung off", still dimly gathering.Like melancholy ghosts, upon the pathWhere he goes sadly, seeking only death.Then live again the forms of those who lieGather'd into the grave's dark mystery.5*58 JOURNAL.Vainly at reason's voice the phantom flies, —It comes, it still comes back to the fond eyes, —Still, still the yearning arms are spread to claspThe blessing that escapes their baffled grasp :Still the bewilder'd memory mutters •' Gone !**Still, still the clinging, aching heart loves on.Oh, bitter ! that the lips on which we pourLove's fondest kisses, feel the touch no more ;Oh, lonely ! that the voice on which we callIn agony, breaks not its silent thrall ;Oh, fearful ! that the eyes in which we gazeWith desperate hope, through their thick filmy haze.Return no living look to bless our sight !Oh, God ! that it were granted that one mightBut once behold the secret of the grave, —That but one voice from the all-shrouding caveMight speak, — that but one sleeper might emergeFrom the deep death-sea's overwhelming surge !Speak, speak from the grey coffins where ye lieFretting to dust your foul mortality !Speak, from your homes of darkness and dismay, —To what new being do ye pass away ? —O do ye live indeed ? — speak, if on highOne atom springs whose doom is not to die ! —Where have I wandered * * *Saturday, auth*When I came down to breakfast, found a very pretty diamondring and some Scotch rhymes, from Mr. , whatwe call a small return of favours. I wish my hand wasn'tso abominably ugly, — I hate to put a ring upon it.called to see if we would ride ; but D had too muchJOURNAL. 59to do — and after sitting pottering for some time, I sanghim the Messenger Bird, and sent him away. Went forafew moments to Mrs. , who seemed much better.Went out to pay sundry bills and visits. Called at Mrs,and spent half an hour most delightfully in hisstudy. His picture of my father is very like, and veryagreeable. 'Tis too youthful by a good deal ; but the expressionof the face is extremely good, and upon thewhole, except that stern-looking thing of Parsley's, 'tisthe likest thing I have seen of him. We had a long discussionabout the stage, — the dramatic art ; which, asHelen says, " is none," for, " no art but taketh time andpains to learn." Now I am a living and breathing witnessthat a person may be accounted a good actor, and toa certain degree deserve the title, without time or pains ofany sort being expended upon the acquisition of the reputation.But on other grounds, acting has always appearedto me to be the very lowest of the arts, admitting that itdeserves to be classed among them at all, which 1 am notsure it does. In the first place, it originates nothing ; itlacks, therefore, the grand faculty which all other arts possess— creation. An actor is at the best but the filler upof the outline designed by another, — the expounder, as itwere, of things which another has set down ; and a finepiece of acting is at best, in my opinion, a fine translation.Moreover, it is not alone to charm the senses that thenobler powers of mind were given to man ; 'tis not aloneto enchant the eye that the gorgeous pallet of the painter,and the fine chisel of the statuary, have become throughheavenly inspiration, magical wands, summoning to lifeimages of loveliness, of majesty, and grace ; 'tis not aloneto soothe the ear that music has possessed, as it were,60 JOURNAL. jcertain men with the spirit of sweet sounds ; 'tis not aloneto delight the fancy that the poet's great and gloriouspower was given him, by which, as by a spell, he peoples iall space, and all time, with undying witnesses of his own \existence ; 'tis not alone to minister to our senses that \these most beautiful capabilities were sown in the soil of ,our souls. But 'tis that through them all that is most re- ifined, most excellent and noble, in our mental and moral inature, may be led through their loveliness, as through a ;glorious archway, to the source of all beauty, and all good iness. It is that by them our perceptions of truth may be imade more vivid, our love of loveliness increased, our ;intellect refined and elevated, our nature softened, our 'memory stored with images of brightness, which, like jglorious reflections, falling again upon our souls, may tend ,!to keep alive in them, the knowledge of, and the desireafter what is true, and fair, and noble. But, that art may Ihave this effect, it must be to a certain degree enduring. |It must not be a transient vision, which fades and leavesbut a recollection of what it was, which will fade too. It imust not be for an hour, a day, or a year, but abiding, in- iasmueh as anything earthly may abide, to charm the senseand cheer the soul of generation after generation. And jhere it is that the miserable deficiency of acting is most japparent. Whilst the poems, the sculptures of the old jGrecian time yet remain to witness to these latter ages [the enduring life of truth and beauty, — whilst the poets of ,Rome, surviving the trophies of her thousand victories, |are yet familiar in our mouths as household words, — whilst iDante, Boccaccio, that giant, Michael Angelo, yet live and jbreathe, and have their being amongst us, through the rich ;legacy their genius has bequeathed to time, — whilst the iJOURNAL. 61wild music of Salvator Rosa, solemn and sublime as hispainting, yet rings in our ears, and the souls of Shakspeare,Milton, Raphael, and Titian, are yet sheddinginto our souls divinest influences from the very fountainsof inspiration — where are the pageants that night afternight, during the best era of dramatic excellence, rivetedthe gaze of thousands, and drew forth their acclamations?gone, like rosy sunset clouds; — fair painted vapours,lovely to the sight, but vanishing as dreams, leaving notrace in heaven, no token of their ever having been there.Where are the labours of Garrick, of Macklin, of Cooke,of Kemble, of Mrs. Siddons ? — chronicled in the dimmemories of some few of their surviving spectators ; whospeak of them with an enthusiasm which we who neversaw them, fancy the offspring of that feeling which makesthe old look back to the time of their youth, as the onlydays when the sun knew how to shine. What have thesegreat actors left either to delight the sense, or elevate thesoul, but barren names, unwedded to a single lasting evidenceof greatness. If, then, acting be alike without thecreating power, and the enduring property, which are atonce the highest faculty of art, and its most beneficial purpose,what becomes of it when ranked with efforts displayingboth in the highest degree. To me it seems noart,* but merely a highly rational, interesting, and exciteevanescent nature of his triumph, however an actormay deplore it, is in fact but an instance of the broad moral justiceby which all things are so evenly balanced. If he can hope forno fame beyond mere mention, when once his own generationpasses away, at least his power, and his glory, and his reign is inhis own person, and during his own life. There is scarcely to beconceived a popularity for the moment more intoxicating thanO-* JOURNAL.ing amusement; and I think men may as well, much better,'perhaps, spend three hours in a theatre, than in a billiardor bar-room, — and this is the extent of my approbationand admiration of my art. Called on Mrs. , whomI like very much. Went to the riding-school to try anew horse, which was ten hands high, all covered withshaggy angry-looking hair, with a donkey's head, andcart-horse legs, with one of which he peached.came to see me mount. Dr. 's grey horse was standingin the school with a man's saddle on. I persuadedto put me on it, and I then sent him away. *******When he was gone, rode for about an hour without anypommel, and found I managed it famously. I slipped rayfoot out of the stirrup in order to see if I could sit withoutthat of a great actor in his day, so much of it becomes mixed upwith the individual himself. The poet, the painter, and thesculptor, enchant us through their works ; and, with very, veryfew exceptions, their works, and not their very persons, are theobjects of admiration and applause 5 it is to their minds we arebeholden; and though a certain degree of curiosity and popularitynecessarily wait even upon their bodily presence, it is faint comparedwith that which is bestowed upon the actor; and for goodreasons— he is himself his work. His voice, his eyes, his gesture,are his art, and admiration of it cannot be separated from admirationfor him. This renders the ephemeral glory which he earnsso vivid, and in some measure may be supposed to compensatefor its short duration. The great of the earth, whose fame hasarisen like the shining of the sun, have often toiled through theirwhole lives in comparative obscurity, through the narrow anddark paths of existence. Their reward was never given to theirhands here, — it is but just their glory should be lasting.JOURNAL. 63both ; but this proved rather too much, for I presently slidvery comfortably off. On my way home, met young ,with his head so completely in the clouds, that I hadbowed to him, and was driving on, when he just perceivedme, and fell into a confusion of bows, which he continuedlong after the coach had passed him. Found the usualtoken of his having been at our house— a most beautifulnosegay ; roses, hyacinths, and myrtle. While I wasarranging them, I heard a tremendous shriek of laughter inthe hall, which was followed by the appearance of Mr.After sitting with him some time, I went and satwith Mrs. . The amiable Charge d' Affaires dinedwith us. After dinner went to see Mrs. ; but shewas too unwell to receive me. * * *% ^-H- if. * ^-j^: * ^ * *Saw Dr. , who expressed manifold deploring at mydeparture, gave him the words of the Sisters. At half pastfive went to the theatre : play, the Wonder. I acted onlyso so ; my father was a beetle dans les vignes du seigneur.When the play was over, the folk called for us, and we wenton; he made them a neat speech, and I nothing but across face and three curtseys. How I do hate this ! 'Tisquite enough to exhibit myself to a gaping crowd, whenmy profession requires that I should do so in a feignedsemblance ; but to come bobbing and genuflexioning on,as me myself, to be clapped and shouted at, and say,thank ye kindly," is odious. After the play, dressed,and off to Mrs. , with my father and Mr. . Onour way thither the spring of our coach broke, and wehad to go halting along for half an hour, with a gracefulinclination towards the pavement on one side, which was64 JOURNAL. i|very pleasant. There was quite a brilliant party at Mrs. ,'s. Told Mr. that I had thrown his horse down. 'Saw and spoke to all Philadelphia. was there, ]and actually sitting still. Fell in love with Mr. 's jyoungest son, who is a youth of some ten years old, and \hovers round me with a plenitude of silent admiration and iastonishment that is most delightful. Miss who is ia very pretty creature, (in fact, all American women are ^ipretty creatures, I never saw any prettier) sang Della ;Gioga e del Placer. She sings very well, but pronounces ,Italian very American, which is a pity. I don't know |anything so necessary to good singing as a good Italian pro 'enunciation, except perhaps a good voice, and a good school. \They made me sing, and I sang them the galley song, Iafter which Miss warbled again. They were surroundingme again, with a shower of " pray do's" when :perceiving D making towards me, with my boa on iher arm, I sat down and sang them, " Yes aunt, I am jready to go," to their infinite edification. I wonder ifMrs. would object to this, I should think not, asis not here to catch it again. * * :Came home, and supped. I had eaten nothing since four 'o'clock, and was famished ; for I do not like stewed ioysters and terrapins,, which are the refreshments invariablyhanded round at an American evening party. Did notget to bed till two o'clock. How beautifully bright the |heavens are here. The sky has an earnest colour that is jlovely and solemn to look at ; and the moon, instead of jbeing " the maiden with white fire laden," has a rich, |mellow, golden light, than which, nothing can be more iIJOURNAL. 65beautiful. The stars, too, are more vivid than in ourskies, and there is a variety of hues in their light whichI never observed before, — some reddish, some violet, andagain others of the palest silver.Sunday, Both.After breakfast Mr. called, also , to know atwhat time we would ride. I fixed at twelve, thereby calculatingthat we should escape the people coming outfrom church. Went and sat a few minutes with Mrs. .Spent my Sunday morning on my knees, indeed, butpacking, not praying. The horses did not come till halfpast twelve ; so that instead of avoiding, we encounteredthe pious multitude. I'm sure when we mounted, therewere not less than a hundred and fifty beholders roundthe Mansion House. Rode out to Laurel Hill. Thecross road was muddy, so we took the turnpike, whichwas clean and short, and would have been pleasant enoughbut for my brute of a horse. Upon my word, these Americanhorses are most unsafe to ride. I never mount onebut I recommend myself to the care of heaven, for I expectto have every bone in my body broken before I dismountagain. At Laurel Hill we lunched. While Dput up her hair, and I ran down to the water side.The ice had melted from the river, in whose still watersthe shores, and trees, and bridge lay mirrored. with beautifuland fairy-like distinctness. The long icicles underthe rocky brow beneath which we stood, had not meltedaway, though the warm sun was shining brilliantly onVOL. II. 666 JOURNAL.them, and making the granite slab on which we stood,sparkle like a pavement of diamonds. I called to theecho, and sang to it scales up, and scales down, and everymanner of musical discourse I could think of, duringwhich interesting amusement I as nearly as possible slippedfrom my footing into the river, which caused bothand myself to gulp. We left our pleasant sunnystand at last, to rejoin D and the lunch, and havingeaten and drunken, we remounted and proceeded on toManayunk, under the bright, warm, blessed sunshine,which came down like a still shining shower upon theearth. The beautiful little water-courses had all brokenfrom their diamond chains, and came dancing and singingdown the hills, between the cedar bushes, and the massesof grey granite, like merry children laughing as they run.After crossing the bridge at Flat Rock, I took the van,riding by myself much faster than my companions, whomI left to entertain each other. Several times, as I lookeddown at the delicious fresh water, all rosy with the rosylight of the clouds, and gushing round the masses of rockthat intercepted their channel, I longed to jump off myhorse, and go down among their shallow brilliant eddies.The whole land was mellow with warm sunset, the skysoft, and bright, and golden, lee a dream. I stopped foralong time opposite the Wissihiccon creek. The stonebridge, with its grey arch, mingled with the rough blocksof rock on which it rested, the sheet of foaming waterfalling like a curtain of gold over the dam among the darkstones below, on whose brown sides the ruddy sunlightand glittering water fell like splinters of light. The thickbright rich tufted cedars basking in the warm amber glow,the picturesque mill, the smooth open field, along whoseJOURNAL.side the river waters, after receiving this child of themountains into their bosom, wound deep, and bright, andstill, the whole radiant with the softest light I ever beheld,formed a most enchanting and serene subject of contemplation.Further on, I stopped again, to look at a mostbeautiful mass of icicles, formed by some water fallingfrom a large wooden conduit which belonged to a mill.The long thick masses of silvery white clung in downwardpyramids together, and on the ground, great roundballs of purest transparent ice, like enormous crystalgrapes, lay clustered upon each other. I waited on alittle sunny knoll above this glittering fairy work, till raycompanions joined me, when, leaving D to pursuethe main road, and I turned off, and explored a prettyravine, down which another mountain stream, half freewild water, half shimmering diamond ice, sparkled in thesunset. We reached Philadelphia at half past four, andhad again to canter down Chestnut street just as the folkswere all coming from church, which caused no littlestaring, and turning of heads. My father asked — — todine with us, but he refused. Mr. dined with us.After dinner went in to pay my last visit to my poor sickfriend. I sat with her until summoned to see some gentlemenin the drawing-room. It pained me to part fromher ; for though she exerted herself bravely, she was verymuch overcome. I fear she will miss me, poor thing ; Ihad become very much attached to her. I went in to bidMrs. good-by. was not gone to bed; I tookher in my arms and kissed her, saying I should not seeher for a long time again. The tears came into her babyeyes, and she said very sadly, " God bless you, Fanny."How curious a train of associations that word produced in68 JOURNAL,me. It brought ■ , and Lord , and that beautifulcreature his child, before my very eyes. But her fatherhad told little Lady to say that, — I am sure he did ;now this little creature blessed me out of her own heart.A child's blessing is a holy thing. Came into the .Found Dr. , young Mr. , and Mr.there. Presently, Mr. came in, with Barona man with a thick head, thick white hair, thatstood out round it like a silver halo, and gold ear-rings. Isang to them till past ten o'clock, and then came to myown room, where I remained up packing and potteringuntil past two.Monday, 31st.The river being yet open, thank heaven, we arose at halfpast four o'clock. Dressed sans dawdling for once, andcame down. *****D and I were bundled into a coach, and rumbled andtumbled over the stones, through the blackness of darknessdown to the steamboat. was waiting for us,and convoyed us safely to the cabin, where I laid myselfdown, and slept till breakfast time. My father, CaptainMr. , and Baron sat themselves downmost comfortably to breakfast, leaving us entirely to thecharge and care of , who fulfilled his trust with infinitezeal. 'Tis curious ; there was a man on board whomI have now seen every time I have been going to or fromNew York to Philadelphia, whose appearance was initself very remarkable, and the subsequent account I re-JOURNAL. 69civet of him, perhaps increased the sort of impression itmade upon me. He was a man of about from thirty tothirty-five / guess, standing about five feet ten, with agreat appearance of strength and activity. His face wasthat of a foreigner, the features were remarkably well cut,and the piercing black eyes, dark hair, and brown complexion,gave a Spanish character to his countenance.There was a sort of familiar would-be gentlemanly mannerin his deportment and address, and a species of slanggentility in his carriage and conversation, that gave me acuriosity to ascertain what on earth he could be. Afterbreakfast, walked up and down deck with . — —was on board. I am happy to hear he is thriving : I loveall my fellow-passengers, and when I see one of them, myheart warms towards them, as to a bit of the dear old landleft behind. After about an hour's steaming, we disembarkedto cross the narrow neck of land which divides theDelaware from the Chesapeake. Here we got into acoach holding some twelve of us, to be conveyed over therail-road by one of Stevenson's engines. Neither the roadnor the conveyances are comparable to those of the Liverpooland Manchester rail-way ; and instead of those luxurious,roomy coaches, which form the merit of the Liverpooltrain, we were squeeze and uncomfortable to a degree.The country along this slip of land is flat and very uninteresting,clothed with threadbare young woods, whosethin spare skeletons, without their heavy mantles, lookedexcessively miserable. The distance from the Delawareto Frenchman, on the Elk, where we were again to takewater, is about sixteen miles, which we did in an hour.The first part of the road lies in Delaware, the latter inMaryland. The Elk, which in this world of huge 70 JOURNAL. jtears is considered but a paltry ditch, but which in our ,country would be thought a very decent-sized river, was,a few days ago, frozen up, thereby putting a stop to the ;steamboat travelling. But fortunately for us, it was open Jto-day, and presently we beheld the steamer coming puff |ing up to take us from the pier. This boat — the Charles |Carroll, — is one of the finest they have. 'Tis neither so |swift nor so large, I think, as some of the North river \boats, but it is a beautiful vessel, roomy and comfortable iin its arrangements. I went below for a few minutes, butfound, as usual, the atmosphere of the cabin perfectly intolerable.The ladies' cabin, in winter, on board one of ithese large steamers, is a right curious sight. 'Tis gene 'really crammed to suffocation with women, strewn in ievery direction. The greater number cuddle round a |stove, the heat of which alone would make the atmo- 1sphere unbearable. Others sit lazily in a species of \rocking-chair, — which is found wherever Americans sitdown, — cradling themselves backwards and forwards, witha lazy, lounging, sleepy air, that makes me long to makethem get up and walk. (Others again manage, even uponfresh water, to be very sick. There are generally a dozenyoung human beings, some naughty, sick, and squalling,others happy, romping, and riotous ; and what with thevibratory motion of the rocking-chairs and their contents, jthe women's shrill jabber, the children's shriller wailing iand shouting, the heat and closeness of the air, — a ladies' 'cabin on board an American steamboat, is one of the most ]overpowering things to sense and soul that can well be iimagined. There was a poor sick woman with three 'children, among our company, two of which were noisy, 'unruly boys, of from eight to ten years old. One of ]JOURNAL. 71them set up a howl as soon as he came on board, whichhe prolonged, to our utter dismay, for upwards of half anhour sans intermission, except to draw breath. I bore itas long as I could ; but threats, entreaties, and bribeshaving been resorted to in vain, by all the women in thecabin, to silence him, I at length very composedly tookhim up in my arms, and deposited him on his back in oneof the upper berths ; whereupon his brother flew at hismother, kicking, thumping, screaming, and yelling. Thecabin was in an uproar; the little wretch I- held in myarms struggled like a young giant, and though I succeededin lodging him upon the upper shelf, presently slid downfrom it like an eel. However, this effort had a salutaryeffect, for it obtained silence, — the crying gave way toterror, which produced silence, of which I availed myselfto sleep till dinner time. At dinner, and Mr.took charge of D and me, who, seeing that we wereto get no dinner till six o'clock, thought fit to eat somelunch. The strange, dark man was sitting opposite us,and discoursing away to his neighbours in a strain andtone in which shrewdness and swagger, and vulgarity anda sort of braggart gallantry were curiously jumbled. Fromhis conversation it was evident that he was a seafaringman. He spoke of having been a midshipman on boardan American frigate. The question they were debatingwas that of superstitious prejudice involving belief inlucky and unlucky days, witches, ghosts, etc. Thestranger professed perfect faith in all, and added sundryexperiences of his own, at the same time observing, thatwith regard to sailors, the strong prejudice they haveagainst sailing on certain days, often creates the very illluck they apprehend ; for if any danger should occur, 'tis72 JOURNAL.all attributed to evil influences against which they haveno power, and they are at once deprived of half theirenergy in labour, and half their courage in peril. Whendinner was over, I pointed out this strange man to my father,asking him if he had any idea who he was. " I amtold," was his reply, " that he is but just returned fromNew York, where he has been tried for piracy." Thisaccounted for everything, — dare-devil look and language,seafaring adventures, and superstitious creed. It is a pleasantmode of travelling that throws one into contact withsuch company. ****** # * # # #Touching pirates, Baltimore, I was told, (I know not howtruly,) is famous for them. They have small schoonersthere of a particularly light build, and raking masts, whichare the prettiest craft in the world to look at, and theswiftest that sail sea. The Baltimore clippers are proverbialfor their elegance and fleetness ; they are like greyhoundson the water. These, I was told, were frequentlyowned by gentlemen of rather an ambiguous character,something between pirate, smuggler, and wrecker, perhapsa judicious compound of all three. Their trade is chiefly,I believe, with and about the West India islands. I lookedat my Spanish-faced friend with redoubled curiosity ; hewas the very man for a pirate. We reached Baltimore atabout half past four. The Chesapeake bay, like the Delawareriver, appeared to me admirable only as an immensesheet of water. At some parts that we passed, it was six,at others ten, at others thirteen miles across. The shoreswere flat and uninteresting on one side, but on the otheroccasionally very picturesque and beautiful, rising in red-journal.73looking cliffs from the water's edge, and crowned withbeautiful green tufts of wood — cedar, I suppose, for nothingelse is green at this time. The carvings of the shore, too,are very pretty, but owing to the enormous width of thewater, my imperfect vision could hardly discern the peculiarfeatures of the land. The day was more lovely thanafine day in early September, in England, — bright, soft,and sunny, witlv the blue in the sky of the delicate colourone sees in the Sevres porcelain. As we entered thePatapsco, and neared Baltimore, North Point and FortHenry were pointed out to me. My spirits alwayssink when I come to a strange place, and as we camealong the wharf sides, under the red dingy-looking warehouses,between which the water ran in narrow dark-lookingcanals, I felt terribly gloomy. We drove up to Barn-ham's,the best house in the town ; and having found outwhere to lay my head, I had my fill of crying.* Afterdinner went and lay down ; slept profoundly till nineo'clock. On my return to the drawing-room foundthere, and Mr. , the man who owns the Front streettheatre, but who it seems is only just out of jail, and hasneither actors nor scenes to get up a play withal. Whilehe was here, came missives from the proprietors of theHolliday street theatre, to inform my father that it waslighted up, and requesting him to come and look at it.This was awkward rather. When Mr. was gone,Another house has been opened at Baltimore within the lastyear, which, though unfinished at the time of our lodging there,promised to be extremely comfortable. The building adjoined,and indeed formed part of the Exchange ; the vestibule of whichis the only very beautiful piece of architecture I have seen here.It is very beautiful.74 JOURNAL. \I came to my room, where I remained without a fire, coldwithout and disconsolate within, till past one o'clock. I \did not know it was New-year's eve ; and so the waterscarried me over this other dam without my looking back iat what was past or forward at what is to come : and why ^should I ? — surely " the thing that hath been, it is that !which shall be ; and that which is done, is that whichshall be done ; and there is no new thing under the sun :" isorrow and joy, hoping and fearing, pain and pleasure* 'laughing and weeping, striving and yielding, — they will jall come again and again, and all things will be the same, Itill all things cease.Tuesday, .January 1st, 1]New-year's Day. \ ^^^^' \There it lies in its cradle ! its pure forehead yet unstained iby sin, unfurrowed by care ; and not an hour shall have ^passed without the traces of both becoming visible. And ;where is the mother gone ? where is the fulfilled year ? — iGone sorrowing to join the crowd of ancestors, who wit jness each against me for the thrift waste I have made |of the rich legacies they one by one have bestowed on me.Oh, new-born year ! ere half thy hours are spent, how ;often will my weary spirit have wished them letter ;wings than even those they wear ! What secrets are |there folded in thy breast, — what undreamt-of chances, — ,what strange befalling, — what unforeseen sorrows,— what .unexpected joys ! Perhaps, in the mysterious accom- ipunishments with which thou art laden, my death may be inumbered ! — perhaps, ere thy course be duly run, the ;death of Time may be decreed ! Oh ! this life, and all >.JOURNAL. 75things in it, remind me of the thin veils of spider's webswhich divided Desire from his aim, and which, thoughHight and transparent, were so numerous, that to lift themall away was hopeless. After breakfast began writingjournal. 'Twas not until dating it that I discovered itwas New-year's day. When I did so, and looked at mystrange surroundings, at the gloomy wintry sky, andthought of the heathenish disregard with which I waspassing over, in this far land, the season of home-gatheringand congregating of kin in my own country, I could notrefrain from crying bitterly. In spite of the pouring rain,and Mr. 's hints to keep us away, my father, whowished to ascertain the truth of the reports with regard tothe state of his theatre, set forward thither with me. Wefound a very large, handsome house, larger, I think, thanthe Park, but dirty, dilapidated, and looking as if therehad been eleven executions in it that morning. No actors,scarcely any scenes, — in short, such a state of things asrendered it totally impossible for us to think of actingthere. Came home ; sat diligently crying the wholemorning. The afternoon cleared up, and became soft andsunny. My father insisted on my taking a walk ; so Ibonneted and set out with him. What I saw of the townappeared to me extremely like the outskirts of Birminghamor Manchester. Bright-red brick houses, in rows ofthree and five, with interesting gaps of gravel pits, patchesof meadow, and open spaces between, which give it anuntidy, straggling appearance. They are building in everydirection, however, and in less than two years, these littlepauses being filled up, Baltimore will be a very considerableplace ; for it covers, in its present state, a largeextent of ground, and contains a vast population. Imme-76 JOURNAL.lately after dinner, our host made his entree with a pianoforte.I had suggested to Mr. that I should be gladof one ; and here it came. I had asked him to return inthe evening, and was glad of the piano, for it helps thetime away. At six o'clock the managers of the Hollidaystreet theatre made their appearance ; and my father statingthat Mr. was literally unable to fulfil his engagementwith us, entered into arrangements with them ;during which, I sat up at a tremendously high window,looking at the beautiful serious skies, and radiant moon,and listening to a tolerable band playing sundry of Rossini'sairs. When these men had departed, camein. I sang and made him sing, till tea time. After thathe entertained us with a very long, but not very clear accountof the various processes of making, polishing, etc.,steel, as practised in his manufactory. His account oftheir hard dealings with the poorer manufacturers wasdreadful, and he himself spoke with horror of it, saying,Oh, they are so miserably ground, poor wretches, theycannot be said to live, — they barely exist." When I remonstratedwith him upon the wickedness of such proceedings,he replied, " We are compelled to do it in self-defence; if we did not use the same means as othermanufacturers, we should presently be undersold." Andthis is the game playing all over England at this moment,in every department of her commerce and manufacture, —this cruel oppression of the poor, this forcing them by aleague against them, as it were, to toil in bitterness fortheir scanty daily bread, while those who thus inhumanlydepreciate their labour, and wring their hard earnings fromtheir starving grasp, grow wealthy on their plunder. Arenot these the things for which God has said he willJOURNAL* 77avenge ? Is his abomination of the false balance, and thestinted measure, and the unjust reckoning, less than in thedays when he said he would visit the oppressor of thepoor, and plead the cause of the widow and fatherless ?Are not these the things that make a nation rotten at core,and ripe for decay? Are not these the things for whichretribution is laid up, and fourfold restitution will be demanded? — 'Tis awful to think of. From this the conversationgrew to the means of obtaining interest upon moneyin this country, which the gentlemen discussed togetherfor a length of time. I listened to them with many sadthoughts. How intent they seemed in their discourse ;how much they appeared to value every slightest advantageof place or circumstance which enabled them to drawa greater profit from their capital ; how eagerly, how earnestlythey seemed absorbed in these calculations. I donot know when I have been so forcibly struck with theworthlessness of money, and the strange delusion underwhich all men seem to be labouring, giving up their lives,as they do, to the hunting of wealth. Are these the caresthat should engross the faculties of immortal souls, andrational thinking creatures ? That we must live, I know,and that money is necessary to live, I know ; but that ourglorious capacities of soul, mind, and body, the fitting exerciseof which alone, in itself, is happiness, should thus bechained down to the altar horns of mammon, is what Inever will believe wise, right, or fitting. I at length spoke,for my heart was burning within me, and burst into aneloquent lamentation on the folly and misery of whichthe world was guilty in following this base worship as itdoes. But when I said that I was convinced happinessmight and did exist most blessedly upon half the meansVOL. II. 778 JOURNAL.which men spent their lives in scraping together, my fatherlaughed, and said I was the last person in the worldwho could live on little, or be content with the mediocrityI vaunted. I looked at my satin gown, and held mytongue, but still I was not convinced. We returned toour music till ten o'clock, when they had some supper,after which they drank a happy new year to England —poor old England, God bless it ! At about twelve o'clockdeparted. Sat up a long time at the window, listeningto some serenading, which, in the moonlight,sounded pleasantly enough.*Sunday, Gtli.At about half past ten Mr. called for us, and wewalked up to the cathedral, which is a large unfinishedstone building standing on the brow of a hill, which is tobe the fashionable quarter of the town, and where thereare already some very nice-looking houses. The interiorof the church is large and handsome, and has more thelook of a church than anything I have been inside of inthis country yet. 'Tis full eight years since I was in aCatholic church ; and the sensation with which I approachedthe high altar, with its golden crucifix, its marbleentablatures, and its glimmering starry lights, savouredfully as much of sadness as devotion. I have not been inaCatholic place of worship since I was at school. HowThis very romantic piece of gallantry, (serenading-,") is verycommon in this country. How it comes to be so I can't quitemake out ; for it is not at all of a piece with the national mannersor tone of feeling. It's very agreeable, though, and is an anomalyworth cultivating.JOURNAL. 79well I remember the beautiful music of the military mass,the pageants and processions of the feast days at highmass, and the evening service, not vespers, but the Salut.*They sang that exquisitely mournful and beautiful et in-carnatic est of Haydn's, which made my blood all runbackwards. One thing disgusted me dreadfully, thoughthe priests who were officiating never passed or approachedthe altar without bending the knee to it, theykept spitting all over the carpet that surrounded and coveredthe steps to it, interrupting themselves in the middleof the service to do so, without the slightest hesitation.I have heard it several times asserted, that Catholicism wasgaining ground extremely in this country. Surely the Preachersayetli well, The thing which has been, it is that which shall be,and there is nothing new beneath the sun. Is it not a marvellousthing to think of, that that mighty tree which has overshadowedthe whole of the Christian world, under whose branches all theEuropean empires were cradled, and which we have with ourown eyes beheld droop, and fade, and totter, as it does at this momentin the old soils, — is it not strange to think of the seed begcarried, and the roots taking hold in this new earth, perhaps to sendup another such giant shadow over this hemisphere? Its growthhere appears to me almost impossible ; for if ever there weretwo things more opposite in their nature than all other things,they are the spirit of the Roman Catholic religion, and the spiritof the American people. It's true, that of the thousands whotake refuge from poverty upon this plenteous land, the greaternumber bring with them that creed, but the very air they inhalehere presently gives them a political faith, so utterly incompatiblewith the spirit of subjection, that I shall think the Catholicpriesthood here workers of miracles, to retain anything like theinfluence over their minds which they possessed in those countries,where all creeds, political and polemical, have but onewatch-word — faith and submission. >!80 JOURNAL. ]We had a very indifferent sermon : the service was of :course in Latin. When it was over, Mr. insisted \on showing me some paintings which hung on either side :the grand entrance. These were a couple of pictures by 1Pauhn Guerin ; the one representing the descent from the :cross, the other the burying of the dead, by St. Charles, ;in the Holy land. I do not understand much about bad ;pictures, but I know good ones when I see them ; and I jthink these were not such. There was no beauty of imamnation or poetical conception whatever in them, and ^there appeared to me to be manifold glaring faults in the jexecution. I could have sworn to their being French jpictures. Was introduced to several people coming out ;of church. A little way beyond the cathedral stands \Washington's monument, — a neat and appropriate pillar, 'which, together with a smaller one erected at the headof our street, to the memory of the North Point heroes,has given Baltimore the appellation of the monumentalcity, which never could have befallen it in any othercountry under heaven, but this. At eight o'clock wewent to Mrs. 's. They are all in deep mourning,and the circle was very small. They are most agreeable,pleasant people, with a peculiar gentleness of manner, likevery high breeding which Lave often observed in Catholicsof the better orders. Their conversation appearedto me totally divested of the disagreeable accent whichseems almost universal in this country. Mrs. talkedto me about my aunt Whitelock, and what a charmingactress she was, and what an enchanting thrilling voiceshe had. I spent a delightful evening. Before we wentaway Mr. showed us a picture of Lady , byJOURNAL. 81Lawrence. It looked quite refreshing, with its lovely darkcurls unfrizzed, and the form of the neck and arms undisguisedby the hideousness of modern fashions. Saw avery good likeness, too, of the Duke of . 'Twasvery like him, though many years younger. * *By the bye, somebody said that had turned RomanCatholic, and very devout. Some of the Mary and Magdalenof the old Italian painters are very converting pictures,with their tearful, melancholy eyes, and golden, glorious,billowy hair. Mrs. amused me very much by her accountof the slaves on their estates, whom, she said, shefound the best and most faithful servants in the world. Beingborn upon the land, there exists among them somethingof the old spirit of clanship, and "our house," "our family,"are the terms by which they designate theirowners. In the south there are no servants but blacks ;for the greater proportion of domestics being slaves, allspecies of servitude whatever is looked upon as a degradation;and the slaves themselves entertain the very highestcontempt for white servants, whom they designate aspoor white trash."Monday, 7th*Young called, and stayed about an hour with us.At half past five took coffee, and off to the theatre. Theplay was Romeo and Juliet ; the house was extremelyfull : they are a delightful audience. My Romeo hadgotten on a pair of trunk breeches, that looked as if he7*82 JOURNAL.had borrowed them from some worthy Dutchman of ahundred years ago. Had he worn them in New York, Icould have understood it as a compliment to the ancestryof that good city ; but here, to adopt such a costume inRomeo, was really perfectly unaccountable. They wereof a most unhappy choice of colours, too, — dull heavy-lookingblue cloth, and offensive crimson satin, all be-puckered,and belated, and puffed, till the young manlooked like a magical figure growing out of a monstrous,strange-coloured melon, beneath which descended his unfortunatelegs, thrust into a pair of red slippers, for all theworld like Grimaldi's legs en costume for clown. Theplay went off pretty smoothly, except that they broke oneman's collar-bone, and nearly dislocated a woman's shoulderby flinging the scenery about. My bed was not madein time, and when the scene drew, half a dozen carpentersin patched trowsers and tattered shirt sleeves, were discoveredsmoothing down my pillows, and adjusting mydraperies. The last scene is too good not to be givenverbatim :Romeo. Rise, rise, my Juliet,.And from this cave of death, this house of horrorsQuick let me snatch thee to thy Romeo's arms.Here he pounced upon me, plucked me up in his armslike an uncomfortable bundle, and staggered down thestage with me.Juliet, {aside.) Oh, you've got me up horridly ! — that'll neverdo ; let me down, pray let me down.Romeo. There, breathe a vital spirit on thy lips,And call thee back, my soul, to life and love !JOURNAL. 83Juliet, (aside.) Pray put me down ; you'll certainly throw medown if you don't set me on the ground directly.In the midst of " cruel, cursed fate," his dagger fell outof his dress; I, embracing him tenderly, crammed it backagain, because I knew I should want it at the end.Romeo. Tear not our heart-strings thus !They crack I they break ! — Juliet! Juliet! (dies.)Juliet. I^io corpse. ) Am I smothering you ?Corpse, (to Juliet. ) Not at all ; could you be so kind, do youthink, as to put my wig on again for me ? — it has fallen off.Juliet, (to corpse.) I'm afraid I can't, but I'll throw my muslinveil over it. You've broken the phial, haven't you ?(Corpse nodded.)Juliet, (to corpse. ) Where's your dagger ?Corpse, (to Juliet.) 'Pon my soul I don't knowSunday, 13th.By half past ten we were packed in what in this countryis termed an exclusive extra, i. e., a stage-coach to ourselves,and progressing towards Washington. The coachwas comfortable enough, and the country, for the firsttwelve or fifteen miles, owing to the abominable accountI had heard of it from every body, disappointed me ratheragreeably. It was by no means so dreary or desolate asI had been led to expect. There was considerable varietyin its outline, and the quantity of cedar thickets scatteredover it took away from the comfortless, threadbare look ofthe wintry woods. Threadbare indeed the trees canscarce be called, for the leaves of the black oak instead of84 JOURNAL.falling as they fade, remain upon the branches and givethe trees more the effect of being lightning-struck, or accidentallyblasted, than withered by the fair course of theseasons. I think the effect is more disagreeable than thatof absolutely bare, leafless boughs. When near, the treeslook singularly deplorable and untidy, although at the distance,the red-brown of the faded oaks mingling with thebright, vivid, green cedars, and here and there a silver-barkedbuttonwood tree raising its white delicate branchesfrom among them, produce a very agreeable and harmoniousblending to the eye. The soil, the banks by theroad-side, and broken ridges of ravines, and water-courses,attracted my attention by the variety and vividness of theircolours. The brightest red and yellow, and then againpale green, and rich, warm gravel-colour. I wished Ihad been a geologist. How much pleasure of reflectionand contemplation is lost to the ignorant whose outwardsense wanders over the objects that surround it, derivingfrom them but half the delight that they give the wise andwell-informed; even fancy is at fault, for fancy itselfscarce devises images more strange, and beautiful, andwonderful, than the reality of things presents to those whounderstand their properties and natures. The waterswere all fast frozen up, and one or two little pools, allcurdled with ice, and locked up in deep, gravelly basins,looked like onyx stones set in gold. As for the road, wehad been assured it was exceedingly good ; but mercy onus! I can't think of it without aching. Here we wentup, up, up, and there we went down, down, down, — now,I was in my father's lap, and now I was half out of window.The utter impossibility of holding oneself in anyoneposition for two minutes, is absolutely ridiculous.JOURNAL. 85Sometimes we laughed, and at other times we groaned atourhelpless and hopeless condition ; but at last, we arrived,with no bones broken, at about three o'clock, at thecapital and seat of government of the United States.*Upon the height immediately above the city, is situatedthe Capitol, a very handsome building, of which the Americansare not a little proud ; but it seems placed there by.jnistak^, so little do the miserable, untidy hovels above,and the scattered, unfinished, red-brick town below, accordwith its patrician marble, and high-sounding title.We drove to Gadsby's, which is an inn like a little town,In most European countries, the seat of government and residenceof the ruling powers and foreign ambassadors, is the capital,and generally the largest, most populous, most wealthy, andmost influential city of the kingdom — the place of all others towhich ti-dwellers would resort to become acquainted with its political,literary, and social spirit. In this, however, as in mostother respects, this country differs from all others ; and the sph-itof independence which renders every state a republic withinitself, gives to each its own capital, the superior merits of whichare advocated with no little pride and jealousy, by the duties ofthe state to which it belongs. Thus, New York, Boston, Philadelphia,Baltimore, Charleston, and New Orleans, are all capitals ;each of them fulfilling in a much higher degree than Washingtonthe foreigner's idea of that word. Indeed I cannot conceive anythingthat would more amaze an European than to be transportedinto Washington, and told he was in the metropolis of theUnited States ; nor indeed, could anything give him a less justidea, of the curious political construction, and widely scatteredresources of the country. Washington, in fact, is to Americawhat Downing and Parliament streets are to London — a congregationof government offices 5 where political characters, secretaries,clerks, place-holders, and place-seekers most do congregate.86 JOURNAL.with more wooden galleries, flights of steps, passages,door-ways, exits and entrances, than any building I eversaw : it reminded me of the house in Tieck's Love-charm.We had not been arrived a quarter of an hour, when inwalked Mr. and Captain , and presently Mr.They sat for some time, discussing, laughing,quizzing, and being funny, and then departed. Captainwas telling us a story about a man somewhere up inthe lost lands, who was called Philemon, and whose threesons were pagan, (christened, 1 suppose, one can't say,)Romulus, Remus, and Tiberius, I thought this was toogood to be true, and D and I laughing over it at dinner,agreed that we wished anything of the sort had happenedto us. " Some bread, waiter : what is yourname ?" said I to the black who was waiting upon us.*' Horatius !" was the reply ; which sent me and Dinto fits.Monday, lath*When I came into breakfast found Mr. , whom I like ;mainly. While he was here, Dr. and camein. I gave the latter a most tremendous grasp of the !hand : it was like seeing a bit of England to see him. iHe said to me, " Oh, how strange it is to see you here;"which caused my eyes to fill with tears, for heaven knows,it feels strange enough. They had hardly been seated ;two minutes, when in rushed a boy to call us to rehearsal. !I was as vexed as might be. They all departed ; Ifaithfully promising to come again, and have a long talk ^about the old country : we then set forth to rehearsal.The theatre is the tiniest little box that ever was seen, — ■,JOURNAL. 87not much bigger, I verily think, than the baby's playhouseat Versailles. When I came to perceive who thecompany were, and that sundry of our Baltimore comradeswere come on hither, I begged to be excused fromrehearsing, as they had all done their parts but a few daysbefore with me. At about two o'clock, Mr. cameto take us to the Capitol. Mr. was in the drawing-room.He had just seen the president ; and it seems, thatfar from coming to any accommodation with the SouthCarolinians, there is an immediate probability of theircoming to blows. They say, the old general is longingfor a tight ; and most assuredly, to fight would be better,in this instance, than to give in ; for, to yield, would bevirtually to admit the right of every individual state to dictateto the whole government. We walked up to theCapitol: the day was most beautifully bright and sunny,and the mass of white building, with its terraces and columns,stood out in fine relief against the cloudless bluesky. We went first into the senate, or upper house, becauseWebster was speaking, whom I especially wishedto hear. The room itself is neither large nor lofty ; thesenators sit in two semi-circular rows, turned towards thepresident, in comfortable arm-chairs. On the same ground,and literally sitting among the senators, were a wholeregiment of ladies, whispering, talking, laughing, and fidgeting.A gallery, level with the floor, and only dividedby a low partition from the main room, ran round theapartment : this, too, was filled with pink, and blue, andyellow bonnets ; and every now and then, while the businessof the house was going on, and Webster speaking,a tremendous bustle, and waving of feathers, and rustlingof silks would be heard, and in came streaming a rein-journal.forcemeiit of political beauties, and then would commencea jumping up, a sitting down, a squeezing through, and ahow-d'ye-doing, and a shaking of hands. The senatorswould turn round, even Webster would hesitate as if botheredby the row, and, in short, the whole thing wasmore irregular, and unbusiness-like than any one couldhave imagined.* Webster's face is very remarkable, particularlythe forehead and eyes. The former projects singularly,absolutely overhanging the latter, which have avery melancholy and occasionally rather wild expression.The subject upon which he was speaking was not one ofparticular interest, — an estimate of the amount of Frenchspoliations, by cruisers and privateers, upon the Americancommerce. The heat of the room was intolerable ;and after sitting till I was nearly suffocated, we adjournedAs the winter resort of all the leading political men of theUnion, Washing-ton presents many attractions in point of society.Their wives and daughters, frequently the reigning beauties ofthen* respective states and towns, generally accompany themthither during the session ; and this congregating of people fromall parts of the country, together with the foreign ministers residingthere, and the travellers drawn thither from mere curiosity,combine to give more variety to the gaieties of Washington thanthose of any of the other cities in the Union can boast. TheCapitol is a favourite lounge in the morning ; and the Americanlady-politicians are just as zealous in their respective parties asour own. I don't know, however, that they would much relishlistening to a long debate from that dismal hole, the lanthorn ofthe house of commons, where one may listen, indeed, and evenjust manage to see, but where to he seen is an utter impossibility :neither do I think that many of them would stand for four longhours, as Miss and poor Lady did, during Brougham'sfamous reform bill speech.JOURNAL. 89to the House of Representatives. On our way thither,we crossed a very beautiful circular vestibule, which holdsthe centre of the building. It was adorned with sundrymemorable passages in American history done into pictures,by Colonel Trumbull. In the House of Representativeswe were told we should hear nothing of interest,so turned off, under Mr. 's escort, to the library,which is a comfortable, well-sized room, where we lookedover Audubon's Ornithology, a beautiful work, and saw aman sitting with his feet upon the table, reading, whichis an American fashion. Met half the New York worldthere. After we had stayed there some time, we wentinto the House of Representatives. The room itself islofty and large, and very handsome, but extremely ill-constructedfor the voice, which is completely lost among thecolumns, and only reaches the gallery, where listeners areadmitted, in indistinct and very unedifying murmurs. Themembers not unfrequently sit with their feet upon theirdesks. We walked out upon the terrace, and looked, atthe view of the Potomac, and the town, which, in spite ofthe enlivening effect of an almost summer's sky, lookeddreary and desolate in the extreme. We then returnedhome. At half past five we went to the theatre. Wewere a long time before we could discover, among the intricate,dark little passages, our own private entrance, andwere as nearly as possible being carried into the pit by asudden rush of spectators making their way thither : Iwish we had been ; I think I should like to have seen myselfvery much. The theatre is absolutely like a doll'splay-house : it was completely crammed with people. Iplayed ill ; I cannot act tragedy within half a yard of thepeople in the boxes. By the bye, a theatre may veryVOL. II. 890 JOURNAL.easily be too small for tragedies which is admirablyadapted to comedies. In the latter species of dramaticrepresentations, the incidents, characters, manners, anddresses, are, for the most part, modern, — such as we meetwith, or can easily imagine in our own drawing-rooms,and among our own society. There is little if any exaggerationof colouring necessary, and no great exertion offancy needful either in the actor or audience in executingand witnessing such a performance. On the contrary,comedy, — high comedy, — generally embodying the manners,tone, and spirit of the higher classes of society, thesmaller the space, consistent with ease and grace of carriage,in which such personifications take place, the lessdanger there is of the actor's departing from that natural,quiet, and refined deportment and delivery, which are, inthe present day, the general characteristics of polished society.'Tis otherwise with tragic representations. Theyare unnatural, not positively, but comparatively unnatural ;the incidents are, for the most part strange, startling, unusual; and though they always must be within possibility,in order to excite the sympathies of beholders, —though some of them may even be historical facts, — yetthey are, for the most part, events which come within theprobabilities of few of us, and this renders necessary a degreeof excitement and elevation in the mind of the spectator,foreign to, and at variance with the critical spirit ofprosaic reality. Again, the scene of a comedy is generallya drawing-room ; and the smaller the stage, thegreater is the possibility of rendering it absolutely likewhat we all have seen, and are daily in the habit ofseeing ; but to represent groves and mountains, or lakes,or the dwellings of the kings of the earth, satisfactorily to,JOURNAL. 91the spectator's mind, there must be a certain distance observed,from which the fancy may take its stand for thebest perception of what is intended. Whereas, in closercontact with such scenes, not only does their immediateproximity convey an unpleasing consciousness of the unrealityof the whole, but the near and absolute detail ofpaint, canvass, and gilding, is obtruded in a manner thatdestroys all illusion, and by disturbing the effect of thewhole upon the spectator, necessarily weakens that partwhich depends solely upon the actor. The same thingapplies to dress. Foil-stone, paste, and coloured glass,by French ingenuity, have been manufactured into toys,which, with the help of distance, may be admitted as representingthe splendours of Eastern costume, or even theglittering trappings of those gaudy little superhuman thefairies. But nearness utterly dissolves the spell, and thesesubstitutes for magnificence become palpable impositions,and very often most ludicrous ones. I have often beenaccused of studying my attitudes, but the truth is, thatmost things that are presented to my imagination, insteadof being mere abstractions, immediately assume form andcolour, and become pictures ; these I constantly executeon the stage as I had previously seen them in my fancy :but as few pictures as large as life admit of being seen tobest effect immediately close to the spectator, so the wholeeffect produced by a graceful attitude, fine colours, or skilfulgrouping on the stage, is considerably diminishedwhen the space is restricted, and the audience brought toonear the performers. So much for little theatres.came in after the play. He told us that as he was comingout of the theatre, a Kentuckian accosted him with, " Well,what do you think of that 'ere gal?''"' — " Oh," hesitatingly92 JOURNAL.replied , " 1 don't quite know." — " Well," retortedthe questioner, " any how, I guess she's o' some account!"Tuesday, 15tli«At eleven o'clock Mr. called. Went with him tosee the original of the Declaration of Independence, also,a few medals, for the most part modern ones, and neitherof much beauty or curiosity. Afterwards went to theWar Office, where we saw sundry Indian properties, —bows and arrows, canoes, smoking pipes, and what interestedme much more, the pictures of a great many savagechiefs, and one or two Indian women. The latter wererather pretty : the men were not any of them handsome ;scorn round the mouth, and cunning in the eyes seemedto be the general characteristic of all their faces. Therewas a portrait of Red Jacket, which gave me a most unpoetical,low-life impression of that great palaver. Thenames of many of them delighted me, as, the Ever-awake;the tian that stands and strikes; the NorthWind. One of the women's names amused me a greatdeal, — the Woman that spoke first, — which title occasionedinfinite surmise among us as to the occasion onwhich she earned it. After we had done seeing whatwas to be seen, we went on to the president's house,which is a comfortless, handsome-looking building, witha withered grass-plot enclosed in wooden palings in front,and a desolate reach of uncultivated ground down to theriver behind. Mr. gave us a most entertaining accountof the levees, or rather public days, at the president'shouse. Every human being has a right to present himselfJOURNAL. 93there ; the consequence is, that great numbers of the very-commonestsort of people used to rush in, and follow-aboutthe servants who carried refreshments, seizing uponwhatever they could get, and staring and pushing about,to the infinite discomfiture of the more respectable andbetter-behaved part of the assembly. Indeed, the nuisancebecame so great, that they discontinued the eatables, andin great measure got rid of the crowd. Mr. assuredme that on one of these occasions, two ladies had themselveslifted up and seated on the chimney-piece, in orderto have a better view of the select congregation beneaththem. Mr. left us to go to the Capitol, and wecame home. , Mr. and Captain called.We sat discussing names ; which in this country are certainlymore ambitious than in any other in the world.*The love of the sublime and beautiful, those aspirations aftersomething" more refined, more exalted and perfect than this worldaffords, in short, that spiritual propensity classed in its many andvarious manifestations by the phrenologists under the title ofideality, will have some vent, and under circumstances most adverseto its existence, will creep out at some channel or another,and vindicate human nature by flourishing in some shape overthe narrowest, homeliest, lowest, and least favourable guise itmay put on. Certainly America is not the country of largerealities, — it is the very reverse ; if I may create a bump, it isthe country of large realities, i. e., large acquisitiveness, largecausality, large caution, and small veneration and wonder. Nathlesssome ideality must needs be, and is, and it creeps out inchristian names. I have heard sempstress called Amanda andEmmeline, and we had a housemaid in New England calledCynthia. Our village carpenter is named Rudolph ; and if thespirit of the people appears to me unimaginative and unpoetical,I take great comfort in their fine names.8*94 JOURNAL.Besides Captain 's classical family, Mr. assuredus that he knew of a man whose name was ReturnJonathan Meigs ; and swore to one in New Yorkcalled Alonzo Lenses Agamemnon Beaugardus, Ihave myself seen a Germanus Boggs, Aquila Jones, andAlpheus Brett; but I have not been favoured with an acquaintancewith any such names as they quoted. appearsto me altered since I saw him in England. He wasalways silent, and quiet, and gentle, but there was an air ofcomplacency and contented cheerfulness about him, whichI think he has very much lost : he looks sad and careworn.I was sorry to see it. After dinner sat writing journal.Mr. came in and sat some time with us. Heis very clever and agreeable, and I like him greatly."Wednesday, 16tK.After breakfast went to rehearsal. At half past twelveMr. came to ride with me. The horse he had got jten for me was base ; but never mind, the day was exqui- \sitely mild and bright, — the sort of early spring-feeling |day, when in England the bright gold, and pale, delicate ]violet of the crocus buds begin to break the rich, darkmould, and the fragrant gummy leaves of the lilac bushes ,open their soft, brown folds. We had a very pleasant 'ride through some pretty woodlands on the opposite side |of the river. At half past five went to the theatre. The :play was the Hunchback : the house was crowded. In \the last scene Master Water upbraided me thus : 'The engineer ^<Who lays the last stone of his sea-built tower, jAnd smiling at it, bids the winds and waves jJOURNAL. 95To roar and whistle now — but in a nightBeholds the tempest sporting in its place.May look gash as I did.Also in the exclamation —Fathers, make straws yovir children : nature's nothingsnothing: once in other veins it flowsIt no more yawned for the parent floodThan doth the stream that from the stream departs.Mr. and came in after the play. We had adiscussion as to how far real feeling enters into our scenicperformances. 'Tis hard to say : the general question itwould be impossible to answer, for acting is altogether amonstrous anomaly. John Kemble and Mrs. Siddonswere always in earnest in what they were about ; MissO'Neill used to cry bitterly in all her tragedy parts ; whilstGarrick could be making faces and playing tricks in themiddle of his finest points, and Kean would talk gibberishwhile the people were in an uproar of applause at his.In my own individual instance, I know that sometimes Icould turn every word I am saying into burlesque, neverShakspeare, by the bye,) and at others my heart aches,and I cry real, bitter, warm tears, as earnestly as '\[ I wasin earnest.Thursday, 17thSat writing journal till twelve o'clock, when we went toMr. 's. Took him up, and thence proceeded to thePresidency to be presented in due form. His excellencyAndrew Jackson, is very tall and thin, but erect and dignifiedin his carriage — a good specimen of a fine old wellesJOURNAL.battered soldier. His hair is very thick and grey : hismanners are perfectly simple and quiet, therefore very :good ; so are those of his niece, Mrs. , who is a ;very pretty person, and lady of the house, Mrs. Jacksonhaving been dead some time. He talked about South jCarolina, and entered his protest against scribbling ladies,assuring us that the whole of the present southern dis jtrances had their origin in no larger a source than thenib of the pen of a lady. Truly, if this be true, the ladymust have scribbled to some purpose. We sat a little !more than a quarter of an hour ; Mr. was calling at :the same time.* We afterwards adjourned to Mr. 's ihouse. * * * * * * 1# * * * # ** * •¥ ^ * * 'IAppointed Mr. to come down directly and ride with 'I am neither sufficiently interested nor sufficiently well in- :formed in the politics of this country to have conceived any opi- ;non of General Jackson, beyond that which the floating discus 'sons of the day might suggest. Of his merits as a statesman I jam totally incapable of judging, or of the effect which his pecu- Iliar policy is calculated to have upon the country. When first I '■came here I heard and saw that he was the man of the people, iIn the dispute with South Carolina, his firmness and decision of 'character struck me a good deal ; and when, in consequence of "!the temporary distress occasioned by his alteration of the cur ,rency, a universal howl was for a short time raised against him, jwhich he withstood without a moment's flinching, I honoured ;him greatly. Of his measures I know nothing, but firmness, de ;termination, decision, I respect above all things ; and if the old '.general is, as they say, very obstinate, why obstinacy is so far imore estimable than weakness, especially in a ruler, that I think jhe sins on the right side of the question. \i\JOURNAL. 97me. Drove with my father and Mr. to leave cardson , and then walked home. The day was brightand fine, but very cold. Habited, and at about one o'clockMr. called for me. On going to the door, I foundhim and his horse, and a strange, tall, grey horse for me,and a young gentleman of the name of , to whom Iunderstood it belonged, and whom Mr. introducedto me as very anxious to join my party. I was a littlestartled at this, as I did not quite think Mr. ought tohave brought any body to ride with me without my leave.However, as 1 was riding his horse, I was just as wellpleased that he was by, for I don't like having the responsibilityof such valuable property as a private gentleman'shorse to take care of. I told him this, alleging it as a reasonfor my preferring to ride an indifferent hack horse,about which I had no such anxiety. He replied that Ineed have none about his. I told him laughingly that Iwould give him two dollars for the hire of it, and thenI should feel quite happy ; all which nonsense passed asnonsense should, without a comment. He is a son ofI thought him tolerably pleasant and well informed***** ;j(:*******I would have a man who lived in the wretchedness cornerof the earth think his own country the first of countries,for 'tis noble and natural, one of the most respectable instinctsin the human heart. We rode till half past three.The horse I was upon, was, Mr. assured me, anEnglish one, but he had been long enough in this worldto learn racking and forget every other more christianpace : he tired me dreadfully. After dinner wrote journaltill time to go to the theatre. The play was the School98 JOURNAL.for Scandal, in the fourth act of which Joseph Surface assuredme that / was a plethora ! ! ! Mr. came inand supped with us after the play. He gave us a very-interestingaccount of a school that had been attempted tobe formed in Massachusetts, for the purpose of educatingyoung men of the savage tribes, who were willing to becomeChristians, and receive instruction. It was obliged,however, to be given up, in consequence of several ofthem having fallen in love with and married Americangirls, whom they took away into the woods, many ofthem after they were there returning to their savage waysof living, which must have placed their wretched Christianwives in a horrible situation.Friday, Isti.At eleven Mr. called to take D and myself tothe war office : I wanted her to see the Indian spoilsthere. On our way thither he read us some very prettyverses which he had written upon the subject of thewoman who spoke first." When we had seen whatwe wanted to see we returned home, and I began to habit.While doing so received a most comical Yankee note,signed by Mr. , but written, I am sure, by Captainto apprize me that the former was unwell, but thathe, Captain , would accompany me on horseback, if ^I pleased. The note was exquisite. I finished dressing,and then we set off". I charged Captain with thenote, and he pleaded guilty, — the thing was evident.While we were riding. Captain told me sundrymost exquisite native morceaux, and one thing that half-killedme with laughing. Mr. 's negro servant andJOURNAL. 99Mr 's conversing together about me, one asked theother if he had seen me yet at the theatre, to which Mrsman replied, " No sir ; I have had the pleasure ofseeing Miss Kemble in private society :" — he brings myhorse down every morning for me ! * * ** * * # *Perhaps after all, life is worth no more than a laugh, andall its strange mysteries of sin and suffering, its summerdreams of excellence innate and to be acquired, its fondyearning affections, its deep passions, its high and glorioustending, — all but jests to make the worldly-wisesmile, and the believers in them despair. God keep mefrom such thoughts ! — they are dreadful ! * ** * * * %* * * # * #After dinner wrote journal. At half past five went to thetheatre : the play was the Hunchback, — the house wasvery good. I wonder if any body on earth can form theslightest idea of the interior of this wretched little theatre :'tis the smallest I ever was in. The proprietors are poor,the actors poorer ; and the grotesque mixture of misery,vulgarity, stage-finery, and real ruggedness, is beyondeverything strange, and sad, and revolting, — it remindsme constantly of some of Hogarth's pictures, and passagesin Goethe's Wilhelm Meister. After the play camehome and supped. By the bye, just as I had done breakfastthis morning Judge called, who is the most exquisiteoriginal I have met with even in this land of theirabundance. He gave me a long scolding for getting upso late, and assured me that I meant to settle in thiscountry, at the same time drawing an enchanting picture4 f^f^ 6 > 'LJf^100 JOURNAL.of rural happiness to the west, — a cottage by a rivulet, |with two cows, and just enough to starve upon ! — I think <I see myself there. This sentimental prophecy was pre |faced by a remark that he knew I was very romantic, and jinterrupted every two minutes by a dexterous electoral iinterjection, which caused me nearly to jump off my chair ,with dismay.Saturday, 19tli« |Giorno corpore! — but I won't anticipate. They have jsettled to act Much Ado about Nothing, instead of The jInconstant. I have no clothes for Beatrice, — but thatdon't matter. After breakfast went to rehearsal, and then !walked with my father to see a very pretty model of what \is to be the town-hall. It never will be, for the corpora |tion are as poor as Job's kittens, (Americanism — com- 1medicated by Captain ,) and the city of Washington jitself is only kept alive by Congress. Talking of the Icity of Washington, — 'tis the strangest thing by way of a !town, that can be fancied. It is laid out to cover, I shouldthink, some ten miles square, but the houses are here, \there, and no where ; the streets, conventionally, not pro \percy so called, are roads, crooked or straight, where ibuildings are intended to be. Every now and then an |interesting gap of a quarter of a mile occurs between those 'houses that are built ; in the midst of the town you can't ;help fancying you are in the country ; and between 'wooden palings, with nothing to be seen on either sidebut cedar bushes and sand, you are informed you are in |the midst of the town. The Elysian fields is a broken ;patch of moorland, sand, and gravel ; the Jardin des .JOURNAL. 101Plantes is a nursery-ground full of slips of shrubs a footand a half high ; the Tiber, alias Goose Creek, is an ditch ; — and Washington altogether struckme as a rambling, red-brick image of futurity, wherenothing is, but all things are to be. Came home and habited; at half past twelve. Captain came for me ;just as we were going, called. He was on horseback,and asked leave to join us, which I agreed to veryreadily. He was pilot, and led us round and about throughthe woods, and across the waters, all of which, as Captainobserved, was in the day's work. We returned athalf past three. Directly after dinner, I set out to paysundry carijfe. The day had been heavenly, — bright, andwarm, and balmy ; the evening was beautifully soft ; andas I drove over hill and dale, marsh and moorland, throughthe city of Washington, paying my cards, the stars cameout one after another in the still sky, and the scatteredlights of the town looked like a capricious congregation ofJack-o'-lanthorns, some high, some low, some here, somethere, showing more distinctly by the dark spaces betweenthem, the enormous share that emptiness has in the congressionalcity. One of my visits lay nearly three milesout of town, so that I was not back until six o'clock. AsI came rushing along the corridor, I met D comingto meet me, who exclaimed, with an air of mingled horrorand satisfaction, " Oh, here you are ! — here is coffee andMr. waiting for you !" I went into the room, andfound a goodly-looking personage, old eno'igli to knowbetter, sitting with my father, who appeared amazinglydisturbed, held an open letter in his hand, and exclaimed,the moment I came in, " There, sir, there is the younglady to speak for herself." 1 courtesies, and sat down.VOL, II. 9102 JOURNAL.Fanny," quoth my father, " something particularly disa- ]agreeable has occurred, — pray, can you call to mind any ,thing you said during the course of your Thursday's ride, 'which was likely to be offensive to Mr. , or anythingabusive of this country ?" As I have already had sundry ispecimens of the great talent there is for tattle in the exclusivecoteries of this gossiping new world, I merely un 'tied my bonnet, and replied, that I did not at that moment \recollect a word that I had said during my whole ride, \and should certainly not give myself any trouble to do so.Now my dear," said my father, his own eyes flashingwith indignation, " don't put yourself into a passion ; composeyourself and recollect. Here is a letter I have justreceived." He proceeded to read it, and the contents :were to this effect — that during my ride with Mr. jI had said I did not choose to ride an American gentle |man's horse, and had offered him two dollars for the hire jof his; that moreover, I had spoken most derogatory of IAmerica and Americans ; in consequence of all which, if ,my father did not give some explanation, or make someapology to the public, I should certainly be hissed off the \stage, as soon as I appeared on it that evening. This was ]pleasant. I stated the conversation as it had passed, add ]ing, that as to any sentiments a person might express on ;any subject ; liberty of opinion, and liberty of speech,were alike rights which belonged to every body, and that,with a due regard to good feeling, and good breeding, |they were rights which nobody ought, and I never would ,forego. Mr. opened his eyes. I longed to add thatany conversation between me and any other person was inobody's business but mine, and his or hers, and that the \whole thing was on the part of the young gentleman con :JOURNAL. 103cornet, the greatest piece of blackguardism, and on that ofthe old gentleman concerned, the greatest piece of twaddlethat it had ever been my good fortune to hear of. " For,"said Mr. , " not less than j^/y members of Congresshave already mentioned the matter to me." Fifty old gossipingwomen ! why the whole thing is for all the worldlike a village tattle in England, among half a dozen oldwives round their tea-pots. All Washington was in dismay; and my evil deeds and evil words were the towntalk, — fields, gaps, marshes, and all, rang with them.This is an agreeable circumstance, and a display of nationalcharacter highly entertaining and curious.* It gaveThe national vanity of the French, and pride and prejudiceof the English, are proverbial ; it is, however, fortunate for boththat they carry these qualities to such an excess, that it is a matterof extreme difficulty to shake the good opinion which they entertainof themselves. Thus, foreigners may visit England, asFrenchmen have done, and swear that the sun never shines there,and that the only ripe fruit the country affords, is roasted apples.John Bull, nothing wrath wraps himself still closer in his owndear self-approval, and in the plenitude of self-content, drinkshis brown stout, and basks by gas-light. On his part, he goesover to Paris, votes the whole beau pays de France horrible, becausehe can't get port wine to drink, or boiled potatoes to eat,in spite of which Monsieur does not attempt to turn him out ofhis country, but eats his ragouts, and drinks his chably, andshrugs his shoulders at the savage islander, from the seventh heavenof self-satisfaction. It were much to be desired that Americanshad a little more national vanity, or national pride. Such anunhappily sensitive community surely never existed in this world ;and the vengeance with which they visit people for saying theydon't admire or like them, would be really terrible if the saidpeople were but as mortally afraid of abuse as they seem to be.I would not advise either Mrs. Trollope, Basil Hall, or Captain104 JOURNAL.me at the time, however, a dreadful side-ache, and nervouscough. I went to the theatre, dressed, and came on thestage in the full expectation of being hissed off it, whichis a pleasant sensation, very, and made my heart full ofbitterness to think I should stand, — as no woman oughtto stand, — the mark of public insult. However, no suchthing occurred, — I went on and came off without any suchtrial of my courage ; but I had been so much annoyed, andwas still so indignant, that I passed the intervals betweenmy scenes in crying, — which, of course, added greatly tothe mirth and spirit of my performance of Beatrice. Inthe middle of the play, Mr. , and Captain camebehind the scenes, and then, indeed, I was quite glad tosee Englishmen ; though their compassionate sympathiesfor my wrongs, and tender fears lest I should catch coldbehind those horrid scenes, very nearly set me off cryingagain. A soft word, when one is in deep commiserationof oneself, is very apt to open the flood-gates, but I wasHamilton ever to set their feet upon this ground again, unlessthey are ambitious of being stoned to death. I live myself indaily expectation of martyrdom : and as for any body attemptingto earn a livelihood here who has but as much as said he prefersthe country where he was born to this, he would stand a muchbetter chance of thriving if he were to begin business after confinementin the penitentiary. This unhappy species of irritabilityis carried to such a degree here, that if you express an unfavourableopinion of anything, the people are absolutely astonishedat your temerity, I remember, to my no little amusement,a lady saying to me once, **I hear you' are going to abuse usdreadfully ; of course, you'll wait till you go back to England,and then shower it down upon us finely." I assured her I wasnot in the least afraid of staying where I was, and saying what Ithought at the same time.JOURNAL. 105ashamed to cri before them, so tried to keep my heart-swellingsdown. When the play was over, came home.Mr. came and supped with us. By the bye, hecalled this morning before I went out riding, and expressedmany sorrows at our departure. He is a cleverand extremely well-informed man, and I like him verymuch. When he was gone, sat talking over the affair.My father was in a greater passion than I think Iever saw him before. I am sure I would not have warrantedone of that worthy young gentleman's bones, if hehad fallen in with him. I am very glad he did not ; for,to knock a man down, even though he does deserve it, isa serious matter rather.wednesday, 30tli, ^Philadelphia. ^After breakfast practised for an hour: wrote journal.Mr. , the wild eyed, flowing-haired, white-waistcoat,velvet collared, called upon me. Hesat some time asking me questions ; but, since theaffair, I have grown rather afraid of opening my mouth,and he had the conversation chiefly to himself. Finishedjournal ; dined at half past three : after dinner went andsat with Mrs. . One Mr. , a Boston man whowas at Mrs. 's ball last night, was in her room. Iwas introduced to him, and he spoke of the 's. *Sat with them till coffee-time. Went to the theatre athalf past five. It poured with rain, in spite of which the9 *106 JOURNAL.house was very good: the play was Bazio. When Icame on in ray fine dress, at the beginning of the secondact, the people hailed me with such a tremendous burst ofapplause, and prolonged it so much, that I was greatlypuzzled to imagine what on earth possessed them. Iconcluded they were pleased with my dress, but couldnot help being rather amused at their vehement and continuedclapping, considering they had seen it several timesbefore. However, they ceased at last, and I thought nomore about it. Towards the time for the beginning of thethird act, which opens with my being discovered waitingfor Fazio's return, as I was sitting in my dressing-roomworking, D suddenly exclaimed, " Hark ! — what isthat?" opened the door, and we heard a tremendousnoise of shouts and of applause. " They are waitingfor you, certainly," said D . She ran out, andreturned, saying, " the stage is certainly waiting for you,Fanny, for the curtain is up." I rushed out of the room,but on opening the door leading to the stage, I distinctlyheard my father's voice addressing the audience. I turnedsick with a sort of indefinite apprehension, and on inquiryfound that at the beginning of the play a number of handbillshad been thrown into the pit, professing to quote myconversation with Mr. at Washington, and callingupon the people to resent my conduct in the grossest andmost vulgar terms. This precious document had, itseems, been brought round by somebody to my father,who immediately went on with it in his hand, and assuredthe audience that the whole thing was a falsehoodI scarce heard what he said, though I stood at the sidescene : I was crying dreadfully with fright and indignaJOURNAL. 1 07tion. How I wished I was a caterpillar under a greengooseberry-bush ! * * * * *Oh, how I did wince to think of going on again after thisscene, though the feeling of the audience was most evident; for all the applause I had fancied they bestowedupon my dress, was, in fact, an unsolicited testimony oftheir disbelief in the accusation brought against me. Theyreceived my father's words with acclamations ; and whenthe curtain drew up, and I was discovered, the pit roseand waved their hats, and the applause was tremendous.I was crying dreadfully, and could hardly speak ; however,I mastered myself and went on with my part, —though, what with the dreadful exertion that it is in itself,and the painful excitement I had just undergone, I thoughtI should have fainted before I got through with it. * ,Saturday, February clatterbreakfast called to see how I did after mywalk: he sat for some time. At twelve went out payingbills and calls ; bought a German eolina ; sat some timewith old Mrs. , and spent a delightful hour with Mr.and his family. He is a most agreeable person, buthe thinks too well of acting. Came home ; dined atthree ; Mr. and Mrs. dined with us. After dinnerwent into her room, and remained there till time to go tothe theatre. Young and Dr. came in. Theplay was the Gamester : it was my benefit, and I am108 JOURNAL.afraid the good folks who addressed that amiable placardto the public will have been rather ill satisfied with theirsuggestion about my benefit. The house was literallycrammed, in consequence of that very circumstance, —crammed is the word. When the curtain drew up, theyapplauded me without end, and I courtesies as profoundlyas I was able ; indeed, I am extremely obliged to this sameexcellent public, for they have testified most satisfactorilyevery way, the kindest feeling possible for me, and themost entire faith in my good behaviour. I did not playwell, my voice was so dreadfully affected by my cough.Monday) 4th*Dined at three. After dinner Mrs. came into ourroom, where I sang and played till time to go to the theatre.The play was the Merchant of Venice, and Katharineand Petruchio for the farce ; — my father's benefit :the house was crammed from floor to ceiling as full as itcould hold : so much for the success of the hand-bills.Indeed, as somebody suggested, I think if we could findthe author of that placard out, we are bound to give hima handsome reward, for he certainly has given us two ofthe finest benefits that ever were seen. I heard that aman said the other day that he should not be surprised ifmy father had got the whole of this up himself. Oh,day and night ! that such thoughts should come into anyhuman being's head.* At the end, the people shouted• I have been assured, I know not how truly, that the wholeof this affair originated with an Englishman. This piece of informationwas given me by a person who said he knew such tobe the fact, and also knew the man.JOURNAL. 109•and shrieked for us. He went on, and made them aspeech, and I went on and made them a courtesy ; and certainlythey do deserve the civillest of speeches, and lowestof courtesies from us, for they have behaved most kindlyand courteously to us, and for mine own good part, I lovethe whole city of Philadelphia from this time forth, forevermore.* Mr. came round to the share door toIt may not be amiss here to say one word with regard to thegratitude which audiences in some parts of the world claim fromactors, and about which I have lately heard a most alarming outcry.Do actors generally exercise their profession to pleasethemselves and gratify their own especial delight in self-exhibition? Is that profession in its highest walks one of small physicalexertion and fatigue, (I say nothing of mental exertion) andin its lower paths is it one of much gain, glory, or ease ? Doaudiences, on the other hand, use to come in crowds to playhousesto see indifferent performers ? and when there do theyout of pure charity and good-will, bestow their applause as wellas their money upon tiresome performances? — I will answer thesepoints as far as regards myself, and therein express the gratitudewhich I feel towards the frequenters of theatres. I individuallydisliked my profession, and had neither pride nor pleasure in theexercise of it. I exercised it as a matter of necessity, to earn mybread, — and verily it was in the sweat of my brow. The partswhich fell to my lot were of a most laborious nature, and occasionedsometimes violent mental excitement, always immensephysical exertion, and sometimes both. In those humbler walksof my profession, from whose wearisomeness I was exempted bymy sudden favour with the public, I have seen, though notknown, the most painful drudgery, — the most constant fatigue, —the most sad contrast between real cares and feigned merriments,the most anxious penurious and laborious existence imaginable.For the part of my questions which regarded the audiences, Ihave only to say, that I never knew, saw, heard or read of any110 JOURNAL.bid us good-night ; and as we drove off, a whole parcel offolk who had gathered round the door to see us depart,set of people who went to a play-house to see what they did notlike ; this being the case it never occurred to me that our houseswere full but as a necessary consequence of our own attraction,or that we were applauded, but as the result of our own exertions.I was glad the houses were full, because I was earning my livelihood,and wanted the money ; and I was glad the people applaudedus, because it is pleasant to please, and human vanity willfind some sweetness in praise, even when reason weighs its worthmost justly. Thus I cannot say that in general I had any greatgratitude towards my audiences. Once or twice, however, thatfeeling was excited between me and my witnesses, and the circumstanceof which I have spoken in my journal, was one of theinstances. But this was a different matter altogether. I was nolonger before an audience labouring for their approbation as anactress* I was dragged before so many judges in my own person,to answer for words spoken in private conversation. Thesame clapping of hands with which they rewarded my exertionsill my profession, was the only method by which they could intimatethe " not guilty," which was their judgment upon the appealthat had been made to them against me ; but with this difference,that I never felt obliged to them, or grateful for theirapplause before, and did feel obliged and grateful for their verdictthen. Now, as regards the benefit-nights of actors, I donot observe that even on these occasions much gratitude isowing to the people who attend them ; for I know, and so doesevery member of the profession, that the oldest and best actoron any stage, — the one who for a series of years has appearedbefore audiences to whom his private respectability and worthwere well known'— the longest established favourite of the public,(as they are termed,) will assuredly have empty houses onhis benefit-nights, if, trusting to the feeling of that public, towhom he owes so much gratitude, he failed to secure the assistanceof whatever star, (tragedian, pantomimist, or dancingJOURNAL. Illset up a universal hurrah ! How strange a thing it is,that popular shout. After all, Pitt or Canning could getno more for the finest oratory that human lips ever uttered,or the wisest policy that human brain ever devised.Sometimes they got the reverse ; but then the hereafter —there's the rub ! Praise is so sweet to me that I wouldhave it lasting : above all, I would wish to feel that I deservedit. I must do so if I am to value it a straw ; andacting, even the best that ever was seen, is, to my mind,but a poor claim to approbation. I think the applause of ,an audience in a play-house should be reckoned with thedog, it matters not which,) happens to be the newest object ofattraction. I speak all this more particularly as regards thiscountry ; for it is here that I have heard most of this species ofcant. Gratitude is a good word and an excellent thing, andneither in speaking or acting should it be misapplied. "In thearistocratical lands over the water, this nonsense about patronagemight surprise one less ; but in America it seems strange thereshould be any mistake about a simple matter of traffic — 'tisnothing in life else. We give our health, our strength, our leisure,and our pleasure, for your money, and your applause,neither of which do we beg or borrow from you. This being thecase, where lies the obligation, and where the gratitude ? As tothe pretty speeches which actors make when called from behind ,the curtain, they always appeared to me very much of the sameorder as advertisements in newspapers — A. D. returns his gratefulacknowledgments to the public for their liberal support, etc.,etc. That calling performers on after a play is a foreign, not anEnglish custom, and, to my mind, one more honoured in thebreach, than in the observance. Extraordinary occasions mightwarrant extraordinary demonstrations ; but it is a pity to makethat a common ceremony, which, rarely granted, would be agratifying testimony of feeling, and excite rational gratitude inthose on whom it was conferred.112 JOURNAL.friendly and favourable opinions of a good-natured tipsynan, — lis given under excitement. Oh Lord ! how unsatisfactoryall things are.Wednesday, 13tli,New York..\After dinner came in. He sat himself down, andpresently was overhead in reminiscences. His accountof Tom Paine's escape from the Conciergerie, on the eveof being guillotined, was extremely interesting. His ownintroduction to, and subsequent acquaintance with thatworthy, was equally so, and his summing up was highly'characteristic. " I tell ye, madam, the saving of thatman's life was an especial providence, that he might comeover to this country, where his works have done so muchharm, and might have done so much more, and just exemplifythe result of his own principles put into practicein his own person, and show that the glorious light ofreason, and the noble natural gifts of man, of which hepreached so much, would neither prevent a man's becominga drunkard and a spendthrift, nor a debased, degradedbeing. If Paine had been guillotined, madam, he wouldhave been a martyr, and his works would have had tentimes the power of evil they had before. But he lived tobe a miserable, low thrift, and sot, and died neglectedand despised by all reputable and respectable individuals,and I say again, it was a manifest providence that he didso." We left the gentlemen to their wine for a shorttime, but were presently summoned back. hadgone to the theatre. began his history to me, andit was, word for word, a repetition of Gait's book, exceptJOURNAL. 113that occasionally it was more touching. The pity of allthis is, the man's own consciousness that he is a lion.His vanity is almost as amusing as his recollections arecurious and interesting ; and though the tears were in myeyes several times while he described the blessed time helived with his sweet Phebe, yet at others, I could scarcehelp exclaiming, in the words of his own countryman,heigh, cretur, cretur ! thou hast unco pause o' thyself' !"He ended his narrative with a eulogy of women thatwould have warmed the heart of a stone ; and to my uttersurprise, addressed Mr. with, " Out upon ye, bachelors,all ! ye throw away your lives, and your life's happiness!" This last attack of 's seemed too much forMr. ; and, as I turned to him with the tears in myeyes, to desire he would not laugh, which he was doingvery heartily, he said he couldn't stand it any longer, andwent away apparently more amused than edified by 'sappeal.Thursday, 14rth.St. Valentine's day ! I wish all these pretty, goldendays, which, like the flowers in the sun-dial of Linnaeus,were wont so gaily to mark the flight of time, were notbecoming so dim in our calendars ; I wish St. Valentine'sday, and May morning, and Christmas day, and NewYear's day, were not putting off* their holiday suits towear the work-day russet of their drudging fellows ; Iwish we were not making all things, of all sorts, so completelyof a neutral tint. * * * *VOL. 11. 10114 JOURNAL.I wouldn't be in the Reform Parliament of England forten thousand pounds ! , and , the bruiser, andthe bankrupt ! Oh, shame, England, shame ! — PoorEngland !A RHAPSODY.White lady, sitting on the sea.Tell to me, oh, tell to me.How long shall thy reigning be,White lady, sitting on the sea ?Long as the oak with which I'm crown'dShall bear one leaf above the ground.Round which the crawling ivy's graspIts cursed tendrils does not clasp ;Long as one foot remains to standFirm on its own ancestral land ;Or one true man be left to claimThe burden of a noble name ;Long as one Gothic shrine shall riseWith 'scutcheon tomb, and banner'd stall.Or the blest glances of the skies.Through storied casements dimly fall ;Long as one heart shall beat to hearLegends of the old, valiant time ;Long as the sabbath wind shall bearThe music of one haunting chime.White lady, sitting on the sea.Tell to me, oh, tell to me.When shall thy down falling be.White lady, sitting on the sea ?When the vile kennel mud is thrownUpon the ermine of the king,JOURNAL. 115And the old worships are cast downBefore a rabble's triumphing ;When toothless is young againTo do the mischief he but dreams,And little shall make more plainThe good that g-litters through his schemes ,-When the steam engine of the northLeaves maBng essays and wry faces ;And patriot Whigs forget the worthOf pensions, power, pride, and places ;When, on the spot where Burke and PittEarn'd their high immortality,Boxers and bankrupts boldly sit.Then, then shall my down falling be.Monday, 18 th.After breakfast went to rehearsal ; came home and stitchedat my Francoise de Fix head-dress. My father is extremelyunwell ; I scarce think he will be able to getthrough this part to-night. After dinner practised, andread a canto in Dante. It pleases me when I refer toBiagioli's notes, to find that the very lines Alfieri hasnoted, are those under which I have drawn my emphaticpencil marks. At half past five went to the theatre. Theplay was Macbeth, for my benefit : the house was veryfull, and I played very ill. My father was dreadfully exhaustedby his work. I had an interesting discussionwith Mr. about the costume and acting of the witchesin this awful play. I should like to see them acted anddressed a little more like what they should be, than theygenerally are. It has been always customary, — heavenonly knows why, — to make low comedians act the witches,and to dress them like old fish-women. Instead of the116 JOURNAL.wild unearthly appearance which Banquo describes, andwhich belongs to their most terrible and grotesquely poeticalexistence and surroundings, we have three jolly-facedfellows, — whom we are accustomed to laugh at, night afternight, in every farce on the stage, — with as due a proportionof petticoats as any woman, letting alone witch, mightdesire, jocose red faces, peaked hats, and broomsticks,which last addition alone makes their costume differentfrom that of Moll Flagon. If I had the casting of Macbeth,I would give the witches to the first melo-dramatic actorson the stage, — such men as T. P. Cooke, and O. Smith,who understand all that belongs to picturesque devilry toperfection, — and give them such dresses, as, without ceasingto be grotesque, should be a little more fanciful, andless ridiculous than the established livery ; something thatwould accord a little better with the blasted heath, thedark, fungus-grown wood, the desolate, misty hill-side,and the flickering light of the cauldron caveat * *f I would recommend Retsch's etching's of Macbeth to thestudy of all representatives of the witches : there is great sublimityand fearfulness in their figures and attitudes. By the bye,in looking over those unique etchings, (I mean all those he hasexecuted,) the colossal genius of Shakspeare is brought morefully in its vastness to our conviction ; for the genius of the artist,which has fallen no whit behind the first work of one of thefirst men of this age, — sinks in utter impotence under the task ofillustrating Shakspeare. The wonder, and the beauty, and thepity of Faust, are as strong and true in the outlines of Retsch, asin the words of Goethe — the drawings equal the poem ; 'tis thehighest praise they can receive : and it is only when v/e turn fromthese perfect works, to contemplate his outlines of Shakspeare,JOURNAL, 117^IVeduesday, 30th.After breakfast and Mr. came. gave methe words and tune of a bewitching old English ballad.Mr. called and sat some time with me : I like himmainly, — he's very pleasant and clever. That handsomecreature, Mme. , called with her daughter and herson-in-law. Mr. , and dined with us. Afterdinner came to my own room, sang over 's ballad,and amused myself with writing one of my own. At halfpast five took coffee, and off to the theatre. The housewas very full ; play, the Stranger : I didn't play well : I'da gown on that did not fit me, to which species of accidentour art is marvellously subservient ; for a tight arm-holeshall mar the grandest passage in Queen Constance,and too long or too short a skirt keep one's heart cold inthe balcony scene in Juliet. Came home ; supped ;finished marking the Winter's Tale. What a dense foolthat fat old Johnson must have been in matters of poetry !his notes upon Shakspeare make one swear, and his summingup of the Winter's Tale is worthy of a newspapercritic of the present day, — in spirit, I mean, not language ;Dr. Johnson always wrote good English. — What dry, andsapless, and dusty earth his soul must have been made of,that we feel, by the force of comparison, how unutterably beyondall other conceptions are those of Shakspeare. Retsch^setchings, both of Hamlet and Macbeth, are, compared with hisGerman illustrations, failures. Hamlet is the better of the two ;but he seems to have quailed under the other in utter inability —Macbeth himself falls far short of all that he should be made toexpress ; and as to Lady Macbeth, Retsch seems to have thoughthe had better not meddle with her.10*118 JOURNAL.) Wi * >poor fat man ! After all, 'tis even* •^ greater misfortunethan fault to be so in.capal^l'^Aif beauty. ^^ *-^l *VThe Lord's son stood at the clear spring head.The May on the other side,And stretch me your hly hand," he said,For I must mount and ride.And waft me a kiss across the brook,And a curl of your yellow hair ;Come summer or winter, I ne'er shall lookAgain on your eyes so fair.Bring me my coal-black steed, my squire,Bring Fleetwood forth !" he cried ;For three score miles he must not tire,To bear me to my bride.His foot must be swift, though my heart be slow ^He carries me towards my sorrow ;To the Earl's proud daughter I made my vow,And I must wed her tomorrow."The Lord's son stood at the altar stone, —The Earl's proud daughter near :And what is that ring you have gotten on.That you kiss so oft and so dear ?Is it a ring of the yellow gold,Or something more precious and bright ? —Give me that ring in my hand to hold.Or I plight ye no troth to-night."JOURNAL. 119** It is not a ring of the yellow gold,But something more precious and bright ;But never shall hand, save my hand, holdThis ring by day or night." ^■ ^i^/tH '^•-'' /And now I am your wedded wife,Give me the ring, I prays"—You may take my lands, you may take my life,But never this ring away'*They sat at the board ; and the lady brideRed wine in a goblet pour'd ;"And pledge me a health, sweet sir," she cried,«' My husband and my lord."The cup to his lips he had scarcely press'd,When he gasping drew his breath.His head sank down on his heaving breast,And he said, " It is death ! it is death ! —Oh, bury me under the gay green shawBy the brook, 'neath the heathery sod,"Where last her blessed eyes I saw.Where her blessed feet last trod !'*Saturday, 23d*We came home at two. and the horses were waitingfor me : we mounted and rode down to the Hobokenferry, where we crossed. The day was like an early dayin spring in England ; a day when the almond trees wouldall have been in flower, the hawthorn hedges putting forththeir tender green and brown shoots, and the primrosesgemming the mossy roots of the trees by the watercourses.The spring is backwards here a good deal than120 JOURNAL.with us : to be sure, it is sudden compared with ours,as my poetizing friend hath it —Not with slow steps, in smiles, in tears advancing.But with a bound, like Indian girls in dancing."I do not like this : I like to linger over the sweet hourlyand daily fulfilment of hope, which the slow progress ofvegetation in my own dear country allows ene full enjoymentof; to watch the leaf from the bark, the blossomfrom the bud ; the delicate, pale-white, peeping heads ofthe hawthorn, to the fragrant, snowy, delicious flush offlowering ; the downy green clusters of small round budson the apple trees, to the exquisite, rosy-tinted clouds ofsoft blossoms waving against an evening sky. The meltedsnow had made the roads all but impassable ; however,the day was delightfully mild and sunny, and thereforewe did not get chilled by the very temperate rate at whichwe were obliged to proceed. We turned off to look atthe Turtle Pavilion, and pursuing the water's edge, gotup upon a species of high dyke between some marshesthat open into the river. Our path, however, was presentlyintercepted by a stile, and as the horses were notquite of the sort one could have risked a leap with,got off" and endeavoured to lead his charger round theedge of the steep bank, but the brute refused that road,and we were forced to turnback; and after flounderingabout over some of the roughest, worst ground imaginable,we e'en went out of the Hoboken domain at the gatewhere we entered, and pursued that beautiful road overlookingthe Hudson, under that fine range of cliffs's whichare the first idea, as it were, of the Palisades. We tookthe lower road down into the glen below Weehawk. TheJOURNAL. 121sun shone gloriously : the little f\\iry stream that ownsthis narrow glade, was singing and dancing along its beautifuldomain with a sweet, gleesome voice, and a successionof little sparkling breaks and eddies that looked likelaughter. We left the muddy road, and turned our horsesinto the stream, but its bed was very stony and uneven,and we were obliged to turn out of it again. We rodelike very impudent persons up to the house on the height.The house itself is too unsheltered for comfort either insummer or winter, but the view from its site is beautiful,and we had it in perfection to-day. Standing at an elevationof more than a hundred feet from the river, we lookeddown its magnificent, broad, silvery avenue, to the narrows— that rocky gate that opens towards my home.New York lay bright and distinct on the opposite shore,glittering like a heap of toys in the sunny distance ; thewater towards Sandy Hook was studded with sails, andfar up on the other side the river rolled away amongshores that, even in this wintry time of bare trees andbarren earth, looked gay and lovely in the sunshine. Weturned down again, but after crossing the bridge over thepretty brook, we took an upper path to the right, andriding through some leafless, warm, sunny woodlands,joined the road that leads to the Weehawken height, andso returned to New York. On our way, discussing thedifference between religion as felt by men and women,agreed with me, that hardly one man out of fivethousand held any distinct and definite religious belief.He said that religion was a sentiment, and that as regardedall creeds, there was no midway with them ; that entirefaith, or utter disbelief were the only alternatives, for thatdisplacing one jot of any of them made the whole totter,122 JOURNAL.—which last is, in some measure, true, but I do not thinkit is true that religion is only a sentiment. There aremany reasons why women are more religious than men.Our minds are not generally naturally analytical — our educationstend to render them still less so : 'tis seldom in awoman's desire, (because seldom in her capacity,) to investigatethe abstract bearings of any metaphysical subject.Our imaginations are exceedingly sensitive, our subservienceto early impressions, and exterior forms, proportionate; and our habits of thought, little enlarged by experience,observation, or proper culture, render us utterlyincapable of almost any logical train of reasonings. Withus, I think therefore, faith is the only secure hold ; fordisbelief acting upon mental constructions so faulty andweak, would probably engender insanity, or a thousandspecies of vague, wild, and mischievous enthusiasms.* II wonder how long it will be before men beg-in to considerthe rational education of the mothers of their children a matterof some little moment. How much longer are we to lead existencesburdensome to ourselves and useless to others, under theinfluence of every species of ill training* that can be imagined ?How much longer are the physical evils under which our naturelabours, to be increased by effeminate, slothful, careless, unwholesomehabits ? How much longer are our minds, naturally weakenedby the action of a highly sensitive nervous construction, tobe abandoned, or rather devoted to studies the least likely tostrengthen and ennoble them, and render them independent, insome measure, of the infirmities of our bodies? How much longerare our imaginations and feelings to be the only portions of ourspiritual nature on which culture is bestowed ? Surely it weregenerous in those who are our earthly disposers, to do somethingto raise us from the state of half-improvement in which we aresuffered to linger. If our capacities are inferior to those of menJOURNAL. 123believe, too, that women are more religious than men,because they have warmer and deeper affections. Thereis nothing surely on earth that can satisfy and utterly fulfilthe capacity for loving which exists in every woman'snature. Even when her situation in life is such as tocall forth and constantly keep in exercise the best affectionsof her heart, as a wife, and a mother, it still seemsto me as if more would be wanting to fill the measure ofyearning tenderness, which, like an eternal fountain,gushes up in every woman's heart ; therefore I think it isthat we turn, in the plenitude of our affections, to that beliefwhich is a religion of love, and where the broadestchannel is open to receive the devotedness, the clinging,the confiding trustfulness, which are idolatry when spentupon creatures like ourselves, but become a holy worshipwhen offered to heaven.* Nor is it only from the abundanceand overflowing of our affections that we are devout; 'tis not only from our capacity of loving, but alsofrom our capacity of suffering that our piety springs.Woman's physical existence, compared with that of man,is one of incessant endurance. This in itself begets anecessity for patience, a seeking after strength, a holdingwhich I believe, as much as I believe our bodies to be inferiorto theirs in strength, swiftness, and endurance, — let us not beoverwhelmed with all the additional shackles that foolish and vainbringing up can add ; let us at least be made as strong in bodyand as wise in mind as we can, instead of being devoted to spiritual,mental, and physical weakness, far beyond that which weinherit from nature.Was it not Mme. de Sevign6 who said with such truth andbitter satire, " Mme. de s'est jet^e dans la devotion, c'est adire elle a change dormant."JOURNAL.forth of the hands for support ; thus, the fragile frame, theloving heart, and the ignorant mind, are in us sources ofreligious faith. But it often happens that those affections,so strong, so deep, so making up the sum and substanceof female existence, instead of being happily employed, asI have supposed above, are converted into springs of acutesuffering. These wells of feeling hidden in the soul,upon whose surface the slightest smile of affection fallslike sunlight, but whose very depths are stirred by thebreath of unkindness, are too often unvisited by the kindlyinfluence of kindred sympathies, and go wearing theirown channels deeper, in silence and in secrecy, and ininfinite bitterness, — undermining health, happiness, thejoy of life, and making existence one succession of bur-endearingdays, and toilsome, aching, heavy hours. Itis in this species of Wight, which falls upon many women,that any religious faith becomes a refuge and a consolation,more especially that merciful and compassionatefaith whose words are, " Come unto me, all ye that labourand are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." Tothat rest betakes itself the wearied spirit, the woundedheart ; and it becomes a blessing beyond all other blessings;a source of patience, of fortitude, of hope, of strength,of endurance ; a shelter in the scorching land, — a springof water in the wilderness. * * * *Saturday, April Isti.At a quarter after four drove down to the boat. waswaiting to see us off, and presently made his ap-journal.125appearance to see us on. Owing to the yesterday's boat nothaving sailed, it was crowded to-day, and freighted mostheavily, so as to draw an unusual quantity of water, andproceed at a much slower rate than common. At a fewminutes after five the huge brazen bell on deck began totoll ; the mingled crowd jostled, and pushed, and rolledabout; the loiterers on shore rushed on board ; the on board rushed on shore ; D and Itook a quiet, sunny stand away from all the confusion,and watched, from our floating palace. New York glideaway like a glittering dream from before us. A floatingpalace indeed it was, in size and in magnificence : I neversaw anything to compare with the beauty, and comfort,and largeness of all its accommodations. Our Scotchsteam-boat, the United Kingdom, is a cockboat to it, andeven the splendid Hudson boat, the North America, is farinferior to it in every respect, except, I believe, swiftness,but then these Boston boats have sometimes very heavysea to go through.* Besides the ladies' cabin, this boat isThe cleanliness of the table furniture, and the neatness of theattendants, is one of the most essential comforts of these boats.The linen, and knives and forks, etc., at our meals, were remarkablyclean and bright. On more than one occasion, too, beingrather late for the public breakfast, we have been indulged witha small separate table in the quiet recess at the end of the greateating and sleeping cabin, — a favour only to be appreciated bypeople unaccustomed to any ordinaries, much less steam-boat din-vegetableswith sometimes near two hundred guests. On boardall the other boats, the only alternative is to have what you eatbrought to you into the ladies' cabin. To those who have oncebreathed the atmosphere of a «• ladies' cabin," it will be difficultto imagine how such an alternative should not be productive ofan amazing saving of the boat's provisions.VOL. II. 11126 JOURNAL.furnished with half a dozen state-rooms, taken from theupper deck, — an inexpressible luxury. Into one of theseour night-bags were conveyed, and we returned to thedeck to watch the sun down. A strong and piercing windblew over the waters, and almost cut me in half as I stoodwatching the shores, which I did not wish to lose bygoing in. However, I might have done so, and lost butlittle ; for after passing Hell-gate, where the rocks in theriver and the banks have rather a picturesque appearance,there was neither form nor comeliness in the flat, wearisomeland to either side ; and the only objects which detainedme on deck were the bright blue waters themselves,all shining in the sunset, and those lovely little boats, withone mast and two glittering sails, scudding past us likefairy craft upon the burnished waves. At about eight wewere summoned down to tea, which was a compoundmeal of tea and supper. The company was so numerousthat they were obliged to lay the table twice. We waitedtill the crowd had devoured their feed, and had ours incomparative peace and quiet. An excellent man, by namean officer in the American army, made himselfknown to me, considering, as he afterwards told me, hiscommission to be a sufficient right of introduction to anybody.He was a native of Boston, and was returning toit,after an absence oi fourteen years. * *Sunday, 14tli.The morning was beautifully bright and clear. Whiledressing heard the breakfast bell, and received sundry in-JOURNAL. 127citations to descend and eat ; however, I declined leavingmy cabin until I had done dressing, which I achieved verycomfortably at leisure, during which time the ship weatheredPoint Judith, where the Atlantic comes in to theshore between the termination of Long Island and thesouthern extremity of Rhode Island. The water is generallyrough here, and I had been prophesied an agreeablelittle fit of sea sickness ; but no such matter, — we passedit very smoothly, and presently stopped at Newport, onRhode Island, to leave and take up passengers. Thewind was keen and bracing; the morning beautifullybright and sunny ; the blue waters, all curled and criedunder the arrow-like wind, broke into a thousand sapphireridges tipped with silver foam, that drove away in sparklingshowers before the bitter breath of the north. Weentered Providence river in a few moments, and steamedalong between Rhode Island and the main land, until wereached Providence, a town on the shore of Rhode Island,where we were to leave the boat, and pursue our route bycoach to Boston. I walked on deck with Captainfor an hour after breakfast, breasting the wind, which almostdrove us back each time we turned up the decktowards the prow. After my walk went in, righted myhair, which the wind had dressed a la frantic, and cameand sat in the sun with Brewster's book, — which I likemainly, — till we reached Providence. The boat was soheavily laden that she drew an enormous quantity of water,and was fairly aground once, as we were nearing thepier. When the crowd of passengers had ebbed away,and we had seen them pack themselves into their stagesand drive off, we adjourned to our exclusive extra, which,to our great sorrow, could not take all our luggage after128 JOURNAL.all. The distance from Providence to Boston is fortymiles ; but we were six hours and a half doing it over anexcellent road. The weather was beautiful, but the countrystill sad and wintry-looking. The spring is backwardshere than in New York by full three weeks : thetrees were all bare and leafless, except the withered foliageof the black oaks, and the face of the country, withits monotonous rises, and brooks flowing through flatfields, reminded me of parts of Cumberland. Every nowand then, however, we came to a little lakelet, or, as theycall them here, pond, of the holiest, deepest dark-bluewater, sparkling like a magic sapphire, against smooth,bright, golden, sandy shores, and screened by vividthickets of cedar bushes. They were like little bits offairy-land, and relieved the wearisomeness of the road.As we approached Boston, the country assumed a morecultivated aspect, — the houses in the road-side villageswere remarkably neat, and pretty, and cottage-like, — theland was well farmed ; and the careful cultivation, andstone walls, which perform the part of hedges here, togetherwith the bleak look of the distances on each side,made me think of Scotland. We entered Boston througha long road with houses on each side, making one fancyone's self in the town long before one reaches it. We didnot arrive until half past six. Went to my own room anddressed for dinner. When I came to the drawing-room,found the 's : dear was half crazy at seeing usagain. After dinner came to my room with her, andrighted all my clothes, and established myself; after teareturned to the same work, and at about half past ten cameto bed. Here we are in a new place ! — how desolate andcheerless this constant changing of homes is : the scrip-journal.129ture saith, " There is no rest to the wicked ;" and truly,I never felt so convinced of my own wickedness as I havedone since I have been in this country.Monday, 15th*Went over to the theatre to rehearse Fazio. Mr.however, met us at the door, and assured me there wasno necessity for my doing so till tomorrow. cameearly to see me, and stayed all the morning. Mr.called this morning, — I was quite glad to see him, — andMrs. , whom I thought beautiful. Tried to finishletter to , but was interrupted about a dozen times.At about half past four the horses came to the door. Theafternoon was lovely, and the roads remarkably good : Ihad a fine, handsome, spirited horse, who pulled my handsto pieces for want of being properly curbed. We rode outto Cambridge, the University of Massachusetts, about threemiles distant from Boston. The village round it, with itswhite cottages, and meeting roads, and the green lawnsand trees round the college, reminded me of England. Werode on to a place called Mount Auburn, a burial-groundwhich the Bostonians take great pride in, and which isone of the lions of the place. The entrance is a fine,solid, granite gateway, in a species of Egyptian style,with this inscription engraved over it: "Then shall thedust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall returnunto God, who gave it"* The whole place is atMy astonishment was unfeigned, when, upon an after inspection,I found this very lofty gateway was constructed of paintedwood. What, a cheat, a sham tiling at the threshold of the grave !surely, thereabouts pretences should have an end. Sham *130 JOURNAL.present in an unfinished state, but its capabilities are very igreat, and, as far as it has progressed, they have beentaken every advantage of. The enclosure is of considerable extent, — about one hundred acres, — and contains |several high hills and deep ravines, in the bottom of vv^hich !are dark, still, melancholy-looking meres. The whole is \cut, with much skill and good taste, by roads for carriages, jand small, narrow footpaths. The various avenues are idistinguished by the names of trees, as, Linden walk, IPine walk, Beech walk ; and already two or three white |monuments are seen glimmering palely through the woods, 'reminding one of the solemn use to which this ground is Iconsecrated, which, for its beauty, might seem a pleasure-gardeninstead of a place of graves. Mr. delighted ;me very much : he told me he was looking for a plot of ,earth in this cemetery which he intended to dedicate to Ipoor English people, who might come out here, and die jwithout the means of being decently laid to rest. We |looked, with this view, at a patch of ground on the slope 'of a high hill, well shadowed over with trees, and de ;scending to a great depth to a dark pond, shining in the |hollow like an emerald. 'Twas sad and touching to gaze |at that earth, with the .thought that amidst strangers, and ;in a strange land, the pity of a fellow-countryman shouldhere allot to his brethren a grave in the quiet and solemnbeauty of this hallowed ground. Our time was limited ;munificence, too, is sad ; an iron railing, or a wooden paling, would, ito my mind, have been a thousand times better than this mock igranite. Let vis hope that this is merely a temporary entrance, :there is real granite enough to be had at Quincy ; and if the jliving can't afford it, why the dead will never miss it, — and anythingwould be better than ^n imitation gateway.JOURNAL. 131SO, after lingering for a short space along the narrow pathwaysthat wind among the dwellings of the dead, we rodehome. We reached Boston at a quarter to seven. Myfather and D were already gone to the theatre. Idressed, and went oyer myself immediately. The playwas begun : the house was not very full. The managershave committed the greatest piece of mismanagement imaginable,— they advertise my father alone in Hamlet tonight,and instead of making me play alone tomorrownight, and so securing our attraction singly before we acttogether, we are both to act tomorrow in Fazio, whichcircumstance, of course, kept the house thin to-night. Myfather's Hamlet is very beautiful. 'Tis curious, that whenI see him act I have none of the absolute feeling of contemptfor the profession that I have while acting myself.What he does appears indeed like the work of an artist ;and though I always lament that he loves it as he does,and has devoted so much care and labour to it as he has,yet I certainly respect acting more while I am seeing himact, than at any other time.* Yet surely, after all, actingThe spirit of man of its own dignity ennobles whatever itdevotes itself to. The most trivial actions may become almostheroical from the motive which prompts them, and the most absurdceremonies of superstition sincerely practised, may excitepity, but neither contempt nor ridicule. If such a thing as anenthusiastic shoemaker were to be met with, there is no doubtbut his feeling of his craft would elevate it into something approximatingan art, and his work would bear witness to his venerationfor it. At the time when the stage was in its highest perfection,its members had all a great love and admiration for theirprofession ; many of them were men of education and mental accomplishment,and brought to bear upon their labour all the intellectualstores which they possessed. They respected their132 JOURNAL. - ;is nonsense, and as I sit here opposite the church-yard, it '^seems to me strange to think that when I come down into ithat darkness, I shall have eaten bread during my life, iearned by such means. The Ophelia was perfectly beautiful: I think I scarcely ever saw a more faultless piece of jmortality in point of outward loveliness. The eyes and !brow of an angel, serene and calm, yet bright and pierceing ; a mouth chiselled like a Grecian piece of sculpture, !with an expression of infinite refinement ; fair round arms jand hands, a beautifully moulded foot, and a figure that !seemed to me perfectly proportioned. It did not perhaps :convey to me the idea of such absolute loveliness as 's ]figure did; but altogether I think I never saw a fairer ;woman — it was delightful to look at her.* The audience !are, upon the whole, cold — very still and attentive, how ;ever, and when they do warm it is certainly very effectown work, and it was respectable ; they thought acting capable \of elevation, of refinement, of utility, and their faith in it invested lit with dignity. Of this class were all my father's family. One >reason why the stage and everything belonging to it, has fallento so low an ebb now, is because actors have ceased to care fortheir profession themselves, — they are no longer artists— acting ,is no longer an art. !Besides the advantage of possessing the very prettiest col |lection of actresses I ever saw, the theatre at Boston has decideely the best company I have played with any where out of iLondon. Some of the old leaven alluded to in the last note |exists amongst the ladies and gentlemen of the Trent theatre : ithey do not seem to despise their work, and it is, generally \speaking, well done therefore. Our pieces were all remarkably jwell got up there ; and the green-room is both respectable and jagreeableJOURNAL. 133tully, for they shout and hurrah like mad. * *"Wednesday, ITtli*Somebody very civilly has sent me that beautiful book,Roger's Italy : it set me wild again with my old frenzyfor the south of Europe. Wrote to ; after dinnerpractised for an hour ; at half past five off to the theatre.The house was crammed : the play, the Stranger. It isquite comical to see the people in the morning at the boxoffice : our window is opposite to it, and 'lis a matter ofthe greatest amusement to me to watch them. They collectin crowds for upwards of an hour before the doorsopen, and when the bolts are withdrawn, there is a yellingand shouting as though the town were on fire. In theyrush, thumping and pummelling one another, and not onecomes out without rubbing his head, or his back, or showinga piteous rent in his clothes. I was surprised to seemen of a very low order pressing foremost to obtain boxes,but I find that they sell them again at an enormous increaseto others who have not been able to obtain any ;and the better to carry on their traffic, these worthiessmear their clothes with molasses, and sugar, &;c., inorder to prevent any person of more decent appearance,or whose clothes are worth a cent, from coming near thebox office : this is ingenious, and deserves a reward. Ourother window looks out upon a large church-yard, in themidst of which stands a cenotaph, erected by Franklin inhonour of his father. Between the view of the play-house,and the view of the burial-ground, my contemplations aresl34 JOURNAL.curiously tinged. This house, (the Treraont,) is admirablyquiet and comfortable.Thursday, 18tli.After breakfast went to rehearsal, — the School for Scandal,however, half the people weren't there, so the rehearsalwas nought. Came home, and at half past eleven rodeout ; the day was beautifully bright : we rode to a beautifullittle mere, called Jamaica Pond, through some countryvery like Scotland. We turned from the road into agentleman's estate, and rode up a green rise into an enclosedfield, which commanded an extensive view of thecountry below. But the spring tarries still, and thoughher smile is in the sky, the trees are leafless, and blossomless,and wintry-looking still. We came in by a prettyvillage called Roxbury, about two miles and a half distantfrom Boston : here we stopped to get a nosegay for myLady Teazle, at a very pretty green-house, kept by a mechanic,who has devoted his leisure hours to the pleasurableand profitable pursuits of gardening. We returned totown at about half past two. I ran into the drawing-room,and found sitting with my father. * *Saturday, Soli.Walked up to the State House. The day was anythingbut agreeable ; — a tremendous high wind, (easterly ofcourse, — 'tis the only wind they have in Boston,) and aburning sun tempered only by clouds of dust, in which,JOURNAL. 135every two minutes, the whole world, — at least, as muchas we could see of it, — was shrouded. On entering thehall of the State House we confronted Chantry's statue ofWashington, which stands in a recess immediately oppositethe entrance. I saw that, how many years ago, inhis study at Publico ! We proceeded to mount into thecupola, whence a very extensive view is obtained of thecity and its surroundings, — and a cruel height it was ! Ibegan it at full speed, like a wise woman, but before Igot to the top was so out of breath, that I could hardlybreathe at all : defend me from such altitudes ! — and afterall the day was hazy and not favourable for our purpose ;the wind came in. through the windows of the lanthornlike a tornado ; and as my father observed, after the exertionof ascending, 'twas the very best place in the worldfor catching one's death of cold. We came down asquickly as we could. At about twelve we rode to MountAuburn. The few days of sunshine since we were lastthere, have clothed the whole earth with delicate purpleand white blossoms, a little resembling the wood anemone,but growing close to the soil, and making one think ofviolets with their pale purple colour : they have no fragrancewhatever. We afterwards rode on to a beautifullittle lake called Fresh Pond, along whose margin we followeda pretty woody path : a high bank covered withblack-looking pines rose immediately on our right, and onour left the clear waters of the rippling lake come dancingto and fro along the pebbly shore, which shone bright andgolden under their crystal folds. We stood with our hatsoff to receive the soft wind upon our brows, and to listento the chiming of the water upon the beach, the most delicioussound in all nature's orchestra. We then turned136 JOURNAL.back and rode home. By the bye, on our way out toMount Auburn we took the Charleston road, and rodeover Bunker Hill. They have begun a monument uponthe spot where General Warren was killed, to commemoratethe event. I felt strangely as I rode over that ground.Mr. was the only American of our party, but thoughin the minority, he had rather the best of it. And this iswhere so much English blood was shed, thought I ; forafter all 'twas all English blood, — do as they can, they cannever get rid of their stock : and deeply as oppression andresistance have dug the grave in which all kindred feelingseems for a time to have been buried, — 'tis only, I believeand trust, for a time, — buried in blood and fierce warfare,to spring up again in peace and mutual respect. Englandand America ought not to be enemies, 'tis unnatural whilethe same language is spoken in both lands. Until Americanshave found a tongue for themselves, they must stillbe the children of old England, for they speak the wordsher children speak by the fireside of her homes. Oh,England ! noble, noble land ! They may be proud ofmany things, these inheritors of a new world, but ofnothing more than that they are descended from Englishmen; that their fathers once trod the soil whereon hasgrown more goodness, more greatness, more beauty, andmore truth, than on any other earth under God's sun.* ^ * * ** * * * # *At half past four we went to dine with the 's. Theirhouse is very pretty and comfortable. When first wewent in we were shown into a couple of drawing-rooms,in which there were beautiful marble copies of one or twoof the famous statues. One of Canova's dancing girls,JOURNAL. 137the glorious Diana, a reclining figure of Cleopatra, — anexquisite thing, — the crouching Venus, and the lovelyantique Cupid and Psyche. * * * *'Tis strange that feelings should pass from our hearts andminds as clouds pass from the face of heaven, as thoughthey had never been there ; — yet not so, after all ; theydo not pass so trackless, — they do leave faint shadowsbehind ; they leave a darker colour upon the face of allexistence : sometimes they leave a sad conviction ofwasted capabilities, and time, precious time, expended invain. Yet not in vain : even though our feelings change,pass, perhaps to our own consciousness — cease altogether,— 'tis not in vain — life is going on — experience andsolemn wisdom may come with the coming time ; and existenceis, after all, but a series of experiments upon ourspiritual nature. Our trials vary with our years ; andthough we deem, (too often rightly,) that suffering anddisappointment are but barren thorns, whereon growsneither fruit nor flower, 'tis our sin that they are so, forthey are designed to bear an excellent harvest. " Sweetare the uses of adversity ;" so he has said wh(> knew allthings, and so indeed to the wise they are.Tuesday, April 30th."We rode down to the " Chelsea Ferry," and crossedover the Charles river, where the shore opposite Bostonbears the name of that refuge for damaged marine stores.The breath of the sea was delicious, as we crossed thewater in one of the steam-boats constantly plying to andVOL. II. 12138 JOURNAL.fro, and on the other side, as we rode towards the beach,it came greeting us delightfully from the wide waters.When we started from Boston, the weather was intenselyhot, and the day promised to be like the day before yesterday,a small specimen of the dog-days. We had abouta five miles' ride through some country that reminded meof Scotland : now and then the dreary landscape was relievedby the golden branches of a willow tree, and thedelicate, pale peach blossoms, and tiny white buds in theapple orchards, peeping over some stone dyke, like aglance over the wall from the merry, laughing spring. Sowe reached Chelsea beach, a curving, flat, sandy shore,forming one side of a small bay which runs up betweenthis land and a rocky peninsula that stretches far out intothe ocean, called Galant. At the extremity of the basinlay glimmering a white, sunny town, by name Lynn; —'lis quite absurd the starts and stares which the familiarnames cause one for ever to make here. This small bayis beautifully smooth and peaceful, the shore is a shelvingreach of hard, fine sand, nearly two miles long, and thewild waves are warded off in their violence from it by therocky barrier of Galant. How happy I was to see thebeautiful sea once more, — to be once more galloping overthe golden sands, — to be once more wondering at andworshipping the grandeur and loveliness of this greatest ofGod's marvellous works. How I do love the sea ! — myvery soul seems to gather energy, and life, and light, fromits power, its vastness, its bold, bright beauty, its fresh,invigorating airs, its glorious, triumphant, rushing sound.The thin, thin rippling waves came like silver leavesspreading themselves over the glittering sand with just alittle, sparkling, pearly edge, like the cream of a brightJOURNAL. 139glass of champagne. Close along the shore the waterwas of that pale, transparent green colour, that blendsso delicately with the horizon, sometimes, at sunset ; butout beyond, toward the great deep, it wore that sereneand holiest blue that surrounds one in mid-ocean, whenthe earth is nearly as far below as the heaven seemshigh above us. For a short time my spirits seemed likeuncared birds ; I rejoiced with all ray might, — I couldhave shouted aloud for delight ; I galloped far along thesand, as close in to the water's restless edge as my horsewould bear to go. But the excitement died away, andthen came vividly back the time when last I stood uponthe sea beach at Diamond, and lost myself in listening tothat delicious sound of the chiming waters — I was manyyears younger then. * * * *The end of my ride was sadder than the beginning, for atfirst my senses alone took cognizance of what surroundedme, and afterwards ray soul looked on it, and it grewdark. We rode two miles along the beach, and stoppedat a little wooden hut, where, Mr. told me, sportsmen,who come to shoot plover along the flats by theshore, resort to dress their dinners and refresh themselves.Here we dismounted : lay in the sun on the roof with thefresh, sweet, blessed breath of heaven fanning us. Myhorse thought proper to break his bridle and walk himselfoff through the fields : they followed him with corn,and various inducements ; and I, mean time, randown to the water, collecting interesting relics, muscleshells, quartz, pebbles, and sea-weed ; finally we remountedand returned home. The weather had changed140 JOURNAL.completely and become quite bleak and cold : the variationsof the climate in this place are terrible. As we rodedown a pleasant lane towards the Salem road, we met alarge crowd of country-people busily employed in raisingthe framework of a house. In this part of the country,the poorer class of people build their houses, or rather,the wooden frames of their houses, entirely before theyset them up. When the skeleton is entirely finishedthey call together all their neighbours to assist in the raising,which is an event of much importance, and generallyends in a merry-making. The filling up the outline ofthe habitation, which they do with boards here, is an afterwork : the frame seems to be the material part of the building,and slight enough too, I thought, for protection againstthese bitter east winds. We reached home at about halfpast two. — The play was Much Ado about Nothing ; thehouse was spoilt by the fair which the ladies have beengetting up for the blind here, and which was lighted andopen for inspection previous to tomorrow, when the saleis to take place. ********** 71*LINES.* * * and IAm reading, too, my book of memory :With eyelids clos'd, over the crested foam,And the blue, marbled sea, I seek my home.All present things forgotten, on the shoreOf the romantic Forth I stand once more ;Once more I hear the waves' harmonious strifeOnce more, upon the mountain coast of Fife.JOURNAL., 141I see the chequer'd lights and shadows fall.Upon the sand crumbles the ruin'd wallThat guards no more the desolate demesne,And the deserted mansion. High betweenThe summer clouds the Ochel hills arise ;And fair, far, like a shadow in the skies,Ben Lomond tow'rs aloft in sovereign height.O, Diamond beach ! are thy sands still as bright —Thy waters still as sunny, — thy wild shoreAs lonely and as lovely as of yore ? —Haunts of my happy time ! as wandering backAlong my life, on memory's faithful track,How fair ye seem, — how fair, how dear ye are !Ye need not to be gazed at from afar ;Deceptive distance lends no brighter hue ;Your beauty and your peacefulness were true.Not yours the charms from which we wearied stray.And own them only when they're far away.O, be ye blest for all the happinessWhich I have known in your wild loneliness.Old sea, whose voice yet chimes upon my ear, —Old paths, whose every winding step was dear, —Dark, rocky promontories, — echoing caves,Worn hollow by the white feet of the waves, —Blue, lake-like waters, — legend-haunted isle,Over ye all, bright be the summer's smile ;And gently fall the winter on your breast,Haunts of my youth, my memory's place of rest."Wednesday, May 1st.Mr. came in the morning, and I settled to call downat eleven for Mrs. to go to the fair. We drove toFaneuil Hall, a building opposite the market, which wasappropriated to the uses of the fair ; but the crowd was so12*142 .JOURNAL.dense round the steps, that we found it impossible to approachthem, and wisely gave up the attempt, determiningto take our drive and then come back and try our laterfortune. We drove down to the Chelsea beach. Theday was bleak and cold, though bright, with a cutting eastwind. After taking a good race along the bright, creamingedge, we returned to the carriage, and drove into townagain to the fair, which we managed at last to enter. Thewhole thing was crowd, crush, and confusion, to my bewilderedeyes. We got upon a platform behind the stalls,and squeezed our way to Mrs. 's shop, where myfather had desired me to buy him a card-case, which Idid. I found installed in her stall. joined us,and Mr. , who drew me away to his wife's table,where I bought one or two things, and having emptiedray purse, came away. After dinner Mr. came in :he showed us some things he had bought at the fair. Ithought the prices enormous, but the money is well spentin itself, or rather, on its ultimate object, and the immediatereturn is of no import.Thursday, 3d.After breakfast went over to rehearsal ; at half past elevenwent out to ride ; the day was heavenly bright and mild,with a full, soft, sweet spring breeze blowing life andhealth over one. The golden willow trees were all inflower, and the air, as we rode by them, was rich withtheir fragrance. The sky was as glorious as the sky ofParadise ; the whole world was full of loveliness ; and myspirits were in most harmonious tune with all its beauty.We rode along the chiming beach, talking gravely of manyJOURNAL. 143matters, temporal and spiritual, and when we reached thepines, I dismounted, entreated for a scrap of paper, and inthe miserable little parlour of this miserable little mansion,sat down and scribbled some miserable doggrel toease my heart. How beautiful the scene around me was !the bright, boundless sea, smooth as a sapphire, exceptat the restless, rippling edge ; the serene, holy sky lookingdown so earnestly and gently on the flowering earth ;the reviving breeze, dipping like a bird its fresh whigsinto the water, — how beautiful all things did seem to me,how full of witnesses of the great power and goodnessthat created them. Why is it that clouds ever come betweenus and God when there are seasons like this, whenwe seem to sit at his very feet, — when his glory and hismercy seem the atmosphere we are breathing, and ourwhole existence is lifted, for a time into the reality of allwe hope and pray for ? Yet these are but passing emotions: they are not indeed the very spirit of God, — theyare but reflections of his image caught from the gloriousmirror of nature. The sky becomes cloudy, — the seastormy ; the blossoming and the bearing season pass away,and winter comes apace, with withered aspect, and bitter,biting breath ; the face of the universe becomes dark, andthe trust, and faith, and joy of our souls, fade into doubt,disbelief, and sorrow. Infirmity and imperfection pluckus back from our heavenward flight, and the weight ofour mortality drags us down fast, fast again towards theearth. These fair, outward creatures, and the blessedemotions they excite, will pass away, — must — do passaway, — and where is the abiding revelation of God towhich we shall turn ? It lives for ever, in the still burninglight of a strong and steadfast soul ; in the resolute will144 JOURNAL.and high unshaken purpose of good ; in the quiet, cahii,collected might of reason ; in the undying warmth andbrightness of a pure and holy heart. * * ************ *My ride did me ten thousand goods. As we were ridingthrough Mrs. 's farm, a little boy came running tomeet me with his hand full of beautiful flowers, which hestc#d up on tiptoe to thrust into my hand, and withoutwaiting to be thanked, rushed back into the house. I wasdelighted : the flowers were exquisite, and the manner ofthe gift very enchanting. Altogether, I do not knowwhen I have been so completely filled with pleasurableemotions as during this ride. * * *LINES.To the smooth beach, the silver seaComes rippling in a thousand smiles,And back again runs murmuringlj'^,To break around yon distant isles.The sunshine, through a floating veilOf golden clouds, looks o'er the wave.And gilds, far off, the outline pale,Of many a rocky cape and cave.The breath of spring comes balmilyOver the newly blossom'd earth ;The smile of spring, on sea, and sky.Is shedding light, and love, and mirth.I would that thou wert by my side,As underneath the rosy bloomOf flowering orchard trees I ride.And drink their fragrant, fresh perfumeJOURNAL. 145I would that thou wert by my side,To feel this soft air on thy brow,And listen to the chiming tideAlong that smooth shore breaking now ;I would that thou wert here to bless,As I do now. the love and care,That with such wealth of loveliness.Have made life's journeying-land so fair.I have taken several enormous rides round Boston, andam more and more delighted with its environs, which arenow in full flush of blossoming, as sweet, and fresh, andlovely as anything can be. On Saturday rode to the BlueHills, a distance of upwards of twelve miles. The roadsround this place are almost as good as roads in England,and the country altogether reminds me of that dear littleland.* These Blue Hills were, a few years ago, a wilderthe English traveller, around whose heart the love ofcountry and the influences of early association may yet cling.New England appears to me, of all the portions of the UnitedStates which I have visited, most likely to afford gratification ;and the Yankees — properly so called, — the Americans withwhom he will find, and towards whom he will feel most sympathy.They do us the honour to call themselves purely Englishin their origin ; they alone, of the whole population of the UnitedStates, undoubtedly were so ; and in the abundant witness whichtheir whole character, country, and institutions bear to that fact,I feel an additional reason to be proud of England, — of Old England,for these are her children, — this race of men, as a race incomparablysuperior to the other inhabitants of this country. Inconversing with New Englishmen, in spite of any passing, temporarybitterness, any political difference, or painful reference146 JOURNAL.ness of forest, — the favourite resort of rattlesnakes ; butthe trees have been partly cleared, and though 'tis still ato past times of enmity, I have always been struck with the admiring,and in some measure, tender feeling with which England,as the mother country, was named. Nor is it possible to travelthrough the New England states and not perceive, indeed, a spirit,(however modified by different circumstances and institutions,)yet most truly English in its origin. The exterior of the houses,their extreme neatness and cleanliness, — the careful cultivationof the land, — the tasteful and ornamental arrangement of theground immediately surrounding the dwellings, that most Englishof all manifestations — above all, the church spires pointing towardsheaven, from the bosom of every village, — recalled mostforcibly to my mind my own England, and presented images oforder, of industry, of taste, and religious feeling, nowhere so exhibitedin any other part of the Union. I visited Boston severaltimes, and mixed in society there, the tone of which appeared tomefar higher than that of any I found elsewhere. A generaldegree of cultivation exists among its members, which renderstheir intercourse desirable and delightful. Nor is this superiordegree of education confined to Boston ; the zeal and the judgmentwith which it is being propagated throughout that part ofthe country, is a noble national characteristic. A small circumstanceis a good illustration of the advance which knowledge hasmade in these states. Travelling by land from New Haven toBoston, at one of the very smallest places where we stopped tochange horses, I got out of the carriage to reconnoitre our suirounding. The town, (if town it could be called,) did not appearto contain much more than fifty houses : amongst the mostprominent of these, however, was a bookseller's shop. The firstvolumes I took up on the counter, were Spurzheim's volume oneducation, and Dr. Abercrombie's works on the intellectual andmoral faculties. I saw more pictures, more sculptures, and morebooks in private houses in Boston than I have seen any whereelse. I could name more men of marked talent that I met withJOURNAL. 147wild, desolate region, clothed with firs, and cheered bya human habitation, its more savage tenants have disappearedwith the thick coverts in which they nestled, andwe rode to the summit of the highest hill without seeinganything in the shape of Eve's enemy. At the top, bythe bye, we did find some species of building in decayand ruin. Whoever perched himself up there had nomind to be overlooked, and must have been fond of freshair. The view from the mountain is magnificent, yet Ido not believe the elevation to be very extraordinary ; althoughas I looked down it seemed to me as though theworld was stretched at my feet, — and I thought of thetemptation of our Saviour. The various villages, withtheir blossoming orchards, looked like patches of a snow-scene; the river wound, like a silver snake, all round thefields ; the little lakes lay diminished to drops of brightblue light ; and the lesser mountains rose below us likethe waves of a dark sea. The whole was strange andawful to me, — the savage loneliness of the place, its apparentremoteness from the earth and its walkers, filled mewith a solemn sensation. Had I been there alone, I donot know a place where I should sooner have expected tomeet some of the wandering spirits of mid-air, — shapes,and sights, and beings of another order from those of theworld, that lay like a map below me. The mountain itselfis formed of granite, of which large slabs appeared throughthere than any where else. Its charitable and literary institutionsare upon a liberal scale, and enlightened principles. Among theNew Englanders I have seen more honour and reverence of parents,and more witnesses of a high religious faith, than amongany other Americans with whom I have lived and conversed.148 JOURNAL.the turf and brushwood. I looked in vain for what Ifound in such abundance on the Portland hill, the sweet,wild thyme. I thought 1 should find some of it amongthe stony rifts, where it loves to cling, but I was disappointed.Indeed, I met with a much more severe disappointmentthan that. The turf was thickly strewn withclumps of violets, the very same in form and colour asour own sweet wood violet. I stooped in an ecstasy togather them, but found they were totally scentless — merepretences of violets. A violet without fragrance ! a wildone, too ! — the thing's totally unnatural. I flung the littlepurple cheat away in a rage. I have since found cowslipswith the same entire absence of fragrance. The heatand cold of this climate chill or wither everything, andalmost all the flowers which are most common and sweet,growing in the moist soil of England, seem reared withdifficulty here, and lose their great fragrance, their soul,as it were, under the extreme influences of this sky.*There were many wild things growing on this mountain,There are, I believe, no primroses, no wild thyme, and noheather, that grow naturally in this country. I do not rememberto have seen either wild honeysuckle, or clematis, both of whichare so abundant with us. The laurentius, rosemary, southernwood,and monthly roses, all of which are so common in England,growing out of doors all the year round, are kept in hothousesduring the winter, even as far south as Philadelphia. Thecommon garden flowers — roses, pinks, are far less abundant andless fragrant than with us. Sweet peas, and mignonette, arecomparatively scarce ; serena, and laburnum, 1 have never seenat all : but so little care is bestowed upon ornamental gardeningthat I do not know whether this dearth of flowers is the fault ofthe climate, or the consequence of the utter neglect in whichflower-gardens are held here.JOURNAL. 149that for beauty, and delicacy of form and colour, wouldhave found honourable place in our conservatories, butthey had not the slightest perfume, and I took no delightin them. A scentless (lower is a monster ; and though Iacknowledge with due admiration the pale beauty of thatqueen of flowers, the camelia, I never see it in its cold,pearl-like pride of bloom, that it does not strike me likea fine lady, — an artificial creature, fair indeed to behold,but without the very property of a flower — sweetness.Oh, the lilies of the valley, — the primroses, — the violets,the sweet, sweet hawthorn, — the fresh fragrant blushrose, — the purple lilac bloom, — the silver serena, — thefaint breathing hyacinths, — the golden cowslips, of amorning at the close of May in England ! — the fulness ofsweetness that loads the temperate air, as it breathes overthe fresh lawns of that flower-garden ! * *I took another long ride to a quarry ten miles distant fromBoston, whence the granite, which is much used in Bostonfor building, is drawn. I started at six in the morning,and rode about twenty miles before breakfast, whichI think was a piece of virtue bordering upon heroism : tobe sure, I had my reward, for anything so sweet as thewhole world, at about half past six, I never beheld. Thedew was yet fresh upon tree and flower, — the roads wereshady and cool, — the dust had not yet been disturbed ; amild, soft, full breeze blew over the flowery earth, andthe rosy apple blossoms stirred on the rocking boughsagainst the serene and smiling sky. They have in thiscountry neither nightingales, thrushes, linnets, nor blackbirds,— at least, none with the same notes as ours ; butVOL. 11. 131 50 JOURNAL.every now and then, from the snowy cherry trees, therecame a wild snatch of trilling melody, like the clear ringingsong of a canary bird. My companion did not knowthe minstrel by his note, but I never heard a more brilliantand joyful strain, or one more fitted to the brighthour of opening day, — always excepting the lark's, thattriumphant embodied spirit of song.* The blackbird'ssong is to me the sweetest in the world, — sad, and soft,and rich as the sunsets through which it is heard. Thequarry which we visited is an extensive vein of fine, dark-colouredgranite. We dismounted and walked among theworkmen to see them at their various processes. Thisquarry, and one at a short distance, merely supply theblocks of granite, which, being detached from the mainstone, are piled upon cars, and sent down an inclinedplane to the rail-road, by means of a powerful chain, whichacts at once as a support and check, suffering the load toproceed slowly down the declivity, and at the same timesending up from the bottom, upon another track, the emptycar, from which the granite has been unloaded below, asthe buckets of a well are drawn up and down. A veryserious accident occurred here, by the bye, io a party ofgentlemen, among whom Mr. was one. They hadplaced themselves in the empty car at the bottom of theinclined line, and were being slowly drawn up, as thecar loaded with granite descended on the other track. Justas they were approaching the summit, the chain by whichthe car was drawn up, gave way, and it rolled backwardsdown the plane with fearful velocity, and starting off theLacking the nightingale and the lark, I think they want thetwo perfect specimens of natural music.JOURNAL. 151track of the rail-road, pitched down into a ravine full ofrocks and blocks of granite, over which the road passeslike a bridge at the foot of the quarry. I believe one ofthem was killed, and the others most terribly injured.The rough blocks of granite are conveyed by horses, inthese same rail-road cars, to smaller quarries below, wherethey are wrought and shaped for their appointed uses.After looking down from the summit of the granite rockupon the country which lay smiling for many a sunnymile of flowery earth and sparkling sea below, and wanderingabout the works, which are interesting and curious,we remounted and rode home over turfy wood-paths,through tangled thickets of pine, fir, and cedar, whosewarm fragrance was beginning to be drawn forth by themorning sun. We disturbed in our path a poor woodcock,who was sitting with her young : it was a pity tosee the poor thing flutter about her treasure, and go trailinga lite way into the brushwood to entice us awayfrom them. Poor mother ! what a tempest of fear andagony was in your downy breast. I was very sorry wehad frightened her, poor creature. The country we rodethrough was extremely pretty, — so indeed I think all thecountry round Boston is ; the only deficiency is water, —running water, I mean, for there are several beautifulpools in its vicinity, — and turn which way you will, thesilver shield of the sea shining against the horizon, is alovely feature of the landscape. But there are no rivulets,no brooks, no sparkling, singing water-courses to refreshone's senses, as one rides across the fields and throughthe woodlands. called on us on Sunday last. Heis very enchanting : 1 wish it had been my good fortuneto see him oftener ; one of the great men of this country.152 JOURNAL.he would have been a first-rate man all the world over ;and like all first-rate people, there is a simplicity, and atotal want of pretension about him that is very delightful.He gave us a description of Niagara, which did what hecomplained no description of it ever does, — conveyed tousan exact idea of the natural position and circumstanceswhich render these falls so wonderful ; whereas, most describerslaunch forth into vague and intangible rhapsodies,which, after all, convey no express idea of anythingbut water in the abstract, he gave me, by his few simplewords, a more real impression of the stupendous cataract,than all that was ever writ or spoken of waterfalls before,not excepting Byron's Terni. Last Saturday I dined at's, where, for my greater happiness, I sat betweenand . I remember especially two bright thingsuttered, the one by the one, the other by the other ofthese worthies. Mr. , speaking of Knowles' Hunchback,said, " Well, after all, it's no great matter. Theauthor evidently understands stage effect and dramaticsituations, and so on, but as for the writing, it's by nomeans as good as Shakspeare." I looked at the man inamazement, and suggested to him that Shakspeare did notgrow upon every bush. Presently Mr. began a sentenceby assuring me that he was a worshipper of Shakspeare,and ended it by saying that Othello was disgusting,King Lear ludicrous, and Romeo and Juliet childish nonsense; whereat I swallowed half a pint of water, andnearly my tumbler, too, and remained silent, — for whatcould I say ? However, in spite of this, I owe somegratitude, for he brought to see me the other day,whose face is more like that of a good and intellectualman than almost any face I ever saw. The climate ofJOURNAL. 153this place is dreadful : the night before last the weatherwas so warm, that, with my window open, I was obligedto take half the clothes off my bed ; last night was so cold,that, with window shut, and additional covering, I couldscarce get to sleep for the cold. This is terrible, andforms a serious drawback upon the various attractions ofBoston, and to me it has many. The houses are likeEnglish Houses ; the Common is like Constitution Hill ;Beacon street is like a bit of Park lane ; and Summerstreet, now that the chestnut trees are in bloom, is perfectlybeautiful. But for the climate, I should like to livein Boston very much : my stay here has been delightful.It is in itself a lovely place, and the country round it ischarming. The people are intellectual, and have beenmost abundantly good-natured and kind to me. *I have finished 's sermons, which are most excellent.I think he is one of the purest English prose writers nowliving : I revere him greatly, yet I do not think his denialof the Trinity is consistent with the argument by whichhe maintains the truth of the miracles. I have begun theDiary of an Ennuyee again : that book is most enchantingto me, — merely to read the names of the places inwhich one's imagination goes sunning itself for ever, isdelightful.New York.I have seen , who, in his outward man, bears butlittle token of his inward greatness. Miss had preparedme for an exterior over which debility and sickness13*154 JOURNAL.had triumphed now for some years ; but, thought I, theremust be eyes and a brow, and there the spirit will surelybe seen upon its throne. But the eyes were small greyeyes, with an expression which struck me at first as moreakin to shrewdness of judgment, than genius, and theloftier qualities of the mind ; and though the brow andforehead were those of an intellectual person, they hadneither the expanse nor conformation I had imagined.The subject of our conversation, though sufficiently naturalfor him to choose, addressing one of my craft, did notappear to me to be a happy one for his own powers, —perhaps I thought so because I differed from him. Hetalked about the stage and acting in as unreal, and in myopinion, mistaken a manner, as possible. Had he expressedhimself unknowingly about acting, that would nothave surprised me, for he can have no means of judgingof it, not having frequented the theatre for some yearspast; and thoSe who have the best means of forming criticaljudgments upon dramatic subjects, for the most parttalk arrant nonsense about them. Lawrence was the onlyman I ever heard speak about the stage who did so withunderstanding and accuracy. I have heard the very cleverestmen in England talk the greatest stuff imaginableabout actors and acting. But to return to : he saidhe had not thought much upon the subject, but that it appearedto him feasible and highly desirable, to take detachedpassages and scenes from the finest dramaticwriters, and have them well declaimed in comparativelyprivate assemblies, — this as a wholesome substitute forthe stage, of which he said he did not approve ; and hethought this the best method of obtaining the intellectualpleasure and profit to be derived from fine dramatic works,JOURNAL. 155without the illusion and excitement belonging to theatricalexhibitions. My horror was so unutterable at this proposition,and my amazement so extreme that he shouldmake it, that I believe my replies to it, were all but incoherent.What! take one of Shakspeare's plays bit bybit, break it piece-meal, in order to make recitals of it ! —destroy the marvellous unity of one of his magnificentworks, to make patches of declamation ! If the stage isevil put it away, and put away with it those writingswhich properly belong to it, and to nothing else ; but donot take dramatic compositions, things full of present actionand emotion, to turn them into recitations and mutilatedones, too : get other poems to declaim, no matterhow vivid or impassioned in their descriptions, so theirform be not dramatic. It is not to be supposed that theeffect proper and natural to a fine dramatic conception canbe preserved, when the language is merely declaimedwithout the assistance of distance, dress, scenic effects, —all the appertaining that the author has reckoned upon towork out his idea. mentioned the dagger soliloquyin Macbeth, as an instance which would admit of beingexecuted after his idea, saying that that, well read by anyperson in a drawing-room, would have all the effect necessaryor desirable. I remember hearing my aunt Siddonsread the scenes of the witches in Macbeth, and whiledoing so was obliged to cover my eyes, that her velvetgown, modern cap, and spectacles, might not disturb thewild and sublime images that her magnificent voice andrecitation were conjuring up around me. If a man professesto tell you a story, no matter what, say the storyof Romeo and Juliet, and sits in a modern drawing-room,in modern costume, it matters not— Ae is no part of his156 JOURNAL.Story, — you do not connect him with his narrative, — hisappearance in no way clashes with your train of thought,you are not thinking of him, but of the people he istalking about. But if a man in a modern drawing-room,and in modern costume, were to get up and begin recitingthe balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet, I think the casewould be altered. However, never having heard such aproposal before, I had not thought much about it, andonly felt a little stunned at the idea of Shakspeare's historiesbeing broken into fragmentsAmong the many signs of the total decay of dramatic mindand spirit in this age, a frequent piece of criticism passed uponmodern plays appears to me a very conclusive one — " Such aplay is exceedingly full of dramatic effect, but there's no poetryin it." " Such a playwright understands situation and character,but really reading his plays you find no poetry in them." I haveheard this bright comment passed repeatedly upon the best dramaticcomposition of modern times, — The Hunchback, a playwhose immense popularity every where is the surest and truestwarrant of its excellence, — a play containing the most dramaticsituations, the most pathetic and comic effects, and by far, thefinest conception of a female character", of any play since the oldgolden dramatic age. I do not hesitate to say that this is a mostfalse piece of criticism, induced alone by a want of perception ofwhat are the requisites in a dramatic poem, and a total absenceof true dramatic feeling. First, in the ingredients of a fine playcomes the fiction, the invention — to this belong those same muchsneered at stage effects, and theatrical situations; next comes theskilful and powerful delineation of individual character ; lastlycomes the item of a poetical diction. One alone has united thesein their utmost perfection ; for such another the world may lookinvain. But I think the play-goers of Shakspeare's time wouldhave been tolerably satisfied with a most interesting fiction, anda true and vigorous delineation of character ; and let me ask, isJOURNAL. 157Thursday*At a little after ten, came to take us to see thesavages. We drove down, D , my father, he, and I,to their hotel. We found, even at that early hour, theportico, passage, and staircase, thronged with gazers uponthe same errand as ourselves. We made our way, atlength, into the presence-chamber ; a little narrow darkroom, with all the windows shut, crowded with people,come to stare at their fellow wild beasts. Upon a sofasat Black Hawk, a diminutive, shrivelled looking old man,with an appearance of much activity in his shrunk limbs,and a calmness and dignified self-composure in his manner,which, in spite of his want of size and comeliness,was very striking. Next to him sat a young man, theadopted son of his brother the Prophet ; whose height andbreadth, and peculiar gravity of face and deportment werethose of a man nearly forty, whereas he is little more thanhalf that age. The undisturbed seriousness of his countenancewas explained to me by their keeper, thus : hehad, it seems, the day before, indulged rather too freelythere no poetry besides that of words ? — is there no poetry in thefable of a play — none in the faithful portraying of a humanbeing's mind and passions ? As for all pretty speeches, lengthydescriptions, abstract disquisitions, — unless things placed in themouth of characters to whose identity such mental manifestationsbelong,— they are inadmissible in a right good play, and shouldby all means be confined to the pages of those anomalous moderngrowths— plays for the closet. In all our elder dramatists, Shakspearealone excepted, the main quality of a play, the story, is oftendefective to an excess, not only in morality, but in probability andconsistency ; and the same defects exist in the delineation of characterin many of their noblest plays.158 JOURNAL.in the delights of champagne, and was suffering just retributionin the shape of a head-ache, — unjust retribution Ishould say, for in his savage experience, no such sweet,bright poison had ever before been recorded, / guess, bythe after pain it causes. Next to him sat Black Hawk'sson, a noble, big young creature, like a fine Newfoundlandpuppy, with a handsome, scornful face, which yetexhibited more familiarity and good-humoured amusementat what was going on, than any of the rest. His hair waspowdered on the top, and round the ears with a brightvermilion-coloured powder, and knots of scarlet berries orbeads, I don't know which, hung like ear-rings on eachside of his face. A string of glass beads was tied roundhis naked throat; he was wrapped in a large blanket,which completely concealed his form, except his legs andfeet, which were clothed in common leather shoes, and aspecies of deerskin gaiter. He seemed much alive towhat was going on, conversed freely in his own languagewith his neighbour, and laughed once or twice aloud,which rather surprised me, as I had heard so much oftheir immovable gravity. The costume of the otheryoung man was much the same, except that his hair wasnot adorned. Black Hawk himself, kad on a blue clothstout, scarlet leggings, a black silk neck handkerchief, andear-rings. His appearance altogether was not unlike thatof an old French gentleman. Beside him, on a chair, satone of his warriors, wrapped in a blanket, with a cottonhandkerchief whisper round his head. At one of thewindows apart from their companions, with less courtesyin their demeanour, and a great deal of sullen savagenessin their serious aspects, sat the great warrior, and theprophet of the tribe, — the latter is Black Hawk's brother.JOURNAL. 159I cannot express the feeling of commiseration and disgustwhich the whole scene gave me. That men such as ourselves,creatures with like feelings, like perceptions, shouldbe brought as strange animals at a show, to be gazed atthe livelong day by succeeding shoals of gaping folk, struckrae as totally unfitting. The cold dignity of the old chief,and the malignant scowl of the prophet, expressed the indecencyand the irksomeness of such a situation. Then,to look at those two young savages, with their fine muscularproportions, and think of them cooped up the wholehorrible day long, in this hot prison-house full of people,made my heart ache. How they must loathe the sight ofthese narrow walls, and the sound of these strange voices ;how they must sicken for their unmeasured range of wilderness! The gentleman who seemed to have the chargeof them, pressed me to go up and shake hands with them,as every body else in the room did ; but I refused to doso from literal compassion, and unwillingness to add tothe wearisome toil they were made to undergo. As wewere departing, however, they reiterated their entreatiesthat we would go up and shake hands with them, — so Idid. Black Hawk and the young men received our courtesywith great complaisance, but when we went to thegreat warrior and the prophet, they seemed exceedinglyloath to receive our hands, the latter particularly, who had,moreover, one of the very worst expressions I think Iever saw upon a human countenance. I instinctivelywithdrew my hand ; but when my father offered his, thesavage's face relaxed into a smile, and he met his greetingreadily. I wonder what pleased him about my father'sappearance, whether it was his large size or not. 1 had asilver vinaigrette in my pouch, which I gave Black Hawk's160 JOURNAL.SOU, by way of keepsake : it will make a charming presentfor his squaw.Sunday June 30thRose at four, but after looking at my watch, resumed myslumbers until six, when I started up, much dismayed tofind it so late, and presently, having dressed as fast asever I could, we set off for the steam-boat. The morningwas the brightest possible, the glorious waters that meetbefore New York were all like rivers of light blazing withthe reflected radiance of the morning sky. We had nosooner set foot on board the steam-boat, than a crowd ofwell-known faces surrounded us : I was introduced to Mr.and Mr. , the brother of our host at ColdSpring. Mr. came and stood by me for a considerabletime after we started. It is agreeable to talk to him,because he has known and seen so much ; traversed theworld in every direction, and been the friend of byronand Shelly ; a common mind that had enjoyed thesame opportunities, (that's impossible by the bye, nocommon mind would have sought or found them) musthave acquired something from intercourse with such men,and such wide knowledge of things ; but he is an uncommonman, and it is very interesting to hear him talk ofwhat he has seen, and those he has known. ********When we reached West Point, Mr. was wailing withhis boat to convey us over to Cold Spring, and accordinglybidding our various acquaintance and companions farewell,we rowed over out of the course of the river, into a sunnyJOURNAL. 161bay it forms among the hills, to our kinsman's abode.Mr. 's place is a lovely little nook, situated on thesummit of a rise, on the brink of the placid curve of waterformed here by the river, and vi'hich extends itself fromthe main current about a mile into the mountains, endingin a wide marsh. The house, though upon a hill, is solooked down upon, and locked in by the highlands aroundit, that it seems to be at the bottom of a valley. From theverandah of his house, through various frames which hehas had cut with exceeding good judgment among theplantations around the lawn, exquisite glimpses appearedof the mountains, the little bay, the glorious Hudson itself,with the graceful boats, for ever walking its broad waters,their white sails coming through the rocky passes, wherethe river could not be detected, as though they were sailingthrough the vallies of the earth. The day waswarm ; but a fresh breeze stirred the boughs, and cooledthe air. My father, and D seemed overcome withdrowsiness, and lay in the verandah with half-closed eyes,peeping at the dream-like scene around them. I was notinclined to rest, and Mr. having promised to showme some falls at a short distance from the house ; he andhis brother, and I, set forth thither. We passed throughthe iron-works: 'twas Sunday, and everything except abright water-course, laughing and singing as it ran, wasstill. They took me over the works, showed me theiron frames of large mill wheels, the machinery and processof boring the cannon, the model of an iron forcingpump, the casting houses, and all the wonders of theirmanufactory. All mechanical science is very interestingto me, when I have an opportunity of seeing the detail ofit, and comprehending, by illustrations presented to myVOL. II. 14162 JOURNALeyes, the technical terms used by those conversing withme. We left these dark abodes, and their smouldering fires,and strange, powerful-looking instruments, and taking apath at the foot of the mountains, skirted the marsh forsome time, and then struck into the woods, ascending atremendous stony path, at the top of which we threw ourselvesdown to pant, and looked below through a narrowrent in the curtain of leaves around us, on the river, androcks, and mountains, bright with the noon-day splendourof the unclouded sky. After resting here a few moments,we arose and climbed again, through the woods,across a sweet clover field, to the brow of the hill, wherestands the highland school, — a cheerful-looking cottage,with the mountain tops all round, the blessed sky above,and the downward sloping woods and lake-like river below.Passing through the ground surrounding it, wejoined a road skirting a deep ravine, from the bottom ofwhich the waters called to me. I was wild to go down,but my companions would not let me. It was in vainthat I strained over the brink, the trees were so thicklywoven together, and the hollow so deep, that I could seenothing but dark boughs, except every now and then, asthe wind stirred them, the white glimmer of the leapingfoam, as it sprang away with a shout that made my heartdance. We followed the path, which began to decline,and presently a silver thread of gushing water, ran like afrightened child across our way, and flung itself down intothe glen. At length we reached the brown, golden-lookingstream. Mr. was exhorting us to take an upperpath, which he said would bring us to the foot of the fall ;but I was not to be seduced away from the side of therivulet, and insisted upon crossing it then and there,JOURNAL. ,, 163through the water, over moss-capped stones, across fallentrees, which, struck by the lightning, or undermined bythe cold-kissing waters, had choked up the brook withtheir leafy bridges. 80, striving on, as best we might,after wading through the stream two or three times, wereached the end and aim of our journey, the waterfall.We stood on the brink of a pool, about forty feet across,and varying in depth from three to seven or eight feet : itwas perfectly circular, and except on the south, — wherethe waters take their path down the glen, — closed roundwith a wall of rock about thirty feet high, in whose crevicestrees, with their rifted roots, hung fearlessly, clothingthe grey stone with a soft curtain of vivid green. Immediatelyopposite the brook, and at the north of the pool,the water came tumbling over this rocky wall in three distinctstreams, which, striking the projecting ledges of iron-lookingstone, at different angles, met within eight or tenfeet of the pool, and fell in a mingled sheet of foam. Thewater broke over the rocks like a shower of splinteredlight, — the spray sprang up in the sunlight, and fell againall glittering into the dark basin below, that gleamed likea magic jewel set in the mossy earth. On the edge ofthe rocks, beside the waterfall, a tree stood out among itsgreenly-mantled fellows, bare, broken, and scathed to thevery roots with lightning. Its upper half had fallen aslantone branch of the waterfall, and lay black and drippingover the pure white torrent, half falling down its course,half stayed by some rocky ledges on which it rested. AsI gazed up in perfect ecstacy, an uncontrollable desireseized me to clamber up the rocks by the side of the fall,and so reach the top of it. My companions laughed incredulouslyas I expressed my determination to do so, but1 64 JOURNAL.followed where I led, until they became well assured thatI was in earnest. Remonstrance and representation ofimpossibility having been tried in vain, Mr. preparedto guide me, and Mr. , with my bag, parasol, andbonnet in charge, returned to the edge of the pool to watchour progress. Away we went over the ledges of the rocks,with nothing but damp leaves, and slippery roots of treesfor footing. At one moment the slight covering of mouldon which I had placed my foot, crumbled from beneath it,and I swung over the water by a young sapling, whichupheld me well, and by which I recovered footing andbalance. We had now reached the immediate side of thewaterfall, and my guide began ascending the slippery,slanting rocks down which it fell. I followed : in an instantI was soaked through with the spray, — my feetslipped, — I had no hold ; he was up above me — the poolfar below. With my head bowed against the foam andwater, I was feeling where next to tread, when a bit ofrock, that my companion had thought firm, broke beneathhis foot, and came falling down beside me into the stream.I paused, for I was frightened. I looked up for a moment,but was blinded by the water, and could not see wheremy guide was ; I looked down the slanting ledge we hadclimbed, over which the white water was churning angrily.Shall I come down again ?" I cried to Mr. whowas anxiously looking up at our perilous path. " Giveme your hand !" shouted his brother above me. I liftedmy head, and turned towards him, and a dazzling curtainof spray and foam fell over my face. " I cannot see you,"I replied ; *' I cannot go on — I do not know what to do."Give me your hand !" he exclaimed again ; and I, plantingone foot upon a ledge of rock so high as to lift me offJOURNAL. 165the other, held up my arm to him ; but my limbs were sostrained from his height above me, that I had no power tospring or move, either up or down. However, I felt mypresence of mind going; I knew that to go down was impossible,except headlong, — the ascent must therefore bepersevered in. *' Are you steady, quite, quite steady ?"I inquired : he replied, ♦' Yes ;" and holding out his hand,I locked mine in it, and bade him draw me up. But hehad not calculated upon my weight, — my slight appearancehad deceived him, and as I bore upon his arm, weboth of us slipped — I turned as sick as death, but onlycried out, 'recover yourself! recover yourself! — I amsafe !" which I was, upon a rocky rim about three incheswide, with my arm resting on the falling stump of theblasted tree. He did recover his balance, and again holdingout his hand, drew me up beside where he was sitting,on the edge of the rocks, in the water. We pledged eachother in the clear stream, and standing on the top of ourhardly gained eminence, in the midst of the rushing brook,I wrang my handkerchief triumphantly at Mr. ; whichwas rather a comical consideration, as I was literally drippingfrom head to foot, — no Naiad ever looked so thoroughlywatery, or could have taken more delight in aducking. As soon as he saw us safe, he scrambled upthrough the woods to the road, and we doing the same,we presently all met on the dusty highway, where wecongratulated each other on our perseverance and success,,and laughed very exceedingly at my soaked, situation*.U*166 JOURNAL.We determined not to pass through the Highland schoolground, but kept the main road for the advantage of sunand wind, the combined influences of which presentlydried my frock and handkerchief. When I reached home,ran up stairs, and dressed myself for dinner, which wesat down to at about four. After dinner came up to myroom, and slept very profoundly until summoned to coffee,which we drank in the verandah. At about eight o'clockthe sun had left the sky, but his warm mantle lay overthe western clouds, and hung upon the rocks and woodymountain sides ; a gente breeze was stirring the treesround where we sat; and through the thick branches of achestnut tree, as they waved to and fro, the silver disk ofthe full moon looked placidly down upon us. We set outstrolling through the woods : leisurely as foot could fall,we took our way through the twilight paths ; and whenwe reached the Roman Catholic chapel our host is buildingby the river side, the silent, thoughtful mountains werewrapped in deep shadows, and the broad waters shonelike a sheet of silver in the moonlight. We sat down onthe cannon lying on the pebbly shore, and Mr. ranoff to order the boat, which presently came stealing roundover the shining waters. We got in, rowing, andthey put me at the helm ; but owing to Mr. 's misdirections,— who seemed extremely amused at my awkwardness,and took delight in bothering poor bymaking me steer all awry, — we made but little progress,and that rather crab-wise, backing, and sideling, and turn-journal.1 67ing, as though the poor boat had been a politician. *Full of my own contemplations I kept steering round andround, and so we wandered, as purposeless as the nightair over the smooth waters, and beneath the shadows ofthe solemn hills, till near eleven o'clock, when we madefor shore, and slowly turned home. We sat for a lengthof time under the verandah : the gentlemen were discussingthe planetary system as accepted in the civilizedworld ; and Mr. maintained, with sufficient plausibility,that we knew nothing at all about it, in spite ofNewton ; for, that though his theories were borne out byall observation, it did not follow therefore that another theoryequally probable might not exist ; that because he hadfound out one way of accounting for the construction andmotion of the heavenly bodies, there was no other possibleway in which they were constructed and impelled ;because one means is sufficient, he argued, it does notthence follow that 'tis the only sufficient means. Mr.maintained that there was at least strong presumptionin favour of Newton's systems : because they areborne out by our observation of results, and also becausehitherto no other better method of accounting for what weperceive has been discovered. And so they went on, theend of all being, to my mind as usual, utter unsatisfactoryand as the mosquitoes were stinging me, I left themto their discussions, and came to bed.168 JOURNAL.Monday, 1st July*Major — — , and Mr. , came over from West Point ;they were going to prove some cannon, that had not yetbeen fired, and some time passed in the various preparationsfor so doing. At length we were summoned downto the water side, to see the success of the experiment.The cannon lay obliquely, one behind the other, at intervalsof about six yards, along the curve line of the littlebay ; their muzzles pointed to the high gravelly bank,, intowhich they fired. The guns were double loaded withvery heavy charges, and as soon as we were safely placedso as to see and hear they were fired. The sound wasglorious: the first heavy peal, and then echo after echo,as they rimhomhavano among the answering hills, whogrowled aloud at the stern voice waking their still, andnoon-day's deep repose. I pushed out in the boat fromshore to see the thick curtain of smoke, as it rolled its silver,and brassy, and black volumes over the woody mountainsides ; parting in jagged rents as it rose, through whichthe vivid green and blessed sky smiled in their peacefulloneliness. They ended in discharging all the cannon atonce, which made a most glorious row, and kept themountains grumbling with its echoes for some minutesafter the discharge. All the pieces were sound, whichwas highly satisfactory ; as upon each one that flaws inthe firing, Mr. loses the cost of the piece. Just asJOURNAL. 1 69the smoke cleared off from the river, we saw the boatmaking to shore ; and presently, Mr. , his wife, andchildren, and a young Mr. , landed. After introductions,and one or two questions, Mrs. went up to hercottage to put things in order there, Mr. betook himselfto Froissart and the shade, Mr. to his business ;and D , my father, Mr. and myself set forth to thefountain in the glen. The weather was intensely hot : thethermometer above 90° in the shade; it was about half pasttwelve, and we toiled and gasped on like so many Indiansup the steep path. The walk had been so laborious, thatneither D nor my father were willing at first to admitthat the object was a sufficient one. We sat for sometimeby the dark shady pool, and they by degrees recoveredtheir breath and complacency, and began to perceivehow beautiful the place really was. My father said thewaterfall looked like a fine lace veil torn bj the rocks,which pleased me, because it did look like that. Mr.proposed an admirable plan, that of walking down thewater's side, and taking a boat upon the Hudson, and soavoiding the long hot walk home. We called at theHighland School, where the worthy man who keeps it,received us with infinite civility, put us into a deliciouscool room, and gave us some white hermitage and waterto drink, which did us all manner of good.* We thenOf the mental process which the pupils at this HighlandSchool undergo, I can say nothing; being totally unacquaintedwith the system of education adopted there; — but a more advan-170 JOURNAL.descended to the river, after some delay and difficulty, gota boat and rowed home. * * * ********^ LINES.Here be the free gifts of the morning for thee .-Dog roses, with their thorns all strung with pearls.And a large round diamond in each rosy cup ;Their leaves are the colour of Aurora's cheeks.Here is a pale white flower, without a name.At least to me, who am a stranger here:It has a delicate almond smell, and grewAmong thick boughs, and leaves that guarded it.Poor thing, I took it from its shelter for thee.gaseous residence for the cultivation of health, strength, (for physicaleducation,) or the development of all those pious and poeticaltending of the human soul and mind which are fostered and ripenedby the sublime influence of natural beauty and grandeur, cannotbe imagined. The gentlemen at the head of this establishmentare New Englanders. The observations I made upon the superiorintelligence and cultivation of the natives of that part of theUnited States, have been borne out constantly by the fact, thatthere is hardly fine establishment in the states I have visited, inany way connected with education, or the dissemination of information,which is not conducted partially or entirely by New Englanders.JOURNAL. 171Here be some lilac heads of clover; sweet,As the breath of love ; they lay amongst the hay,In a new-mown meadow, glittering in the sun.Here are the leaves of the wild vine, that shineLike g-lass without, and underneath are whiteAnd soft as a swan's breast. There is an oak branch,I gathered it, because it grows at home,And in this strange land look'd as sad, and loving,As a friend's face : when it is wither'd, keep it.They are all heavy with the tears of the night.Who weeps, because she may not meet the sun;And when he comes down from the mountain-tops,Parting the forests with his hands of fire.He drinks her weeping, kissing all the flowersWith passionate love, which makes them look so blushing.Tuesday, stackedup my bag, took a cup of tea, went and gatheredsome flowers, and gave the poor Iamb some heads ofclover, bade a very unwilling farewell to the pretty place,and rowed over to West Point, where Mr. was waitingfor us. We breakfasted at ten, and went down to meetthe boat. Young Mr. came over to see us off, andbrought me some lovely fresh flowers. Mr. , andMr. , were both at the embarking post. When theboat came up, the rush to and from it was without exceptionthe most frightful thing I ever saw. The 's werelanding, and I just spoke to her, as she was borne past bythe throng. Safely on board, I again found myself JOURNAL.rounded by familiar faces ; I took out my work, and Mr.sat down by us. As a nuisance, which all unsought-forcompanionship is, he is quite the most endurable possible,for he has seen such things, and known such people, thatit is greatly worth while to listen to him. Everything hesays of Byron and Shelley confirms my own impressionof them. The scenery of the Hudson immediately beyondWest Point loses much of its sublimity, though no beauty.The river widens and the rugged summits of the Highlandsmelt gradually into a softer and more undulating outline.The richness, and swelling, and falling of the land, remindedme occasionally of England. The yellow grainwas giving diversity and warmth to the green landscape,and the shadowy woods fencing the cornfields, threw overthe whole picture a sheltering peaceful charm. On theleft, we presently began to see the blue outline of theCatskill mountains towering into the hot sky, and lookingmost blessedly cool and dark amid the fervid glowing ofthe noon-day world. Mrs. came on board at one ofthe stopping-places. I was quite glad to see her sweetface, and hear her gentle voice again. Mr. wasgreatly smitten with her calm look of repose, and killingspeech, and took to her vehemently. She told me longstories like fairy tales, of caverns lately discovered in thebosom of these mountains ; of pits black and fathomless,of subterranean lakes in gloomy chambers of the earth, andtumbling waters which fall down in the dark, where menheard, but none had dared to go. How I should like toJOURNAL. 173go there ! Oh who will lead me into the secret parts ofthe earth, who will guide me to the deep hiding place,where spirits are, where the sir of this upper world isnot breathed, and its sounds are unknown, where the lightof the sun is unseen, and the voice of human creaturesunheard — how I should like to go there.At about halfpast three in the afternoon, the sky becamesuddenly and thickly overcast, the awning which shelteredthe upper deck was withdrawn, and every preparation madefor a storm. The pale angry-looking clouds lay heaped likechalk upon a leaden sky, and presently one red lightningdipped down into the woods like a fiery snake falling fromthe heavens. At the same time, a furious gust of windand torrent of rain rushed down the mountain side. Wescuttled down to the lower deck as fast as ever we could,but the storm met us at the bottom of the stairs, and inan instant I was drenched; chairs, tables, every thingwas overturned by the gust, and the boat was runningwith water in every direction. It thundered and lighteneda lille, but the noise of the engine was such that wescarce heard the storm. I stood by the door of the furnace,and dried leisurely, talking the while to Mr. ,who is sun burnt enough to warm one through with alook. During our progress, one of the wheels, or paddlesas they are properly called, took it into its head to knockits case to pieces, and banged the boards about in a strangeway. Accident the second: one of the men, a black,who was employed in tending the fire, got so dreadfullyheated with the intense furnace, that he rushed out of theVOL. 11. 15174 JOURNAL.engine room, and swallowed two or three draughts of coldwater ; the effect was instantaneous, he fell down in violentinternal spasms, and died, poor wretch ! before wearrived at Albany. We reached that town at about halfpast five in the afternoon, and went to a house the 'srecommended to us. At about seven they gave us dinner,and immediately after I came up to my own room. Iwas so exhausted with fatigue and a violent cold andcough, that I literally fell down on the floor, and slept tilldark. As we came up the river we passed Dr. 'splace, Hyde Park, which has the reputation of being thebest kept private estate in America ; the situation of thehouse, on the edge of a ridge, appeared to me, from theriver, rather too much exposed.Saturday 6thMy father had settled to go to the Cohors Falls. *^ 5}r-fr ^ "i^ v|f -^When we were in the steamboat, going up to Troy,*Troy ! and that Troy has a mount Ida ! ! The names of placesin this country are truly astonishing. Troy, Syracuse, and Romeare pretty well in this way, but the state of New York alone, I believe,boasts of a Mantis, a Homer, a Virgil, an Ovid, a Cicero,and a Socrates, whose second appearance in this world is in all thenominal. 4t6put a letter into my hands, which he told me was written bythe mother of Allegra, Byron's child. The letter was remarkableonly for more straightforwardness and concisenessthan is usual in women's letters. I do not knowwhether gave it me to read on that account alone,or because it contained allusions to wild and interestingadventures of his own ; perhaps there was a mingling ofmotives. There never was, by the bye, a homogeneousmotive, as Brewster would say, in the human breast.We reached Troy in about twenty minutes, and walkedup into the town to procure some species of vehicle forour progress to the Falls. There was none ready ; andwhile one was being procured, a man who was standingnear us very civilly invited us to come into his shop andsit down, which we did very readily. The-situation ofthe warehouses on the side near the river, of the mainstreet of Troy, is exceedingly pretty. They are, for themost part, large long rooms, opening to the street at theone end, and on the other looking down from a considerableheight upon the Hudson. The shop we were in wasa china store, and the nice cold crockery ware made onecool to look at it ; the weather was roasting.Mr. left us to gather information, and kindlybrought me back word that the population of Troy wasfive hundred, or five thousand, I really forget which, andglories of flaming red bricks, new boards and white paint. DidPythagoras admit of men becoming towns as well as beasts? — Iforget.176 JOTTRNAt.for my Journal it don't much matter ; and that the storekeeperassured him the Trojans were an exceedinglyrefined and literary set of folks, and that the society, inpoint of these two advantages, was no whit behind Boston— there's for Boston IWe obtained a coach, and crossed a ferry such asI had never seen before, worked by horses. Poorwretches ! they reminded me of 's steeds Martyreet Souffrance. Mr. observed that they led the lifeof the majority, and so they dc Labour and sufferingthat custom renders endurable, and that ends by grindingdown every faculty of mind or soul: we're a blessedpack of drudges, and deserve ta be just what we are.After crossing the ferry, we drove about five miles throughsome gentles. smiling lands that made one feel very charitable.The Cohors is, I believe, a Dutch name for ahill just above a turn in the Mohawk, where after someshallow rapid hasty running over a rocky bed, the riverflings itself down over a broad barrier, between thirtyand forty feet high, with the most delightful gushingsound in the world. The foam looked very nice and soft,and thick, and cold : I longed to be in the middle of it.********************After wandering about for some time, we sat ourselvesdown on a high grassy knoll just above the Falls. *JOURNAL. 177We returned in time, as we flattered ourselves, to meetthe steamboat which leaves Troy for Albany at four ;but just as we were crossing the ferry, the steamer ranpast us, leaving us with eyes and mouths wide open,very much bothered as to how we were to get down toAlbany. D proposed a row boat, and the sense ofthe company seemed to agree thereto ; but upon drivingto the inn where we hired our carriage, and inquiring forsuch a conveyance, we were assured that there was nosuch thing to be had : whereupon, my father, good easyman, believed there was not, and got into the coach again.Mr. , however, had absconded, and remained goneso long, that I began to think he had perhaps started toswim down the river, when he presently appeared, informingus that he had gotten a boat for us. We jumpedreadily out of the coach, and though my father had actuallymade a bargain for the hire of it, to convey us toAlbany, with the innkeeper ; and moreover given him themoney, the righteous man refunded the dollars, whichFalstaff knows is a displeasing thing to do : "I hate thatpaying back !" Our row back was delightful : the eveningwas calm and lovely beyond description, the sun hadlost his fierceness, and the warm air elapsed the freshwoods tenderly, the waters were unbroken as a mirror,the very spirit of love and peace possessed the world, theeffect of all which was to send me into a very soundsleep. * * * * * *15*178 JOURNAL.We reached Albany in very good time for dinner. Mr.dined with us : what a savage he is in some respects.He's a curious being; a description of him wouldpuzzle any one who had never seen him. A man withthe proportions of a giant for strength and agility, taller,straighter, and broader than most men ; yet with the mostlistless indolent carelessness of gait, and an uncertainwandering way of dropping his feet to the ground, as ifhe didn't know where he was going, and didn't muchwish to go any where. His face is as dark as a moor's,with a wild strange look about the eyes and forehead,and a mark like a scar upon his cheek ; his whole appearancegiving one an idea of toil, hardship, peril andwild adventure. The expression of his mouth is remarkablymild and sweet, and his voice is extremely low andgentle. His hands are as brown as a labourer's; henever profanes them with gloves, but wears two strangemagical looking rings ; — one of them, which he showedme, is made of elephant's hair. * * * *Occasionally, in his horror of one class of prejudices, heembraces the opposite ones : perhaps the extreme of anyevil, in this world of imperfect means, can, only be effectuallyresisted by its reverse extreme.JOURNAL. 179Monday, 8thAfter breakfast went to rehearsal. Mr. came withus. The actors were one and all reading their parts, thelady who played Charlotte was the only exception, shewas perfect. As I sat on the stage, between my scenes,a fat, good-tempered, rosy, bead-eyed, wet-haired, looking man accosted me ; and having ascertainedthat I was myself, proceeded to accuse me of having,in Mrs. Haller, pronounced the word " industry"with the accent on the middle syllable, as, " industry ;"adding, that he had already quoted my authority to severalpeople for the emphasis, and begging to know myexquisite reason" therefore. It was in vain that Iurged that it must have been a mistake if I said so ; thatI never meant to say so, if I did say so ; that if I did sayso, I was very wrong to say so ; that I was very sorryfor having said so ; that I never would say so again. Betweeneach of my humblest apologies my accuser merelyreplied, " but you did say inf/wstry," with an inflexiblepertinacity of condemnation, which was not a whit softenedby my sincere confessions. Presently, the worthycreature, adverting to the letter in the Mirror about GeneralJackson, begged, that as I had passed the fourth ofJuly, that glorious anniversary, in Albany, I would illustrateits celebration by some remarks in the styleof that admirable composition. Great was the fat man'ssurprise, and evident his contempt for me, when I disclaimedthe authorship of that document. Greater stillwaxed both, when I assured him that on the fourth of180 JOURNAL.July I positively walked out of the town, to avoid thenoise in it. After this, he remained gazing at me in silentamazement, and as soon as he had sufficiently recoveredfrom it to move, he took up his hat, and brieflywished me " good morning." Mr. told me theman was a newspaper editor, but I think he looked toofat and fresh, and good-tempered for that. When we returnedhome, sat down to write Journal. * *The play was the Gamester, the house was very full.Mr. did not know one syllable of his part, and botheredme utterly. At the end of the play they calledfor my father, and civilly desired we would act the Hunchback; as, however, we had not the dresses for it with us,he declined, but promised we would return hereafter. *Tuesday, 9th.After breakfast, the day being extremely fine, Mr.urged us to go out, and take a walk ; so forth we set, myJOURNAL. 181/father and I leading the way, and D— — and Mr.following. * * * * **************We crossed the river, and following the first road like aflock of geese errant, arrived at the top of a delightfulbreezy knoll, opposite a tiny waterfall, the rocks andbasin of which were picturesque, but the water had beenturned oflT, to turn a mill. The hill where we stood, commandeda beautiful view of the Hudson, Albany, and theshores stretching away into sunny indistinctness. Myfather, and D , and Mr. , sat down under someoak trees ; I ran off to explore the stream. * *After looking about in every direction, I returned to myfriends ; we strolled away through the woods and alongthe high road, with the sweet smell of mellow hay keepingus company the while. We halted at an orchardcorner, near a pleasant looking farm, where we all agreedwe should like to live. * * * *******Mr. killed us with laughing, with an account hegave us of some of Byron's sayings and doings, whichwere just as whimsical and eccentric, as unamiable, but182 JOURNAL.very funny. To-morrow, we start for Utica ; Mr.comes with us, I am glad of it, I like him.Wednesday, lOth*just as we were getting into the rail road coach for Schenectady,a parcel was put into my hand. It was a letterfrom , and Pellicle's Mie Prigioni ; I was glad ofit. At Schenectady we dined. By the bye I must not forgetto mention the civility we met with from the peoplewho kept the house. There have been so many instancesgiven, of the discomfort and discourteousness which travellersencounter in America, that 'tis but justice to recordthe reverse when one meets with it. For my ownpart, with very few exceptions, I have hitherto met withnothing but civility and attention of every description.We have almost always commanded private sitting, andsingle sleeping rooms ; have had our meals served in tolerablecomfort and decency, and even on board the steamboats,where every thing is done by shoal, I have found,that in spite of being an inveterate dandle, and never readyat any of the bell ringings, I have always had a placereserved for me, and enough to eat without fighting for it.But to return to our Schenectady hosts. The house wasvery full, and while waiting for the canal boat, to avoidthe gaping crowds with which all the rooms were filled,JOURNAL. 183D and I walked out into the verandah, when a prettylassie, the daughter, 1 conclude, of the house, invited usinto a very nice private parlour belonging to the family,where I found a fine piano, books, musick, and all civilizationas well as civility. We proceeded by canal toUtica, which distance we performed in a day and a night,starting at two from Schenectady, and reaching Utica thenext day at about noon. I like travelling by the canalboats very much. Ours was not crowded, and thecountry through which we passed being delightful, theplacid moderate gliding through it, at about four miles anda half an hour, seemed to me infinitely preferable to thenoise of wheels, the rumble of a coach, and the jerkingof bad roads, for the gain of a mile an hour. The onlynuisances are the bridges over the canal, which are so verylow, that one is obliged to prostrate oneself on the deckof the boat, to avoid being scraped off it ; and this humiliationoccurs, upon an average, once every quarter of an hour.Mr. read Don Quixote to us : he reads verypeculiarly ; slowly, and with very marked emphasis. Hehas a strong feeling of humour, as well as of poetry ; infact they belong to each other, for Humour is but Fancylaughing, and Poetry but Fancy sad.The valley of th Mohawk, through which we crept thewhole sunshine day, is beautiful from beginning to end;fertile, soft, rich, and occasionally approaching sublimityand grandeur, in its rocks and hanging woods. We had alovely day, and a soft blessed sunset, which, just as we cameto a point where the canal crosses the river, and where the184 JOURNAL.curved and wooded shores on either side recede, leaving abroad smooth basin, threw one of the most exquisite effectsof light and color, I ever remember to have seen, over thewater, and through the sky. The sun had scarce beendown ten minutes from the horizon, when the deck wasperfectly wet with the heaviest dew possible, which droveus down to the cabin. Here I fell fast asleep, till awakenedby the cabin girl's putting her arms affectionatelyround me, and telling me that I might come and havethe first choice of a berth for the night, in the horriblehencoop allotted to the female passengers. I was toosleepy to acknowledge or avail myself of the courtesy,but the girl's manner was singularly gentle and kind.We sat in the men's cabin until they began making preparationsfor bed, and then withdrew into a room abouttwelve feet square, where a whole tribe of women weregetting to their beds. Some half undressed, some brushing,some curling, some washing, some already asleep intheir narrow cribs, but all within a quarter of an inch ofeach other : it made one shudder. As I stood coweringin a corner, half asleep, half crying, the cabin girl cameto me again, and entreated me to let her make a bed forme; however, upon my refusing to undress before so muchgood company, or lie down in such narrow neighbourhood,she put D and myself in a small closet, where werefour empty berths, where I presently fell fast asleep, whereshe established herself for the night, and where D ,wrapped up in a shawl, sat till morning under the halfopen hatchway, breathing damp starlight.JOURNAL. 185Thursday, 11th*D 's exclamations woke me in the morning : the daywas breaking brightly, and the dewy earth was beginningto smile in the red dawn, when we approached LittleFalls, a place where the placid gentle character of theMohawk becomes wild and romantic, and beautifullypicturesque. The canal is for some space cut throughthe solid rock, and the banks, high and bold, were crownedwith tangled woods, and gemmed with wild flowers,and the delicate vivid tufts of fern. It was exceedinglybeautiful ; and though I believe I missed some part of thescenery immediately sun-sounding Little Falls, the approachto it, which is of the same nature, enchanted meextremely. When we arrived at Utica, I gave the nicecabin girl my sever needle case : her tenderness and careof me the night before made it impossible for me to offerher money. She took my gift, and throwing her armsround my neck, kissed me very fervently for it. I wasstruck with her manner, which had appeared to me in dischargeof her common duties reserved, and rather dignified.This exhibition of feeling surprised me, therefore,and together with her dark eyes, hair and complexion,made me think she must have foreign blood in her veins.I asked her, but she said no : American by birth, Englishby descent ; certainly she had neither the face nor bearingof the one or the other. She was a very singular andstriking looking person : as for Mr. , he fell in lovewith her forthwith, and, I think had half a mind to settleVOL. II. 16186 JOURNAL.on the Mohawk and make her his fellow-farmer. AtUtica we dined ; and after dinner 1 slept profoundly. Thegentlemen, I believe, went out to view the town, which,twenty years ago, was not, and now is a flourishing place,with fine-looking shops, two or three hotels, good broadstreets, and a body of lawyers, who had a supper at thehouse where we were staying, and kept the night awakewith champagne, shouting, toasts, and clapping of hands :so much for the strides of civilization through the savagelands of this new world. The house was full, and wecould not get a room to ourselves, so we sat in a corner ofthe large dining-room. Passed the evening in writingjournal ; — Mr. showed me his of Sunday last.Friday, 12tli.We all breakfasted early together, and immediately afterbreakfast got into an open carriage, and set off for Trenton.D and my father sat beside each other, and Iopposite them, — Mr. on the box, and so we progressed.The day was bright and breezy ; the countrywas all smiling round us in rich beauty ; the ripeningsheets of waving grain ; the sloping fields, with here andthere the grey tombstone of a forest tree ; the vivid thicketsbounding the pale harvest plots ; the silvery-looking fenceswith their irregular lines relieved against tie dark woods ;the clear sky above, — all was lovely. About seven milesfrom Utica we stopped to water the horses at a lonelyroad-side house. We alighted, and without ceremonystrolled into the garden ; a mere wilderness of overgrownJOURNAL. IQ*^sweetbread, faint-breathing dog-roses, and flaunting redpoppies, overshadowed by some orchard trees,— fromwhich we stole sundry half-ripe cherries. The place wasdesolate, I believe ; yet we lingered in it, and did not thinkit so. We got into the carriage again : the remainingeight miles of our journey were as beautiful and as bad asthe preceding ones had been. I thought of our dark driveback, through these miry and uneven ways. At last wereached the house at which visitors to the Falls put up ;a large, comfortable dwelling enough, kept by a couple ofnice young people, who live in this solitude all the yearround, and maintain themselves and a beautiful big babyby the profits they derive from the pilgrims to Trenton.We ordered dinner, and set forth to the Falls, with ourhost for guide. We crossed a small wood immediatelyadjoining the house, and descending several flights of steps,connected by paths in the rocky bank, we presently stoodon the brink of the channel, where the water was boilingalong, deep and black, and passing away like time. Wefollowed along the rocky edge : the path is not more thanafoot wide, and is worn into all manner of unevenness,and cavities, and slippery with the eternal falling of thespray. walked before me : we dared not turn ourheads for fear of tumbling into the black whirlpool below.We walked on steadily, warning each other at every step,and presently we arrived at the first fall, where the rest ofour party were halting. I can't describe it : I don't knoweither its heighth or width ; I only know it was extremely188 , JOURNAL.beautiful, and came pouring down like a great rolling heapof amber. The rocks around are high to the heavens,scooped, and singularly regular ; and the sides of the torrentare, every now and then, paved with large, smoothlayers of rock, as even and regular in their proportions asif the fairies had done the work. After standing before thetumbling mass of water for a length of time, we climbedto the brink above, and went on. Mr. flung himselfdown under a roof of rock by the waterfall. My father,D , and the guide, went on, out of sight ; andand I loitered by the rapid waters, flinging light branchesand flowers upon the blood-coloured torrent, that whirled,and dragged, and tossed them down to the plunge beneath.When we came to the beautiful circular fall, we creptdown to a narrow ridge, and sat with our feet hanging overthe black cauldron, just opposite a vivid rainbow, that wasclasping the waterfall. We sat here till I began to growdizzy with the sound and motion of the churning darknessbeneath us, and begged to move, which we did very cautiously.I was in an agony lest we should slip from thenarrow, dripping ledges along which we crawled. Wewandered on, and stopped again, at another fall, upon arocky shelf overhanging the torrent, beside the blasted andprostrate trunk of a large tree. I was tired with walking;and was lifting me up to seat me on the fallen tree,when we saw Mr. coming slowly towards us. Hestopped and spoke to us, and presently passed on : we remainedbehind talking and dipping our hands into the freshJOURNAL. 189water. At length we rejoined the whole party, sitting bya narrow channel, where the water looked like ink. Beyondthis our guide saw it was impossible to go. I wasfor ascertaining this by myself; but ray father forbade meto attempt the passage further. I was thirsty; and theguide having given me a beautiful strawberry and pale bluebell,that he had found, like a couple of jewels, in somedark crevice of the rocks, I devoured the one, and thengoing down to the black water's edge, we dipped the fairycup in, and drank the cold clear water, with which abundantdraught I relieved my father's thirst also.* AroundThese beautiful little delicate wild flowers seem to love thedewy neighbourhood of waterfalls : it is only at Trenton, and theChaucer in Canada, that I remember to have seen them at all inthis country. Some poor Scotch peasants about to emigrate toCanada, took away with them some roots of the " bonny bloomingheather," in hopes of making this beloved adorner of their nativemountains, the cheerer of their exile ki the wild lands to whichthey were going. The heather, however, refused to grow in theCanadian soil, and the poor emigi-ants had not the melancholypleasure of seeing its sweet, familiar bloom round their new dwellings.The person who told me this, said that the circumstancehad been related to him by Walter Scott, whose sympathy withthe disappointment of these poor children of the romantic heather-landbetrayed itself even in tears. When I visited the beautifulfalls of the Chaucer, our party was enlivened, and the picturesqueeffect of the scene much heightened, by some of the highlandband belonging to the regiment quartered in Quebec. Icould not help wondering, as I gathered the blue-bells which16*IDO JOURNAL.the place where we were resting, the rocks rose like circularwalls up to the very sky. From their overhangingedges tiny threads of water fell upon the rocky pavementbeneath, with a silver glancing, and a clear, plashing tone,that sounded even amid the hoarse talking of the darkwaters below. In some mould among these cliffs, at theirvery highest edge, a tree had struck its roots, and growingupside down, stretched its drooping green arms to the hurryingstream below, that would not tarry. We had walked,I suppose, a mile and a half along the water's side ; andhia this distance its course is broken by six beautiful cataracts.The variety of the colour of the water, — occasionedby the various depths of its channel, and the different tintsof the rocks over which it flows, — is singular. Where theriver expands, its rapid, broken waves were of the darkestred-brown, like coffee, — or rather, indeed, redder than that,like a deep blood-colour ; reaching the walls of rock, overwhich they fall into a lower bed, they became pouringmasses of amber and diamonds, or soft, thick heaps ofwhitest foam ; and then again, in the deep, narrow channelswhich received their headlong leaping, all was blackas blackest night, and the waters were sucked away undergrew profusely round the cataract, whether these poor fellowslooked upon the emblem of their distant country with any of thefeelings which I lent them ; and the whole brought back to mymind the heather that would not gladden the exile's eyes in aforeign soil, and the compassion of Scott for his countrymen'sdisappointment.JOURNAL. 191the hollow rocks in inky eddies, that made me think ofdrowning with double horror. The several falls are veryvarious in their height and forms ; but they are all beautiful— most beautiful ; not a place to visit for a day, but tolive the summer away in. * * * *When we were all rested, we rose to retrace our steps :our guide was a man of some cultivation, and of muchnatural refinement ; with a strong feeling of the exquisitebeauty of the scenes in which he was living. Thesefalls are upon his own land, belong to him, and he pointedout to us a spot beside the torrent where he said he hadread all Byron's works ; —-this pleased me. Returning, Ithought the path even more difficult than it was before :there is a chain fastened along the rock where it narrows,for the security of persons walking ; this has been put upsince the lamentable loss of a young girl, who followingher party along this slippery path, missed her footing, andwas swept into a foaming whirlpool, whence nothing couldever emerge. Our guide told us of another terrible accident,which happened not long before we were there. Ayoung lady and her lover were going along the water side,and in order to retain hold of her hand, he walked upona narrow ridge, where he could hardly balance himself:the girl said, "Oh if you walk there, I shall let you go ;"she did so, and in the same instant he slipped from the192 JOURNAL.rock and was dragged away to that dark death.* Thechain upon the rock was about as high as my shoulder,but when the river is swollen, it constantly rises above thechain, at which time it is scarce possible to go any distancealong its banks : this had been the case a short time beforewe were there. We returned to the house and dined.After dinner had a gossip with Mrs. , and a rompwith her beautiful baby. I strolled into the garden, — it wasin disorder, and looked like a wilderness ; but I saw someroses drooping their full bosoms to the earth, and I wentto fetch them. Our host came with me. He said he hadbut little leisure to cultivate his garden, and could not wellafford to have it kept in better order ; that it supplied themwith nearly all they required, and that with his other occupationshe had hardly time to make it more than useful.I questioned him about the number of visitors who cameI do not know that the sense of danger has ever been so vividin my mind, as vrliile walking along this narrow edge of eternity.Nothing around Niagara appeared to me half so full of peril as thepath along the Trenton Falls; although I have hung ovei^ thebrink of the last rock that vibrates on the ver verge of that greatabyss, and explored entirely alone, the path under the huge waterycurtain that falls from Table Rock. I do not know whetherthe mention of the late accidents at Trenton affected my imagination,and caused me to exaggerate the danger, but it appeared tomealmost miraculous, that every body passing along those narrow,dripping, uneven ledges, did not share the fate of the two unfortunatepersons I have mentioned.JOURNAL. 193to the falls : he said in summer there was a constant successionof them, but that in winter no one came there.Upon ray expressing some surprise that people did notcome and remain for some weeks at least, in so beautifula place, he told me that the generality of visitors werequite satisfied with an hour's stroll by the water, and thatsome had arrived at his door, alighted from their carriage,dined, sauntered round the house, and without even goingdoivn to the river, returned to Utica, quite satisfied withhaving been at Trenton. I was amazed. But the utter insensibilityof the generality of Americans to the beautyand subhraity of nature, is nothing short of amazing ;and in this respect they literally appear to me to want asense. I have been filled with astonishment and perplexityat the total indifference with which they behold scenesof grandeur and loveliness, that any creature with half asoul would gaze at with feelings almost of adoration. Butinthese glorious tabernacles of nature, where God's majestyseems as it were visibly resting on his works, I have seenAmericans come and stare, and stand for a moment, anddepart again, apparently impressed with nothing but thesingularity of the man or woman who could remain therelonger than they did. What can be the cause of this ?— -is it possible that a perception of the beautiful in nature isa result of artificial cultivation ? — is it that the grovellingnarrowness of the usual occupations to which the majorityaddict themselves, has driven out of them the fine spiritwhich is God's altar in men's souls ?— is it that they JOURNAL. Icome incapable of beauty ? Wretched people ! They re- jmind me, by contrast, as I see them toiling along the jcrowded streets of their cities, those dens of Mammon, of |Wordsworth's noble description of him, j*« Who walked in glory and in joy, IBehind his plough, upon the mountain side." \ii# * * * ^ * 'i* * * * * i****** IAt about sun-set I wandered into the wood, to the top of |the steps leading to the waterfall, where I could hear far |below, its sweet voice singing as it passed away. I re- ,gained standing here till the carriage was announced. :Just before we went away, our host gave me a small piece ■of crystal ; it is found among the rocks here, which I be !lieve present many curious geological phenomena, which I ;leave to the learned to describe. The strata are the most 'beautifully regular possible, and upon their broad smoothsurfaces, a thousand theories sit, which I hope I did notdisturb, as I walked over them in the plenitude of my ,ignorance admiring God's masonry ! Oh fair world ! oh !strange, and beautiful, and holy places, where one's soul jmeets one in silence, and where one's thoughts arise ■with the everlasting incense of the waters from the earth ,which is His foot-stool, to the heavens which are His jthrone. It grew dark long before we reached Utica : half ;the way I sang, the other half I slept, in spite of ruts five ]JOURNAL. 195fathoms deep, and all the jolting of these evil ways. Tomorrowwe start on our way toJSiagara, which Mr.says is to sweep Trenton clean from our memories. — 1 donot think it.Saturday, Isti.Left Utica at six o'clock, in our Exclusive Extra : wewere to go on as far as Auburn, a distance of seventy-sixmiles. The day was very beautiful, but extremely hot.At Vernon where we stopped to breakfast, we overtookthe 's. We had a very good breakfast, and I think,for the first time since our land journey from Baltimore toPhiladelphia last winter, we were waited on by women.Found a case of musical glasses, sat on the floor in greatdelight amusing myself with them. While the stage wasgetting ready, and I began wandering about, but theplace did not look promising, and the heat was intense ;we sat ourselves down under the piazza of the tavern, andI gave him the words of " To that lone well." In aboutan hour we set off again. The country was very rich andbeautiful, and at every knoll backed by woodlands, andskirted by golden grain-fields, Mr. exclaimed,Come, we will have a farm here !" He and ray fatherwere to smoke, reflect, and enjoy life: I was to sing wheneverI happened to please, and enjoy life too : D wasto brew, to bake, wash, iron, plough, manage the house,look after the cattle, take care of the poultry, mind the196 JOURNAL.dairy, in short, do everything on earth that was to be done,and enjoy b'fe too : all which arrangements afforded usmatter of converse on the way, and much amusement.Then my father and Mr. had long argumentationsabout acting ; the latter is a vehement admirer of Kean's,and of course, that being the case, matter of debate wasnot wanting. It was all extremely pleasant and profitable,and while the sun shone, and we all kept our tempers,nothing could do better. amused me by telling meportions of 's book, the Adventures of a Younge Son,with which he had been extremely charmed, and which Iremember beginning on board ship, as we crossed fromEngland. * * '* * ** * * * *^ ^ w tP vF ^At about half past three, we arrived at a place called Syracuse!! ! where, stopping to change horses, my father observedthat here there were two different routes to ourpoint of destination, and desired our driver to take that jwhich passes through Skaneateles, a very beautiful village, 'situated on a lake so called. However, to this the masterof the inn, who was also, I believe, proprietor of the coach, ;iseemed to have some private objection ; and while my fa |ther was yet speaking, very coolly shut the coach door in ihis face, and desired the driver to go on in the contrary direction.The insolence of the fellow enraged my father jextremely, and it was rather astonishing, — that's the fact ; \but the deuce is isn't, if, in a free country, a man may not ;JOURNAL. 197choose which way his own coach shall go, in spite of thefolk who pay him for the use of it. We had to pocketthe affront, and what was much more disagreeable, totravel an ugly uninteresting road, instead of a picturesqueand pretty one. We had not proceeded many miles afterthis occurrence, and were just recovering our equanimities,when the said vehicle broke down. We were not overturnedor hurt, only tilted a little on one side. The driver,however, did not seem to think it safe to proceed in thiscondition. The gentlemen got out, and searched the hedgesand thickets for a piece of oak sufficiently strong and stout,to repair, at least for the moment, the damage. We werenot at the time within reach of any house. At last, theyprocured what they wanted and having propped up thecarriage after the best fashion they could, we proceeded ata footpace to the next village. Here, while they wereputting our conveyance into something like better order,and I wandered away to a pretty, bright water-course,which, like all water in this country, was made to turn amill. The coach being made sound once more, we packedourselves into it, and progressed. The evening was per-fecdy sultry. I never shall forget, at a place where westopped to water the horses, a cart full of wretched sheepand calves, who were, I suppose, on their way to theslaughter-house, but who, in the meantime seemed enduringthe most horrible torture that creatures can suffer.They were jammed into the cart so as to be utterly incapableof moving a single limb ; the pitiless sun shoneVOL. II. 17198 JOURNAL.fiercely upon their wretched heads, — and their poor eyeswere full of dust and flies : I never saw so miserable aspectacle of suffering. I looked at the brutal-looking manthat was driving them, and wondered whether he wouldgo to Hell, for tormenting these helpless beasts in thisfashion.The sun set gloriously. Mr. began talking aboutGreece, and getting a good deal excited, presently burstforth into " The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece,"which he recited with amazing vehemence and earnestness.He reminded me of Kean several times : whilehe was declaiming he looked like a tiger. 'Tis strange,or rather, 'tis not strange, 'tis but natural, how, in spiteof the contempt, and even hatred, which he often expressesfor England and everything connected with it,his thoughts and plans, and all the energies of his mind,seem for ever bent upon changes to be wrought in England,— freer government — purer laws — more equal rights.He began to talk about Cromwell : he wanted, he said, tohave a play written out of Cromwell's life. We talkedthe matter over with infinite zeal, and established mostsatisfactorily, that to accomplish such a thing as it oughtto be done, would be quite one of the most difficult tasksin the world. Nobody but a religious and political enthusiastcould do it: a poet, unless himself a republican Englishmanand fanatical sectarian, hardly could : — it must beunlike all other works of art, not an imitation of truth, buttruth itself. Schiller is the only man I can imagine whocould have attempted it with any chance of success ; and IJOURNAL. 199even doubt whether he would have made of it the firebrandour friend wants.* Towards evening, the heat becamemore and more oppressive ; our coach was but ill cobbled,and'leaned awfully to one side. I fell asleep lying in myfather's lap ; and when we reached Auburn, which wasnot until nine o'clock, I was so tired, so miserably sleepy,• Thank God, a firebrand which shall throw Eng-land into confusionand anarchy is not indeed of easy make. Italy, crushedunder the heel of her northern rulers, or France, blown aboutwith every breath of opinion, may rush into revolutions, for a ballador an opera. The misery of the one, and the miserable excitabilityof the other nation, render it easy to rouse, in the former,the spirit of retribution, in the latter, the desire of change. ButEnglishmen, who are neither slaves nor weathercocks, are lesseasily stirred to wild excesses of political excitement. Let whowill steer, the old ship is too well ballasted to sink. Whoeverrules, — whatever party may be at the head of her government,England is sound at heart ; there is a broad foundation of moralgood and intelligence in the nation, which will not be shaken orupturned, let factions erect or pull down what temporary trophiesthey please, to their own short-lived and selfish triumphs. Thefile of the mechanic may still gnaw angrily at the iron crown ofthe aristocracy, — interests of classes may still jar, — parties wrangle,— and the eternal warfare between those who climb, and thosewho stand upon the topmost round of the ladder, may still bewaged ; and so be it, — in none of these is there fear or danger,but rather a wholesome action of power against power — a checking,winnowing, purifying, and preserving influence. Moral evil,vice and mental evil, — ignorance, — are the roots of decay :surely England is far from the day of her downfalling.200 JOURNAL.and so tortured with the side-ache, from the cramped positionin which 1 had been lying-that I just crawled intothe first room in the inn where we alighted, and droppeddown on the floor fast asleep. They roused me for supper,and very soon after, I betook myself to bed. Theheat was intolerable ; the pale feet of the summer lightningran along the black edges of the leaden clouds, — the worldwas alight with it. I could not sleep : I never enduredsuch sufTocalinof heat.^ Sunday, 14t]i*Rose at eight : the morning was already sultry as the hottestnoon in England. After breakfast I wandered aboutthe house in search of shade : went into an empty room,opened the shutters, and got out upon a large piazza, orrather colonnade, which surrounded it. The side I hadchosen was defended by the house from the fierce sunlight,and I walked up and down in quiet and loneliness for sometime.Not far from the house, stood the prison, — one ofthe state prisons of the country, — a large grey building,which appeared like a huge block of granite, unshelteredby a single tree or bush, and dim with the hazy heat ofthe atmosphere. Being Sunday, we were not able to visitit; but the person who kept the house where we were, —a very intelligent and civil man, — gave us some account ofit, and fully corroborated the fact which Stuart mentions,that when the prison took fire, and that all the criminalsJOURNAL. 201confined in it were liberated to assist in saving the building,in spite of the general confusion, and total absence ofrestraint or observation, which, for some time left themthe most easy opportunity of escape, not one of them tookadvantage of this accident to recover their liberty, butevery prisoner returned voluntarily, after the fire was gotunder, to his cell. This seems miraculous, and speaksmore for the excellence of the system pursued in theseestablishments, than all the disquisitions in the world. Atabout ten, our exclusive extra having driven to the door,we packed ourselves into it, and proceeded towards Geneva,where we were to dine. The sky, however, presentlybecame overcast ; and towards noon the world wasabsolutely shrouded in a lead-coloured pall. The air wasstifling ; it was impossible to draw one's breath ; and aquarter of a degree more of heat would certainly have occasionedsuffocation. We were all gasping: suddenly, thered lightning tore open the heavy clouds ; the thunderrcHled round the heavens ; the rain came down in torrents ;we were away from all shelter, and obliged to proceedthrough the storm. The leather curtains of our coachwere speedily unrolled and buttoned down ; but this formedbut a miserable shelter against the furious rain. Our carpetbags, which were on the outside of the carriage, weresoaked through, and we ourselves were soon in nearly asbad a plight. The rain came in rivulets through the crevicesof our insufficient shelter, and the seats and bottomof the coach were presently standing pools. We arrived17*202 JOURNAL.between twelve and one o'clock at Cayuga ; and here wedrew up before the inn door, to await the end of the storm.The rain was still so violent that we preferred remainingin the coach, to getting out and being still more thoroughlydrenched. The thunder growled sulkily at a distance, andthe lightning glared rapidly from side to side. By degreesthe over swollen clouds, having emptied themselves, rolledaway ; the rain became less violent ; the mist and heavyvapour parted from off the face of the earth, — and the lakeappeared blending with the sky amid the indistinct andhazy outlines of the half-shrouded country. While wewere sitting listening to the storm, silence had fallen uponus all : a thunderstorm is apt to prove an interruption toconversation. During this pause Mr, took out hispencil, and wrote upon a scrap of paper a very eloquentMahometan description of the attributes of God. I do notknow whether it was his own, or an authentic Mahometandocument : it was sublime. * * *# * *' * * # *The storm having abated, we proceeded on our way,crossed a bridge a mile and some roods long, over theCayuga Lake; which however, was still so veiled withscowling mist and clouds, that we could discern none ofits features. At about three o'clock we reached Geneva,a small town situated on a lake called Seneca water. Herewe dined: — — had most providentially brought silverforks with him, for the wretched two-pronged iron implies203ments furnished us by our host, were anything but cleanor convenient. After dinner, the weather having becomemild and bright, we went up to a piazza on the secondfloor, which overlooked the lake and its banks. The latterare very picturesque, and the town itself, climbing in terracesalong the side of a steep acclivity rising from the water,has a very good effect. The lake at this point did notappear very wide, for we could distinguish from wherewe stood, minute objects on the opposite shore. Afterresting ourselves for a short lime, we again took to ourcoach, and pursued our route towards Canandaigua, wherewe were to pass the night. The afternoon was bright andbeautiful, the road tolerable, and the country through whichwe passed, fertile and smiling. As the evening began tocome on, we reached Canandaigua lake, a very beautifulsheet of water of considerable extent. We coasted forsome time close along its very margin ; the opposite shorewas high, clothed with wood, from amidst which, hereand there, a white house looked peacefully down on theclear mirror below ; the dead themselves can hardly inhabitregions more blessedly apart from the evil turmoil ofthe world, than the inhabitants of these beautiful solitudes.*1 have had occasion to observe, in a former note, that foreignerstravelling' through this country, see only the least desirablesociety of the various cities they visit. There is another class ofAmericans, whom they rarely, if ever, become acquainted with atall. By far the most interesting, in my opinion, which the country204 JOURNAL.Leaving the water's edge we proceeded about a quarter ofa mile, and found ourselves at the door of the inn at Ca-affords.I speak of those families thickly scattered through all thestates, from whose orig-final settlers many of them are immediatelydescended ; who reside upon lands purchased by their grandfathersin the early days of the British Colonies and who, living remotefrom the Atlantic cities, and the more travelled routes betweenthem, are free from all the peculiarities which displease anEuropean in the societies of the towns, and possess traits of originalityin their manners, minds, and mode of life, infinitely refreshingto the observer wearied of the eternal sameness whichpervades the human congregations of the old world. In mixingwith the commercial fashionables and exclusives of the Americancities, the European is at once amused and annoyed with theassumption of a social tone and spirit at variance with the wholemake of the country. He is told that he is in the best society ofthe place, and with perfect justice condemns this best society, asprobably the worst he ever saw : — a society assuming the airs ofseparate rank where no rank at all exists, attempting to copy theluxury and splendour of the residents of European capitals, withoutpossessing one tithe of their wealth to excuse the extravagance,or enable them to succeed in the endeavour; and presenting themost incongruous and displeasing mixture possible, of pretension, ignorance,affectation, and vulgarity. I have before said, that even inthe cities, there are circles of a very different order; but yet freerfrom all these drawbacks is the society formed by the class ofpeople of whom I have spoken above, and whom I should designateas the gentry of this country ; using that term in the bestsense in which it was once used in England. Among this largebut widely scattered portion of the community, should the Euro-journal.205antigua ; the principal among some houses surroundingan open turfed space, like an English village green, acrosswhich ran the high road. My father, Mr. , and Iwent up to a sort of observatory at the top of the house,from whence the view was perfectly enchanting. Thegreen below, screened on three sides with remarkably finepoplar trees, and surrounded by neat white houses, remindedme of some retired spot in my own dear country.Opposite us the land rose with a gente wooded swell, andto the left the lake spread itself to meet the horizon. Afresh breeze blew over the earth, most grateful after theintense heat of the morning, and the sky was all strewedwith faint rosy clouds melting away one by one into violetwreaths, among which the early evening star glittered coldand clear. We came down to supper, which was servedto us as usual, in a large desolate-looking public room.After this, we came to the sitting room they had providedfor us, a small comfortable apartment with a very finelytoned piano in it. To this I forthwith sat down, and playedand sang for a length of time. Late in the evening I leftpean traveller's good fortune lead him, he will find hospitalitywithout ostentation, purity of morals, independent of the dread ofopinion, intellectual cultivation, unmixed with the desire of display,great simplicity of life and ignorance of the world, originality ofmind naturally arising from independence and solitude, and the bestbecause the most natural manners. Of such, I know, from thelower shores of the Chesapeake, to the half savage territory aroundMichilimakinack.206 JOURNAL.the instrument, and my father, Mr. , and I took a delightfulstroll under the colonnade, discussing Milton, manypassages of which my father recited most beautifully, tomy infinite delight and ecstacy. By and bye they wentin, and came out to walk with me. Certainly thisclimate is the most treacherous imaginable : the heat thismorning had been intolerable, and to-night a piercing coldwind had arisen, that would have rendered winter clothingby no means superfluous. We walked rapidly up anddown, till the bleak blast became so keen that we wereglad to take refuge in the hoisise. Our unfortunate carpet-bagsand their contents are literally drenched, many ofmy goods and chattels will never recover this ablution ;among others, I am sorry to say, 's beautiful satchel.Monday, 15tli*Our breakfast, which was extremely comfortable and clean,was served to us in our private room, a singular favour ;one, I hope, which will become a custom as the countryis travelled through by greater numbers. Before breakfastD had been taking a walk about the pretty village, andtrying to beg, borrow, or steal some flowers for me. Themaster of the inn, however, succeeded better than she did,for he present made his appearance with a very beautifuland fragrant nosegay, which I found to my utter dismay, hadbeen levied from a gentleman's private garden in my name.ray horror was excessive at this, and was scarcely diis307wished when I discovered, upon inquiry, that they hadbeen gathered from Mr. 's garden ; that gentlemanhaving large property, and a fine residence here. He wasnot in Canandaigua himself, but as we drove past his house,I left cards for his lady, who must have thought my demandon her green-house one of the greatest impertinenciesextant. It was nine o'clock when we left Canandaigua :we were all a little done up with our two previous days,and it was unanimously settled, that we should proceedonly to Rochester, a distance of between thirty and fortymiles, which we accomplished by two o'clock. Rochester,upon whose site, I understand, twenty years ago therestood hardly a house, is now a large and populous manufacturingtown. The progress of life in this country isamazing. From day to day the wilderness becomes inhabited,peopled, civilized ; and where yesterday the majesticwoods were standing and the silent waters gliding in all thesolemn solitude of unexplored nature ; to-day, the sound ofthe forge and anvil is heard, the busy feet of men pass andrepass, their mingled voices resound, their dwellings arise.The wheels of a thousand mechanical miracles clash, creak,and jar; the vapours of a thousand steam-engines mingle withthe hitherto lonely clouds, and the huge tins of a thousandsteam-boats beat the waters, carrying over their hitherto undisturbedsurface, the vast produce of industry ; the labours,the arts, the knowledge, the wealth, the wonders of educationand civilization. It is something that fills one withadmiration ! in the old, and eke the new sense of the word.208 JOURNAL.The inn at which we alighted was large and comfortable ;in the drawing-room I found a very tolerable piano-forte,to which I instantly betook myself. By the time we hadseen our bed-rooms, and ordered dinner, we found weshould have leisure before it was ready, to walk to thefalls of the Genesee, (the river on which Rochester stands,)which have some celebrity for their beauty. A man fromthe hotel volunteered to be our guide, and joined our party.We walked up the main street, which was crowded, andfull of business. From this, presently turning off, wefollowed a wider road, with houses and pretty flower-gardenson each side, and reached, after half a mile's walk,a meadow skirted by a deep ravine, through which theriver, from whence we looked immediately upon thefalls. They would be, and were, I doubt not, once beautiful; for the barrier of rock, over which the river throwsitself into the valley below, is of considerable breadth andheight; but alas ! the waters have been turned off" to turnmills, and a thin curtain which falls over the rocks like avapoury sheet of blue smoke, is all that remains of theGenesee falls ; whilst from a thousand dingy lookingmills and manufactories, the poor little rivulets of labouringwater, come rushing through narrow dirty channels,all stained and foaming, and hot from their work, to throwthemselves into the thin bosom of their parent stream.Truly, mills and steam-engines are wonderful things, andI know that men must live ; but I wish it were not expedientto destroy what God has made so very beautiful, inJOURNAL. 550yorder to make it useful. Our guide, perceiving our admirationwas a good deal excited by the picturesque beautyof the scene, fell into a species of rhapsody, which terminatedthus : " Yes, sir, when I see the waters thus fallingfrom the bottom to the top, — I say, sir, when I look at thewater falling from the bottom to the top, I can compare itto nothing — but — but — but — wool out of a cotton-mill !"This was an unlooked for climax, and gave us all a violentinclination to laugh in the face of the orator ; which howeverwould have been exceedingly wrong, for so sincerewas the good man in his enthusiasm, that he was not inthe least aware of the miraculous proceeding which hetwice with much emphasis, ascribed to the upward fallingwaters «**«*** * * * ********We waited in this meadow, for the passing of a train ofrail-road carriages, which run between Rochester and af This spot is famous as the scene of the last exploit of a singularindividual, known by the name of Sam Patch. An Irishmanby birth, I believe, he came over to this country to earn his bread,and hit upon a very ingenious method of doing so, i. e., jumpingfor large wagers down cataracts 5 which daring feat he performedsuccessfully more than once. But, like the Sicilian diver of old,poor Sam Patch took one plunge too many 5 and after leapingwith impunity from the rocks immediately below the Falls of Niagara,he found his death in the Genesee — attempting the leap, itiii said, while in a state of intoxication.VOL. II. 1 8210 JOURNAL.small village about three miles distant, where the river wassaid to be very beautiful. We hailed them as they wentby, and proceeded in them to their destination. The viewitself, from this point, though romantic and pretty, wasscarce worth going out of the way for : the walk back,however, was delightful. The river runs here through adeep gully, the banks rising precipitously above a hundredfeet on each side of it. On one side, they are beautifullyand thickly wooded ; the other presents a bare wall of reddishrock, lying in very regular strata. About a mile anda half below the falls, the channel of the river contractsitself, and the water, forcing its way through some irregularrocky projections, forms a very pretty miniature cataract.We walked along the high margin of the glen, uponsome very thick, soft turf, looking down upon the deepbed of the water, and enjoying a delicious fresh breeze.'Tis curious enough, that upon this strip of turf, close tothe high road, under the shelter of a group of trees, wefound a couple of tombstones. They were carefully railedround, and bore the names of a man and his wife, withouthowever assigning any cause for their choice of a burial-placeso public and unhallowed. The last mile of ourwalk was by no means so agreeable as the previous parthad been. Nearing the town, we had to leave the brinkof the river, and follow the dusty track of the rail-road.When we reached Rochester, we dined : after which 1Event and lay down, and slept till tea time. When I camedown to tea, found the gentlemen profoundly busied :JOURNAL. 211writing home, — Mr. journalizing, — my father poringover maps and road-books, to find out if we could not possiblyget as far as Niagara tomorrow.Tuesday, 16th.Had to get up before I'd half done my sleep. At sixstarted from Rochester for Murray, where we purposedbreakfasting. Just as we were nearing the inn at this sameplace, our driver took it into his head to give us a taste ofhis quality. We were all earnestly engaged in a discussion,when suddenly I felt a tremendous sort of stunningblow, and as soon as I opened my eyes, found that thecoach was overturned, lying completely on its side. Iwas very comfortably curled up under my father, who byheaven's mercy did not suffocate me ; opposite sat D ,as white as a ghost, with her forehead cut open, and anawful-looking stream of blood falling from it; by her stoodMr. , also as pale as ashes ; was perched like abird above us all on the edge of the door-way, which wasopen. The first thing I did was to cry as loud as ever Icould, " I'm not hurt ! I'm not hurt !" which assurance Ishouted sufficiently lustily to remove all anxiety from theirminds. The next thing was to get my father up, in accomplishingwhich he trampled upon me most cruelly. Assoon as I was relieved from his mountainous pressure, Igot up, and saw to my dismay, two men carrying Mr.into the house. We were all convinced that some of his212 JOURNAL.limbs were broken. I ran after as quickly as I could, andpresently the house was like an hospital. They carriedhim into an upper room, and laid him on a bed: here toothey brought D , all white and bleeding. Our hand-basketsand bags were ransacked for salts and eau de cologne; cold water, hot water, towels, and pocket handkerchiefswere called into requisition ; and I with my clothesall torn and one shoulder all bruised and cut, went fromthe one to the other in utter dismay. Presently, to mygreat relief, Mr. revived, and gave ample testimonyof having the use of his limbs, by getting up, and in themost skilful manner plastering poor D 's broken browup. went in quest of my father, who had received aviolent blow on his leg, and was halting about, lookingafter the baggage, and the driver, who had escaped unhurt.*The chief cause of our misfortune was the economywith which the stage-coaches are constructed in thisthrifty land, — that is, they have but one door, and of courseare obliged to be turned round much oftener than if theyAlthough nobody, I believe, ever travelled a hundred milesby land in this country, without being overturned, the drivers deserveinfinite credit for the rare occurrence of accidents. Howthey can carry a coach at all over some of their roads is miraculous; and high praise is due to them, both for care and skill, thatany body, in any part of this country, ever arrives at the end ofa land journey at all. I do not ever remember to have seen six-inlanddriving except in New England, where it is common, andwhere the stage-drivers are great adepts in their mystery.JOURNAL. 213had two. In wheeling us therefore rapidly up to the inn,and turning the coach with the side that had a door towardsthe house, we swung over and fell. While thecoach was being repaired, and the horses changed, we,bound up, bruised, and aching, but still very merry, satdown to breakfast. Mr. , who had been merely stunned,seized on the milk and honey, and stuffed away withgreat zeal ; poor D was the most deplorable of theparty, with a bloody handkerchief bound over one half herface ; I only ached a lite ; and I believe escapedwith a scratch on his finger ; so, seeing it was no worse,we thanked God, and devoured. After breakfast, wepacked ourselves again in our vehicle, and progressed.Mr. had procured for me a bunch of flowers, and Iamused myself with making a wreath of them. Our routelay over what is called the Ridge road, a very remarkabletract, pursuing a high embankment, which was once theboundary of Lake Ontario, though the waters are now distantfrom it upwards of seven miles. The theories of thegeologists respecting the former position of the lake arevery singular, though borne out by similar instances ofnatural convulsions, and also by the very features of theland. The country through which we journeyed to-daywas wilder and less cultivated than any we have yet seen.A great deal of forest land, consisting of close, thin, tallsecond growth springing around the stump of many a hugetree ; thick, tangled underwood, marsh, and damp, greenwilderness, where the grass and bushes trailed about in18*214 JOURNAL.rank luxuriance ; and piles of felled timber, with here andthere a root yet smoking, bore witness to the first inroadsof human cultivation. None of the trees that were standingwere of any girth, or comparable in size and beauty toour park trees; but some of the stumps were of large size,and must have been the foundations of noble forest pillars.Our road, after leaving the Ridge road, was horrible. Forsome length of time before we reached Lockport, we weredragged over what is called a corduroy road, which consistsmerely of logs of wood laid close to each other, — thenatural inequalities of which produce a species of joltingincomparably superior to any other I ever felt, and administeringbut little comfort, either to our bruised bonesor apprehensive nerves. We reached Lockport at aboutfour o'clock. There had been rain in the course of themorning, but the evening was clear, though very cold.The appearance of Lockport is very singular, — a collectionof new white houses, that look as though they werebut this instant finished, standing in a half-cleared wilderness.All round the town, if such it may be called, stretchthe remains of the once pathless woods, half cleared, halfsavage-looking yet ; and, as far as the eye can reach, thecountry presents a series of dreary slopes, covered withprostrate trees, heaps of hewn timber, smoking stumps,and blackened trunks, — a sort of forest stubble-land, a verydesolate-looking thing indeed. The house where we stoppedappeared to be hardly finished. We ordered dinner ;and I forthwith began kindling a fire, which was extremelyJOURNAL. 216welcome to us all. I was very much bruised with ourmorning's overturn, and went and lay down in my bedroom,where I presently slept profoundly.'Wednesday, 17th*At nine o'clock we started from Lockport : before doing so,however, we went down to the canal-side to look at theworks, which are here very curious and interesting.ran into a bookseller's shop, and got 's book for me,which he was going to pounce upon without knowingwhat it was ; and , for some reasons best known tohimself, snatched it away from him, saying it was a bookwhich he was sure he would not like. The road betweenLockport and Lewistown is very pretty ; and we got outand walked whenever the horses were changed. At oneplace where we stopped, I saw a meek-eyed, yellowish-whitecart horse, standing with a man's saddle on hisback. The opportunity was irresistible, and the desire,too ; I had not backed a horse for so long ; so I got upupon the amazed quadruped woman's fashion, and took agallop through the fields, with infinite risk of falling off,and proportionate satisfaction. We reached Lewistown atabout noon, and anxious inquiries were instituted as tohow our luggage was to be forwarded when on the otherside ; for we were exclusive extras, — and for creatures soabove common fellowship there is no accommodation inthis levelling land. A ferry and a ferry-boat, however, it216 JOURNAL.appeared there were, — and thither we made our way.While we were waiting for the boat I climbed out on thebranches of a huge oak, which grew over the banks of theriver, which here rise nearly a hundred feet high. Thuscomfortably perched like a bird 'twixt heaven and earth, Icopied off some verses which I had scrawled just beforeleaving Lockport. The ferry-boat being at length procured,we got into it. The day was sultry ; the heat intolerable.The water of this said river Niagara is of amost peculiar colour, like a turquoise when it turns green.It was like a thick stream of verdigris, full of pale, milkystreaks, whirls, eddies, and counter-currents, and lookedas if it was running up by one bank, and down by theother. I sat in the sun, on the floor of the boat, revisingmy verses. * * * * ** * * # %Arrived on the other side, i. e. Canada, there was a secondpause, as to how we were to get conveyed to the falls.My father, , and D betook themselves to an innby the road-side, which promised information and assistance ;and and I clambering up the heights of Queens-ton,sat ourselves down under some bushes, whence welooked towards Lake Ontario, and where he told me thehistory of the place ; how his countrymen had thumpedmy countrymen upon this spot, and how the Englishgeneral Brock had fallen, near where we sate. A monumentin the shape of a stone pillar had been erected toJOtlRNAL. 217his memory, and to the top of this betook himself toreconnoitre, which ambitious expedition I felt no inclinationto share. After he had been gone some time, I thoughtI perceived signs of stirring down by the inn door ; Itoiled up the hill to the base of the pillar to fetch him, andwe proceeded down to the rest of the party. An uneasy-looking,rickety cart, without springs, was the sole conveyancewe could obtain, and into this we packed ourselves.brought me some beautiful roses M^hich he had beenstealing for me, and gave me a glass of milk, withwhich restoratives I comforted myself, and we set forth.As we squeaked and creaked (I mean our vehicle) up thehill, I thought either my father's or 's weight, quiteenough to have broken the whole down, but it did nothappen. My mind was eagerly dwelling on what wewere going to see : that sight which said was theonly one in the world which had not disappointed him.I felt absolutely nervous with expectation. The soundof the cataract is, they say, heard within fifteen miles whenthe wind sets favourably : to-day however there was nowind : the whole air was breathless with the heat of midsummer,and though we stopped our wagon once or twiceto listen as we approached, all was profoundest silence.There was no motion in the leaves of the trees, not a cloudsailing in the sky, everything was as though in a brightwarm death. When we were within about three miles ofthe falls, just before entering the village of Niagara,stopped the wagon, and then we heard distinctly, though318 Journalfar off, the voice of the mighty cataract. Looking over thewoods which appeared to overhang the course of the river,we beheld one silver cloud rising slowly into the sky — theeverlasting incense of the waters. A perfect frenzy of impatienceseized upon me. I could have set off and run the wholeway, and when at length the carriage stopped at the doorof the Niagara House, wailing neither for my father, D ,nor , I rushed through the hall, and the garden, downthe steep foot-path cut in the rocks. I heard steps behindme, was following me ; down, down I sprang, andalong the narrow foot-path, divided only by a thicket fromthe tumultuous rapids, I saw through the boughs the whiteglimmer of that sea of foam — " Go on, go on, don'tstop," shouted , and in another minute the thicketwas passed. I stood upon Table Rock. seized meby the arm, and without speaking a word, dragged meto the edge of the rapids, to the brink of the abyss. I sawNiagara — Oh God ! who can describe that sight ! ! !