ON THE ADAPTATION OFEXTERNAL NATURE TO THE PHYSICALCONDITION OF MANPRINCIPALLY WITH REFERENCE TO THE SUPPLY OF HISWANTS AND THE EXERCISE OF HIS INTEL.Actual FACULTIESBYJOHN KIDD M.D. F.R.S.REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINEIN THE UNIVERSITYOF OXFORD-v/-5»LONDON '^WILLIAM PICKERINGOXFORD,PRINTED BY S. COLLINGWOOD, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY.TOHIS GRACETHEARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.MY LORD,Having been appointed to write 4:he followingTreatise by the late President of theRoyal Society, in consequence of your Grace'srecommendation, it was natural that I shouldbe desirous of publickly acknowledging thehigh honour thus conferred upon me.I therefore request you to accept my respectfulthanks for permitting me to inscribethis Treatise with your Grace's name : assuringyou that, however inadequately I may havebeen found to answer your expectation in theVI DEDICATION.execution, I have not applied myself to thetask committed to me, without the exertionof much thought, and the strongest desire ofso executing it, as to justify your Grace's favourableopinion.I have the honour to be,My Lord,with the greatest respect,Your Grace's most obliged ^and obedient Servant,J. Kidd.Oxford,March 15, 1833.PREFACE.1 HE occasion which gave rise to this and theaccompanying Treatises is explained in the followingnotice : but the Author of the presentTreatise thinks it right to add, that, althoughencouraged by the honour of having been recommendedby His Grace the Archbishop ofCanterbury, he should have shrunk from hispresent attempt, had he considered that anyexact elucidation of the details of science wasrequired in the execution of it.As, however, the intention of Lord Bridgewater,and the very extent and diversified natureof the subject, seemed to him almost necessarilyto exclude any great exactness of elucidation,and to require a popular rather than ascientific exposition of facts ; and as the wholetenour of his pursuits during the last thirtyyears of his life accorded with the character ofthe proposed subject ; he the more readily undertooka task, to the execution of which heVlll PREFACE.could not but look forward with much pleasure.And if he should in any instance stimulate thereader to examine the question with any portionof the interest and satisfaction with whichhe has himself examined it, he is confident thathe shall not have laboured in vain.It will be for others to determine whether ajudicious selection and a sufficiently natural arrangementof the materials of the followingTreatise have been adopted : but to those, whomay think that many of the subjects have beentreated too cursorily, the Author begs leave topoint out the extensive range afforded by sowide a field of inquiry ; and the consequentnecessity of compression in each particular; thesubject of this Treatise being in fact an epitomeof the subjects of almost all the others. He alsoconsiders it right to state, that it is the immediateobject of the Treatise itself to unfold a trainof facts, not to maintain a formal argument ; togive a general view of the adaptation of the externalworld to the physical condition of man, not toattempt directly to convince the reader that thisadaptation is a proof either of the existencePREFACE. IXand omnipotence of the Deity, or of his beneficenceand wisdom ; though undoubtedly itis hoped by the writer, as it was intended bythe munificent individual who originally proposedthe general subject of this and the accompanyingTreatises, that such a conviction,if not already existing, may be produced byits perusal. Without questioning, therefore, onthe present occasion, the intellectual powers orthe moral motives of those who profess themselvessceptics with respect to either natural orrevealed religion, the Author addresses himselfprincipally to those who are believers in boththe one and the other. With respect indeed toa disbelief in the basis of natural religion, hemust ever feel assured, as in another place hehas expressed himself, that, however easy itmay be to account for the external profession ofa disbelief in God, the supposition of the existenceof intellectual atheism involves an intellectualabsurdity. With respect to the truth ofRevelation, although the subject of this Treatiseis not directly connected with that question, hewould still wish to consider himself as addressingthose chiefly who with himself believe that theX PREFACE.objects which surround us in our present stateof existence, and which are so obviously intendedto advance the general powers and facultiesof Man, without advancing the powersand faculties of any other animal, are purposelydestined to produce an ulterior and higher effect;the nature of which effect is to be learnt fromthe doctrines of Revelation alone. And he hasthought it right to say thus much on the generalsubject of religion, not merely for the purpose ofrecording his own sentiments ; but that, in professingto address those principally who believein revealed as well as in natural religion, if onany occasion he should assume the truth of Revelation,he may not be with justice accused oftaking that for granted, of which the readerdoubts.NOTICE.The series of Treatises, of which the present is one, ispublished under the following circumstances :The Right Honourable and Reverend FrancisHenry, Earl of Bridgewater, died in the month ofFebruary, 1829 ; and by his last Will and Testament, bearingdate the 25th of February, 1825, he directed certainTrustees therein named to invest in the public funds thesum of eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, withthe accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposalof the President, for the time being, of the Royal Societyof London, to be paid to the person or persons nominatedby him. The Testator further directed, that the person orpersons selected by the said President should be appointedto write, print, and publish one thousand copies of a workOn the Power Wisdom and Goodness of God, as manifestedin the Creation ; illustrating such word hy all reasonablearguments ; as for instance the variety adjuration of'God's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral hmg-dams ; the effect of digestion, and thereby of conversion ;the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite varietyof other arguments; as also by discoveries ancient andmodern in arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature.He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the saleof the works so published should be paid to the authors ofthe works.xuThe late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determiningupon the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions ofthe Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrenceof a nobleman immediately connected with the deceased,Mr. Davies Gilbert appointed the following eight gentlemento write separate Treatises on the different branchesof the subject, as here stated :THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, Dad.Professor OF DIVINITY IN THB UNIVERSITY OP EDINBURGH.ON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GOD AS ManifestedIN THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NatureTO THE MORAL AND INTELLECTUALCONSTITUTION OF MAN.JOHN KIDD, M.D. F.R.S.REGIUS Professor OF MEDICINE IN THB UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.THE REV. WILLIAM Wheel, Mea. F.R.S.FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS CONSIDERED WITHREFERENCE TO NATURAL THEOLOGY.SIR CHARLES BELL, K.H. F.R.S.THE HAND: ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGN.PETER MARK ROGET, M.D.FELLOW OF AND SECRETARY TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.ON ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGYXlllTHE REV. WILLIAM Auckland, Dad. F.R.S.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH AND PROFESSOR OF Geology IN THEUNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.THE REV. William KIRBY, Mea. F.R.S.ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.William PROUT, M.D. F.R.S.ON CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTIONOF DIGESTION.His Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex, Presidentof the Royal Society having desired that no unnecessarydelay should take place in the publication of theabove mentioned treatises, they will appear at short intervals,as they are ready for publication.CONTENTS.PageCHAP. I. Introduction 1Sect. I. The Physical Condition of Man ib.II. The general Constitution of external Nature 4CHAP. II. The Physical Character op Man 9Sect. I. The Physical Character of Man, comparedwith that of other Animals ib.II. Differences in the Form of the Infant and ofthe Adult ; particularly with reference to theSpine 12III. Physical Superiority of Man , on what Principleto be estimated 18IV. Early and gradual Developement of the intellectualFaculties of Man 22CHAP. III. On the Powers op the human HandCONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL OrGAN 28CHAP. IV. On the Brain, considered as the OrganOP the Intellectual Faculties 43CHAP. V. The Nervous System op Animals inGENERAL 47Sect. I. The Nervous System of the inferior Animals. . ib.II. The Nervous System of Man 53III. Indications of natural Talent and Dispositiondeducible from the Structure of the Brain 59IV. The general Doctrine of Physiognomy, asconnected with the Form of the Body 67V. The Developement of the Human Brain, comparedwith that of other Animals 73VI. Cursory View of the Extent of Human Powerover the Objects of the external World 7^CONTENTS. XVPageCHAP. VI. Adaptation op the Atmosphere to thePhysical Condition of Man 80Sect. I. The general Constitution of the Atmosphere . . ib.II. Light 83III. Heat 95IV. The general Uses of Water 107V. Baths 112VI. The Fluidity of Water 118VII. The natural Sources of Water 123VIII. The Air of the Atmosphere, as connectedwith Respiration 126IX. Effects of the Motion of the Air, as connectedwith Human Health, &c 133X. Effects of the Motion of the Air, as connectedwith the Arts, &c 144CHAP. VII. Adaptation of Minerals to the PhysicalCondition of Man 152Sect. I. The general Characters of Minerals ib.II. Application of Minerals to Architecture andSculpture 154III. Gems and precious Stones 168IV. The Distribution and relative Proportions ofSea and Land; and the geological Arrangementand physical Character of some of the superficialStrata of the Earth 173V. Beds of Gravel 176VI. Metals 187VII. Common Salt, &c. . 199CHAP. VIII. Adaptation of Vegetables to the PhysicalCondition of Man 202Sect. I. General Observations on the Vegetable Kingdomib.II. The Cocoa-nut Tree, including the Formationof Coral Reefs 204III. Vegetables as a Source of Food 216IV. Vegetables as applicable to Medicine 225V. Vegetables as applicable to the Arts, &c 232XVI CONTENTS.PageCHAP. IX. Adaptation op Animals to the PhysicalCondition op Man : 243Sect. I. General Observations on the Animal Kingdom ib.II. Geographical Distribution of Animals 248III. The Camel 249IV. Domestication of Animals 258V. Animals as a Source of Food 264VI. Manufacture of Sal Ammoniac 267VII. Animals as a Source of Clothing, &c 270CHAP. X. Adaptation of the external World toTHE Exercise of the Intellectual Facultiesof Man 273Sect. I. On the Rise and Progress of Human Knowledgeib.,11. Opinions of Lucretius on the Constitution ofMatter in general; and on the Nature ofLight, Heat, Water, and Air 286III. Opinions of the Ancients on the Organizationand Classification of Animals 298IV. On those Animal Forms called Monsters, orLusus Naturae 334CHAP. XI. Conclusion 339APPENDIX 347ON THEADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURETO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.CHAPTER I.Introduction.SECT. I.The Physical Condition of Man.W HEN Hamlet, in contemplating the grandeurof creation, breaks forth into that sublime apostropheon man — " How noble in reason ! howinfinite in faculties ! in form and moving, howexpress and admirable ! in action, how like anangel ! in apprehension, how like a God ! thebeauty of the world ! the paragon of animals!" — who does not feel elated by the description?who does not feel conscious of itstruth?Nor is its truth the less admissible, becausethe poet, in concentrating the powers of hisimagination on the excellencies of that work ofB2 INTRODUCTION.creation which bears the stamp of the Creator'simage, has omitted to present to our view thereverse of the impression, the frailty namely ofour fallen nature : for although, on moral andreligious considerations, each individual is boundhabitually to take the one view in conjunctionwith the other; in a simply philosophical contemplationof human nature we are not precludedby any reasonable barrier, from takingsuch a partial view of the subject as the occasionmay suggest.In the present instance, indeed, I am strictlycalled upon to consider, not the moral, but thephysical condition of man : and to examine howfar the state of external nature is adapted to thatcondition ; whether we regard the provisionsmade for the supply of man's ivants, either naturalor acquired; or those which are made for theexercise of his intellectual faculties. The followingtreatise naturally, therefore, divides itselfinto two parts : in the first of which it is intendedto investigate and describe the physicalcondition of man ; in the second, the adaptationof external nature to that condition .But a wide field here opens to our view : forman cannot, under any circumstances, be consideredas an insulated being ; or unconnectedwith the rest of animated nature. He is indeedbut one link in the great chain of animal creation; and not only does the contemplation of hisINTRODUCTION. 3condition lose half its interest, if separated fromthe contemplation of the condition of other animals; but it cannot be satisfactorily investigatedwithout that aid. And, again, animal life itselfis but one among many modes of existence, bywhich the Creator has manifested his omnipotence; and which it is necessary to contemplatein connexion with the general phenomena ofnature, in order to shew the superiority of thatprovince, at the head of which human beingshave been placed.In attempting however to form a just estimateof the physical condition of man, we must notregard him merely under the aspect of savageor uncivilized life, and consider this as his naturalstate : for it may be presumed that, at thepresent day, such a puerile view of the questionis not for a moment entertained by any onecapable of philosophical reflection. In fact, inas many different states as man does actuallyexist, civilized or savage, so many are his naturalstates. If any indeed could be preeminentlycalled his natural state, it would be thatof civilization : for not only does experienceshew that his natural tendency is towards such astate ; but we know, from the highest authority,that the existence of man is connected with amoral end ; (with more indeed than a moral end ;since morals have immediately a relation to thislife only, while man is destined for a future ;)B 24 INTRODUCTION.and a moral end is hardly attainable in an uncivilizedstate of society.SECT. II.The general Constitution of external Nature.The more familiar objects of that externalworld by which man is surrounded are usuallydistributed into three kingdoms, as they arecalled; the miimal, vegetable, and mineral: butfor the purpose of this treatise it will be necessaryto take into our account the phenomena ofthe atmosphere also.The atmosphere principally consists of the airwhich we respire ; (a form of matter so subtle, inall its states, as to be invisible ;) together witha variable proportion of water, of which a partisalways retained in close combination with theair ; and, like the air itself, exists always in aninvisible state. There are also diffused throughthe atmosphere those still more subtle agents,heat and electricity. But all these, though of sosubtle a substance, are in their occasional effectsthe most powerful agents of nature. For, omittingthe consideration of their silent but wonderfuloperation, as exhibited in the process of vegetation,and in many other processes less open toobservation, let us consider the occasional effectsof air in the violence of a tornado ; or of water,in the inundation of a rapid river : or let us contemplatethe effect of either an indefinite diis5nation or increase of heat ; on the one hand, thenatural process of animal decomposition arrestedby its abstraction, so that the imbedded mammothremains at this moment in the same statethat it was four thousand years ago; and inwhich, under the same circumstances, it undoubtedlywould be, four thousand or four millionyears hence ; on the other hand the possibilityof the dissipation of all the constituentparts of matter, or their fixation in the state ofglass, resulting from the agency of indefinitelyincreased heat : or, lastly, let us consider thetremendous effects of condensed electricity inthe form of lightning : — and we shall necessarilyacknowledge that though in their usual state theconstituents of the atmosphere are among themost tranquil agents of nature, yet, when theirpower is concentrated, they are the most awfullyenergetic.In the mineral kingdom the most characteristicproperty of the several species appears to be adisposition to a peculiar mode of mutual attractionamong the particles composing the individualsbelonging to them ; from which attraction,when exerted under the most favourable circumstances,result that symmetry and regularity ofform, to which the term crystal has been applied.The transparency and degree of hardnessof crystals are various, and depend muchupon external circumstances. The form is funds36 INTRODUCTION.mentally the same for each species, though capableof being modified according to knownlaws ; and the substance is chemically the samethroughout its whole extent. Every atom of acrystallized mass of gypsum consists of water,lime, and sulphuric acid, united in the same proportionsas are found to exist in the whole mass,or in any given part of it.The individuals of the vegetable kingdom differvery remarkably from those of the mineral, bothin form and substance. In their form we seenothing like the mathematical precision of crystallization; and in their substance they differwidely, according to the part of the vegetablewhich is examined : so that, independently ofprevious knowledge of the species, we couldhardly discover any natural relation betweenthe several constituent parts of the individual.What is there in the insulated leaf of a rose orof a peach tree, that would lead us to expect thefruit of the one or the flower of the other ? Butthe most remarkable line of distinction betweenvegetables and the individuals of the precedingkingdom consists in their mode of increase andreproduction. Minerals can only increase assuch, by the apposition of particles specificallysimilar to themselves ; and can only be originallyproduced by the immediate combination of theirconstituent elements. But vegetables have anapparatus within them, by means of which theyINTRODUCTION. 7can assimilate the heterogeneous particles of thesurrounding soil to their own nature ; and theyhave also the power of producing individualsspecifically the same as themselves : in commonlanguage, they are capable of contributing totheir own growth, and to the continuation oftheir species. And as they produce these effectsby means of internal organs adapted to the purpose,they are hence denominated organizedbodies.The individuals of the animal kingdom veryclosely resemble those of the vegetable in thetwo properties just described. The respectiveorgans differ, as we might expect, in their formand position ; but in their functions or mode ofaction, there is a strong analogy, and even similarity,throughout. But animals differ from vegetablesmore remarkably than these do from everyunorganized form of matter, in being enduedwith sensation and volition ; properties whichextend the sphere of their relations to such adegree, as to raise them immeasurably aboveall other forms of matter in the scale of existence.In distributing the individuals of the materialworld among these four kingdoms of nature,there occasionally prevails considerable obscurity,not only with respect to the true placewhich an individual ought to occupy in thescale of a particular kingdom ; but even withB 48 INTRODUCTION.respect to the question, under which of the fourkingdoms it ought to be arranged ; this obscurityarising of course from the points of resemblanceapparently balancing, or more thanbalancing, the points of difference. Let us forinstance, in the atmospherical kingdom, take afragment of a perfectly transparent crystal ofpure ice ; and, under ordinary circumstances, itwould be difficult, either by the sight or thetouch, to distinguish it from a fragment of transparentquartz, or rock crystal : indeed the transferof the original term Kpvo-TaXXog, from the oneto the other, shews the close resemblance of thetwo. Some minerals again so nearly resemblevegetables in form, as to have given rise to specificterms of appellation, derived from the vegetablekingdom ; Si Flos ferri, mineral agaric, &c.And, lastly, many of the animals called sea-anemonesso far resemble the flower called by thesame name, that their real character is at firstvery doubtful to those who are unacquaintedwith the animals of that genus. But, omittingthese rare and equivocal instances, and avoidingthe confinement of abstract definitions, we maysafely affirm that, of all the kingdoms of nature,the individuals of the animal kingdom have themost extensive and important relations to thesurrounding universe. And I need not here insiston the obvious inference, that if among thekingdoms of nature animals hold the first rank,PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN. 9ill consequence of the importance of these relations,among animals themselves the first rankmust be assigned to man.CHAP. II.The Physical Character of tian.SECT. I.The Physical Character of Man compared with that ofother Animals,Although, when viewed in the aggregateof his faculties, moral as well as physical, manconfessedly holds the first rank among animals;yet, if we exclude from our consideration thoseintellectual powers and moral qualities by whichhe is essentially characterized, and confine ourview to his mere animal nature, we find that hescarcely differs in any important point from anyof the species of the higher classes. In eachthere is the same necessity for air, and sleep,and food ; and the nature of the food and themode of its digestion are not materially different: the nutrient fluid extracted by the processof digestion is converted into blood of thesame character, and distributed in the samemanner through the system : the constituentparts of the body and their mode of growth arealmost precisely the same ; for the bone, muscle.10 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.tendon, skin, hair, and brain of the horse, ordeer, or tiger, or bear, scarcely differ in theirphysical or chemical characters from the correspondentparts in man : similar secretions, as thebile, tears, and saliva, are separated by similarlyconstructed organs ; and similar parts becomesimilarly diseased : the special senses of sight,hearing, taste, and smell, are exercised throughthe medium of similar organs, simply modifiedaccording to the particular wants of individualspecies : the sources of mere bodily pain or pleasureare generally the same : the instinctive affections,passions, and propensities are the same,and are manifested in the same way ; the angrylook of a dog, for instance, bespeaking the internalfeeling as strongly as that of the man ; andthe playful and rapid movements of the youngpuppy resembling the careless hilarity of childhood,no less than the stayed motions and waryeye of the aged hound resemble the sedatenessof the aged human being.Probably, however, it would be nearer thetruth, were we to say that man, if divested of hisintellectual powers, and endued merely with hisanimal nature, m^ ould be inferior to the brutes ;for, possessing, as is the case, very few of theprospective or preservative instincts, he wouldbe unable, without the aid of his intellectualpowers, to provide for some of his most imperiouswants.PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN. 11But we may go even further than this. Letus suppose, for instance, a community of humanindividuals, who, though not gifted with intellectualpowers in a degree sufficient to instructothers, or improve themselves, were yet enduedwith them to a degree sufficient to render them,if the opportunity offered, docile to a certain extent,and capable of executing many of the commonoffices of life ; (and what town or villagedoes not present to our observation individualinstances of such unhappy shadows of humannature ?) how could a community like this exist ;in which, though all, by the terms of the supposition,were capable of learning something, yetnone would be capable of teaching any thing?of what use under these circumstances would bethat " instrument of instruments" the humanhand, where there was no presiding mind todirect its movements? And, with respect to thatM wonderful auxiliary of the human powers, howincorrect is the reflection of those who have assertedthat men are superior to brutes, only becausethey possess this instrument: and howtruly philosophical is the opposite reflection,that man is not superior to other animals becausehe possesses this instrument ; but he isprovided with such an instrument precisely becausehe is already superior to all other animals.And the converse is equally true, that, with intellectualpowers of even a higher order than12 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.those which they already possess, human beingscould not live in a state of society, could hardlyindeed exist in any state, unless furnished withsuch an instrument as the hand.SECT. II.Differences in the Form of the Infant and of the Adidt ;particularly ivith reference to the Spine.And yet, notwithstanding the confessed superiorityof man, if we view him only in the infancyof his individual existence, what is therethat is calculated to give an earnest of his futurevigour and activity, either with respect to bodilyor mental powers ; and what are all the advantagesof the external world to a creature so utterlyhelpless, so utterly incapable of using oreven passively enjoying them? In fact, with theexception of a very few instinctive rather thanvoluntary acts, such as that of deriving its nutrimentfrom the mother's breast, the infant is, fromthe feebleness of his powers, incapable of efficientexertion ; and depends entirely on the assistanceof those around it.The physical differences, observable in comparingthe structure of the infant with that ofthe adult, which enable the one to execute manyoperations of which the other is incapable, existto a certain extent in every part of the body ;but are perhaps more remarkable in the spinethan in any other part : and the spine there-physicalCHARACTER OF MAN. 13fore may be selected as a fit term of comparison.In considering the office of the adult spine,with a view to the present subject, we find thatgreat strength, combined with great flexibility,is particularly requisite. With reference tostrength, the pyramidal form of this naturalcolumn is obviously conducive to the purposeintended ; and the arrangement of the solid matter,of which it is composed, is such as to contributeto the same effect; for that solid matter, insteadof being collected into one compact mass,is diffused in such a manner as to resemble thestructure of sponge ; and it is Avell known, withreference to the strength of artificial columns,that, the same quantity of matter being givenfor each, and their height being the same, thosecolumns which are hollow are stronger than thosewhich are solid. Again, the whole column ismade up of numerous parts, called vertebrae,which are so firmly bound together as to lessenthe chance of being broken in the act of bending; and these vertebrae being applied to eachother, throughout, by broad horizontal surfaces,are thus best calculated to support the perpendicularpressure of the superincumbent parts.The effect of general strength is further accomplishedby the mutual locking in of the projectingportions, or processes, of the several vertebrae; and the same effect is accomplished to an14 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.additional extent among those vertebrae whichbelong to the thorax or chest, by the mode of articulationbetween them and the ribs ; each ribbeing united, not entirely to a single vertebra,but partially to two contiguous vertebrae, neartheir line of junction.The flexibility of the spine is secured to theutmost requisite extent, by the great number ofarticulations or joints which it possesses, amountingto more than twenty ; as well as by the elasticityof the substance constituting those joints :and the projecting parts or processes of the severalvertebrae, which serve for the insertion ofthe muscles and tendons which are to move thewhole, are differently disposed in the neck, theback, and the loins ; so as to be accommodated tothe degree and kind of motion required in each :thus the vertebrae of the neck admit of a lateralmotion to a greater extent than those of theback ; and the vertebrae of the back admit offlexion and extension to a greater degree thanthose of the neck ; while the vertebrae of theloins, being intended for support rather thanflexibility, have their processes so distributed,as to contribute principally to the former ofthose effects.Thus far we have considered the conditions ofthe adult spine, and have seen that they are calculatedmost admirably both for flexibility andfor strength. Let us now examine the same co-physicalCHARACTER OF MAN. 15lum in the age of early infancy ; and here weshall see, that, although at that period the parts,in which the conditions of strength and flexibilityare so remarkably developed in the adult state,are not yet formed, or not completed ; thoseparts which are essential to the security of thelife of the individual are nearly in as perfect astate as at the age of manhood : so that in themidst of the most decided marks of weaknessand imperfection in the rest of the column, thereis an extraordinary instance of strength and perfectgrowth, in precisely that part of it whichcould not have been left in an incomplete state,without manifest, immediate, and constant dangerto the individual. In other words, the bodiesand processes of the several vertebrae on whichthe strength and flexibility of the spine depend,are in early infancy still in a soft or cartilaginousstate; while the annular portions, which withtheir intervening ligaments constitute the spinalcanal, are completely ossified ; so as to give asgreat a degree of security to the spinal marrowas at the age of manhood.Nor need we spend much time in ascertainingthe final cause of this remarkable difference. Isit not indeed obvious on a moment's reflection,that the very helplessness and imperfect state ofthe physical powers in infancy, so ill understoodand appreciated, though so beautifully describedby Lucretius, contribute to the fuller developedPHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.ment of the moral character, not only of the individual,but of his parents also, and of all hisimmediate connexions? The mutual affection,for instance, that takes place and is cementedbetween the infant and its mother, during thelengthened period in which the latter nurses heroffspring ; the stimulus, which is given to theexertions of the other parent in supplying theincreasing wants of those who depend on himfor support; and the general feeling and expressionof good-will and attachment, which bindtogether the numerous individuals of the samefamily ; all coincide to increase the sum of humanhappiness and virtue. Whereas, were theinfant born with all its powers complete, andcapable of exerting those powers as soon asborn, independently of the assistance of parent,or sister, or brother ; what would then remainof those endearing relations, but the emptyname ?How incorrect then is the conclusion of thepoet in that otherwise most beautiful passage ofhis poem ! *' The new-born babe, which, like theshipwrecked mariner, lies prostrate on theground, naked and destitute of every assistonce required for the support of life, piercesthe surrounding air with its incessant cries ;** as if foreseeing the long train of miseries whichit must hereafter encounter. And yet the tenderfoal and lamb not only begin to crop thePHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN. 17grass, but play about the mother almost assoon as born. The nurse's soothing lullaby isnot wanted by them, nor the excitement of therattle or of any other toy : nor do they requirea change of clothing accommodated to thechanging temperature of the surrounding atmosphere; nor arms for their defence, norwalled cities for their protection ; kind naturesupplying to them in bountiful profusion whateveris necessary to satisfy their wants." Asif it might not have been reasonably and safelyconcluded, that that same power, (call it "nature,"or by any other name,) which provided so amplyfor the early wants of the lower species of animals,had some good and special reason forleaving the human infant in a temporary stateof helpless weakness.Turn porro Puer , hit saevis projects ab undidNavita, nodus hume janet, infant, indians omniVital auxilioj cum primum in hominis oresNoxious ex also matris natura profit ;Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut sequum 'st,Cui tantum in vita rested transire valorem.At varia crescent Pedes,, Armenia, Feraeque ;Nee crepitacula eis opu' sunt, nee unquam adhibenda 'stAlma nutricis bland atque infanta lequel :Nee varies quadrant Vessels pro tempore Coeli.Denique non Armis opus est, non Omnibus artis,Ques sua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia largeTellus ipsa part, naturae daedalus rerum.Lib. V. 223-235.18 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.SECT. III.Physical Superiority of Man ^ on what Principle to heestimated.From this helplessness in his early years, andfrom the occasional inferiority of some of hisphysical organs to the corresponding organs ofbrutes, it has sometimes been absurdly askedwhat claim man has, from his physical structureor powers, to be placed first in the scale of animalbeings. His strength, what is it to that ofthe elephant or of the horse, or even of somespecies of reptiles or fish? his powers of sightand motion, what are they to those of the bird?his sense of odours, to that of the dog ? his touch,to that of the spider ?And yet, even if we entirely omit the considerationof the soul, that immaterial and immortalprinciple which is for a time united tohis body, and view him only in his merely animalcharacter, man is still the most excellent ofanimals. How confined are the powers of otheranimals, considered generally, when comparedwith those of the human species. The comb ofthe bee indeed is in its construction wonderful ;and so is even the nest of the bird, or the habitationof the beaver : but these animals couldnever be taught to fabricate, or to use, the simplestof those machines or instruments, whichman, even in a very partially civilized state, isPHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN. 19in the daily habit of making and employing :much less coidd they be taught to perform thosecomplicated operations which result from theiremployment.But, it may perhaps be said, it is the mind,the intellectual power of man, which enableshim to produce the effects in question. Hismind indeed enables him to conceive the planof those operations which he executes, but itdoes no more : and were his form deficient byone of the smallest of its present members, hewould be rendered nearly helpless. Take fromhis hand but one of the fingers, and he could donothing. It is the human hand which gives thepower of execution to the human mind ; and itis the relative position of one of the fingers tothe other four, which principally stamps thecharacter of the hand ; for the thumb, by itscapability of being brought into opposition witheach of the other fingers, enables the hand toadapt itself to every shape ; and gives it thatcomplete dominion which it possesses over thevarious forms of matter'.Give all the intelligence therefore that youplease to the horse, or to the elephant, yet withhoofs instead of hands it is physically impossiblethat they could construct the simplest in-^ The term poltroon, if not of fancied etymology , (policetruncated,) verifies this statement ; the Roman soldier who hadbeen deprived of his thumb, being deemed unfit for service.c 220 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.instrument : nor could the organs even of thebeaver, were that animal gifted with the highestintellectual powers, enable it to effect much morethan it is capable of effecting at present.Man then is in every sense superior, in organizationas well as in intellectual powers, to allother animals ; and the degree of resemblanceto him, as thus superior, is the main principle ofclassification adopted at the present day : andupon the whole it will be found that, in proportionas the powers and relations of animals areextensive, their structure resembles that of man.And, with respect to the degrees of this resemblance,it may be observed that occasionally itis so strong, as to constitute all but identity ofform, as in some of the quadrumanous animals,or apes ; while in others it is so faint, as to renderit questionable whether we are viewing ananimate or inanimate body, as in several varietiesof sponge. It is evident that the stabilityof the principle of classification, now described,depends on the permanency of the specific formof animals : and it will be found that nature hasguarded this point in so sacred a manner, thatafter the lapse of thousands of years, the identityof the species may be not only traced, butdemonstrated, when nothing but the almostmouldering bones of the individual remain.But this subject will be considered more atlarge hereafter.PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN. 21As then, in estimating the moral or intellectualcharacters of particular men, we are not influencedby the consideration of insulated defectsor excellencies, but of the aggregate powers andqualities of the individual ; so, in comparingother animals with man, we ought not to affirmthat they approach nearer to the standard of hisperfection in proportion as they approach nearerto him in the structure of this or that part, or inthe development of particular powers or qualities; but in proportion to that approximationwhich results from the balance of their structureand powers considered collectively. And on thisprinciple, however nearly a few of them may resemblehim, they never can approach even theconfines of an equality of nature; whateversome speculative individuals have presumptuouslysupposed, or others in their simplicityhave feared. Thus the resemblance to the humanform, as well internally as externally, is soremarkable in particular species of the ape, thatwhile some philosophers (who however proceededwithout a knowledge or a due considerationof the true principles of the science concernedin their reasonings) have maintainedthat the ape and man are but varieties of thesame species, or at most but different species ofthe same genus; others, with an unnecessaryanxiety, have laboured to vindicate the supposedinsult thus offered to the dignity of human 322 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.ture, by searching for some fixed and invariabledifference in the structure of corresponding partsof each.But the question is puerile : for let us evensuppose that the whole and every part of thestructure of the ape were the same as that ofman ; let every bone, and every muscle, andevery fibre of the one correspond exactly withthose of the other, not only in form and situation,but also in size and proportion; let the brainitself, that tangible instrument of the intellectualpowers, be in structure the counterpart of thehuman ; yet, unless in its functions it resembledthat of man, in other words, unless there wereassociated with it his intellectual peculiaritiesand the moral and religious sense, to what dreadedconclusion would the closest resemblanceslead ? However near the approximation in theirform, in their nature there must ever be an immeasurabledistance between the two. The ape,compared with man, may indeed be among otheranimals " proxies hic :" still however it mustbe added, '-' long sed proxies inter valle."SECT. IV.Early and gradual Developement of the intellectualFaculties of Man,The helplessness of infancy then is but temporary: and a new scene soon opens to the contemplationof those who have sufficient opportuneCHARACTER OF MAN. 23cities of watching the development of the humancharacter : for, long as is the period, comparedwith the natural term of his own life, and longerstill, compared with the corresponding period inthe life of other animals, before man attains thefull stature of his mind as well as of his body ;he at a very early season begins to manifest thesuperiority of his intellectual nature : he verysoon begins to collect those materials for futureuse, which, though he will never hereafter beable to call to mind the moment or the circumstancesof their accession, he will use as effectuallyas if he had originally acquired them by industriousand direct attention.It does not fall within the intention of thistreatise to attempt to ascertain the period whenthe first dawn of intelligence enlightens thecountenance of the infant; but, undoubtedly,among its earliest beams are those expressivesmiles, which, although they are occasioned bythe aspect of the mother, and are perhaps onlyconnected with the expectation of an animalpleasure, namely the simple enjoyment of nourishment,yet are soon elicited by other individualsalso, who may understand how to winthe attention, and amuse the faculties of the infantmind.It seems as if there were implanted in theyoung of all animals, of the higher orders, aninstinctive propensity to those actions which arec424 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.naturally determined by their specific form whenfully developed ; in order perhaps, among otherpurposes, to give occasion for that exercise of thelimbs which is necessary to the health of the individual.Hence the young ram couches hishead, and tilts at his adversary, long before hishorns have appeared ; and the young pheasantassails his antagonist with his projected legs,long before his spurs have begun to bud. And,following this analogy, may we not reasonablysuppose that the sports of childhood have a naturaltendency to prefigure the occupations ofmanhood ; and that by the extension of the sameprinciple, independently of the impulse given bysystematic education, or spontaneous imitationof their parents and others, there are instinctivedifferences in the amusements of children of differenttemperaments, connected with their futuredestinations in life? Thus while the boy is engagedin the mimicry of military parade orequestrian exercises, the girl devotes her timeto more feminine occupations, and busies herselfin acting the various duties which her nurseryor household will hereafter require. The recordedattempt to conceal Achilles in femaleattire, whether founded in fact, or, as is probable,merely a fictitious anecdote, will serveto illustrate the present point ; inasmuch asthe use of the means, said to have been employedby Ulysses to detect the hero, was evilCHARACTER OF MAN. 25gently suggested by the principle just now advanced.At this early period of life then, the judgmentbeing not sufficiently matured for deeper observation,the mind is satisfied with a view of theform and surface of objects presented to it ; withtheir anatomy, as it were, rather than with theirphysiology : but, in the mean time, it is thusacquainting itself distractedly with those sensiblequalities, with which it must necessarily befamiliar before it can proceed to reason on causesand relations. And although it may appear atfirst view that a very disproportionately longperiod of our life is devoted to the mere exerciseof the senses, it is yet highly probable that importantmental operations may be simultaneouslygoing on, though we are at the time unconsciousof them : for something analogous isobservable throughout the whole course of ourexistence. How few there are, for instance, who,at any period of life, can call to mind a tenthpart of what they have even recently heard orobserved. And if this may be correctly affirmedof the adult age of life, and of those individualswhose original powers of mind are great, howmuch more strongly will it apply to those whoseoriginal powers of mind are not above the commonstandard, or not yet matured by age. Sothat there can be very little doubt that the generalprinciples and rules, which regulate the PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN.sowing and conduct of men on ordinary occasions,have been originally deduced by each individualfrom much of what has been long forgotten.It has been asserted by persons, whose intellectualpowers were of the highest order, andwhose industry was as remarkable as their abilities,that more than six or eight hours in eachday could not be employed effectively by thegenerality of young men for the purpose of mentalimprovement. If this however be the case,and as a general position it probably is not veryfar from the truth, in vain does the ambitiousstudent rob nature of that sleep which Providencehas made necessary for the renovation ofthe exhausted powers of our mind, as well as ofour body ; and in vain also does he attempt tocombine simultaneously the efforts of mental attentionwith bodily exercise, or to pursue hisseverer studies during the hour of meals : inboth which cases, they, who adopt the custom,not only err in employing too continuous an applicationof the powers of the mind ; but in impedingto a certain and often very inconvenientdegree the process of natural respiration ; and,consequently, of other functions of the body,particularly of digestion. How main a pointeLord chief justice Hale ; (see Boswell's Life of Johnson,vol. ii. p. oil, 4to. London, 1791 ;) not 4to mention living authorities.PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF MAN. 27ought it to be therefore with those who superintendthe education of young persons, to avoidthe application of too great a strain on the naturalspring of the intellectual powers.It is questionable whether at any period of lifethe correspondence between the external worldand the sensitive and intellectual faculties ofman, is so rapid, so vivid, and so effectual, asduring that space which is intermediate to infancyand adolescence : and this fact, if it be so,may be explained by that principle of our nature,on which depends the love of novelty ;namely, that susceptibility of the nerves whichmakes them capable of being stimulated morevehemently by new, than by accustomed impressions: for certainly this principle is likelyto be more exercised in proportion as we arenearer the period of infancy ; since every impressionis then either absolutely new, or has notyet rendered the nerves dull by too frequent arepetition of its application. Another happy instanceof the harmony that exists between thenature of man and the external world, is thereadiness and confidence with which at thisearly period of life the impressions of senseare received. Where all is new, and thereforeequally matter of wonder, there is yet no roomfor doubt. Nature teaches the mind to receiveevery thing without distrust, and to rely implicitlyon those inlets to knowledge, the impressPOWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,sons of sense, which are destined to be its onlyguides in the first years of life. Scepticism isnot the tendency of childhood : and perhaps it iswith reference to the analogy between the eye offaith and the eye of sense at this early period oflife, that our Saviour pronounces a blessing uponthose who receive the evidences of our religionwith the simplicity of little children.CHAP. III.On the Powell of the human Hand, consideredas a corporeal Organ,At length however, having passed the preparatorydiscipline both of natural and of parentaleducation, and having arrived at the maturityof his powers, man is fitted to exercise hisempire over the external world.But before we consider the character of thematerials provided for the supply of his variouswants, or for the exercise of his intellectual faculties,let us examine more closely than hithertothe condition of those corporeal organs, by theagency of which he is enabled to produce theresults intended.There can be no doubt that those organs are,if not exclusively, at least preeminently, thetrain and the hand: of the latter of which,not only are the uses of the several parts andCONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 29of the whole made practically manifest everymoment of our lives ; but its antecedent capabilitiesare so open to the investigating eyeof reason, as to afford one of the readiest subjectsof physical demonstration. And although,with respect to the brain, we not only have nosatisfactory evidence, but cannot even form aprobable conjecture, of the use or mode of actionof any particular part ; yet we cannot doubtthat it is the instrument by which our intellectualpowers hold communion with externalnature. I shall dedicate therefore this and thefollowing chapter to the consideration of thegeneral history of these organs.It would be an invasion of the province ofothers to give an anatomical description of theseveral constituent parts of the human hand :but in saying that its adaptation to the variouspurposes to which it is applicable is so open tothe investigating eye of reason, as to afford oneof the readiest subjects of physical demonstration,a tacit reference was made to that remarkablepart of the writings of Galen, in which heexpatiates upon the capabilities of this wonderfulinstrument: and that that extraordinarywriter could hardly have selected a better subject,for the exercise of his powers in intellectualanalysis, will be readily granted on a perusal ofthe following passages ; provided they correctlyrepresent the spirit of the original.30 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,In that portion of his works which bears thistitle, '* On the Use of the various Parts of theBody," after having defined what is to be understoodby the term part, or member, as appliedto an animal body, Galen proceeds in the followingmanner: "But all these parts of the** body were made for the use of the soul, thatsentient and intelligent principle which animatesthe body, and of which the body ismerely the organ ; and on this account thecomponent parts of animals differ accordingto the nature of this principle : for some animalsare bold and fierce ; others are timid and*' gentle : some are gregarious, and cooperate for** their mutual sustenance and defence ; othersare solitary, and avoid the society of their fellows: but all have a form or body accommodatedto their natural dispositions and habits.Thus the lion has powerful fangs and claws ;the hare has swiftness of foot, but in other** points is defenceless. And the fitness of thisarrangement is obvious : for those weaponswith which the lion is furnished are as appropriateto his nature, as they would be uselessto the timid hare ; whose safety, dependingentirely on flight, requires that swiftness offoot for which she is so remarkable. But to*' man, the only animal that partakes of divineintelligence, the Creator has given, in lieu of^ Lib. I. cap. 2.CONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 31** every other natural weapon or organ of desfence, that instrument, the hand ; an instrumentapplicable to every art and occasion, aswell of peace as of war. Man therefore wants*' not a hoof, or horn, or any other natural weapon; inasmuch as he is able with his hand tograsp a much more effective weapon, the swordor spear. Besides which, natural weapons canbe employed only in close conflict ; while someof the weapons employed by man, as javelinsor arrows, are even more effectual at a distance.** And, again, though man may be inferior tothe lion in swiftness, yet by his dexterity andskill he breaks in to his use a still swifter animal,the horse ; mounted on whose back hecan escape from or pursue the lion, or attackhim at every advantage. He is enabled moreoverby means of this instrument to clothe'' himself with armour of various kinds, or to entrenchhimself within camps or fenced cities.Whereas were his hands encumbered with anynatural armour, he would be unable to employthem for the fabrication of those instrumentsand means, which give him such a decidedadvantage over all the other animals of creation.Nor have we yet enumerated the most importantof those privileges which the hand impartsto man. With this he weaves the garmentthat protects him from the summer's32 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,heat or winter's cold ; with this he forms thevarious furniture of nets and snares, which givehim dominion over the inhabitants as well ofthe water as of the air and earth ; with hishand he constructs the lyre and lute, and thenumerous instruments employed in the severalarts of life ; with the hand he erects altars andshrines to the immortal gods ; and, lastly, bymeans of the same instrument he bequeaths toposterity, in writing, the intellectual treasuresof his own divine imagination : and hence we,who are living at this day, are enabled to holdconverse with Plato and Aristotle, and all thevenerable sages of antiquity."In reasoning on the utility of the hand, ascharacteristic of the human species, Galen thusexpresses himself: "Man being naturally destituteof corporeal weapons, as also of anyinstinctive art, has received a compensation,first in the gift of that peculiar instrument thehand, secondly in the gift of reason ; by theemployment of which two gifts he arms andprotects his body in every mode, and adornshis mind with the knowledge of every art.For since, had he been furnished with anynatural weapon, he would have possessed theuse of this alone on all occasions ; or had hebeen gifted with any instinctive art, he wouldnever have attained to the exercise of othere Lib. I. cap. 4.CONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 33arts ; hence he was created destitute of thoseinsulated and individual means and arts, whichcharacterize other animals ; inasmuch as it ismanifestly preferable to have the power ofmaking use of various means and various arts.Rightly, therefore, has Aristotle defined thehand to be the instrument antecedent to, orproductive of, all other instruments : andrightly might we, in imitation of Aristotle, definereason, as opposed to instinct, to be theart antecedent to, or productive of, all otherarts. For as the hand, though itself no particularorgan, is yet capable of being adaptedto all other organs, and is consequently antecedentto them ; so reason, though itself noparticular art, is yet capable of comprehendingand applying all ; and may therefore beconsidered as an art antecedent to all others.Thus man alone, of all animals, possessing inhis soul this general and original capacity, isjustly endued in his body with this generaland original instrument."let us then scrutinize this member of ourbody ; and inquire, not simply whether it bein itself useful for all the purposes of life, andadapted to an animal endued with the highestintelligence ; but whether its entire structurebe not such, that it could not be improved byany conceivable alteration.^ Lib. i. cap. 5.D34 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,In the first place, it possesses in an eminentdegree a leading quality of an organ of grasp ;since it readily applies itself to, and securelyholds, bodies of every form and size that arecapable of being moved by human strength.Nor need we inquire whether it be better forthis purpose that it should be divided intoseveral parts ; or, that it should be altogetherundivided : for is it not apparent without furtherreasoning, that had it been undivided, itcould have grasped only just such a portionof every object presented to it, as was equalto itself; but that, being divided into manyparts, it can both easily grasp bodies muchlarger than itself; and can accurately searchout, and lay hold of, the smallest particles ofmatter. For to the former it is capable ofgenerally applying itself so, as to encompass** them by the separation of the fingers ; whilein laying hold of very minute objects, the entirehand is not employed, but only the tipsof two of the fingers : because from the graspof the whole hand minute objects would easilyescape.Thus then the hand is framed in the mannermost convenient for laying a firm hold onobjects both greater and less than itself. Andin order to enable it to apply itself to objectsof various shapes, it is evidently most convenientthat it should be divided into manyCONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 35parts, as it is : and it seems to be better constitutedfor this purpose than any similar instrument; for it not only can apply itself tosubstances of a spherical form, so as to touchthem with every part of itself ; but it also cansecurely hold substances of a plane or of aconcave surface ; and, consequently, it canhold substances of any form.And, because many bodies are of too greata size to be held by one hand alone, naturehas therefore made each hand an assistant toits fellow ; so that the two, when together laysing hold of bodies of unusual bulk, on oppositesides, are fully equivalent to a single hand ofthe very largest dimensions : and, on this account,the hands are inclined towards, and inevery point are made equal to, each other ;which is at least desirable, if not necessary,in instruments intended to have a combinedaction.Take then any one of those unwieldy bodies,which a man can only lay hold of by means ofboth his hands, as a millstone or a rafter ; ortake one of the smallest objects, as a millet-seedor a hair, or a minute thorn ; or, lastly,reflect on that vast multitude of objects of every** possible size, intermediate to the greatest andthe least of those above mentioned ; and yeuwill find the hands so exactly capable of graspingeach particular one, as if they had beenD 236 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,*' expressly made for grasping that alone. Thusthe smallest things of all we take up with the*' tips of the fingers ; those which are a little largerwe take up with the same fingers, but not withthe tips of them ; substances still larger we** take up with three fingers, and so on withfour, or with all the five fingers, or even withthe whole hand : all which we could not do,were not the hand divided, and divided preciselyas it is. For suppose the thumb were** not placed as it is, in opposition to the otherfour fingers, but that all the five were rangedin the same line ; is it not evident that in thiscase their number would be useless? For inorder to have a firm hold of any thing, it isnecessary either to grasp it all round, or at** least to grasp it in two opposite points ; neitherof which would have been possible, if all thefive fingers had been placed in the same plane :but the end is now fully attainable, simply inconsequenceof the position of the thumb ;which is so placed, and has exactly such adegree of motion, as, by a slight inclination, tobe easily made to cooperate with any one ofthe four fingers. And no one can doubt thatnature purposely gave to the hands a formadapted to that mode of action, which theyare observed to have; while in the feet, whereextent of surface is wanted for support, all thesLib. ii. cap. 9.CONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 37toes are arranged in the same plane. '^ But, toreturn to a point which we were just now considering,it is not merely necessary in layinghold of minute objects to employ the extremitiesof the fingers opposed to each other, butthat those extremities should be exactly of thecharacter they are, namely soft, and round,and furnished with nails : for if the tips of thefingers were of bone, and not of flesh, we couldnot then lay hold of such minute bodies asthorns or hairs ; or if they were of a softer andmoister substance than flesh, neither then couldsuch small bodies have been secured. For, inorder that a body may be firmly held, it isnecessary that it be in some degree infoldedin the substance holding it; which conditioncould not have been fulfilled by a hard orbony material ; and on the other hand, a materialtoo soft would easily yield to substances ofwhich it attempted to lay hold, and would continuallylet them escape : whereas the extremitiesof the fingers are just of that intermediatedegree of consistence, which is calculatedfor their intended use.' But, since tangible substances vary muchin their degree of hardness, nature has adaptedthe structure of the extremities of the fingersto that circumstance : for they are not formedeither entirely of flesh, or of the substance1^ Lib. i. cap. 6. i Lib. i. cap. 7«D 338 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,called nail ; but of a most convenient combsnation of the two ; thus those parts which arecapable of being mutually brought in apposition,and which are employed in feeling forminute objects, are fleshy ; while the nails areplaced externally, as a support to the former.For the fingers are capable of holding soft substances,simply by the fleshy or soft part of** their extremity ; but they could not hold hard** substances without the assistance of nails ;deprived of the support of which the flesh** would be forced out of its position. And onthe other hand, we could not lay hold of hardsubstances by means of the nails alone ; for*' these being themselves hard, would easily slipfrom the contact of hard bodies.*' Thus then the soft flesh at the tips of the** fingers compensating for the unyielding natureof the nails, and the nails giving support to theyielding softness of the flesh, the fingers arehereby rendered capable of holding substancesthat are both small and hard. And this willbe more evident, if you consider the effect of** an unusual length of the nails ; for where the** nails are immoderately long, and consequentlycome in contact with each other, they cannotlay hold of any minute object, as a small thornor a hair : while, on the other hand, if, from*' being unusually short, they do not reach tothe extremities of the fingers, minute bodiesCONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 39are incapable of being held through defect ofthe requisite support: but if they reach exactlyto the extremities of the fingers, they then,and then only, fulfil the intention for whichthey were made. The nails, however, are applicableto many other purposes besides thosewhich have been mentioned ; as in polishingand scraping, and in tearing and peeling offthe skin of vegetables, or animals : and inshort, in almost every art where nicety of executionis required, the nails are called intoaction."In alluding to the sceptics of his time, the languageof Galen is as follows. *' whoever admiresnot the skill and contrivance of nature,must either be deficient in intellect, or musthave some private motive, which withholdshim from expressing his admiration. He mustbe deficient in intellect, if he do not perceivethat the human hand possesses all those qualificationswhich it is desirable it should possess; or if he think that it might have had aform and construction preferable to that whichit has : or he must be prejudiced, by havingimbibed some wretched opinions, consistentlywith which he could not allow that contrivanceis observable in the works of nature ^"^ Lib. iii. cap. 10.1 Galen adds : " Such persons we are bound to pity as beingoriginally infatuated nth respect to so main a point ; whiled440 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HAND,Galen then thus sums up this part of the argument." The contrivances of nature are sovarious, and so consummately skilful, that thewisest of mankind, in endeavouring to search** them out, have not yet been able to discoverthem all"^." And nearly in the same words,expressive of the same sentiment, does Solomonsay — " Then I beheld all the work of God, that*' a man cannot find out the work that is doneunder the sun : because though a man labour** to seek it out, yet he shall not find it ; yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet*' shall he not be able to find it."I may be permitted, perhaps, to subjoin apassage from another part of the same work ofGalen, though not confined to the same subject;in which, after having noticed many evidencesof design in the construction of the human body,particularly the adaptation, in the number and'' at the same time it behoves us to proceed in the instruction of'' those happier individuals, who are not only possessed of asound intellect, but of a love of truth."On another occasion, in reprobating such cavillers, he says:(lib. iii. cap. 10.) " But if I waste more time on such profligates,'' virtuous men might justly accuse me of polluting this sacred'* argument, which I have composed as a sincere hymn to thepraise and honour of the Creator ; being persuaded that truepiety to him consists, not in the sacrifice of whole hecatombs of'^ oxen, nor in the offer of a thousand varieties of incense ; but'^ in believing within ourselves, and in declaring to others, how'* great he is in wisdom, power, and goodness."«^ Lib. X. cap. 10. » Eccles. viii. consideredAS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 41size of the parts, to the effect to be produced,he breaks out into this remarkable apostrophe :® How can a man of any intelligence refer all** this to chance, as its cause : or, if he deny thisto be the effect of foresight and skill, I wouldask, what is there that foresight and skill doeffect? For surely where chance or fortune*' act, we see not this correspondence and regularityof parts. I am not very solicitous aboutterms ; but if you choose to call that chancewhich has so nicely constructed and so justlydistributed all the parts of an animal body, do** so ; only remember and allow, that in so doingyou do not fairly exercise the privilege offraming new terms : for in this way you maycall the meridian splendour of the sun by thename of night ; and the sun itself, darkness.What ! was it chance that made the skin giveway so as to produce a mouth ? or, if this happenedby chance, did chance also place teethand a tongue within that mouth ? For, if so,why should there not be teeth and a tongue inthe nostrils, or in the ear?" Or, to carry on asimilar appeal, " did chance dispose the teeth*' themselves in their present order ; which if it*' were any other than it is, what would be theconsequence ? If, for instance, the incisors andcanine teeth had occupied the back part of themouth, and the molar or grinding teeth hadLib. xi. cap. 7* and 8.42 POWERS OF THE HUMAN HANDoccupied the front, what use could we have** made of either ? Shall we then admire the skillof him who disposes a chorus of thirty-two** men in just order ; and can we deny the skillof the Creator, in disposing the same numberof teeth in an order so convenient, so necessaryeven for our existence?"He then extends the argument to the teeth ofother animals, as corresponding with the natureof their food ; and also to the form of their feet,as having a relation to the character of theirteeth.Never," says Cuvier, one of the most experiencedphysiologists of the present age, " neverdo you see in nature the cloven hoof of the ox** joined with the pointed fang of the lion ; nor** the sharp talons of the eagle accompanying** the flattened beak of the swan."In corresponding expressions Galen exclaims,** prow does it happen that the teeth and talons*' of the leopard and lion should be similar ; asalso the teeth and hoofs of the sheep andgoat ; that in animals which are by naturecourageous, there should be found sharp andstrong weapons, which are never found in*' those animals that are by nature timid : or,lastly, that in no animal do we meet with acombination of powerful talons with inoften-P Lib. xi. cap. 8. ed. Kiihn. vol. iii. p. 875. lin. 3-17- andp. 892. lin. 12-17.CONSIDERED AS A CORPOREAL ORGAN. 43sive teeth ? How should this happen, but that** they are all the work of a Creator, who everkept in mind the use and mutual relation of** different organs, and the final purpose of allhis works?"CHAP. IV.On the Brain, considered as the Organ of theIntellectual Faculties.IT can no more be doubted that many of thephenomena of nature, and the important practicaland philosophical conclusions deduced fromthem, would have been hitherto concealed fromhuman knowledge, had man failed to exercisethose intellectual faculties with which the Creatorhas endued him ; than that political communitieswould have failed to exist, and social lifeto be adorned with the arts of civilization, hadall mankind determined to pursue the mode oflife adopted by savage tribes : nor can it bedoubted that the Creator, in imparting to manintellectual faculties superior to those of brutes,intended that he should exercise them, not solelywith a view to the higher and future destinationof his nature, but also with a view to the purposesof this present life.Since however the senses of hearing, sight,and touch, which are the great inlets of knowledge,are possessed by many of the inferior44 ON THE BRAIN.classes of animals in common with ourselves, bysome indeed in a more exquisite degree ; sincealso those animals are capable of rememberingpast, and conjecturing future events, althoughincapable of the more abstract functions of theunderstanding ; it becomes highly interesting toinquire whether there is any thing in the physicalstructure of man which renders him morecapable of being acted on by external agents,with respect to the development of his intellectualfaculties, than brutes are : in other words,whether there is a material instrument in animalorganization, the general composition of which isin obvious correspondence with the degree ofintellect evinced by different species of animals,including man as one of those species.Now if any one in the least degree conversantwith the laws of optics and of sound, were todoubt the adaptation of the structure of the eyeand of the ear to those laws respectively, hewould fairly be ranked among the individualsof that class of speculations whose minds are tooweak to apprehend any truth. And though thereis not so obvious a relation between the structureof the brain and the exercise of the mentalfaculties, as in the case of the eye and light, andof the ear and sound ; yet the indications of anatural connexion between the two are bothclear and numerous. And hence not only havephilosophical inquirers in all ages acknowledgedON THE BRAIN. 45such a connexion ; but the most common observershave ever felt an intuitive conviction ofits existence, and have considered the brain asthe instrument of thought and reason ^ : thetruth of which assertion is evident from variousmetaphorical terms expressive both of intellectualdefect and of intellectual excellence.It may be presumed that, without the aid affordedby the study of anatomy or natural history,the most cursory observer might discoverthat the indications of intelligence manifestedby the various classes of animals generally correspondin degree with their approximation inphysical structure to man ; and that, if we confineour view to the four highest classes, namelyfish, reptiles, birds, and quadrupeds, and considerthem with reference to their respectivedegree of docility ; fish and reptiles, which arethe lowest in the scale, will readily be allowedto be inferior to birds, which are a degree higherin the scale; and these again will with equalreadiness be allowed to be inferior to quadrupeds,which are the highest.And it would be acknowledged upon a moreaccurate investigation, that, although there are^ and his pure brain.Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling house.Doth, by the idle comments which it makes.Foretell the ending of mortality.King John, Act 5, Scene 7-46 ON THE BRAIN.at first sight some seeming exceptions to the regularityof gradation, the apparent anomaliesvanish when put to the test of a philosophicalexamination. Should it be said, for instance, thatthe bee or the ant shews greater indications ofintelligence than many species much higher inthe scale of animal creation, it may be answeredthat those indications are manifested in actionswhich are referable to instinct, rather than intelligence; actions namely, which being essentialto the existence of the individuals, and the preservationof the species, are apparently determinedby some internal impulse which animalsunconsciously obey. Nor does it militate againstsuch a notion of instinct, that when accidentalimpediments prevent the regular evolution ofthe comb, taking that as an instance, the beeaccommodates the arrangement of its fabric tothe impediment which is placed in its way : forsuch a modification of instinct is as clearly necessaryin the case of an occasional impediment,as instinct itself is necessary for the generalpurpose.In speaking of instinct I purposely avoid aformal definition of the term : for any attemptto define with accuracy a principle, of the realnature of which we are ignorant, usually leavesus in a state of greater darkness than we werebefore ; of which the following extraordinary attempt,with reference to the very principle nowON THE BRAIN. 47under consideration, is a sufficient illustration.It is quoted from an author of the name of Wagner,in a work on the Brain of Man and otherAnimals, written by Wenzel and his brother;and is as follows : " The instincts of animalsare nothing more than inert or passive attractionsderived from the power of sensation : andthe instinctive operations of animals nothingmore than crystallizations produced throughthe agency of that power ^'."Of the general position, then, that the brainis the instrument of intelligence, and that thedegree of intelligence characteristic of differentclasses of animals is proportional to the approximationof their structure to that of man, itmay for the present be presumed that no onedoubts.CHAP. V.The Nervous System of Animals in general,SECT. I.The Nervous System of the inferior Animals.AS the peculiarities in the structure of thehuman brain cannot be understood without areference not only to the brain but to the nerve" Instincts animation nihil aliud sunt, quam attractionsfortune a sensibility profectae ; et forum artificial nihil aliudquam crystallizationes per sensibilities produce." Wenzel,De penitiori Structure Cerebri. Tubing, fol. 1812. p. 248, 1. 10.48 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.vous system at large of other animals ; it will benecessary to take such a survey of that systemas may be sufficient for the present purpose.In the lowest species of animals, which appearto be devoid of any specific organs of digestion,motion, or sensation ; whose economyindeed only enables them to contribute, in amode as yet unknown, to the nutrition and preservationof the individual, or to the continuationof the species, no distinct nervous systemhas yet been discovered, or at least satisfactorilydemonstrated : it is presumed rather than knownthat in such animals there exists a variable numberof small insulated masses of nervous mattercalled ganglions, which are connected with eachother, and with different parts of the body, bymeans of slender filaments that radiate fromthese masses in various directions.In ascending the scale of animal existencewe meet with species, in which, though devoidof organs of sense and motion, there exist distinctorgans of digestion : and in such speciesthe upper part of the passage leading from themouth to the stomach is usually surrounded bya kind of collar, from whence distinct nervesare distributed to the other parts of the body.In ascending still higher the scale of animalexistence we find, together with a greater symmetryof structure in the whole individual, additionalcomponent parts of the nervous system,NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 49and a greater degree of regularity in the distributionof these superadded parts. Thus in thoseclasses of animals which include the leech, thecentipede, and the bee, whose bodies are naturallydivisible into distinct segments, we find aseries of ganglions placed opposite the respectivesegments, and sending out nerves which are appropriatedto the muscles of voluntary motionattached to these segments : and the severalganglions are reciprocally united by interveningportions of a nervous cord, which is continuedfrom one extremity of the body to the other ; soas to present the appearance of a thread inwhich knots have been tied at stated intervals.And in those species of these classes which haveeyes, as is the case with insects, there are additionalganglions near the head ; from whicharise the nerves of vision, and, probably, oftouch.If in ascending still higher the scale of animalexistence, we examine the nervous systemof fish, reptiles, birds, and quadrupeds, we findthat those parts which are subservient to thenutrition of the individual, and to the continuationof the species, are supplied with ganglionsand nerves corresponding in their general characterand mode of distribution with the nervoussystem of the lower classes : and that the arrangementof the nerves of voluntary motionmerely differs from that of the intermediateE50 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.classes, in being more elaborate ; the individualnerves all communicating with a continuous cordwhich extends from one extremity of the bodyto the other; but which, instead of floatingloosely in the general cavity of the body, as ininsects, &c. is contained in a canal essentiallyconsisting of a series of parts called vertebrae,which taken together form what is called thespine or backbone. From the structure of thisspine these classes are called vertebrated : andit is deserving of notice that these classes alonehave a cranium, or skull.The nervous cord above described is knownmore familiarly under the name of the spinalmarrow, a term which is derived from its resemblance,in some of its physical characters,to the oil contained in the interior of the bonesof man and various other animals.That portion of the spinal cord which is contiguousto the head is continued into the cavityof the skull ; and is there apparently lost in amore or less regular mass of nervous mattercalled the brain : which is small, and simple inits structure, in fish ; larger, and more complicated,progressively, in reptiles, birds, andquadrupeds ; largest, and most complicated, inman.From the lower surface of the brainarise several pairs of nerves which are principallydistributed upon the organs of the distinctsenses, and the muscles of the face : and it isNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 51worthy of observation, that while the nerves ofthe muscles of mere animal motion, as of thetrunk and extremities, are derived from thespinal marrow ; the nerves of the muscles of theface, which may be called preeminently themuscles of moral and intellectual expression, arederived from the brain itself.In ascending then from fish, the lowest of thefour classes of vertebral animals, to quadrupedswhich constitute the highest class, the generalmass of the brain upon the whole increases inproportional size ; and at the same time it alsomore and more resembles that of man both inits general form, and in the character and proportionsof its several parts. But the humanbrain, when fully developed, contains parts whichdo not exist in the brain of those animal specieswhich approach nearest to man in the structureof this partIt cannot be uninteresting in an inquiry likethe present to add, with respect to those occasionaldeviations from the common form, calledmonsters and lusus naturae, that nature neverIt may be convenient here to state that the human brain isnaturally divisible into two parts called the cerebrum and cerebellum; of which the former is eight or nine times larger thanthe latter. The cerebrum, which occupies nearly the whole ofthe cavity of the skull, consists of two parts, called hemispheres ;and it should be particularly borne in mind that it is with referenceto the great size of its hemispheres that the human brainexceeds that of all other animals.e252 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.elevates the brain of an individual of a lower tothat of a higher class ; though the brain of anindividual of a higher is frequently not developedbeyond the degree of a lower : and this law ofthe development of the brain is, with referenceat least to the distinction of classes, correspondentwith that of the general form. Thusa lusus naturae or monster in the class of quadrupeds,for instance, or of birds, may have twoheads, or eight legs ; but the supernumeraryparts will be always those of its own class, indeedof its own species : and therefore it is absurdto suppose that if there be no mixture ofspecies in the same class, there should ever be aconfusion of two distinct kingdoms of nature.Horace, than whom no one better understoodthe principles of imaginative or artificial poetry,knew that abrupt combinations of heterogeneoussubjects would certainly offend a correct taste,because unnatural : for taste, it may be affirmed,is, in one of its essential attributes, a feeling inharmony with natural combinations ; whetherthe individual combination be that of sounds, orcolours, or forms, or of intellectual images, ormoral sentiments: and nature, which may bepreeminently called the Tiyyri ttoiyjtiky}, though shemay occasionally surprise the mind by unusualcombinations of organs natural to the species,never so couples together heterogeneous organs,as that the limbs of animals of one speciesNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 53should be united with those of another species ;in short, as Horace himself expresses the conception,Non utSerpents avitus eminently, tigris agiii *.SECT. II.The Nervous Si/stetn of Man.The nervous system of man, without any referenceto that of other animals, naturally resolvesitself into three sufficiently distinct divisions: of which one is appropriated to thoseparts, which characterize him as simply an organizedbeing ; another, to his powers of voluntarymotion ; the third, or the brain, to the organsof the several senses, and, probably, tothe manifestation of the intellectual powers andmoral affections.Of the two first of the foregoing divisions it isnot necessary to speak more at large ; becauseno doubt exists in the minds of physiologists asto the nature of their offices. But this is notthe case with respect to the brain ; which thereforedemands a greater share of our attention.Of all the parts of the nervous system takencollectively, the brain has been most generallyconsidered as the organ of the mind : and it haslong been a favourite speculation to endeavourto ascertain what part of this organ is subservesubject of lusus naturae, or monsters, will be resumedtowards the conclusion of this treatise.e354 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.vient to the existence and exercise of those intellectualpowers and moral feelings, which to agreater or less extent are possessed by manyother animals as well as man. It is presumed atleast that of the existence of intellectual powersor moral feelings in unites no one can doubt, whohas been at all accustomed to observe the charactersand habits of animals ^^ ; so that when incommon language it is asserted that man differsfrom other animals in possessing reason, whilethey are irrational, the term reason must betakenin its most extended sense, as implyingthe aggregate faculties of man, both moral andintellectual.I will not here insist on the evidence of theintellectual powers of brutes, as deducible fromthe effects of what we call instinct ; because inall those actions which are the result of instinct,animals appear to be guided by a natural andirresistible impulse from within, which leadsthem to seek or to avoid that which will beeither useful or injurious to them ; and enablesthem to perform the most complicated acts, asthe building of a nest or the construction of acomb, though they may never even have seenthe same acts performed by other individuals of^ Aristotle in his History of Animals, distinctly affirms suchan existence — even-Ti yap iv rots ttXclotois kuI tS>v aXkoiv ^^a>v i^vj;rasp nell rrjv yj/vxrjv rpoTrav, ane eVt rcoi/ dvOpconav e;(ft (f>av€ pare pasThis dia(fiopds, p. 212. lin. 7-10. ed. Beaker.NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 56their species. I would rather insist on thatevidence of their intellectual powers, which isderived from their conduct, when, in consequenceof having been removed from their naturalsphere of action, they are impelled by externaland accidental circumstances. Thus thewariness of old animals in avoiding the pursuitor arts of man, and the sagacity with which apractised hound will cut off an angle in order toshorten his distance, may be considered as proofsof a considerable degree of intellectual ratherthan of instinctive prudence in brutes.The playfulness of the young of most quadrupeds,often indeed observable in the adult animalalso, may be regarded as no obscure proofof the exercise of the intellectual faculty whichwe call imagination ; for that playfulness almostalways consists in the representation of mutualhostility, though the real disposition at the sametime is any thing but hostile. The dog for instance,under such circumstances, snarls andbites, but with evident intention not to hurt.Of the existence of moral feelings in brutes,there is still more decided proof than of the existenceof intellect. Thus the expression of joyin a dog at sight of his master is not to be mistaken,and the expression of fear in a horse atthe sound of the whip is equally unequivocal inits character. Again, animals become attachednot only to individuals of their own species, butE 456 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.to individuals of even a different order or class :and they evidently feel regret upon separationfrom these their companions.On the supposition that the brain is the organof the intellectual powers, physiologists havebeen led to compare the proportions of thewhole and of its several regions in man andbrutes ; in order to arrive at a knowledge ofsuch facts as might serve for a basis for ascertainingwhich are the parts essential to its actionas such an organ. It has been supposed bysome that the intellectual faculties may be inproportion to the absolute size of the brain ; suchan opinion being grounded on the fact, that thehuman brain is larger than that of the horse orox. But on the other hand, the brain of thewhale or of the elephant taken in its wholemass is larger than that of man ; though the intelligenceeven of the elephant bears no proportionto that of the human mind. Again, thebrain of the monkey or of the dog is smallerthan that of the ox or the ass ; yet with respectto their intellectual faculties the former approximatemuch more closely to man than the latter.Neither do the dispositions or qualities of animalsappear to be connected with the absolutesize of their brain : for animals most differentand even opposite in disposition may be rangedin the same class with reference to the size ofthis organ ; the tiger and the deer, for instance,NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 57among quadrupeds : and among birds, the hawkand the pigeon.It would appear probable from some instances,that the proportional size of the brain with referenceto the size of the body would give a moreuniform result. Thus a crocodile twelve feet inlength, a serpent eighteen feet in length, and aturtle that weighs from three hundred to fivehundred pounds, have not any of them a quantityof substance in their brain equal to half anounce; and the slight degree of intellectual powermanifested by these animals corresponds withsuch a proportion. But on examination it appearsthat the proportional size of the brain isnot a more certain criterion than the absolutesize. The brain of the elephant for instance issmaller in proportion to its body than that of anyother quadruped : and yet what quadruped exceedsthe elephant in sagacity ? and, in comparingmany of the inferior animals with man inthis respect, it is found that not only do differentgenera of the same order differ very widely fromeach other in the proportion of their brain totheir body, as the bat and the fox ; but that theproportion is sometimes inversely as the degreeof intellect of the animal : thus, as far as we arecapable of judging, the intellect of the fox is infinitelygreater than that of the bat, and yet thebrain of the former, proportionally to its body, isonly one half the size of the latter. Occasionally58 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.the disproportion is still greater in different speciesof the same genus, and even in different varietiesof the same species : thus in some dogs thebrain compared with the body is as one to fifty,while in others it is as one to three hundred.Again, it appears that the brain of some of thegenera of the lowest orders in a class is proportionallylarger than that of some of the genera ofthe highest orders. Thus, in the mammalia, thebrain of the dolphin, which animal is in thelowest order of that class, is in proportion to itsbody four times as large as the brain of the fox,which is an animal of one of the highest orders.And the brain of the mouse and of the mole arenearly, if not quite as large, in proportion to theirbody, as that of man. And the same circumstanceoccurs even in the second class, or birds;for the brain of the sparrow is in proportion tothe body as large as, nay even larger, than thatof man.Lastly, for it is unnecessary, and would betedious, to enter further into the detail of thispart of the subject, there does not appear to beany connexion between the degree of intellectualfaculties and the mutual proportions of the severalconstituent parts of the brain ; or between thedegree of the intellectual faculties and the mutualproportions of the brain and nerves. Sothat it appears, from a review of what has beenadvanced, that no criterion of the degree of in-NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 59reflect is found in the absolute size of the brain ;nor in its relative size, as compared with that ofthe body of the individual ; nor in the relativesize of its constituent parts, or of the whole of it,to the nerves.SECT. III.Indications of natural Talent and Disposition deduciblefrom the Structure of the Brain,If the entire history of the brain were a primaryobject in this treatise, it would be righthere to investigate in detail the observations andtheory of Dr. Gall respecting this organ : but onthe present occasion it will be unnecessary torefer to that theory further than may be requiredby the course of the argument.The simple enunciation of Dr. Gall's theoryis this, that " the brain in general is the instrumentby which the intellectual faculties, and** the moral sentiments and propensities, aremanifested ; particular parts of it being theorgans of those several faculties, sentiments,and propensities : and that according to thestate of these organs will be the faculties, sentiments,and propensities of each individual."To those who have objected to this theory,that it leads towards the doctrines of fatalism,and the material nature of the soul, it has beenanswered ; first, that as, according to the theory,no individual, who is endued with intellect, is60 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.deficient in the organs of those moral sentiments,which, if cultivated, will be sufficient to counteractwhatever bad propensities he may have,the theory cannot consistently be accused of inculcatingthe doctrine of fatalism : and secondly,that without inquiring what the soul is, or inwhat manner it is united to the body in this life,which Dr. Gall considers as questions not onlybeyond the comprehension of human reason, buttotally unconnected with his inquiries, the theorymerely investigates the material conditions ofthat part of the body by which the soul is affirmedto manifest itself to our observation.It has been already stated that, in exposingto view the lower surface of the brain, severalpairs of nerves are observable which may betraced to the organs of sense and some otherparts : and it is admitted by many anatomistsof acknowledged accuracy, that, of all thesepairs, not one, excepting the olfactory and optic,is derived from the great mass of the braincalled its hemispheres : but Dr. Gall shews it tobe highly probable in fact, as it evidently is inreasoning, that neither the olfactory nor theoptic nerves are derived from the hemispheres :whence it would appear that, with the doubtfulexception of the nerves of smell and sight, notasingle nerve of the whole body is derived fromthe great mass of the brain : for the organs ofthe other senses, and all the muscles of volensSYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 61try motion, together with the whole assemblageof the organs of digestion, and the heart, andthe lungs, are evidently supplied from othersources.Either then the great mass of the brain isallotted in a most anomalous disproportion tothe two senses of smell and sight, which in manyanimals are comparatively weak ; or, if it do notsupply the nerves of sight and smell, there is nopart of the body which it does apparently supplywith nerves : and then the conclusion pressesupon us with peculiar force, that the brain isexclusively the instrument of the immaterial partof our present existence.It appears from Dr. Gall's own account, thathe was originally led to this peculiar train ofthought by observing the difference of talentsand character in his own brothers, and in otherchildren with whom he happened to associate ;some of whom, though under perfectly similarcircumstances of education with the rest, weremuch quicker in apprehending what was taughtthem : and further, by observing in different individualsof the same species of animals, as dogs,that some were fierce, some mild : again, that inbirds of the same species some continued to singtheir own notes only, while others would listento, and imitate, artificial music : and with referenceto the last mentioned instance particularly,he argued that the difference could notsi NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.arise from the greater or less degree of perfectionin the organ of hearing, for it is the same inboth ; but must be looked for in the brain, towhich the organ of hearing conveys sounds ; andin which, and not in the ear itself, they are perceived.There are moreover numerous instanceswhich shew that the sense of hearing is by nomeans in proportion to the degree of perfectionin the construction of the ear. Thus, the doghears with indifference the sweetest melody : andyet the construction of his ear approximatesmore to that of man than the construction of theear of even the most musical birds. And onthis point Dr. Gall asks, if the organ of hearingdetermine the power of singing, why should thefemale bird be mute, seeing that in this part ofits bodily construction it differs not from themale ? It is equally observable that in men thetalent for music is not in proportion to any superiorityin the organ of hearing ; in the constructionof which indeed there is little if anyapparent difference between any two individuals.Partial insanity and partial idiocy are amongthe circumstances which Dr. Gall considers asfavouring his theory. The frequency of the formermust be a fact well known to all : the latteris not uncommon; and even persons of considerableintelligence occasionally exhibit very obscuretraces of this or that particular faculty.NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 63Other arguments in favour of his system hedraws from the temporary effects produced bycerebral inflammation on the state of the mentalpowers : in the case, for instance, of idiots, whoduring the inflammatory action have manifesteda considerable degree of understanding; but afterthe cessation of that action have relapsed intotheir former state of fatuity.It would seem, in the instances here adducedby Dr. Gall, that the mental faculties which hadbeen previously in a state of fatuity, are renderedfor the time rational, in consequence of adegree of excitement which in individuals notlabouring under fatuity would have probablyproduced delirium : and, as a rational state ofthe faculties may be considered, to use a mathematicalexpression, as a mean proportional tofatuity and delirium, it might be expected thatthe same cause which would raise a rationalstate of the faculties to delirium, would raise anidiotic only to a natural state : as, in a similarmanner, wine is observed to modify the charactersof individuals of different temperaments, byelevating them for the moment :It keeps the unhappy from sinking,And makes e'en the valiant more brave."It would occupy too much time to enter intothe detail of this interesting part of Dr. Gallssystem : nor was more originally intended thanto introduce the subject to the consideration of64 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.those, who happen not to have reflected on itbefore, in such a manner as to enable them toform some judgment of the merits of a theory,the character of which has been injured to thefull as much by its injudicious friends as by itsprofessed enemies. Of this theory it may perhapsbe affirmed with truth, that, considered asan abstract philosophical speculation, it is highlyingenious, and founded upon unobjectionableprinciples : and that while the general conclusionis inevitable with respect to the collectivefunctions of the brain, there is nothing unreasonablein supposing that specific parts servespecific purposes. The rock, on which Dr. Galland his implicit advocates have split, is the attemptto fix the local boundaries of the severalfaculties of the soul. Had he satisfied himselfWith developing the structure of the brain in thevarious classes of animals ; and had he been contentto shew that, in tracing its structure fromthose animals which manifest the least indicationsof intelligence to those which exhibit stillstronger and stronger, it proportionally advancesin its resemblance to the structure of the human ;and lastly, had he only drawn from these premisesthe general probable conclusion, that specificparts had specific uses with respect to themanifestations of the immaterial principle ofanimal existence ; (and assuredly brutes are enduedwith such a principle, though, as beingNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 65devoid of the moral sense, they are not fitted forafuture state, and consequently perish whentheir bodies die ;) had Dr. Gall been contentto have stopped at this point, without venturingto define the local habitations of the supposedspecific organs, he would have acquiredthe unalloyed fame of having developed a beautifultrain of inductive reasoning in one of themost interesting provinces of speculative philosophy: whereas, in the extent to which he hascarried his principles, his doctrine has becomeridiculous as a system ; while in its individualapplications it is not only useless, but of a positivelymischievous tendency : for, without the aidof this system, every man of common sense hassufficient grounds on which to judge of the charactersof those with whom he associates ; andit is evidently more safe to judge of others bytheir words and actions, and the general tenorof their conduct, than to run the risk of condemningan individual from the indication ofsome organ, the activity of which, for a momentallowing its existence, may have been subduedby the operation of moral or religious motives.But there is an occasional absurdity in theapplication of the theory, which, though obvious,does not seem to have been noticed. Letus suppose, for instance, the case of a murderer ;and that a disciple of Dr. Gall were to maintainthat, as the crime of murder proceeds from theF66 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.operation of the organ of destructiveness, thatorgan would be found highly developed in suchan individual ; and yet, upon actual inspection,this were not found to be the case. Here,although the disciple of Dr. Gall might be disappointedin finding no such development, aplain reasoner would not be so disappointed :for is it not obvious that avarice, or shame, orjealousy, might in a moment operate so powerfullyas to lead an individual to the crime ofmurder, whose nature and habits were as faras possible removed from the propensity to thatcrime ; and who, consequently, according toDr. Gall's own principles, would be devoid ofany undue development of the organ of murder?With respect to ourselves indeed, the study ofthe system may be attended sometimes with thehappiest consequences : for if, from the contemplationof it, we can be strengthened in our convictionof the fact, which both reason and revelationteach us, that each individual is liable toparticular temptations depending on his specifictemperament, we shall thus have one additionalmemento of our frailty, one additional incentiveto watch over, and combat, ** the sin which doth*' so easily beset us."NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. fjffSECT. IV.The general Doctrine of Physiognomy as connected iviththe Form of the Body.As the indiscreet zeal, not only of Dr. Gall,but of physiognomists in general, has thrownunmerited discredit on that department of speculativephilosophy which they have cultivated,it may be worth while to examine the subject onother authority than that of professed physiognomists.There are many phenomena, then, connectedwith the moral and intellectual faculties of man,both in a healthy and diseased state, which, byshewing the reciprocal influence of the two distinctparts of our nature, the soul and the body,render it probable that the energies of the former,although it be itself immaterial, may bemanifested by means of a material instrument.The existence of this reciprocal influence, whichindeed we might expect from their intimatethough mysterious union, cannot be denied.Thus grief or expectation destroys appetite ;and mental application to any favourite pursuitmakes us insensible of the want of food : and,on the other hand, a disordered state of the digestiveorgans evidently impedes the free exerciseof the mental powers ; or oppresses the soulwith those dreadful, though really groundlessapprehensions, which have been termed hypochondriacalfrom the situation of the organs,f268 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.the morbid state of which is supposed to giveris to those apprehensions. Again, intoxicationconfuses the memory and judgment ; andthe repeated abuse of wine permanently debilitatesthe mind, and often terminates in confirmedinsanity. The state of the air affects themental energies and moral feelings of many individuals,to a degree inconceivable to those whoare not thus subject to its influence. And theimpression of fear has been known suddenly toarrest the symptoms of endemic ague and epilepsy.The general idea that this connexion of thesoul and body may be traced in the conformationof the latter, it will be at once remembered,is by no means new : and the anecdote of theunfavourable judgment passed on the moral dispositionof Socrates, from the character of hiscountenance, will readily recur to the mind onthis occasion. Aristotle has even entered intosome details on the forms and shades of colourof the hair and features, and indeed of variousother parts of the body, as indicative of particulartemperaments or constitutions of the mind.And it is hardly a question, whether every indiaFor an exposition of Aristotle's views on this subject consulta work of Galen, entitled Hei Tien Th ^YXH2 HGON^ inwhich the question of the connexion between the faculties of thesoul and the conformation of the body is discussed. Galen, op.Kiihn, vol. iv. p. 768-798.NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.vidual is not accustomed in some degree to decideon character from the features, the colourof the hair, and other external indications, independentlyof that expression of the countenance,which rather marks the actually existingstate of the mind than the latent disposition ofit y. But if it be in any degree probable thatthe connexion between the soul and body maybetraced in the conformation of the features orother parts of the body, in a much greater mustit be probable that that connexion may be tracedin the structure of the brain.Nor does there appear, on the ground eitherof reason or of religion, any thing objectionableor absurd in the assumption, antecedently toobservation, that the intellectual and moral tenShakspeare has several references to indications of personalcharacter, as depending on the form of the countenance, &:c.Cleopatra. Bear'st thou her face in mind? isn't long, or round?Messenger. Round, even to Jaulii?iess.Cleopatra. For the most part too.They are foolish that are so. Her hair, what colour ?Messenger. Brown, madam : and her foreheadAs low as she would wish it.Antony and Cleopatra, Act III. Scene 3.Caliban We shall lose our time.And all be turn'd to barnacles, or to apesWith, foreheads villanous lory.Tempest, Act IV. near the end.Julia. Ay, but her forehead' s low ; and mine's as high.Two Gentlemen of Verona, end of Act IV.f370 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.(benches of the soul may in a qualified sense bedetermined, or at least modified, by the peculiarstructure of the body : that they are frequentlycoincident with certain peculiarities of corporealstructure is a matter of actual observation.Is it absurd to suppose that, man being a compoundof soul and body, the body has been soconstructed in each individual as to become afit arena on which that struggle shall be manifested,which undoubtedly takes place betweenthe conflicting passions of the soul ? For it willnot be denied by those to whom this treatise isaddressed, that the soul wants not the substanceof a corporeal frame for the mere existence of itsevil principles, but only for the external manifestationof them. An authority at least whichcannot be questioned by a believer in revelation,asserts that out of the heart, that is, evidentlyfrom the context, out of the soul, proceed murder,theft, adultery, and the like.Is it absurd to suppose that, the brain beinga very complicated organ, made up of distinctlydifferent parts, these parts are subservient to theexercise of different functions ? or, since it is evidentthat in every other individual organ of thebody, where there is an identity of structure,there is also an identity of function in all theparts, may we not fairly presume that, were theintegral parts different, the effects producedwould be different; and, consequently, that asNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 71the integral parts of the brain differ from eachother, the offices of those parts may be different?Or, again, will it be denied as a matter of factthat different faculties and propensities manifestthemselves in different individuals; and is it unreasonable,on the ground of analogy, our onlyground in this case, to suppose that they manifestthemselves through the agency of differentinstruments ? And since the visceral nerves areappropriated to the mere vital functions of nutrition; and the spinal nerves to general muscularmotion and common sensation ; and thenerves of the special senses occupy but a verysmall portion of the brain ; to what assignablepurpose can the great mass of that organ be applied,if not to the operations of that intellectualand moral principle, which, after the abstractionof the organs of nutrition, motion, and sensation,is the only imaginable part of our presentnature ?Is the language of Scripture entirely allegoricalthroughout the sacred volume ? or do we believeon just grounds that we are contaminatedwith an innate propensity to evil ; that there aretwo principles within us constantly strugglingfor the mastery ; and that, spite of our betterpart, and against the strongest feelings of conscienceand determination of judgment, we stillare for ever yielding to the worse ?Shall we deny that the tendencies to evil areF 472 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.different in character in different individuals;and by that denial shall we attempt to falsifythe testimony of experience as to the fact itself;and the conclusions of antecedent reasoning asto its probability : for, if all men were avariciousfor instance, or ambitious in the same points,where would be the field for the display of otherqualities ; and how could the affairs of the worldbe conducted?But whatever may be the real state of thecase — whether the brain act as a simple organby the simultaneous operation of all its parts ;or whether those parts act independently in theproduction of specific effects — no one can doubtthat the organ itself is the mysterious instrumentby means of which, principally, if not exclusively,a communication is maintained betweenthe external world and the soul. Nor canit be doubted, indeed it is a matter of fact whichis constantly open to our observation, that thedegree of approximation in the structure of thebrain of other animals to that of man bears avery obvious relation to the degree of intelligencemanifested by the various classes of animals: so that, in just reasoning, it must on everyconsideration be admitted to be the instrumentby which the various degrees of intelligence aremanifested.It is a matter also of observation, that thepowers of the mind are capable, like those ofNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 73the body, of being strengthened by exercise andcultivation : and, further, that not only do themental faculties gradually manifest themselvesfrom the moment of birth onwards ; but that thephysical development of the brain advancesproportionally up to a certain period. But onthis point it will be desirable to make a fewmore particular remarks.SECT. V.The Developement of the Human Brain compared withthat of other Animals,The brain of all vertebral animals, includingeven man, is nearly identical in structure in theearly period of the embryo state of those animals.But at the period of birth there is a veryremarkable difference between the degree ofdevelopment of the human brain, and of thatof the inferior animals. In quadrupeds, for instance,the brain, according to Wenzel, is fullydeveloped at the moment of the birth of the individual; contains, that is, at that time, all theparts in as perfect a state as they are in theadult animal of the same species (Wenzel,p. 246) : while, with respect to the human species,it is asserted by Wenzel, and his statementis confirmed by the observations of others,that although the brain makes continual andrapid advances to its ultimate magnitude andperfect state, from the period of conception to74 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.the seventh year after birth, yet all the partshave not attained their full size till the age ofseven years (p. 254). And this difference isexactly what might be antecedently expected,from the comparatively greater degree of intelligencemanifested by the young of other animals,of the higher orders at least, than by thehuman infant.But it is very worthy of observation, that thoseparts of the human brain, which are formedsubsequently to birth, are entirely wanting inall other animals, including even quadrupeds,which Wenzel has examined (p. 246): and thatduring the evolution of the parts peculiar to thehuman brain, the peculiar faculties of the humanintellect are proportionally developed : andfinally, that, till those parts are developed, thosefaculties are not clearly perceptible (Wenzel,p. 247). But at the age of seven years the humanbeing essentially possesses, although notyet matured by exercise and education, all thoseintellectual faculties which are thenceforwardobservable : and at that age the brain is perfectin all its parts. And, from the age of sevenyears to the age of eighty, the changes of thehuman brain with respect to size, either collectivelyor in its several parts, are so trifling ashardly to be worth notice (p. 247-266).In comparing either individual actions or thecomplicated operations of man, with those ofNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 75other animals, it is observable, that the actionsand operations of the adult human being asmuch excel in design and method the actionsand operations of all other adult animals, asthose of the infant are excelled in precision andadroitness by the young of all other animals(p. 247) : and both these facts correspond withthe relative constitution of the brain at the respectiveperiods ; the brain of other animals beingperfect at birth, which is not the case withthe infant ; while the brain of the adult humanbeing manifests a higher degree of organizationthan that of any other animal, and is thereforephysically fitted for functions of a higherorder.It appears then highly probable, both fromthe intuitive conviction of mankind at large, andfrom a comparative examination of the structureand development of the brain in man andother animals, that the intellectual superiorityof man, physically considered, depends on thepeculiarities of the human brain : and with respectto the rest of his body, it is certain thatthe hand is the instrument which gives him thatdecidedly physical superiority which he possessesover all other animals. In all other respectsthere is no physiological difference, ofany importance at least to the present argument,between man and the higher orders ofanimals : and the peculiarities of his physical76 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.condition, with reference to the form and generalpowers of his body, rest therefore on thosetwo organs, the hand and the brain. And asthe adaptation of the external world to the physicalcondition of man must have a special referenceto those peculiarities in his structurewhich distinguish him essentially from otheranimals, it has therefore been thought importantto dedicate a considerable portion of thistreatise to the investigation of the characters ofthe two organs above mentioned.SECT. VI.Cursory Vieiv of the Extent of Human Power over theObjects of the external World,Having examined, as far as is necessary forthe purpose of this treatise, the animal characterof man, both with respect to the points inwhich he partakes of the nature of other species,and those in which he is elevated above them ;let us proceed to consider the adaptation of theexternal world to the physical condition of thatbeing to whom the Creator has given dominionover all his other works ; whom alone, of all theliving tenants of the earth, he has endued witha mind capable of conceiving, and corporealpowers capable of executing those wonderfulcombinations, which make him lord of the worldwhich he inhabits ; which enable him to compelthe properties of inert matter to bend to hisNERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 77behests ; and to direct not only the energies ofthe inferior animals, but even those of his fellowcreatures, to the purposes which he mayhave in view.In contemplating, for instance, as in all thepride of its appointments it advances throughthe waves, the majestic movements of a man-of-war,let us trace its whole history, and thenceadmire the extent of human power over the materialworld. Look at the rude canoe of the NewZealander, or call to mind the nearly as rudecoracle of our own forefathers, and comparethose simple and puny products of an infant artwith the complicated and gigantic triumph ofnaval architecture now before you ; and no wonderif, observing the ease and precision of itsmovements, the unlettered savages of the islandsof the Pacific conceived the stupendous machineto be some form of animated matter; whose fiercenature and awful power were announced by thetremendous roar and destructive effects of itsartillery.Or, passing from inert matter to living andintellectual agents, let us in imagination firstview the tumultuary and predatory incursionsof the aboriginal borderers of the Ohio, or evenof the more civilized tribes of modern Arabia ;revenge or booty their sole object, without anyplan of civil government or national aggrandizement;and then let us contemplate the profound78 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS.views and combinations of the Macedonian monarch— that military meteor, whose course, thoughoccasionally eccentric, was yet constantly regulatedby the preponderating attraction of his originaldesign ; and whose plans, though markedby temporary and local devastation, yet securedthe foundation of the durable and general prosperityof future generations. The theme is toovast and too sublime for the present effort, evenhad it never been before attempted ; but thegenius of the learned author of the " Commerceand Navigation of the Ancients ^" has admirablydeveloped the great and profound views ofAlexander, ignorantly described by Pope as thesallies of insane ambition ; and has significantlyalluded to the successful accomplishment of hiswonderful attempt, in that beautifully appropriatelegend placed under the engraving of thehead of his hero,Aerial terres gentibus^.''"'Or let us investigate the career of the equallyextraordinary conqueror of the present century.View him overcoming every moral and physicaldifficulty in the pursuit of his gigantic and fearfulproject of universal empire ; uniting distantand hostile nations in confederacies against theirown liberties ; changing their long established^ The very reverend W. Vincent, D. D. late dean of Westminster.'^ Q. Curt. lib. ix. cap. 6.NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMALS. 79dynasties, in order to set over them kings of hisown family. View him absorbed in his heartlesscalculations on the advantages to be obtained,for his personal aggrandizement, by theendless sacrifice of human life ; breaking intothe peaceful occupations of domestic scenes, anddesolating the happiness of myriads of his subjects,not to ward off the dangers of hostile invasion,nor to lay the foundation of the futuregood of his country, but solely to gratify his owninsatiable thirst of power; and yet by the magicof his name rallying round his standard, evento the last, the remnants of his former recklessschemes of inordinate ambition.In meditating on the astonishing scene presentedto the imagination by the description ofa career so strange, we might almost be in doubtwhether these effects a\ ere produced by a merehuman mind ; or marked the presence of a superhumanintelligence, permitted for a time toexercise a guilty world. But whatever he were,he is gone ; and his place will know him nomore. One moral reflection in the meantimeforces itself upon the mind ; partly applicableto himself, and partly to mankind at large.Inebriated with prosperity, and regardless ofthe Power which could alone uphold him, hefell from his towering height; and was banishedfar from the theatre of his former ambition, andalmost, indeed, from the haunts of men. But,80 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREhaply, the prolongation of his existence in thesilent retirement of that sequestered island wasmercifully intended to lead him to a calm reflectionon the real value of sublunary possessions: for how very visionary and like a dreammust all his former life have frequently appearedto him, when standing on the brow of someprecipitous rock, the natural boundary of his insulatedprison, he mused on the interminableexpanse of the Atlantic ; and compared his presentdesolation with his former glory. Or, if theterrors of Omnipotence failed even then to movehis obdurate heart, his example at least remainsa merciful beacon to others ; who may learnfrom his doom, that there is a Power which cansay, as easily to the tempestuous ocean of ambition,as to the natural deep, " Hitherto shalt thoucome, but no further : and here shall thyproud waves be stayed."CHAP. vr.Adaptation of the Atmosphere to the PhysicalCondition of Man,SECT. I.The general Constitution of the Atmosphere,IN the foregoing part of this treatise the physicalcondition of man has been considered underthe view of the general capabilities of his nature,rather than of his actual state : but it is evidentTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 81on a moment's rejection that his actual state willbe very different at different periods of time, orindifferent parts of the world at the same period: and this observation applies no less tocommunities than to individuals. How greatthe contrast, with reference to the case of individuals,between the intellectual powers and attainmentsof a Newton and a native of NewHolland ; and in the case of communities, howgreat the contrast between any of the kingdomsof modern Europe, and the rude tribes fromWhence they were originally derived.In proceeding then to illustrate the adaptationof the external world to the physical conditionof the human species, we must view individualsor communities under all possible circumstancesof existence, and make the illustrationof as general application as the nature ofthe subject evidently demands.And, in order to effect something like a systematicarrangement of the immense mass ofmaterials whence the following illustration is tobe deduced, it is proposed to investigate separatelythe four kingdoms or divisions of nature,the general characters of which were given inthe commencement of this treatise ; beginningwith the atmospherical and ending with the animalkingdom.If it where possible, with the bodily as with themental eye, to behold the constitution of the 82 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREatmosphere which surrounds our earth, we shouldview a compound probably the most complexin nature : for into this circumambient ocean ofair, as it is called by Lucretius, are carried upwhatever exhalations arise not only from theearth itself, but from every organized form ofmatter, whether living or in a state of decomposition,that is found upon the earth's surface ; thedews of morning, the balms of evening ; the fragranceof every plant and flower; the breathand characteristic odour of every animal ; thevapour invisibly arising from the surface of thewhole ocean and its tributary streams ; and,lastly, those circumscribed and baneful effluvia,however generated, which when confined to definiteportions of the atmosphere produce thosevarious forms of fever which infest particulardistricts : or those more awful and mysteriousmiasmata, which, arising in some distant region,and advancing by a slow but certain march,carry dismay and death to the inhabitants ofanother hemisphere.Such is the complex character of the atmosphere;and, indeed, from this assemblage ofvapours contained in it, it has received its peculiarappellation ; being the receptacle, or magazine,as it were, of terrestrial exhalations ^,^ Semper enim quodcunque fruit de rebus ; id omneAris in magnum fertur mare. Lib. V. 277» 8-TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 83All these various exhalations however may beconsidered as foreign to the constitution of theair, being neither constantly nor necessarily presentanywhere ; all, with the exception of thataqueous vapour which is continually rising fromthe surface of the earth, as well as of the oceanand every lake and river. But, in addition tothis aqueous vapour, the air is also charged toa variable extent with light and heat and electricity: of which the two first are so obviouslyadapted to the wants of man as to demand immediateattention. Electricity is probably ofequal importance in its relation to man : but thetrue character of that relation has not yet beensufficiently developed to call for a distinct considerationon the present occasion.SECT. II.Light.The metaphorical expressions of all ages andnations, with respect to light, sufficiently evincethe value in which that inestimable gift is held.In the sacred Scriptures indeed, not only aretemporal blessings compared to light, and temporalevils to darkness ; but holy deeds are frequentlydescribed under the character of theformer ; and unholy deeds under the characterof the latter : and, with respect either to classicalor oriental literature, a thousand instances mighteasily be adduced illustrative of the same metaphoricaluse of the terms in question.G 284 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREWhen, after a dark and tempestuous night,the mariner first perceives the dawn of returningday ; although that dawn discover to his viewthe evil plight to which the storm has reducedhis vessel, why does he still hail day's harbingeras his greatest relief, but because without theaid of light he could not possibly extricate himselffrom the difficulties of his situation ? Or,when the child, awakened from its sleep, findsitself alone in darkness, why is it overwhelmedwith terror, and why does it call out for protection,but from the influence of those undefinedfears, which naturally occur to the mind underthe privation of light ?There is something so congenial to our naturein light, something so repulsive in darkness, that,probably on this ground alone, the very aspectof inanimate things is instinctively either gratefulor the reverse, in consequence of our beingreminded by that aspect of the one or of theother : so that on this principle, perhaps, particularcolours throughout every province of natureare more or less acceptable in proportionas they approach nearest or recede farthest fromthe character of light, whether reflected immediatelyfrom the heavenly bodies, or from theazure of the sky, or from the thousand brillianthues with which the setting or the rising sunilluminates its attendant clouds.In illustration of the principle just advanced,TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 85gold and silver among metals might be opposedto lead and iron : and, among flowers, the brilliancyof the crocus, the lily, or the rose, to thelurid aspect of henbane or belladonna. Andthough something of a moral character may inthese instances determine the preference ; yetthere is nothing unreasonable in supposing, that,as the instincts of the inferior animals regulatetheir tastes and distastes to natural objects ; sothere may also be in the case of human beingscongruities, or the reverse, between the sense impressedand the object impressing it. In fact,with respect to that sense, the organ of which isthe ear, it is known that infants shrink back fromdeep sounds, and express delight at acute sounds,long before any intellectual or moral feeling cansway them; and, correspondently with this assertion,the lullaby of the nurse partakes, amongall nations, of the same essential character. It isa fact equally deducible from observation, thatparticular flavours and odours are naturally acceptable,or the reverse, to children. And again,with reference to the sense of touch, smooth surfacesalmost universally give a pleasing impression; which is not imparted by rugged surfaces.Why then may it not be the same with respectto the sense of sight, in the case either of colouror of form ?The abundant supply of light from its naturalsource the sun, and the ease with which it is frogs86 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREcrucible by artificial means during the absence ofthat luminary, render us habitually less sensibleof its real value, than undoubtedly we should be,were we to experience a long continued privationof it. And as to the regularly periodical privationof it which we experience in consequenceof the alternation of night with day, this is so farfrom being an evil, that it is obviously beneficial ;inasmuch as, in consequence of this very absence,sleep is both directly and indirectly conciliated :without which gift of Heaven, all our facultieswould soon be exhausted, and all our happinessconsequently extinguished.The beneficial influence of sleep on our wholeframe is too obvious in its effects to require anyformal demonstration : but it will be interestingto consider its relation to the absence of light.It appears then that, by a fundamental law ofour nature, a sense of uneasiness invariably followsa long continued exercise of our powers,either corporeal or mental : and, unless thissense of uneasiness have been produced by tooinordinate exercise, it is soon relieved by thatstate of the system which we call sleep ; duringthe continuance of which, provided it be soundand of a perfectly healthy character, all the voluntarymuscles of the body become relaxed, andthe nervous system remains comparatively inactive; the whole body acquiring by this temporarycessation of its energies a renovated actoTHE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 87cumulation of those powers, which are necessaryfor the purposes of active and intellectual life.By the periodical succession of night to day,we are naturally disposed to yield to the sensationof approaching sleep. For, with the absenceof light cease all the usual stimuli of thatsense, which is accommodated to the impulseof this agent, and which calls our faculties intoaction more frequently than any other : nor isthe intention of nature less evident, because,either from avarice or the dissipation, of luxury,some individuals protract the labours or thepleasures of the day beyond the natural periodassigned for those purposes; since these areunnatural exceptions to the observance of thegeneral law.Although it would be difficult to prove directlythat there is any necessary connexion betweendarkness and sleep, yet this connexion is renderedat least highly probable by the effect usuallyproduced on the approach of darkness uponanimals in general, but more remarkably onbirds; for, with the exception of those whosehabits are nocturnal, all birds betake themselvesto sleep as soon as night approaches : and ifdarkness should anticipate night by many hours,as happens when any considerable eclipse of thesun takes place in the middle of the day, we stillfind the birds of the field as well as our domesticatedfowls give the same indications of com-g483 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREposing themselves to sleep, as at the regular periodof sunset. If it should be said that this doesnot more serve to prove a connexion betweendarkness and sleep with reference to these animals,than to prove the effect of a long continuedassociation resulting from their habit of going toroost at sunset ; it may be asked, why shoulddarkness, unless from some inherent cause, leadthem to compose themselves to sleep at the hourof noon, instead of the usual hour of evening ;since, on the one hand, periodical states of theanimal system do not usually recur before thetermination of the habitual period ; and, on theother hand, the individuals cannot at so early anhour have experienced such a degree of exhaustionas would of itself invite to sleep ?In stating that the voluntary action of themuscles ceases during sound sleep, we ought notto omit the remarkable fact that those muscleswhich are not under the empire of the will continuetheir action uninterruptedly through thedeepest sleep. Of all the muscles of involuntarymotion, this observation holds most remarkablywith respect to the heart; the continuedaction of which organ during sleep is a phenomenonworthy of the deepest attention of aphilosophical mind . All other organs of the bodyhave their periods either of absolute or comparativerest ; the senses are in a measure periodicallylocked up by sleep during one quarter atTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 89least, if not one third of our whole existence ;the limbs of the most athletic individual losetheir power of motion after a few hours of unremittedexertion ; even the brain, which duringthe hours of sleep and the interruption of all thecommon functions of the body frequently representsto the internal senses the most busy scenesof active life — even the brain may be exhaustedby unusual fatigue, or other causes, and maythus involve the general system in the stupor ofapparent death — but the heart, unless on suchoccasions as the momentary interruption of aswoon, never rests : so that, whether we lookback to that period of our existence, when, inour yet imperfect state, there could scarcely bediscovered the faint outline of those members,which in after life constitute man's strengthand beauty, the presence of the heart may berecognised by the impulse of its vibratory motion,though its form is yet undefined, or at leastindistinguishable ; or whether, on the other hand,we look forward to the latest moments of protracteddisease, or expiring old age, the sameorgan is the last part of our frame which continuesto give immediate proof of vital motion.The privation of light is rarely, if ever, total :for though the empire of time is divided innearly equal proportion between day and night,there are comparatively few nights in whichthere is not diffused through the air a sufficient90 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREquantity of light for many of the purposes oflife. Nor, with respect to those persons whoeither were born blind, or became blind in earlyinfancy, is the absence of light felt with anydegree of severity; for, in such instances, althoughthe individual may be made to understandthat he wants some faculty which thosearound him possess, there cannot be howeverany consciousness of privation where there neverhad been actually any enjoyment ; or wherethere was no recollection of it, if it had for atime existed. And even in the case of individualswho have been deprived of sight longsubsequently to birth, although the recollectionof the former enjoyment must more or less imbittertheir present state ; yet so long as theoffices of surrounding friends are the means ofadministering to their comfort, more especiallyif those offices are fulfilled with kindness, themind soon becomes reconciled to the privation :for it is a fact, repeatedly observed, that blindpersons under such circumstances are usuallycheerful. Nor ought we to forget the compensationwhich nature affords to those who are deprivedof sight, in the consequently quickenedactivity of some of the other senses.Let us however suppose for a moment that, allthe faculties and recollections of man remainingunaltered, and the general processes of naturecontinuing, if possible, the same as they areTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 91now, the existence of light were withdrawn fromthis earth : what would then be the conditionof mankind? How could those occupations oflife be pursued which are necessary for the supplyof our simplest wants? Who in that caseshould yoke the ox to the plough, or sow theseed, or reap the harvest? but indeed undersuch a supposition there would soon be neitherseed for the ground, nor grain for food : for, ifdeprived of light, the character of vegetation iscompletely altered ; and its results, as far asgeneral utility is concerned, destroyed. Or suppose,further, that these necessary supplies oflife were no longer required, on account of someconsequent alteration in our physical constitution; or that they were procured for us by anyunknown means ; yet, in all the higher enjoymentsof our nature, how cheerless, how utterlymiserable would be our situation. Under suchcircumstances, wisdom would not only beatone entrance quite shut out'but no other entrance could then be found forit ; for of the other senses, the only remaininginlets of knowledge with reference to an externalworld, there is not one, which, if unaidedby sight, could be of any practical value. Withrespect indeed to our inward feelings, though weshould, on the one hand, be spared, by the privationof light, the worse than corporeal pain ofthe averted eye of those who ought to meet us92 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREwith gratitude and affection ; we should, on theother hand, lose the beams of filial or parentallove ; of which even a momentary smile outweighsan age of pain.As in mathematical reasoning the truth of aproposition is sometimes indirectly proved byshewing that every process of proof but the oneproposed would lead to an absurd conclusion :so, though the supposition of a general and totalprivation of light is on all probable grounds ofreasoning inadmissible, it may yet serve to shewus indirectly the value of the good we enjoy.But it is sufficient to have given a few instancesof the necessary effects of such a privation : andit will be a more grateful task to enumerate theactual benefits which we derive from the agencyof light.In the vegetable world, upon the products ofwhich animal existence ultimately depends, lightis the prime mover of every change that takesplace, from the moment the germ emerges fromthe soil. Exclude the agency of light, and in ashort time the most experienced botanist mightpossibly be at a loss to know the plant withwhich he is otherwise most familiar; so completelyobliterated are all its natural characters,whether of colour, form, taste, or odour. Thusthe faded colour of the interior leaves of the lettuceand other culinary vegetables is the resultof such a degree of compression of the body ofTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 93the plant as excludes the admission of lightbeyond the exterior leaves. And, again, if abranch of ivy or of any spreading plant happento penetrate during the progress of its vegetationinto a dark cellar, or any similar subterraneoussituation, it is observable, that, with thetotal loss of colour, its growth advances withgreat rapidity, but its proportions alter to suchSL' degree as often to mask its original form.And, lastly, which in a practical point of viewis of the greatest importance, if a plant whichhas grown without the influence of light be chemicallyexamined, its juices, it might almost besaid its whole substance, would be found to consistof little else than mere water ; and, whateverodour it may have, is characteristic, not ofits original nature, but of its unnatural mode ofgrowth ; becoming, in short, very like that of acommon fungus. The total result is, that all thenative beauties and uses of a vegetable growingunder these circumstances are lost: the eye isneither delighted by any variety or brightnessof colour ; nor is the sense of smell gratified byany fragrance : the degeneracy of its fibre intoa mere pulp renders it unfit for any mechanicalpurpose ; and the resinous and other principleson which its nutritive and medicinal virtues depend,cease to be developed. In some instances,however, the bleaching or violation of plants isuseful in correcting the acrid taste which betADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHERElongs to them in their natural state; as in thecase of endive and of celery.The effect of light upon vegetation has beenselected in the preceding paragraph as affordingthe most powerful instance of the adaptation ofthis natural agent to the physical condition ofman. Its effects upon individuals of the mineraland animal kingdom are neither so easily to betraced, nor are nearly so important in their consequences,at least in a practical point of view ;and therefore it is not proposed to bring themforward in a more particular manner.The observation of those modifications whichlight undergoes when reflected from the surfacesof bodies has given rise to one of those impressivearts which are capable of contributing noless to the refinement of society at large, thanto the gratification of the individuals who cultivateor admire them. For who can look on theproductions of such masters as Guido, Raphael,or Michael Angelo, without imbibing a portionof the spirit which animated those masters inthe execution of their inimitable works? or, ifwe quit the regions of imagination and of history,and descend from the higher efforts of theart into the retirement of domestic life, who cansuccessfully describe those emotions which areexcited by the portrait of a beloved object, achild or parent now no more ; or by the representationof that home and its surroundingTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 95scenery, in which the careless and happy hoursof childhood were passed ?The intrinsic source of the pleasure which weexperience from the contemplation of a paintingis probably to be sought for in that principleof our nature, of more extensive influenceperhaps than is generally supposed, which derivesa gratification from perceiving the resemblanceof actual or probable truth ; or even, andsometimes in a higher degree, from the delineationof fictitious characters and scenes : andhence the art of painting is easily made the vehicleof the ludicrous and the horrible, no lessthan of the sublime and the beautiful: and, hencealso, the painter may incur a considerable degreeof moral responsibility in the exercise ofhis art. But this view of the subject, thoughfertile in reflections of great moment, and practicallytoo much neglected, does not belong tothe purpose of the present treatise.SECT. in.Heat.From the consideration of the subject of light,the mind passes by a natural transition to thatof heat : for these agents, though not necessarilyor always, are in reality very often associatedtogether : and they are each of them characterisedby the want of that property which almostseems essential to matter, namely weight.M ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREIn their relation to the physical existence ofman and animal life in general, there is this differencebetween them — the presence of light isonly indirectly necessary ; the presence of heatis directly necessary. Different degrees of heatindeed are requisite for different species of animals: but if the heat to which any individualanimal be exposed be much below that which isnatural to the species, and be continued for asufficient length of time, all the vital functionsare eventually destroyed ; or, as in the case ofthe hibernation of particular species of animals,are at least partially suspended.The degree of heat adapted to the humanframe is so nicely adjusted to the bodily feelingsof man, that, if we take a range of fifty degreesof Fahrenheit's thermometer as indicatingthe average extent of variation to which thebody is exposed in this climate, it will be foundthat a difference of two or three degrees, aboveor below a given point, will generally be sufficientto create an uncomfortable sensation. Thelate Mr. Walker, whose experiments on the artificialproduction of cold are well known to thephilosophical world, ascertained that the pointof 62^ or 63^ of Fahrenheit is that, which, uponan average of many individuals, is in this climatethe most congenial, as far as sensation is concerned,to the human body. But it is a mercifulprovision of nature, considering the numerousTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 97vicissitudes of human life, that man is capableof resisting very great and even sudden alterationsof temperature without any serious inconvenience.Thus an atmosphere so cold, as todepress the mercury in Fahrenheit's thermometerto the 52d degree below the freezing pointof water, has been borne under the protection ofvery moderate clothing. And, on the other hand,an atmosphere of a temperature as high as the200dth degree of Fahrenheit, which is within afew degrees of the boiling point of water, wasborne by the late Dr. Fordyce, during ten minutes.And it is highly worthy of notice, asconnected with the general intention of thisTreatise, that, during the same time, a thermometerwhich had been fixed under his tongueindicated only the 98th degree of Fahrenheit:so that the body remained very nearly of its naturaltemperature, during its exposure to an atmosphereexceeding its own temperature by full100 degrees.This uniformity of animal temperature, undersuch circumstances, is in a great measure owingto the process of evaporation, which takes placefrom the general surface of the body, and fromthe air-vessels of the lungs : for if animals areconfined in a chamber, the atmosphere of whichd Phil. Trans. 1775. vol. Ixv. p. Ii. « Ibid. p. 118.f For an account of similar experiments carried to a furtherextent, see p. 484, &c. of the same volume of the Phil. Trans.H98 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREis SO moist that no evaporation can take placefrom the surface of their bodies, it has beenfound that their temperature is as capable ofbeing steadily and uniformly raised, by increasingthe heat of the room in which theyare placed, as if they were inanimate matter.The application of heat to the various purposesof life has a very extensive range ; andwith reference to the daily preparation of themore common forms of our food, whether animalor vegetable, distinguishes the habits of manfrom those of every other species. Without thepower indeed of commanding the applicationof heat in its various degrees, many of the mostimportant arts of civilized society would fail.Without that power, how could clay be hardenedinto the state of brick, of which materialmost of the habitations in many large cities areconstructed ? Without the aid of the same agent,how could quicklime, the base of every commoncement, be produced from limestone ? withoutthe application of the higher degrees of heat,metals could neither be reduced from their ores,nor the reduced metals be worked into convenientforms. Neither, without the same aid,could that most useful substance glass be produced; a material, which, in comparison hardlyknown to the ancients, has in modern timesbecome almost indispensably necessary to personsof the poorest class, as a substance of dailyTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 99use for various economical purposes. But if weconsider the properties of this variable compound,with reference to the aid derived fromit in the investigations of science, there are fewsubstances of higher importance to the philosopher.Among the most useful of those propertiesare its impermeability to fluids, either in aliquid or aeriform state ; its ready permeabilityto light, together with its power of modifying thequalities of that fluid; and its resistance to almostall those chemical agents, which are capable ofdestroying the texture of most other substanceswith which they remain long in contact.In considering the extensive utility of thethermometer and barometer, in their commonand most convenient forms, it is evident thattheir practical value almost entirely depends onthe transparency of glass, and on its impermeabilityto air : for if the glass, of which they aremade, were opaque, the variations in the levelof the quicksilver contained within them wouldbe imperceptible to the eye ; and could not beindirectly ascertained, unless by very circuitousand difficult means : and, on the other hand, ifthe glass were permeable to air, the variation inthe level of the quicksilver, in the case of thebarometer at least, would necessarily be prevented.The same properties of transparencyand impermeability to air very greatly enhance,if they do not solely constitute the value of glass,h2100 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREin all those philosophical experiments which arecarried on under what is called the exhaustedreceiver.But the most important result of the transparencyof glass is the modification which light undergoesin its passage through lenticular massesof that material. When, for instance, in consequenceof disease or advancing age, the eyeno longer retains the power of discerning objectsdistinctly, how much of hourly comfort, aswell as of intellectual enjoyment, would be lost,were we not able to supply the natural defectby the artificial aid of glasses of the requisiteform and density. And, again, how many importantfacts in the physiology of animals andvegetables, as also in the constitution of inanimatebodies, would have remained for ever undiscovered,but for the aid of the microscope ;the magnifying powers of which depend on thetransparency, and form, and the right adjustmentof those pieces of glass through which theobjects subjected to observation are viewed?And, lastly, how shall we estimate the valueof those discoveries, to say nothing of the constantlyaccumulating mass of observations connectedwith them, which the world owes to thatwonderful instrument the telescope ? By the aidof which not only has the knowledge of our ownsidereal system been extended, in consequenceof the discovery of new planets belonging to it ;TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 101but it seems to have been rendered highly probablethat those obscurely defined luminousmasses, which sir William Herschel termed nebulae,observable within the limits of individualconstellations, are really the accumulated lightof innumerable stars seen through the mediumof a space hitherto immeasurable : and that themilky tray itself is an extended accumulation ofsimilar nebulae ; the collected light of which, atsome inconceivable point of distance, may appearto the inhabitants of still more distantspheres, as a mere speck. Dare the mind attemptto penetrate beyond this general statement,and to speculate upon the characters ofits detail? What if there be a resemblance, oreven an analogy, between the structure and inhabitantsof this earth and of the other planetsof our system ? What if every fixed star whichwe either see with the naked eye or by the aidof the telescope, or whose existence we can conceiveon probable grounds by the mind's eye, beitself the centre of a system consisting, like ourown, of numerous subordinate spheres, and everyoneof these inhabited by responsible agents, likeourselves ; to whose uses both inorganic elementsand animals and vegetables, analogous if notsimilar to our own, may be subservient? Whatif the moral history and state of the inhabitantsof those numberless spheres be like that ofman ? — But the view, which the investigation ofh3102 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREthis question seems capable of unfolding, is tooawful for the eye of reason ; and, however itsdiscussion might magnify our conviction of theinfinite power and goodness of the Creator, isnot to be approached perhaps without culpablepresumption.Let us therefore return to considerations moreappropriate to the character of human knowledge: and, having referred to the effects producedby heat on various forms of matter, let usinquire what facilities nature has placed withinour reach for the purpose of exciting and maintainingheat itself. The chemist in his laboratory,surrounded by the numerous and variousagents which he is constantly employing, cannever have any difficulty in producing it. Byconcentration of the sun's rays he may inflameany combustible substance : by compression ofcommon air in a small cylinder of glass, ormetal, he may ignite a piece of fungus, or inflamea piece of phosphorus, attached to theextremity of the piston which is employed tocompress the air. He may instantaneously produceflame by pouring concentrated nitric acidon oil of turpentine, or on certain saline compounds; by the simple trituration of phosphorus,or other chemical agents ; by directing asmall stream of inflammable air on minute particlesof platina loosely aggregated in a statesomewhat resembling sponge; or, not to accu-TO THE PHYSICAL Conditions MAN. 103emulate too many instances, he may delight himselffor the thousandth time by igniting a finewire of steel, in passing the electric currentalong it by means of the Voltaic apparatus ^.There are few individuals however who havecommonly such magic instruments at hand : and,even if they had, it is probable that they wouldwant both the leisure and inclination to preservethem in a state fitted to produce at any momentthe intended effect ; for, though each successive8 It will not perhaps be deemed impertinent, to relate an instanceof the sagacity of the late Dr. Wollaston, in connexionwith the present subject. It happened to the author of thisTreatise, at a comparatively early period of his life, to deliver aletter of introduction to Dr. Wollaston at a moment when thatphilosopher was engaged in conducting an electric current, bymeans of the Voltaic apparatus, through three portions of finesteel wire, differing from each other in diameter. With that vivacityof manner, which in him resulted rather from the simpleconsciousness of the acquisition of truth, than from the ignobletriumph of individual superiority, he asked which of those wireswould first become of a red heat ; and being answered, at ahazard rather than from any reasonable ground of conjecture,that a red heat would perhaps first take place in the thickest ofthe three — " 1 expect it will," he said, " and that the finest wire'' will never reach a red heat ; for I conclude that, from its tree fineness, the heat excited in it will be dissipated by diction so rapidly, as to prevent the accumulation of a quantcity sufficient for its ignition." It need hardly be added thatthe conjecture was verified.As an instance of the minute scale on which Dr. Wollastonwas in the habit of carrying on his philosophical investigations,it may be mentioned that the preceding experiment was conductedin a single cell of a single and moderately sized Voltaictrough.H 4104 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREyear has of late given birth to some new form ofapparatus calculated to produce instantaneouslight, we find ourselves constantly recurring tothe flint and steel, which our forefathers of manygenerations have used ; and which will doubtlessbe the staple apparatus of our latest posterity.The more important part of the present inquiryremains to be considered, the meansnamely of maintaining heat, when once excited,to a sufficient extent and degree of intensityfor the various purposes of social andcivilized life. To this important purpose, amongothers, the products of the vegetable world, bothin a fossil and recent state, are destined ; andin examining the origin and general historyof some of these products, particularly with referenceto common coal, we shall meet with aninteresting example of those provisions of naturewhich Dr. Paley has denominated prospectivecontrivances.In the early periods of civilization, and whilethe population of a country bears a small proportionto the extent of soil occupied, the indigenousforests easily supply an ample quantityof fuel : or, in the absence of those largerspecies of the vegetable kingdom which may bedescribed under the term of timber, the humblestproductions of the morass, though not themost desirable, are however a sufficient substitute.Thus the sphagnum palustre and otherTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 105mosses, by their successive growth and decay,form the combustible substratum of those extensiveand at present uncultivated tracts in Ireland,which, till they shall have happily beenreclaimed by the industry of a yet barbarouspopulation, contribute by the turf and peatwhich they afford, to the comfort of myriads ofindividuals ; who, were it not for this source ofsupply, would be, in their present state, in totalwant of one of the principal necessaries of life.In many populous districts of this island, theaboriginal forests, which formerly so amply suppliedthe surrounding inhabitants, have longsince been cleared from the surface of the earth :and their site is now occupied by cultivatedlands and a condensed population. The formersource of fuel has consequently in such partslong since failed: but the clearing of the surfacehas in many places detected that invaluable mineralcombustible, which, usually bearing in itselfindubitable marks of a vegetable origin,from the traces of organization still apparent inalmost every part of its substance, was depositedages before it was wanted, as a future substitutefor the fuel which in the meantime hasbeen derived from the actually existing vegetablekingdom.It is not intended here to enter into the generalconsideration of those geological formationscalled coal fields, which are the repositories of106 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREthis useful mineral : but there is one circumstancein their history so evidently calculatedto facilitate the labour of man in obtaining thissubstance, and to extend its supply, and so remarkablythough not exclusively characteristicof those particular formations, that, though notobvious to a general observer, it cannot fail toarrest the attention of those to whom it is pointedout. A coal field may be represented, in a populardescription, as consisting of a successionof alternating strata of coal and sand-stone, &c.:which, having been originally deposited in abasin-shaped cavity, in such a manner as to beatthe same time parallel to the concave surfaceof the basin and to each other, have been subsequentlybroken up by some force that hasthrown the planes of the ruptured masses intovarious directions. Now, had the strata remainedundisturbed, a very considerable proportion ofthe coal which is now quarried would most probablynever have been obtained by human industry:for, the strata dipping down from thecircumference towards the centre of the basin,that perpendicular depth, beyond which it ispractically impossible to work the coal, wouldsoon have been reached in the operation of mining.But, in consequence of the rupture andconsequent dislocation of the strata, many ofthose portions which were originally depositedat such a depth beneath the surfaces wouldTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 107have rendered the working of them impossible,have been thrown up to the very surface ; andthus have become available to the miner.SECT. IV.The general Uses of Water,One of the earliest political punishments ofancient Rome affords an indirect but very remarkableproof, of the immediate importance ofthe elements of fire and water ^ to human life :for this punishment consisting, in part, in an interdictionfrom the use of water, compelled theindividual so punished to fly from his nativeneighbourhood, in order to obtain that necessaryarticle of support elsewhere : and, hence,banishment and interdiction from fire and waterbecame synonymous terms. There are few whohave not experienced the uneasy sensation occasionedby even a temporary privation of thisnecessary : and the death that ensues upon a^ An apology will hardly be required for applying the semielement to a substance, which though it has long been experimentallyascertained to be a compound will in a popular viewbe always considered as a simple body; especially if it be rememberedthat even among the ancients this term did not necessarilyimply that the substance so called was absolutely a simpleor uncompounded body. It was sufficient with them, that, inall the kno^vn processes and phenomena of nature, the substancepresented itself under the same essential form : but they wereprepared to allow that elementary bodies {a-roix^la) might possiblybe resolved into absolutely simple principles (dpxai).108 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREcontinued privation of it is, perhaps, of all modesof death the most dreadful. This we learn fromthe occasional accounts of individuals who haveescaped from shipwrecks, in which their companionshad perished amidst the agonies ofthirst. And it is said of those unhappy victimsof a barbarous punishment, in Persia, (who beingimmured in masonry as to every part oftheir body but the head, are left to perish inthat state,) that they terminate their last hours,perhaps days, in incessant cries for water.The necessity of this element for our supportmay be antecedently inferred, on philosophicalprinciples, from an examination of the physicalcomposition of any animal body; of which, inby far the greater number of instances, morethan three-fourths of the whole weight are dueto the presence of water. This water of compositionmay be easily separated by the applicationof a moderate degree of heat, or even byspontaneous evaporation at a common temperature,without any further decomposition of thebody ; the muscles and skin consequently shrinkingto such an extent, as to give the whole framethe appearance of a skeleton, enveloped, as itwere, in parchment. Such a result is occasionallyobservable in human bodies which havebeen deposited in dry cemeteries ; and is by nomeans uncommon in the case of small animals,as rats, for instance, which having been acci-TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 109mentally wedged in between a wall and a wainscot,are subsequently found in the state abovedescribed.An experiment of a very simple character initself, and very easily made, will serve to ascertain,not only the proportional quantity of waterof composition contained in some forms of animalmatter, but also the properties communicatedby the presence of that element thus combined.Every one has noticed the opaline ormilky appearance and the remarkable elasticityof cartilage, or gristle, as it is more commonlycalled : which characters depend on the watercontained in it; for if a piece of gristle, theweight of which has been previously ascertained,be exposed to the air of a warm room, it will atthe end of a few hours have lost a portion of itsweight; and will have become nearly transparent,and entirely inelastic : and if, in this state,it be immersed in water, it will gradually recoverits original weight, and also its elasticityand opaline appearance. If, instead of gristle,a piece of boiled white of egg be employed, thesame results will be observable; for, togetherwith loss of weight and elasticity, it will becomebrittle, and nearly as transparent as pure amber: and on the other hand, by subsequent immersionin water, its original properties will besoon restored. By experiments nearly as simpleas those above mentioned it may be demonsADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREstated, that all the liquid and solid parts of ananimal, with some few exceptions, contain prconsist of more than three-fourths of their weightof water : the importance of which element inthe mere composition of our body is hence directlyevident.But if we would have a familiar illustration ofits importance in the daily and hourly occurrencesof life, let us in imagination accompanyan individual of moderate rank and condition insociety, from the time of his rising in the morningtill the hour of sleep at night, in order to observethe utility of water in administering eitherdirectly or indirectly to his various wants andhabits. How great is the comfort, to say nothingof the salubrity of the practice, which results tohim from the application of water to the surfaceof the body, by means either of the bath or anysimpler process ! and, again, the change of thelinen in which he is partially clothed is renderedequally comfortable and salutary, in consequenceof its having been previously submitted to theprocess of washing. The infusion of coffee or oftea, which is probably an essential part of hisearliest meal, could not have been preparedwithout water : neither could the flour of whichhis bread consists, have been kneaded ; nor thefood of his subsequent meal, the broths and mostof the vegetables at least, have been rendereddigestible, without the aid of the same fluid ;TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. Illand with respect to his common beverage, whethermilk, or any form of fermented liquor,water still constitutes the main bulk of that beverage.So far the use of water is directly and immediatelynecessary to his comfort and subsistence :but its indirect and remote necessity is equallyobservable in all that surrounds him. There isscarcely an article of his apparel, in some partof the preparation of which water has not beennecessarily employed ; in the tanning of theleather of his shoes ; in the dressing of the flaxof which his linen is made ; in the dyeing of thewool of his coat, or of the materials of his hat.Without water the china or earthen cups, out ofwhich he drinks, could not have been turned onthe lathe : nor the bricks, of which his house isconstructed, nor the mortar by which they arecemented, have been formed. The ink withwhich he writes, and the paper which receivesit, could not have been made without the use ofwater. The knife with which he divides hissolid food, and the spoon with which he conveysit when in a liquid form to his mouth, couldnot have been, or at least have not probably beenformed, without the application of water duringsome part of the process of making them.By water the medicinal principles of variousvegetable and mineral substances are extracted,and rendered potable ; which could not be in-112 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREproduced into the animal system in a solid state :and this element itself becomes occasionally amost powerful medicinal instrument by its externalapplication, in every one of its forms ;whether as a liquid, under the name of the coldor warm bath ; or in the form of ice, in restraininginflammation and hemorrhage ; or, lastly, inthe state of steam, as in the application of thevapour bath.SECT. V.Baths.The custom of bathing, whether in a mediumof a high or of a low temperature, appears to bein a great measure derived from the gratificationof a natural feeling : for we find it prevalent inevery country and in every stage of society, notonly with reference to its medicinal effects, butas a mere luxury. Thus at every season of theyear, when the sky is serene at least, the inhabitantsof hot climates plunge into their nativestreams for the sake of the refreshment impartedto the surface of their bodies ; and the samerefreshment is equally sought by the natives ofcolder climates during the heat of their shortsummer : in each of which instances the pleasurablesensation is the principal motive for thepractice. But on some occasions a more permanentgood is sought ; and the hope of immediatepleasure is so far from being the motive,that a sensation very nearly allied to pain, andTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 113in many instances less tolerable than pain itself,is encountered in the shock of the cold bath,with a view to the preservation or restoration ofhealth. It may be said perhaps that the glowof warmth which usually succeeds this shock isin itself a pleasure ; as indeed it is : but it maybepresumed that very few individuals experienceany pleasure from the shock itself, orwould consent to encounter it but for its pleasurableand beneficial consequences.For the enjoyment of the cold bath natureaffords the immediate resource of springs andrivers, in almost every part of the world ; butthe enjoyment of the warm bath is in generalnot easily attainable ; warm springs being comparativelyof rare occurrence : the pleasure ofthe warm bath however is so congenial to man'sfeelings, that it is sought for by savages as wellas by the inhabitants of the most luxurious cities; and is as acceptable in tropical as in coldclimates.It is at all times interesting to contemplate theexpedients which human ingenuity discovers forthe accomplishment of its purposes : but sucha contemplation is more particularly interestingwhen it developed the revival of a principle, theknowledge of which had been buried duringmany centuries of intervening ignorance ; andthus justifies the reflection of moral wisdom :The thing that hath been, it is that which114 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHERE*' shall be ; and that which is done is that which*' shall be done: and there is no new thing underthe sun."In a most amusing and instructive account ofPompeii, which forms one of the volumes publishedunder the name of the Library of EntertainingKnowledge, is a dissertation on theBaths of the Ancients ; which will amply repay,by the information it conveys, the time occupiedin its perusal. In that dissertation is containeda description of the remains of some publicbaths, discovered in the excavations of Pompeii :and with reference to the disposition of the furnaceof the baths a fact is stated, which is peculiarlyapplicable to our present purpose.It is evident that, in consequence of the enormousquantity of water which was daily heatedin their public baths, the attention of the ancientsmust necessarily have been directed tothe most economical mode of applying the fuelby which the heat of the furnace was maintained: and the following extract from the abovementionedaccount of Pompeii will shew that,even in a small town of ancient Italy, an economicalprinciple was well understood and appliedeighteen centuries since, which has only been oflate revived in modern science. It is stated inthat account (p. 152), that " close to the furnace,** at the distance of four inches, a round vacantspace still remains, in which was placed theTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 115copper for boiling water {caldarium) ; nearwhich, with the same interval between them,was placed the copper for warm water (tepid; and at the distance of two feet fromthis was the receptacle for cold water {fri-gidarlum). A constant communication wasmaintained between these vessels ; so that asfast as hot water was drawn off from the cal-darius,the void was supplied from the ,which, being already considerablyheated, did but slightly reduce the temperatureof the hotter boiler. The tepidarium inits turn was supplied from a general reservoir :*so that the heat which was not taken up bythe first boiler passed on to the second ; and,instead of being wasted, did its office in preparingthe contents of the second for the highertemperature which it was to obtain in the first.It is but lately that this principle has beenintroduced into modern furnaces ; but its usein reducing the consumption of fuel is wellknown."In the same account of Pompeii is afforded astriking instance, with reference to the vapourbath, not only of the similarity of the meansemployed for producing a similar effect, by individualsbetween whom no communication canbe traced or even supposed ; but also a similarityof custom, with reference to the enjoyment ofsocial intercourse, between communities not lessI 2116 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREwidely separated from each other by time andspace, than by degree of civilization ; betweenthe luxurious inhabitants of imperial Romeeighteen centuries ago, and the savage tribesof north-western America at the present day.The author of the account of Pompeii states(p. 187-190), on the authority of Tooke's Russia," that the Russian baths, as used by thecommon people, bear a close resemblance tothe vapour bath (laconic) of the Romans.They usually consist of wooden houses, situated,if possible, by the side of a runningstream. In the bath-room is a large vaultedoven, which, when heated, makes the pavingstones lying upon it red hot ; and adjoiningto the oven is a kettle fixed in masonry forthe purpose of holding boiling water. In thoseparts of the country where wood is scarce, thebaths sometimes consist of wretched caverns,commonly dug in the earth close to the bankof some river. The heat in the bath-room isusually from 104® to 122® of Fahrenheit; andmay be much increased by throwing water onthe glowing hot stones in the chamber of theoven. The Russian baths therefore are ; and it appears that even the savagetribes of America are not wholly unacquaintedwith the use of the vapour-bath.Lewis and Clarke, in their voyage up the Missouri,have described one of these in the folioTHE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 117lowing terms : * We observed a vapour-bath,consisting of a hollow square of six or eightfeet deep, formed in the river bank by dammingup with mud the other three sides, andcovering the whole completely, except an apertureabout two feet wide at the top. Thebathers descend by this hole, taking withthem a number of heated stones, and jugsof water ; and, after being seated round theroom, throw the water on the stones till thesteam becomes of a temperature sufficientlyhigh for their purposes ^"'It appears then, from the foregoing statement,that the peasants of Russia, and the savages ofNorth America, are in the habit of employingthe same means for converting water into vapour,which were employed by the Romans atthe most luxurious period in their history : andto the peasants of Russia and the savages ofNorth America, may be added the natives ofNew Zealand and other islands of the Pacificocean ; merely with this qualification, that theyemploy the steam, so raised, not for the purposeof a vapour-bath, but of dressing their food.It is worthy of notice, as illustrative of thesocial feeling inherent in human nature, that,equally among the uncivilized natives of Americaas among the luxurious inhabitants of aniSauer, in his account of Billings's expedition, describes thesame kind of bath as used in north-western America (p. 175).i3118 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREcent Italy, " it is very uncommon for an individualto bathe alone ; he is generally accompaniedby one, or sometimes several, of hisacquaintance : bathing indeed is so essentially^' a social amusement, that to decline going intobathe, when invited by a friend, is one ofthe highest indignities that can be offered tohim" (p. 190).SECT. VI.The Fluidity of Water.Familiarized as we are to the consequencesresulting from that property of water, wherebyits particles move so easily among themselves asto yield to the least impulse, provided there bespace for yielding, we rarely perhaps meditateon its importance : and yet it is entirely owingto this property that a free communication is capableof being maintained between distant partsof the world by means of the ocean at large, andbetween different parts of the same country bymeans of navigable rivers; or by those more thanrivals of navigable rivers, artificial canals ^.Rarely also, perhaps, do we meditate on theequally important fact, that, throughout thegreater part of the world this element usually^ It has been stated,, on credible authority, that an agent ofa great proprietor of canals being incidentally asked, during alegal examination for what purpose he conceived rivers hadbeen made answered, '' that, no doubt, they were intended to*• feed canals."TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 119exists in a liquid state : and important indeed isthat fact ; for, of the three states under which itis capable of existing, namely of ice, water, andvapour, if its predominant state had been thatof ice or of vapour, philosophers might possiblyhave conjectured, but the world could neverhave seen realized, the mighty results of commerceas depending on the art of navigation.From the same physical character of water,above described, namely, its fluidity, manifestingitself actively instead of passively, are dailyproduced results of equal importance to society,and equally surprising in themselves. Who indeedcan adequately describe the advantagesderived from water in aiding the powers of mechanism,from the half-decayed and moss-grownwheel that scarcely sets in motion the grinding-stoneof the village mill, to the astonishing momentumof the steam engine which kneads ahundred tons of heated iron with as much easeas the hands of the potter knead a lump of clay !And here, since it is of the utmost importanceto mankind that this element should usuallyexist in a liquid state, let us pause a while to investigatethe means employed by nature to preventits rapid conversion either into vapour orinto ice. For although its partial existence inboth those states is perhaps eventually as necessaryto the general good of the world as itsmore common state of water, yet, if its suddeni4120 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREor rapid conversion into either were not prevented,great temporary evil would necessarilyensue from our privation of it as a liquid.It has been already mentioned that the atmosphereconstantly holds in solution or suspensiona great body of water, in a state of minutedivision : but the quantity that can be carried upinto the atmosphere by the process of evaporationis limited in two ways; first, by the air'sincapability of holding in suspension more thanacertain proportion ; and secondly, by the restrainingeffect of the pressure of the atmosphere.But the rapid evaporation of water isalso prevented by the comparatively low temperatureat which all its natural forms exist,even in tropical latitudes.The prevention of the sudden conversion ofwater into ice depends on a peculiarity in itsphysical constitution, which is no less remarkablein a simply philosophical point of view,than beneficial in its result to the great bulk ofmankind. Water, in common with all otherforms of matter, is gradually contracted in itsvolume by a diminution of its temperature ; andultimately passes into a solid state. It does nothowever continue to be condensed to the momentof its congelation, but only to a certain degreeof temperature ; from whence it begins toexpand ; and continues to expand till it arrivesat the point of congelation.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 121In this deviation from a general law we find avery beneficial accommodation to the wants ofman : for had it been the property of water tobecome more and more condensed as it approachedthe point of congelation, one of theconsequences would have been that lakes andrivers, instead of becoming gradually frozen fromthe surface towards their bed, would almost in amoment have become one solid mass of ice : andthe evil that would be produced by such an effectmay be conjectured, by considering thatwhenever a long protracted and severe frost hasthickened to an unusual extent the superincumbentstratum of ice, the difficulty of breakingthrough this stratum, in order to arrive at thewater beneath, is proportionally increased, andsometimes becomes practically insuperable.It will be interesting to trace the steps bywhich this providential law of nature is manifested: and the whole process is easily renderedintelligible to any one who will simply bear inmind these three points, namely, that the averagetemperature of lakes and rivers is duringthe heat of summer more or less above the 40thdegree of Fahrenheit's scale ; that water itself atabout the 40th degree is of its greatest density ;and that under all common circumstances itfreezes, or becomes solid, at the 32d degree. Ifwe suppose then the temperature of a pool orlake to equal at any given moment the 50th ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREgree of Fahrenheit ; and a gradual reduction ofits temperature to take place from that momentby the effect of a constantly diminishing temperatureof the air ; under such circumstancesthe following phenomena would occur. Theparticles of the water at the surface becomingmore condensed, that is, heavier, as they becamecooler, would sink towards the bottom, and bereplaced by the hitherto subjacent particles;which in their turn, undergoing a similar condensationby a decrease in their temperature,would consequently subside towards the bottom; till at length the whole mass of water hadarrived at the temperature of about 40°. Fromthis point any progressive decrease of temperaturewould have an expansive effect upon theparticles of water near the surface ; which, beingthus rendered relatively lighter than the particlesof the subjacent mass, would not subside;but, remaining on the surface, would continueto be expanded and made still lighter till theyhad reached the temperature of 32° ; at which degree,under ordinary circumstances, they wouldfreeze. But the coat of ice thus formed wouldbe, in some measure, a barrier to the effect ofthe colder atmosphere upon the bulk of thewater beneath ; which consequently would remainfor a comparatively longer time in aliquid state ; and would be easily procured forgeneral purposes, by making partial openingsTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 123through the frozen surface. Now if the densityof water continued to increase in a regular progressionto the moment of congelation, it wouldnecessarily happen, from the sinking of the particlesgradually thus condensed, that at somegiven moment the temperature of the wholemass, still in a liquid state, would have arrivedat the freezing point ; and consequently thewhole mass would have been frozen, or becomesolid, at the same moment. The possibilityof such a simultaneous congelation is notmerely a philosophical deduction, it sometimesactually occurs. Thus, under certain circumstances,particularly if kept entirely free fromagitation, water, still retaining its liquid form,may be cooled down to a point several degreesbelow that of congelation ; when, upon a slightagitation, the whole mass is converted at onceinto the state of ice.SECT. VII.The natural Sources of Water.For the supply of a substance of such immediatenecessity to the very existence of man, andof such extensive utility in promoting his comforts,nature has provided the amplest means;all however ultimately derived from that massof water which has been carried up into the atmosphereby evaporation from the sea : so thatif that evaporation were to fail, all forms of ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREmal and vegetable matter, with the exception ofthose which belong to the ocean itself, wouldsoon perish ; for under such circumstances theearth would be deprived of those seasonableshowers, without which its vegetable productionscould not be sustained ; and every springwould soon fail, and every river be dried up :for rivers are in most instances formed by theprogressive accumulation of various torrents ;and these are produced by that portion of rainwhich, having fallen upon the ridges and inclinedsurfaces of hills and mountains, descendsmore rapidly than the soil can absorb it : andsprings result, in a manner that will be hereaftermentioned, from the accumulation of that portionof the rain which sinks beneath the surfaceon which it has fallen. But it is evident that ifthe vegetable world were to perish, the animalworld could not long survive.Nor are the laws by which the moisture, containedin the atmosphere, is precipitated from itin dews or rain, among the least admirable instancesof the provision made by nature for aconstant supply of the wants of man.The mechanism, if the term be allowable, bywhich the formation of clouds and the occasionaldescent of rain are regulated, resides inthe variableness of the state of the heat andelectricity of the atmosphere : in consequence ofwhich a given mass of air is incapable of re-TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 125training, in solution or suspension, the same quantityof moisture which it did before ; and hencethat moisture is precipitated in the form of dewsand fogs ; or, being previously condensed intoaccumulated masses of clouds, is dischargedfrom those clouds, in the form of rain.It almost seems puerile to illustrate the adaptationof the present laws and order of nature tothe wants of man, by the supposition of the consequencesthat would ensue from a failure of thoselaws ; and yet, as in actual life we often feel notthe value of the good which we possess, till admonishedby the prospect of its loss ; so, withreference to the constitution of nature, we maymore forcibly be impressed with the convictionof its general harmony and subserviency to ourwants, by the supposition of its being differentfrom what it is, than by the direct contemplationof its actual state. In supposing then that meanshad not been provided for the regular dischargeof portions of that mass of water which has beencarried up into the atmosphere by the processof evaporation, the existence of that mass wouldhave been of little avail to man : for mere contactof an atmosphere, however moist, could notpromote vegetation to any useful extent; and1 Niebuhr asserts, what is confirmed by other travellers, thatmany tracts in Egypt and Palestine, formerly well cultivated andfertile, are at present mere deserts for want of irrigation. (Descript.de I'Arabie, p. 241.)126 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREthe formation of springs and rivers would be aseffectually prevented by rain ceasing to fall fromthe atmosphere, as if the material of the rain itselfdid not exist in it.Of the modes in which nature disposes of therain that has fallen on the earth, and of theformation of natural springs and rivers, moreparticular notice will be taken hereafter : but itmay be observed by the way, that, althoughthere is scarcely any substance which water isnot capable of dissolving to a certain extent,and consequently no natural form of water ispure, yet in almost every instance the naturalforms of water are not only innocuous, but salutary.SECT. VIII.The Air of the Atmosphere as connected ivith Inspiration.If we suppose the atmosphere deprived ofheat, and light, and moisture, and of all thoseother heterogeneous particles which are eithernaturally or accidentally contained in it ; therestill remains the medium which is the receptacleor vehicle of those various substances : and thismedium is indeed that, which in common apprehensionis understood to be the atmosphere itself.Of the vital importance of atmospherical airno formal proof can be required ; for every onecapable of the least reflection must know thatTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 127its presence is almost constantly necessary to theexistence of man, from the moment of his birthto that of his death. Of all other external aidswe may be deprived for a comparatively longtimewithout danger, or even without much inconvenience; of light and heat for instance, andof food and sleep : but we cannot be deprived ofthe air which we breathe even for a very fewminutes, without dreadful distress; or, if formore than a very few minutes, without the extinctionof life.This vital importance of the air depends, principally,on its capability of assisting to withdrawfrom the body, chiefly through the agency of thelungs, portions of that peculiar principle calledcarbon : the permanent retention of which wouldbe incompatible with the continuance of life.And the union of this principle with one of theconstituent parts of atmospherical air is probablyeffected in the lungs during the process ofrespiration ; the compound passing off in the actof expiration, in the state of an aeriform fluid,called carbonic acid gas.But, in order to give a clear idea of the natureof the process of respiration, it will be necessaryto explain more particularly not only the constitutionof that portion of the atmosphere whichsupports this process, but some of its chemicalrelations to other substances. Atmospherical airthen, considering it in its adaptation to the prossADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREcess of respiration, consists of a mixture or combinationof two aeriform fluids, which are verydifferent from each other in character, but intimatelyblended together in the proportion of fourto one. Of these two fluids, that which is in thesmaller proportion is not only capable of supportinglife, when respired or breathed alone;but is capable of supporting it for a much longerperiod than an equal volume of atmosphericalair would have supported it : and if, instead ofbeing employed for the process of respiration, itbe made the medium of supporting combustion,the consequent phenomena are still more remarkable; for the combustible body not onlyburns for a longer time than it would have donein the same quantity of atmospherical air, but itburns with an intensity much more vivid ; thelight of the flame being in many instances toopowerful to be easily borne by the eye. On theother hand, that constituent part of atmosphericalair, which is in the greater proportion, not onlywill not support either life or flame, even for ashort time ; but extinguishes both, almost in aninstant.By numerous experiments, which it is at presentunnecessary to describe, it has been ascertained,that many of the metals are capable ofattracting and combining with this respirablepart of the air : during which process the metallicbody assumes an earthy character, and THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 129comes increased in weight ; while the weight ofthe air, in which the experiment has been conducted,becomes diminished exactly to theamount in which that of the metal has been increased; and, at the same time, the residuaryportion of the air which has been employed inthe experiment equals only about four fifths ofthe original volume ; and is now incapable ofsupporting either life or flame. But, by processeswell known to chemists, the metallic substancemay be made to yield a quantity of airequalling that which has been lost during the experiment,the metal at the same time returningto its original state and weight; while the air,thus separated, if added to the residual portion,not only restores the volume and weight of theoriginal quantity ; but also its power of supportinglife and flame.If, instead of a metal, certain inflammablesubstances be employed, similar changes are effectedon the air ; and the inflammable substance,together with an increase of weight andother alterations, acquires acid properties ; andhence that respirable portion of the air has, froma Greek derivation, been called oxygen ; as beingthe effective cause of the pacification of thoseinflammable bodies. It has moreover beenascertained that, during combustion, a pieceof pure charcoal weighing twenty-eight grainscombines with as much oxygen gas as wouldK130 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREweigh seventy-two grains : and, as the volumeof the gas employed remains the same at theend of the experiment that it was at the beginning,provided it be brought to the same degreeof temperature and atmospherical pressure,it appears that the carbon is as it wereheld in solution by the gas: and as this chemicalcompound of carbon and oxygen possessesacid properties, it is called carbonic acidgas,A volume of this gas, then, which weighs onehundred grains, consists of twenty-eight grainsof carbon chemically combined with seventy-twograins of oxygen : and it has certain properties,by which, without the labour of actualanalysis, it may be recognised from any othergas ; among the more important of which, forour present purpose at least, is the readinesswith which it communicates a wheyish appearanceto lime-water, when made to pass throughthat liquid. Making use of this character asatest, any individual may easily satisfy himselfthat during the process of respiration aquantity of carbonic acid gas passes from hislungs : for if, after having inhaled a portion ofatmospherical air uncontaminated with any mixtureof it, he breathe slowly through a narrowtube, the further extremity of which is immersedbeneath the surface of a portion of lime-water,he will observe that as the bubbles of air ariseTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 131through the lime-water, that liquid becomesopaque ; and the opacity thus communicated tothe water can be shewn to be the result of acompound formed by the union of the carbonicacid, which has evidently been given out fromthe lungs, with the lime previously held in solutionin the lime-water.Let it now be kept in mind that a hundredcubic inches of carbonic acid gas, under ordinarycircumstances, weigh a little more thanforty-six grains ; and that a quantity of thesame gas weighing a hundred grains containstwenty-eight grains of carbon ; and the followingstatement will be easily intelligible. It appears,from experiments which have been madefor the purpose, that during the process of respirationin an individual of ordinary size andhealth, about twenty-seven cubic inches and ahalf of carbonic acid gas are given off from thelungs in the course of one minute ; which at theend of twenty-four hours would amount to 39,600cubic inches, or in round numbers 40,000 ; andas 100 cubic inches weigh 46 J grains, 40,000would weigh 18,532 grains. Then, since a quantityof carbonic acid gas weighing 100 grainscontains twenty-eight grains of carbon, a quantityweighing 18,532 grains would contain 5190grains, or nearly eleven ounces, at 480 grainsto an ounce : so that a quantity of carbon equallingtwo thirds of a pound in weight is daily disk2132 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREcharged from the blood by means of the simpleprocess of respiration.In an illustration of the general question ofthe adaptation of external nature to the physicalcondition of man, it is clearly immaterial whether,during the process of respiration, the carbonicacid is supposed to be produced by theunion of the carbon of the animal system withthe oxygen of the air respired ; or whether, asis possible, the carbonic acid, having been previouslyformed in the body at large, is given offin the form of carbonic acid gas from the lungs,while the oxygen gas of the atmosphere is absorbedby those organs. The main point to beconsidered is, the fact of the removal of that quantityof carbon, which could not be retained withsafety to the life of the individual : and when weconsider that the entire quantity of the carbon,thus discharged, is collected from every the mostinterior and remote part of the body, how worthyof admiration is the economy of nature in producingthe intended effect ! The air is the mediumthrough which the carbon is to be discharged; and yet the constitution of the bodyis such, that the air could scarcely be introducedinto any of its internal parts without occasioningthe most serious consequences, if not death itself:but by means of the circulation of the blood,that beautiful contrivance intended primarily forsustaining the nourishment and warmth and lifeTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 133of every part, the noxious principle is conveyedto the lungs ; where it is of necessity brought, ifnot actually, yet virtually, into contact with theair ; and thus it is effectually removed from thesystem.SECT. IX.Effects of the Motion of the Air, as connected withHuman Health, dec.In the history of water we had an opportunityof observing how extensive are the benefitsarising to mankind from that physical property,by which its particles are capable of movingwith the greatest ease among each other : norare the benefits less considerable, which arisefrom the same property in the element nowunder consideration ; especially when aided bythose alterations in its volume, which followupon every change of temperature : for fromthese combined causes arise those currents ofair, which administer, in various modes, as wellto the luxury and comforts of man, as to hismost important wants.Who does not see the miseries that would resultfrom a stagnant atmosphere ? To the houselessand half-clothed mendicant indeed, whounder exposure to a wintry sky instinctivelycollects his limbs into an attitude as fixed asmarble, lest by their motion he should dissipatethe stratum of warmer air immediately surrounds3134 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREing his body — to such an individual indeed, undersuch circumstances, a stagnant atmospherebecomes a benefit of the highest value; not onlyby preventing or moderating the painful sensationof cold ; but by preventing the dissipationof that degree of heat v^^hich is necessary forthe preservation of the vital principle, which inhis unsheltered state might otherwise possiblybe soon extinguished. But let circumstances bereversed : and, instead of the wretched beggarexposed to an inclement sky, let us picture toourselves an Asiatic prince surrounded by allthe luxuries which power and opulence can procure,but oppressed by the sultry atmosphere ofa burning sun ; how grateful to his feelings isthe refreshing coolness occasioned by the artificialagitation of the surrounding air : in orderto extend the means of obtaining which gratification,fountains of water are customarily introducedinto the interior rooms of Indian andArabian palaces, the evaporation of the sprayof which gives a refreshing coolness to the air.Or let us recur to scenes more familiar, andmore illustrative of the effect produced ; to thebedside of the almost exhausted invalid, whoseexistence is alone made tolerable by the assiduoussupply of fresh streams of air : there let uswitness, in the thankful smile which animateshis pallid countenance, the soothing sensationwhich the languid sufferer experiences. EvenTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 135for such a momentary solace, what, of all hismost valuable possessions, would not every oneof those miserable victims have surrendered,who once perished in that dreadful dungeon ofCalcutta?In many instances nature tempers the highdegree of heat belonging to particular climates,by the periodical recurrence of cooling winds atstated hours of the day. Thus, in the islandsand on the coasts in general of the tropical regionsof the earth, the alternations of what arecalled the sea and the land breeze are of thehighest importance to the comfort and health ofthe inhabitants : of which the following statement,taken from an official paper on the medicaltopography of Malacca, furnishes a sufficientillustration". " The Malay peninsula possesses,though within the tropics, and almost underthe equator, a very equable temperature andmild climate. Whatever be the prevailingwind, the sea-breeze generally sets in fromthe south between ten and twelve in the morning,and continues till six or seven in the evening; when, after a short calm, the land windbegins to blow from the north-east : and soconstant are these breezes, that, unless duringa storm, the influence of the monsoon isscarcely perceptible. And so uniform is their^ Printed at the government press, Pining, 1830. See theEden. Med. and Surg. Journal, for July 1831, p. 179-k4136 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHERE** effect, with respect to the temperature of theair, that, throughout the year, the variationdoes not exceed fourteen or fifteen degrees ofFahrenheit ; being rarely higher than eighty-eightdegrees, or lower than seventy-four degrees."And though the hurricanes, to which theseregions are frequently exposed, are occasionallymost dreadful in their effects upon the propertyand even the lives of the inhabitants ; yet wemay not only be assured on general principlesof reasoning that in the main they are beneficial,but on some occasions we have immediatedemonstration of their remedying a greater evil.Thus when swarms of a peculiar species of anthad, during many years, ravaged the island ofGrenada, to so serious an extent that a rewardof twenty thousand pounds had been offered toany one who should discover a practicable methodof destroying them ; and when neither poisonnor fire had effected more than a partialand temporary destruction of them, they wereat once swept away by a hurricane and its accompanyingtorrents of rain. Of the numbersin which these insects occurred, some estimatemay be formed from the following statement ofan eyewitness of credible authority ; who says"he had seen the roads coloured by them formany miles together ; and so crowded werethey in many places, that the print of theTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 137horse's feet was in a moment filled up by thesurrounding swarms ^.''We who rarely are oppressed, for more thanafew hours in a whole summer, by such a stateof the atmosphere as occasionally precedes athunderstorm, when no friendly breeze interposesto remove the close and humid stratum ofair which envelopes our bodies, may well bethankful that our lot has not been cast in certainregions of the earth ; in those Alpine valleys,for instance, whose scarcely human inhabitantsattest the dreadful consequences of aconfined atmosphere : the influence of whichoften affects not only the present sensations andcomforts, but even the intellectual, and eventuallythe moral character, of those who are habituallyexposed to it.It appears, from recent inquiries, that the physicaland intellectual and moral degradation, sooften observable in the inhabitants of mountainvalleys in general, but noticed particularly inthe valleys of the Rhone, may be referred withprobability, among other causes, to a stagnantatmosphere ; and to the reverberation of heatfrom the sides of the mountains which boundthose valleys, cooperating with an alternation ofpiercing winds : the degree of that degradationat least is always proportional to the action ofthose causes.Philos. Trans. 1790, p. 347-138 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREIt is not necessary here to dwell minutely onthe disgusting alteration which the human beings,now particularized, undergo : those whoare desirous of such information may consult avery recent work by Dr. James Johnson o. Allthat is here intended is a statement of the generalfact. And it appears that in the milderinstances, the principal alteration which takesplace is an enlargement of the thyroid gland ;which enlargement is by medical men calledhronchoceley and by the inhabitants of the Alpsgoitre P. In the instances of extreme alteration,the stature rarely reaches the height of five feet ;the skin becomes unnaturally discoloured, anddisfigured by eruptions ; the limbs distorted ;and the cretin for so he is denominated in thisstate, is frequently, in addition, both deaf anddumb, and entirely idiotic. Between the stateof simple goitre and that of most perfect cretinismthe degrees of alteration are innumerable.And, as indicating the connexion between thisunnatural state of the individual, and the atmospherewhich he habitually respires, the followingobservation is worthy of attention. " In theo Change of Air, &c. by James Johnson, M. D. London, 8vo.1831.P Such an enlargement we often in this country witness inindividuals, who, in every other respect, are so far from beingdeformed, that they are frequently remarkable both on accountof their beauty, and the symmetry and full development oftheir whole bod v.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 139Valais," and " in the lower gorges or ravines** that open on its sides, both cretinism and goitreprevail in the most intense degree : as we ascendthe neighbouring mountains, cretinismdisappears, and goitre only is observed ; and** when we reach a certain altitude, both maladiesvanish ^."Among the physical effects of the motion ofthe air, that of sound is among the most remarkableand important : of the intimate nature ofwhich, however, and of the laws that regulateits transmission, I should not speak more particularly,even if I felt myself competent to thetask ; being a subject of too abstruse a characterin itself to claim a close investigation inatreatise like the present : besides which, it willbe examined in a separate treatise by others.Whatever may be the moral effects either ofsimple sounds, or of certain combinations ofsounds, and such effects though apparently of afugitive character are occasionally very powerful,there can be no doubt that particular soundsact physically on our frame. Thus the gentlemurmur of running water, or the repetition ofany simple tone, even though not agreeable initself, is calculated to soothe the whole nervoussystem so as to induce sleep. There are fewperhaps who have not experienced such an effect,from long continued attention to a public1 Change of Air &c. p. 58.140 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREspeaker ; and an apparent, though probably notthe legitimate, proof of the effect having beenproduced by the sound of the voice of the speakeris derived from the fact, that, upon his ceasingto speak, the sleeper usually awakes. There arefew, again, who have not known from personalexperience that certain tones affect the teethwith that peculiar and unpleasant sensation familiarlydescribed under the term, set on edge.Even in the appalling sensation excited bythunder, the mind is probably overawed by thephysical effect produced on the nervous systemby the crash, rather than by any apprehensionof danger from the thunder itself: for that sensationis usually excited even in those who aremost assured that no danger is to be expectedfrom the loudest crash of the thunder, but onlyfrom the lightning which accompanies it. Noris it unreasonable to suppose that an analogyexists between the sense of hearing and theother senses, with reference to the objects oftheir several sensations : and since in the caseof taste, of sight, of smell, and of touch, someobjects are on reasonable grounds conjecturedto be naturally offensive, while others are agreeableto the respective senses ; why, it may beasked, should not the same relations hold withrespect to the ear and the peculiar objects of itssensation ? Evelyn well observes, that the bountifulCreator has left none of the senses whichTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 141he has not gratified at once with their mostagreeable and proper objects.Of all the objects of sense, sound perhaps,as a principle of mental association, the mostpowerfully excites a recollection of past scenesand feelings. Shakspeare briefly elucidates thisprinciple in these lines :Yet the first bringer of unwelcome newsHath but a losing office ; and his tongueSounds ever after as a sullen bell,Remembered knowing a departed friend."Henry IV. Part II. Act I. Scene 1.The author of the " Pleasures of Memory"not less forcibly illustrates the same principle :The intrepid Swiss, who guards a foreign shore,Condemned to climb his mountain cliffs no more,If chance he hear the song so sweetly wild,Which on those cliffs his infant hours beguiledMelts at the long-lost scenes that round him rise,And sinks a martyr to repentant sighs."Rogers, &c. page 21, line 1.Nor is the principle less powerfully illustratedin that most beautiful Psalm beginning with thewords, " By the waters of Babylon we sat down*' and wept :" for who can read that affectingapostrophe, " How shall we sing the Lord's songin a strange land," without entering into all thepathos of the scene represented by the sacred^ poet to the imagination?It is said to be the opinion of the Hindoo,142 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREand though not of much value in argument,there is at least a metaphysical elegance in theopinion, that the remarkable effects of music onthe human mind depend on its power of recallingto the memory the airs of paradise, heardin a state of preexistence.But, if an individual instance of the truth ofthe present position were to be selected, it wouldnot be possible perhaps to find one more impressivethan that which has been recorded ofthe late emperor of the French. It is said thatat that period of his life, when the consequencesof his infatuated conduct had fully developedthemselves in unforeseen reverses, Napoleon,driven to the necessity of defending himselfwithin his own kingdom with the shattered remnantof his army, had taken up a position atBrien, the very spot where he had receivedthe rudiments of his early education ; when, unexpectedly,and while he was anxiously employedin a practical application of those militaryprinciples which first exercised the energiesof his young mind in the college of Brien,his attention was arrested by the sound of thechurch clock. The pomp of his imperial court,and even the glories of Marengo and of Austerlitz,faded for a moment from his regard, andalmost from his recollection. Fixed for a whileto the spot on which he stood, in motionless attentionto the well known sound, he at lengthTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 143gave utterance to his feelings ; and condemnedthe tenour of all his subsequent life, by confessingthat the hours, then brought back tohis recollection, were happier than any he hadexperienced throughout the whole course of histempestuous career.144 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHERESECT. X.Effects of the Motion of the Air, as connected with theArts, sc,I PROCEED now to consider the effects of theatmosphere, while in a state of motion, in aidingthe various arts and operations of civilized society: in which the action is sometimes explicableon mechanical, sometimes on chemicalor on physical principles.It would not be a short or easy task to enumeratethe various substances which require tobe deprived of all sensible moisture, in order tobe applicable to the immediate purposes of life ;or in order to be capable of being preserved inastate fit for future use : and the separation ofthat moisture which they may contain in theirnatural state, or which they may have accidentallycontracted, can in general only be effectedby exposure to the open air : but as that portionof the air, which is in contact with themoistened substance, would soon be so far saturatedwith the vapour arising from it as to beincapable of absorbing more, it must necessarilybe replaced by successive portions of fresh air ;in order that the substance may be thoroughlydried : and hence' we see the advantage of currentsof air, or, in common language, of thewind, for the purposes in question. Withoutthe aid of such currents, the grass newly mownTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 145would often with difficulty be converted intohay : and with still more difficulty would thatconversion take place should it during the process,as is most likely to happen, be exposed torain. The same difficulty would occur, but attendedwith much more serious effects, in thecase of sheaves of wheat or barley, which havingbeen once drenched with rain would berendered unfit for producing bread, unless themoisture were soon dissipated: and with respectto the process of reducing the corn itself to thestate of meal, that is, in common language, ofgrinding it ; although many other mechanicalmeans are capable of being applied to that purpose,who does not see the advantages of thecommon windmill, even where other means areavailable, which in many places they would notbe?In the drying of moistened linen, and of papernewly made; in the seasoning, as it is called,of wood ; and on numerous other occasions, thesame advantages occur from the same cause,and are explicable in the same way. But thereis one instance, of very familiar occurrence,where the effect of a free ventilation is productiveof the greatest comfort. At the breakingup of a long protracted frost, a very remarkablequantity of moisture is usually depositedfrom the air, upon the surface of every thingwith which it comes in contact : and there can146 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREbe scarcely an individual, from the peasant tothe noble, who has not often experienced thecomfortless state of the interior of his habitationfrom this cause. The opulent indeed, supposingthat nature did not provide the remedy, mighteasily remove, and often do accelerate the removalof the evil, by the introduction of currentsof air artificially heated : but the indigent, incapableof commanding so expensive a remedy,would meet with serious detriment, did not atimely change in the state of the atmosphereenable it to reabsorb the moisture which hadpreviously been discharged from it ; for manyparts of the furniture of their habitation wouldbe injured, or even destroyed by the moistureimbibed by them : and with respect to a muchmore important point, a healthy state of body,both the opulent and the indigent would be alikesufferers, from a continued exposure to the externalatmosphere in such a state.In the foregoing instances currents of air havebeen considered as acting on a fixed point asit were, or on bodies nearly stationary. Let usnow consider their action on bodies capable ofbeing set in motion, as nautical vessels of allkinds, and we shall not fail to see the importanceof that action to some of the highest interestsof man.To those, of whatever condition in life, whoare surrounded by the numerous resources of aTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 147commercial city, it is immediately of little import,unless as a question of mere corporeal feeling,whether the air be in a state of perfectcalm, or freshened by a breeze ; and whetherthat breeze be from the east, or from the west.To the agriculturist even it is comparatively oflittle interest, unless at particular seasons, whetherthe wind be high or low, or from whatquarter it may come ; further than as particularstates and directions of the wind are indicationsof rain or drought. But to those " who go downto the sea in ships, and occupy their businessin great waters," not only the degree of force,but the direction of the wind, is of the highestmoment : while on many occasions, even in thepresent advanced state of science and naval architecture,a motionless state of the atmosphere,or a calm, might be fatal to all their speculations.Every one who has lived for a time onthe sea-coast must have observed with whatanxiety the owner of the smallest fishing boatwatches the variations in the state or directionof the wind, as connected with the practicabilityof putting out to sea. If the wind be in an unfavourablequarter, or if it blow not with sufficientforce to swell his sails, he saunters inlistless inactivity along the beach : but if thewished for breeze spring up, the scene is atonce changed, and all is alacrity and life.In some parts of the world Providence hasL 2148 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHEREcompensated for the disadvantages arising fromthe general uncertainty of the wind, by the continuedregularity of its direction through statedseasons: in consequence of which, the merchantmancalculates upon the commencement andduration of his voyage with a degree of securityand confidence, which sets him comparatively atease as to the event. These periodical currentsof air indeed have been named from this verycircumstance the trade winds: and, in illustrationof their adaptation to the purposes of commerce,a more striking instance perhaps couldnot be adduced than the following, which isgiven in a volume, entitled, " Four Years' Residencein the West Indies," written by a gentlemanof the name of Bay ley ^. In the descriptionof the island of St. Vincent it is therestated that a little sloop, the private signal ofwhich was unknown to any of the merchants,sailed into the harbour one morning, and immediatelyattracted the notice of the surroundingcrowd ; and the history of its unexpectedappearance is thus given. " Every one hasheard of the little fishing smacks employed incruising along the coast of Scotland ; whichcarry herrings and other fish to Leith, Edinburgh,or Glasgow, worked by three or fourhardy sailors, and generally commanded byr London, 8vo. 1830, p. 292.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 149an individual having no other knowledge ofnavigation than that which enables him tokeep his dead reckoning, and to take the sunwith his quadrant at noonday.It appears that a man who owned and.com-landed one of these coasting vessels had beenin the habit of seeing the West India shipsload and unload in the several ports of Scotland; and, having learned that sugar was avery profitable cargo, he determined, by wayof speculation, on making a trip to St. Vincent,and returning to the Scottish market with afew hogsheads of that commodity. The nativeswere perfectly astonished—they had never*' heard of such a feat before; and they deemedit quite impossible that a mere fishing smack,*' worked by only four men, and commanded byan ignorant master, should plough the boisserous billows of the Atlantic, and reach the*' West Indies in safety ; yet so it was. Thehardy Scotchman freighted his vessel ; made** sail ; crossed the bay of Biscay in a gale ; gotinto the trades ; and scudded along before thewind, at the rate of seven knots an hour, trustingto his dead reckoning all the way. Hespoke no vessel during the whole voyage, andnever once saw land until the morning of thethirty-fifth day ; when he descried St. Vincent'sright a-head : and setting his gift-topsail, heran down, under a light breeze, along theL 3150 ADAPTATION OF THE ATMOSPHERE*' windward coast of the island ; and came toanchor about eleven o'clock under the circumstances before mentioned."Such a vessel, and so manned, could hardlyhave performed the voyage here described, hadit not been aided by the current of the tradewind : and what then must be the advantage ofsuch a wind, when, instead of aiding the punyenterprise of a single and obscure individual, itforwards the annual fleets of mighty nations.Most important therefore to the Roman empirewas the discovery of Hippalus, which enabledits fleets to stretch across at once from the Africanto the Indian coast by means of the southwesterlymonsoons. But, if we would view thesubject in all its magnitude, let us contemplatewith a philosophic eye the haven of any one ofthe larger sea-ports of Europe ; filled with vesselsfrom every maritime nation of the world,freighted not only with every thing which thenatural wants of man demand, or which the stateof society has rendered necessary to his comfort,but with all which the most refined luxury hasbeen able to suggest. " Merchandise," to usethe words of Scripture, " of gold, and silver, and*' precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen,and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thinewood, and all manner vessels of ivory, andall manner vessels of most precious wood,and of brass, and iron, and marble, and intoTHE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 151damon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense,and wine, and oil, and fine flour, andwheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, andchariots."But the importance of all the foregoing pointsof consideration in the history of the relation ofthe air to human wants is far inferior to thathighest and most beneficial of all its relations,the production of the human voice : for fromthis source arises articulate language; withoutwhich medium of communication betweenman and man, what would become of the mostimportant transactions of the business of life,as well as of its most rational pleasures, thecharms of social converse? But the considerationof the mechanism of the human voice isappropriated to a distinct treatise : and the useof language is adapted rather to the moral thanto the physical condition of man : and I thereforeforbear to dwell on a theme in itself of thehighest interest.In dismissing the subject of atmospherical air,I would wish to observe how beautiful an instanceits history affords of the multiplicity ofbeneficial effects, of very different characters,produced by one and the same agent ; andoften at one and the same moment. Thus whilewe have seen the air of the atmosphere servingas the reservoir of that mass of water from whenceclouds of rain, and consequently springs andl4152 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSrivers are derived, we have also seen that it atthe same time prevents, by the effect of its pressureon their surface, the unlimited evaporationand consequent exhaustion of the ocean, andother sources, from whence that mass of wateris supplied. And again, while the agitation ofthe air contributes to the health of man, by supplyingthose currents which remove or preventthe accumulation of local impurities, it at thesame time facilitates that intercourse betweendifferent nations in which the welfare of thewhole world is ultimately concerned. And lastly,while in passing from the lungs in the act of expirationit essentially forms the voice, it at thesame time removes from the system that noxiousprinciple, the retention of which would be incompatiblewith life.CHAP. VII.Adaptation of Minerals to the Physical Conditionof Man,SECT. I.The general Characters of Minerals.IT has been shewn in the foregoing chapter,that the constituent parts of the atmosphere arefew in number, and of great simplicity in theirTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 153composition ; that some of them usually exist inthe state of invisible vapour, and consequentlyare without sensible form and colour : and thatothers, as light, and heat, and electricity, are notonly without form and colour, but are also ofsuch tenuity as to be incapable of affecting themost delicately constructed balance ; in commonlanguage, are without weight. We are nowentering on a department of nature, which consistsof objects characterised by properties verydifferent from those we have been lately considering; remarkable, as a class, for the mathematicalprecision of their form, the brilliancyand variety of their colour, and for theirgreat weight ; most of them being many timesheavier than the heaviest element of the atmosphere.Few mineral substances, however, exist, insuch a state of purity as to exhibit the simplecharacters of their individual properties ; theclass consisting of a great variety of species,which are capable of entering into union witheach other, and of which the natural combinationsare extremely numerous. But, as mightbe anticipated from the general analogy ofnature, the advantages arising to mankind fromthis mixture of character are infinitely greaterthan if the individual minerals had existed inastate of purity, and uncombined with eachother. Thus, to take the most familiar, and154 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSperhaps the most important instance, almostall natural soils consist principally of mixturesof the three earths called silex, lime, andalumine; none of which, unmixed with eitherof the other two, or at least with some equivalentsubstance, would serve the purposes ofagriculture.Again, all the common forms of clay consistprincipally of various combinations of the twoearths called silex and alumine; and althoughmany of those properties which make clay valuableare communicated by the alumine, the silexcontributes very considerably towards thegeneral utility of the compound.SECT. II.Application of Minerals to Architecture and Sculpture.Among the earliest arts of civilized life maybejustly reckoned the rudiments of architecture: for it may be with truth affirmed that,with very few exceptions, wherever man existsin a state of society, he is found to protect himselffrom the vicissitudes of the weather, notonly by the immediate clothing of his body, butby means of independent habitations ; to which,if at no other time, at the close of the day atleast, he betakes himself; in order to enjoy thatperiodical rest which is requisite for the renewedexertion of his bodily powers : and veryfew are the situations which do not afford contoTHE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 155lenient materials for the purposes of building.In whatever situation then man may be placed,he will most probably have the means of procuringthe comfort of a fixed habitation. Nor is itlong before he adds a certain degree of luxury toutility : for wherever the simple architecture ofthe dwelling is not decorated with some ornamentaladditions, we may be certain that societyexists in a very low state of civilization ; so thatsculpture, as an artificial refinement, seems tobe a natural consequence of architecture. And,perhaps, the superiority attainable by educationand habit is not displayed in any of the arts oflife so strikingly as in these. From the simpletent of the Bedouin to the majestic ruins of Palmyra,among which it is pitched ; or from therude hut of the modern Acropolis to the awfulgrandeur of the Parthenon which overshadowsit ; how infinite are the gradations which markthe progress of these arts ?And with respect to statuary, that highest departmentof the art of sculpture, what emotionsis it not capable of raising in the mind, particularlywhen employed in representing the passionsor any of the attributes of man ! If, forinstance, the mind of the savage could be instantaneouslyelevated to the feeling of correct taste,what would be the sensations of the islander ofthe southern Pacific, in turning from the view156 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSof his hideously-formed and grim idol, to thecontemplation of that glory of the Vatican,the Lord of the unerring bow,The God of life, and poesy, and light ;The sun in human limbs arrayed, and browAll radiant from his triumph in the fight :in whose eyeAnd nostril, beautiful disdain, and might,And majesty, flash their full lightnings by,Developing in that one glance the Deity ^."I will not here attempt to trace the history ofarchitecture, considered as an art characteristicof civilized society : for in such an attempt ourreasoning must often be founded on conjectureinstead of facts; than which nothing is more unsatisfactoryand irksome to a philosophicallycontemplative mind. It will be more congenialto the purpose of this treatise to point out themeans afforded by nature for the advancementof an art, which in its origin is necessary tosome of the chief wants and comforts of individuals;and which is subsequently conducive, bythe exercise of the highest faculties of the mind,not only to national utility and glory, but alsoto national security ^With respect to the inferior animals the instinctivepropensity to construct receptacles forthemselves or their offspring is obvious : and if^ Child Harold canto IV. stanza 161.t In the construction for instance of military fortifications,and piers, and bridges, &:c.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 157on any ground we may attribute the principleof instinct to man, it seems justifiable on thatwhich we are now considering. Omitting, however,those more remarkable instances of instinctwhich direct the bee, the ant, the spider, theswallow, or the beaver, in the fabrication of thestructures which they put together with suchnice art ; if we merely consider the simple burrowof the rabbit or the mole, we seem to acquirea strong presumption that man would notbe destitute of a similar instinct : and it mayreasonably be supposed that, by whatever intellectualpower or internal sensation the savageis directed so to adjust the various joints andmuscles of his limbs as to balance his bodywhen in danger of falling, by a similar powerhe is enabled so to adjust the rude boughs ofwhich his hut is composed, that by mutuallysupporting one another they may at the sametime serve for a support to the grass, or moss,which is thrown over them for the purpose offorming a shelter". Numerous traces of such^ The following statement, from Lewis and Clarke's Travels,will shew how much may be effected by human ingenuity andindustry though aided by the slightest means : " The Column'bien Indians possess very few axes ; and the only tool employedin their building, from the felling of the tree to thedelicate workmanship of the images, (adorning their canoes,)is a chisel made of an old file : and this is worked withoutthe aid of a mallet. But with this they finish a canoe fiftyfeet long, and capable of holding between twenty and thirtypersons, in a few weeks." p. 435. To the preceding state158 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSan instinct are observable in the amusements ofchildren ; as in the arrangement of loose stonesin the form of enclosures ; and in the formationof banks and dikes by the heaping up of thesand of the sea-beach : and, should it be assertedthat such amusements are not to be referred toinstinct, but are to be classed simply under theprinciple of imitation, (as may certainly manyof the amusements of children,) it may be answered,that, if not original instincts, they maybeconsidered as at least instinctive imitationsof the necessary engagements of after-life. Ithas been sometimes supposed that the incliningbranches of an avenue of elms or other treessuggested the idea of the gothic aisle ; but sucha supposition seems both unnecessary in itself,ment may 'with propriety be added the following translation ofthe account which accompanies the twelfth plate in the firstvolume of De Bry : " The method of making boats in Virginiais truly wonderful : for, although the natives have no instrumentsof iron, or in any way resembling those of Europeannations, they still have the power of making boats fully capableof being conveniently navigated. Having selected a largeand lofty tree, they surround it with a fire just above theroots ; taking care to smother any flame, lest it should injurethe rising part of the stem. In this way they burn throughthe greater part of the stem ; and, by thus weakening it, occasionits downfal. By a similar process they burn away thebranches and the upper part of the tree ; and, raising thetrunk thus prepared on forked props, so as to support it at aconvenient height for working, they scrape away the bark bymeans of large shells ; and then excavate it in a longitudinal"^ direction by alternately burning and scraping it."TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 159and incorrect as to the probable order of occurrences: for whoever has read the travels ofPallas through different parts of the Russianempire, or of other Oriental travellers, will findample proof of the existence of the gothic styleof architecture long before our earliest Europeanchurches were built : and it is just as probable,if not more so, that the gothic aisle suggestedthe idea of the elm avenue, as that this suggestedthe idea of the gothic aisle.The mineral substances employed in the structureof human habitations necessarily differ indifferentparts of the world, in consequence ofthe difference of the materials afforded by thesubjacent strata ; and, accordingly, an experiencedeye will conjecture, almost with certainty,the character of the subjacent strata,from the nature of the materials employed inthe buildings erected on the surface : or, conversely,if the nature of the subjacent strata beantecedently known, the character of the stoneemployed in the buildings of the vicinity will,almost to a certainty, be known also ; and, onthis principle, as much surprise would be excitedin the mind of a well-informed geologistby the prevalence of granite in the buildings ofKent or Sussex, as of limestone near the Land'sEnd in Cornwall.The nature, however, of the material employedin building is in some measure determined by160 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSthe particular stage of civilization of the inhabitants.Thus in the early periods of civilization,and before the aboriginal forests of a countryhave been cleared, wood has usually beenthe principal and almost the only substance employed.In proportion as the population of acountry increases, wood becomes more and morescarce ; and then brick and stone begin to beemployed : but when the population has increasedto a very considerable extent, thosematerials almost entirely supersede the use ofwood, unless in the interior of the building :and hence, in this densely-peopled island, thehalf-timbered dwellings of our ancestors aredaily becoming more picturesque x.The value of building-stone depending greatlyon its hardness, but the difficulty of working itbeing increased proportionally to its degree ofhardness, it ought not to escape our notice, inatreatise, of which it is the professed object toillustrate the adaptation of external nature tothe physical condition of man, that many of thecommon forms of building-stone, though softwhile yet undetached from the quarry, becomehardened very considerably by exposure to theair : which change in their state enhances theirvalue in a twofold sense; for, in consequence^ Throughout the interior of Russia and of Siberia the greaterpart of the buildings in every town were, within a few years,entirely of wood.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 101of their previous softness, they are more easilyworked ; while their subsequent hardness insuresthe greater durability of the building in whichthey are employed. And, again, though manyvarieties of stone are so easily worked, evenafter a long exposure to the air, as to haveacquired in consequence the name of freestone ;yet even with respect to such as are of thehardest and toughest quality, an equal degreeof ease in working them is easily attainable bypractice. To an unpractised workman, for instance,nothing is more difficult than to give adeterminate form, by the hammer or chisel, togranite, slate, or flint ; and yet a little experienceenables the mason to work all these to thegreatest nicety : and that person would indeedbe very incurious, who, although he might notnaturally be disposed to notice mechanical processes,did not feel an interest in observing theform which the roofing-slate takes under thebill of the slater ; or the ease with which thegun-flint is formed into its peculiar shape by afew strokes of a light hammer.But, after the stones have been detached fromthe quarry, and have been worked into a convenientform for building, it is in the greaternumber of instances necessary to the stabilityof the intended structure, that they should beconsolidated together by some intermediate substance: for it would very rarely happen that theM162 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSseparate stones could be obtained of such a sizeas to be capable of remaining fixed by theirown weight. Sometimes this effect is producedby means merely mechanical, as in the case ofthe construction of the larger circle of Stonehenge; where the upper extremity of two contiguousperpendicular stones, being pared awayso as to form what is called a tenoii, is let intoa corresponding cavity called a mortise cut intoeach extremity of the horizontal stone that unitesthem.As such Cyclopean masonry would be far tooexpensive for common purposes ; and as the labourand expense of uniting together, by crampsof iron or other mechanical means, the verygreat number of stones requisite for the constructionof even a small building, would be endless; we at once see the importance of any mediumthat will fully and readily effect thatminion, without much expense of time or money :and how completely the substance called mortaranswers the intended purpose, the slightestobservation will make manifest. As the employmentof this useful substance appears tohave existed antecedently to history, it is notworth while to spend any time in conjecturinghow it was first discovered : but it is quite inunison with the intention of the present treatiseto observe, that, of the three materials of whichit is principally made, namely lime, sand, andTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 163water, the first is readily obtained by the simpleapplication of heat to any common form oflimestone, a process which is occasionally goingon in every limekiln ; and the means of obtainingthe two others are almost every whereathand.Hitherto the materials, applicable to the artsof architecture and sculpture, have been consideredas adapted to the common or necessarywants of mankind : but in what may not improperlybe called the poetry of those arts, they arecapable, in their application, of eliciting the highestpowers of the imagination : for surely thismay with propriety be affirmed of such sublimeproductions as the Parthenon in architecture,or the Belvedere Apollo in sculpture. Nor arewe obliged to seek for such productions solelyin the classic ages of antiquity : for, to say nothingof Palladio, Michael Angelo, Canova,Thorvaldson, and other ornaments of modernEurope, our own country has given birth toworks of the highest excellence in either departmentof the art. Nor need this assertion bemade with any hesitation, while in architecturethat imperishable monument of genius, the Eddystone lighthouse, attests the fame of Smeaton ;and in sculpture, the pure and simple taste ofChantry has, in that most exquisite work containedwithin the walls of Lichfield cathedral,thrown a truth and beauty over the image ofM 2164 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSdeath, which none of his predecessors had everattained y.Who can peruse the journal of Smeaton, andnot admire the penetration, the resources, andthe activity of his genius? Consider the natureof the task which he had engaged to perform ;his limited and uncertain opportunities of action;the failures of others who had preceded him inasimilar undertaking ; the consequent necessityof new principles, and new combinations, in hisplan of operations ; the formidable dangers hewas continually under the necessity of encountering; and, lastly, the awful responsibility ofthe undertaking itself: consider all these points,and it may be safely affirmed that, as an instanceof the conjoined effects of personal enterprise,fortitude, and perseverance, the Eddystonelighthouse stands unrivalled.On a small, precipitous, and completely insulatedrock, deriving its very name from the irregularand impetuous eddies which prevail aroundit ; elevated but a few feet above the level of thesurrounding ocean, even in its calmest state ;and exposed at all times to the uninterruptedswell of the Atlantic ; by the joint violence ofthe wind and waves of which, a preceding structurehad been in a moment swept away, leavingy One exception to this assertion perhaps exists,, in a work ona similar subject by Banks ; in the church of Ashbourne, Derbyshire.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 165not a wreck behind ; on such a spot was thisnew wonder of the world to be erected. Formerexperience is here of little avail, and commonprinciples and means have been already tried invain ; the architect is thrown almost entirely onhis own resources ; and they do not fail him.In order to combat the force of those overpoweringelements to which the future structure is tobe constantly exposed, he looks about for thatnatural form which is found most permanentlyto resist a similar conflict ; and viewing with aphilosophic eye the expanded base of the oak,and the varying proportions of its rising stem,he made the happy selection of this object asthe type of the proportions of his intended work.On this occasion," he himself says ^, " thenatural figure of the waist or bole of a largespreading oak presented itself to my imagination.Let us for a moment consider this tree:suppose at twelve or fifteen feet above its base,it branches out in every direction, and formsa large bushy top, as we often observe. Thistop, when full of leaves, is subject to a verygreat impulse from the agitation of violentwinds ; yet partly by its elasticity, and partlyby the natural strength arising from its figure,it resists them all, even for ages, till the grasA Narration of the Building, &c. of the Eddystone Lighthouse,London, 1 791 , p. 42.m3166 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSdual decay of the material diminishes the coherenceof the parts, and they suffer piecesmeal by the violence of the storm : but it isvery rare that we hear of such a tree beingtorn up by the roots. Let us now consider itsparticular figure — connected with its roots,which lie hid below ground, it rises from thesurface thereof with a large swelling base,which at the height of one diameter is generally reduced by an elegant curve, concave tothe eye, to a diameter less by at least onethird, and sometimes to half of its original** base. From thence its taper diminishing moreslow, its sides by degrees come into a serpentcircular, and for some height form a cylinder.After that, a preparation of more circumferencebecomes necessary for the strong insertionand establishment of the principal boughs,which produces a swelling of its diameter.Now we can hardly doubt but that every secttion of the tree is nearly of an equal strengthin proportion to what it has to resist : andwere we to lop off its principal boughs, andexpose it in that state to a rapid current ofwater, we should find it as much capable of** resisting the action of the heavier fluid, whendivested of the greatest part of its clothing, asit was that of the lighter when all its spreadsing ornaments were exposed to the fury of thewinds : and hence we may derive an idea ofTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 167what the shape of a column of the greatest** stability ought to be, to resist the action of externalviolence, when the quantity of matter is** given whereof it is to be composed."But invention and composition do not constitutethe whole of the character of genius, in thepractical arts at least. Industry, both that whichresists the listlessness arising from continuityand sameness of pursuit ; and, still more, thatwhich, though repeatedly repressed by unexpectedimpediments, as repeatedly recovers itselasticity ; unconquerable and indefatigable industry,like that of the ant, is likewise requisite.And such industry did Smeaton manifest ; andhis industry has hitherto been completely crownedwith success. The Eddystone has withstoodthe war of winds and waves through the greaterpart of a century, unshaken in a single point :and if of any human work we dare affirm asmuch, we might affirm of this, *' manet aeternum-que manet."We now turn to the efforts of genius, of another,and, intrinsically, a higher order — to thatbeautiful composition of Clan trey, to which allusionhas been already made. A different taskis here to be accomplished : it is not the stormof the physical elements which is to be resisted,but the poignant grief of the bereaved parent isto be assuaged ; and that, not by any nepenthewhich may obliterate the memory of lost hap4168 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSpines ; but by, I had almost said, the livingimage of the very objects themselves from whichthat happiness arose, and in which it centred.Alone, and undistracted by the presence of surroundingfriends, the widowed mother approachesin mournful silence the consecrated aisle; where,softly clasped in each other's arms, she sees herbeloved children resting in the repose of sleeprather than of death : and gazing on them withintense affection, she for a while forgets her sorrow;indulging in a dream which almost realizesher past happiness.SECT. III.Gems and precious Stones.If it were the purpose of this treatise to pointout the adaptation of external nature to themoral as well as to the physical condition ofman, it might be easily shewn, that, however anundue degree of attention to outward ornamentsis bl am able, a moderate degree of attention isboth allowable and right : otherwise, and it isan instance that outweighs all others, it wouldnot have been observed in the decorations of thetemple of Solomon, nor in the original ordinationsrespecting the dress of the Levitical priesthood.Those substances consequently, whichare capable of being applied to ornamental purposes,become, in our mode of using them, a testof virtue, in the same manner as our ordinaryTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 169clothing, and food, and sleep; all of which,though even necessary to our existence, maybeabused by a luxurious indulgence in them.But at present I am no further concerned withthe moral part of the question, than to inferthat, if an attention to external ornament be notonly allowable, but right, we may antecedentlyexpect that materials for its exercise would beprovided by nature : and that is indeed thefact ^.It would be difficult however to determinewhich of the three kingdoms, the animal, vegetable,or mineral, is the most prolific sourceof those beautiful forms and colours which areprincipally valued as objects of external ornament.We do not indeed observe in any flowerthat iridescent play of col ours which characterisessome varieties of the opal and felspar, amongminerals ; and the plumage of certain birds, andthe scales of certain fish, among animals : butinelegance and variety of form, and in splendourand simplicity of colour, the vegetable worldwill be found to yield neither to the animal normineral. Mineral substances, however, fromtheir rarity as well as beauty, are more prized ;and from the durability of their substance aremore permanently applicable to ornamental purposesthan those either of animal or vegetable" Wherefore did nature pour her bounties forth ?" &c.Com us, line 726, &c.170 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSorigin ; and therefore serve better to illustratethe principle of this treatise.From among those substances which in commerciallanguage are called precious stones,though some so called are not really derivedfrom the mineral kingdom, it is proposed toselect the diamond as a preeminent example ofthe whole class ; because, in addition to thoseproperties which render it valuable as an ornamentalgem, there are some points in its historywhich give it a peculiar worth. It will naturallyexcite the surprise of those, who are unacquaintedwith the chemical history of this substance,to learn that the purest diamond doesnot essentially differ from a particular variety ofcommon coal ; or from that mineral of whichdrawing pencils are made, and which is usually,though not with propriety, called plumbago andblack lead: and yet nothing has been moreclearly proved than that equal weights of theseseveral substances, if submitted to the processof combustion, will produce nearly equal quantitiesof carbonic acid gas ; which has alreadybeen stated to be a chemical combination ofdefinite proportions of carbon and oxygen ; thediamond, which is the purest form of carbon,burning away without leaving any residuum ;the other two leaving a very small proportion ofashes, in consequence of their containing foreignmatter.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 171And here we can hardly fail to notice a veryremarkable instance of what may be called theeconomical provisions of nature. How rarely,and in what small quantities, are the diamondand plumbago found ; and how abundantly doescoal predominate in many parts of the world !The Borrodale mine of plumbago in Cumberlandis the most considerable source of that substancethroughout Europe ; and the province ofGolconda almost alone supplies the whole worldwith diamonds : and, probably, the accumulatedweight of all the plumbago and of all thediamonds, which have ever been derived fromthose and other sources, would not equal a hundredthpart of the weight of coal which is dailyquarried in Great Britain. Suppose now thatthe case had been reversed ; and what wouldhave been the consequence ? diamond and plumbago,though really combustible substances, yetfrom their slow combustibility could never haveanswered, in the place of coal, as a fuel for generalpurposes ; and, on the other hand, withoutthat large supply of coal which nature has provided,what would have become of the domesticcomforts and commercial speculations of thegreater part of Europe, during the two last centuries?The value of the diamond is not derived solelyfrom its transparency and lustre. Its remarkablehardness is another and a most useful ADAPTATION OF MINERALSparty belonging to it ; for, in consequence of itsgreat degree of hardness, it is capable of cuttingand polishing not only the hardest glass, buteven the hardest gems : and if we consider howuseful a substance glass is, how universally employedas a means of at the same time admittinglight and excluding the air from the interior ofour houses ; but that in consequence of its hardnessand brittleness it would with great difficultybe divided by any common mechanicalinstrument, so as accurately to fit the frames inwhich it is fixed for the above purposes, we atonce see the value of a substance which easilyand readily accomplishes that end. A smalldiamond no larger than a mustard seed, fixedin a convenient handle, enables the glazier tocut a plate of glass into pieces of any shapethat he pleases : and the same instrument willserve his daily use for many successive years.Nor is it among the least of the glories of thisgem, that it gave occasion to that remarkableconjecture of sir Isaac Newton respecting itschemical nature. That philosopher having observed,that the refractive power of transparentsubstances is in general proportional to theirdensity ; but that, of substances of equal density,those which are combustible possess therefractive power in a higher degree than thosewhich are not, concluded from a comparisonof the density and refractive powers of theTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 173diamond, that it contained an inflammable principle; which opinion was subsequently confirmedby direct experiment. It will be rememberedby the chemical reader that on thesame ground he made the same conjecture withrespect to water, and with the same success.And never, perhaps, did the eye of philosophypenetrate more unexpectedly the thick veilwhich is so often found to hide the real characterof various forms of matter : for, imperishableas from its name the adamant was supposed tobe, who would have antecedently expected thatit might be dissipated into air by the process ofcombustion ? and, with respect to the other subjectof his conjecture, if any principle was opposedto combustibility in the opinion of mankind,it was water — " Aquae contraries ignis."SECT. IV.The Distribution and relative Proportions of Sea andLand ; and the geological Arrangement and physicalCharacter of some of the superficial Strata of the Earth.As it is clearly a just object of the presenttreatise to select the most familiar and most obviousinstances of the principle intended to beillustrated, I shall in entering upon the abstrusedepartment of geology, consider only those phenomenawhich offer themselves to the eye inevery part of the world ; and which are eitherat once intelligible, or easily demonstrable, tothe commonest observer.174 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSOf such phenomena the most prominent arethe general distribution of the sea and the land ;and the relative proportions of their superficialextent. With reference to the sea, although wemay never know all the ends which are answeredby its saltness, and why its depth should begreater in some parts than others ; and althoughwe can perhaps form no more than a conjectureas to the advantages derivable from the tides ;(the prevention, for instance, of a stagnant stateof the water ;) or from the accumulation of icenear the poles ; (the cooling, probably, of the generalmass of the atmosphere and the consequentproduction of currents of air;) yet of its mode ofdistribution, and of the relative extent of its surface,we readily apprehend the reason ; simplyin considering that all those forms of water whichcontribute to the fertilization of the earth, orthe support of animal life, are derived from theocean. Were the superficial extent of this thereforemuch less than it is, the quantity evaporatedwould not be sufficient for the intendedpurposes ; or, were the distribution different fromwhat it is, were the sea, for instance, to occupyone hemisphere and the land the other, the waterevaporated would not be so equally diffusedthrough the atmosphere as it is at present.And, with respect to the land, how beautifullydo the particular arrangement and character ofits surface conspire with its general distribution.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 175to equalize the difFusion of the water that is dischargedupon it from the atmosphere ! The truthof the proposition contained in those lines,Rustics expectant dum defeat amnis, at illeLabour, et labour in omne volubilis aevum,"depends on the nature of the particular arrangementand character, to which allusion has justbeen made. On the one hand, the general surfaceof the land ascending from the sea on allsides towards some central ridge or district,called the watershed of the country, all the rainthat does not sink beneath the surface is accumulatedinto rivers ; which naturally descendtowards, and ultimately reach, the sea : and, onthe other hand, the superficial strata being ingeneral incapable of immediately absorbing therain which falls upon them, the descent of thewater is the necessary result of the inclinationof the surface. But if, from partial causes, suchan inclination of the land is either wanting, orthe course of rivers is impeded by the unrepressedgrowth of reeds and sedge, the adjoiningdistrict is overflowed, and at length convertedinto a stagnant marsh. It is from such aphysical cause, that, at this moment, the ancientsite of Babylon attests the truth of prophecy ;being still, as it has been for ages, " a possessionfor the bittern, and pools of water."But that which is called the watershed of anylarge tract of land is not simply the most elevated176 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSportion of the whole surface : it consists also, inagreater or less degree, of ranges of mountains ;down the highly inclined sides of which therain immediately descends in numerous torrents,which by their gradual accumulation produce rivers.And, as best calculated to secure the permanenteffect, the substance of these mountainsis in general so hard, and impermeable to water,that, with reference to the present system of theearth, they may justly be characterised by theepithet " everlasting." But if, instead of beingthus durable, they were of a soft or friable substance,they would soon cease to exist as mountains; and if they were porous, instead of compact,they would absorb much of that rain whichnow contributes to the formation of rivers.From that portion of the rain which, in comparativelyflat districts, sinks beneath the surfaceof the earth, reservoirs of water are formed :from which, either spontaneous springs arise,or into which, artificial excavations called wellsare sunk : and of the utility of such reservoirs,those beds of gravel which occur in every partof the world afford upon the whole the best illustration.SECT. V.Beds of Gravel.Few subjects would at the first view appearmore barren of interest than a bed of gravel ;consisting, as it usually does, of nothing butTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 177fragments of broken pebbles and sand, heapedtogether in apparently inextricable confusion.Yet such beds, dispersed as they are very generallyover the surface of the regular strata, administermaterially to the wants of man ; in affordinghim the means of supplying himself readilywith that important necessary of life, water.From the irregularity in the form and size ofthe component parts of gravel, and from theslight degree of cohesion by which they areunited, the whole mass is necessarily porous :and hence, readily transmitting the rain whichfalls on its surface, becomes charged with waterto an extent proportional to the quantity of rainwhich has penetrated it ; being enabled to retainthe water thus accumulated, in consequence ofits resting on some substratum, as clay, which isimpermeable to water : so that, if an excavationsufficiently deep be made into any part of thegravel, the water immediately drains into thisexcavation, and rises at length to the level ofthe general mass of water contained in the wholebed ; by which easy process, in such instancesat least, those reservoirs, called wells, are formed: and these reservoirs are never exhausted,so long as the whole bed of gravel retains anyconsiderable proportion of water. A very readyillustration of this fact is afforded by the familiarinstance of those excavations which childrenare accustomed to make in the sand of the sean178 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSbeach, while yet charged with moisture duringthe ebbing of the tide.The inhabitants of a town which, like Oxford,is built partly on a comparatively shallow bedof gravel, and partly on a deep stratum of clay,can well appreciate the value of the former substratumof their habitations, with reference tothe facility of procuring water : for while they,whose dwellings are built on the gravel, canreadily obtain water by sinking a well immediatelyon the spot ; they, whose dwellings are onthe clay, must either procure water from a distance,or incur a very serious, and, finally perhaps,useless expense, in attempting to perforatethe clay. With respect to its general uses,gravel seems only to be employed in the repairingof roads and walks ; in the composition ofsome kinds of mortar ; and as a convenient occasionalballast for sailing vessels : so that, if weconfine our view to the means afforded by gravelbeds of supplying the ordinary wants of man,their history may be comprised in a few words.Not so, if we view them with reference to theirorigin, and the nature of their occasional consFrom the observation of an analogous arrangement in thegeneral strata of the earthy namely ;, that those which are perviousto water alternate with those which are impervious towater Mr. William Smithy " the father of English geology'became acquainted with the origin of springs and the true principlesof draining.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 179tents : and little dreams any one, save the professedgeologist, what a mine lies hid, in thoseconfused heaps of ruin, for the exercise of man'sintellectual faculties. Few subjects indeed haveafforded ampler scope for philosophical reflection.In proof of which, I need do no more thanrefer to the labours and ingenuity of Cuvier onthe continent, and of Professor Buckland in ourown country : of whom the one, by a scientificexamination of the organic remains of gravelbeds, in addition to those of some of the regularstrata, has brought to light not only numerousindividual species, but whole families of animals,which have ceased to exist ages and agessince : and the other, with no less labour andingenuity, has all but exhibited some of theseanimals to our view in the very act of devouringand digesting their food.How often, and with what intense interest, hasnot the scientific geologist perused the originalessays of Cuvier ; in which, setting out from thecasual observation of a simple fragment of a fossilbone belonging to some extinct species, hehas established not only the class and order, buteven the size and proportions of the individualto which it belonged, and the general nature ofits food. And how often, in addition to professedgeologists, has not an attentive audience of academicalstudents listened with admiration to theclear and vivid eloquence of the other of thosen2180 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSphilosophers, the Geological Professor of Oxford,while he unfolded that beautiful chain of factsby which he traced his antediluvian animals totheir native caves ; and exposed to view, to themental eye at least, and almost to the corporeal,their particular habits, and even the relics oftheir last meal. And, lest there should be anydoubt as to the nature of this meal, he discovered,by a most philosophical, for I will not sayfortunate conjecture, unequivocal proofs of theactual remains of it; not only in its original, butalso in its digested state. I here allude particularlyto his verification of the masses of digestedbone which he has most satisfactorily shewn tohave passed through the whole tract of the digestiveorgans of his favourite hyenas; and whichare so nearly identical, in every character, withthe similar masses that daily traverse the sameorgans of the living species, as to make it difficulteven for an experienced eye to ascertainthe difference between them.It is natural that I should feel a pleasure inrecording the well-earned fame of a friend withwhom I have lived in habits of intimacy for morethan twenty years ; and whom, in the commencementot his career, I had the good fortune to leadinto that avenue of science, on which he has subsequentlythrown more light than perhaps anyother English geologist ; with the exception indeedof one, the reverend W. Conybeare, the adoTHE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 181miration of whose comprehensive and commandingviews, as well in fossil as in general geology,is not confined to his own countrymen ; themembers of the French Institute having attestedtheir sense of his preeminent talents by the highhonour of selecting him, a few years since, asone of their corresponding members.On one point, however, of Professor Buckland'sgeneral theory of the organic remains met withingravel beds, and in certain natural caverns,I not only differ from him, but think it right toexpress the ground of that difference. Dr. Buck-land'sarguments in favour of his opinion thatthe animals of the gravel beds, and the caverns,habitually frequented the spots where these remainsare found, are not only ingenious, but areoccasionally supported by facts which almostnecessarily lead to that conclusion : and it is notintended to attempt to invalidate them. Theydo not indeed stand in the way of the objectionnow to be advanced ; this objection being applicableto that part of the theory only whichconsiders the destruction of these animals as theeffect of the Mosaic deluge. Nor is the objection,in its origin, so much directed against theinsulated supposition that these organic remainsare immediate proofs of the Mosaic deluge ; asagainst the principle of supporting the credibilityof the sacred Scriptures on any unascertainedinterpretation of physical phenomena. Such aN 3182 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSsupport appears to be imprudent, as well as unnecessary: unnecessary, because the moral evidenceof the credibility of the Scriptures is of itselffully sufficient ; imprudent, because we havethe strong ground of antecedent analogy, notonly in another but in this very branch of knowledge,for anticipating a period in the progressof science, when particular phenomena may beinterpreted in a very different manner from thatin which they are interpreted at present. Thusthe explanation of the motions of our solar system,which is now admitted very generally, withoutany fear of weakening the authority of Scripture,was once as generally impugned on theprinciple of that very fear. Time was also, andindeed within the last century, when the shellsand other organic remains, which are imbeddedin the chalk and other solid strata, were consideredto be the remains and proofs of the Mosaicdeluge ; and yet at the present day, withoutany fear of injuring the credibility of the Scriptures,they are admitted very generally to havebeen deposited anteriorly to the Mosaic deluge.And who will venture to say, in the infancy ofa science like geology, that the same change ofopinion may not happen with respect to the organicremains of the gravel beds and caverns.Nor indeed do I think, and I expressed thisopinion nearly twenty years since, that the organicremains of the gravel beds and the cavernsTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 183can be, on even mere philosophical grounds, adducedas physical proofs of the Mosaic deluge.For as according to the Mosaic record it was theintention of the Deity on that occasion, in themidst of a very general destruction of individualsto preserve species, we should in reason expect,among the organic remains of that catastrophe,a preponderance, at least, of the remains of existingspecies : since, although some species mayhave been lost subsequently to the deluge, thesenaturally would be comparatively few. But thefact is just the reverse ; for by far the greaternumber of the organic remains of the gravel, asof the caverns, belong to species not knownnow to exist. And with respect to those remainswhich appear capable of being identifiedwith living species, Cuvier allows that theybelong to orders of animals, the species of whichoften differ only in colour, or in other pointsof what may be called their external or superficialanatomy ; and cannot therefore be satisfactorilyidentified by the remains of their bonesalone.I do not consider it right to enter into a moreextended examination of the question on thepresent occasion : but, could it be proved thatvisible traces of the Mosaic deluge must necessarilyexist, arguments might be adduced toshew both where those traces ought to be expected,and that they do actually exist. ButN 4184 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSthe deluge itself was evidently a miracle, or aninterference with the laws which usually regulatethe operation of second causes : and whoeveradmits the force of the reasoning, containedin Butler's Analogy of Natural and RevealedReligion, will be disposed to allow that the visibleevidence of the catastrophe may have beenpurposely obscured, in order to exercise our faithin an exclusive belief of the moral evidence.I would not lay undue weight on the negativeproof arising from the absence of human remains,although they have been in vain searchedfor, even in parts of the world to which it mayfairly be presumed that the human race hadpenetrated at the period of the Mosaic deluge :but undoubtedly such a negative proof is notwithout considerable weight ; especially whentaken in connexion with the theory of a continentalgeologist, M. de Beaumont, of whosepowers of philosophical generalization ProfessorSedgwick speaks in language the most expressive." I am using," he says, " no terms ofexaggeration, when I say that, in reading the*' admirable researches of M. de Beaumont, Iappeared to myself, page after page, to beacquiring a new geological sense, and a newfaculty of induction ^."After having taken a general survey of M. de'^ See Professor Sedgwick's address to the Geological Society,1831, p. 29.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 185Beaumont's observations and views, Mr. Sedgwickalludes to an opinion which he himself hadexpressed in the preceding year, that what iscommonly called diluvial gravel is probably notthe result of one but of many successive periods.But what I then stated," he adds, ** as a probableopinion, may, after the essays of M. deBeaumont, be now advanced with all the authorityof established truth — we now connectthe gravel of the plains with the elevation of*' the nearest system of mountains ; we believethat the Scandinavian boulders in the north ofGermany are of an older date than the dilu-'' virum of the Danube : and we can prove thatthe great erratic blocks, derived from thegranite of Mont Blanc, are of a more recentorigin than the old gravel in the tributaryvalleys of the Rhone. That these statementsmilitate against opinions, but a few years since** held almost universally among us, cannot bedenied. But, in retreating when we have advancedtoo far, there is neither compromise'* of dignity, nor loss of strength ; for in doingthis, we partake but of the common fortune ofevery one who enters on a field of investigatetion like our own. All the noble generalizationsof Cuvier, and all the beautiful discoveriesof Buckland, as far as they are theresults of fair induction, will ever remain uneshaken by the progress of discovery. It is186 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSonly to theoretical opinions that my remarks** have any application" (p. 33).Mr. Sedgwick then proceeds to argue thatdifferent gravel beds having been formed at differentperiods, it may happen from the natureof diluvial action, that mixtures of the materialsof different beds may occur ; and consequentlythat " in the very same deposit we may find theremains of animals which have lived duringdifferent epochs in the history of the earth"(p. 33).He then shews how, from the double testimonyof the widely existing traces of diluvialaction, and the record of a general deluge containedin the sacred Scriptures, the opinion wasnaturally formed that all those traces were referableto one and the same action : though weought in philosophical caution to have hesitatedin adopting that opinion, because " among theremnants of a former world, entombed in theseancient deposits, we have not yet found a singletrace of man, or of the works of his hands"(p. 34). Lastly, he strenuously denies that thefacts of geological science are opposed to thesacred records, or to the reality of an historicdeluge; and for himself utterly rejects such aninference : and argues justly, that there is anaccordance between the absence of human remainsin these diluvial beds of gravel, and thesupposed antiquity of their formation, inasmuchTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 187as the phenomena of geology, and the testimonyof both sacred and profane history, " tell us inalanguage easily understood, though writtenin far different characters, that man is a recentsojourner on the surface of the earth"(p. 35).SECT. VI.Metals.The atmosphere, and the vegetable, and animalkingdoms, being three out of the four generaldepartments of the external world, are mostextensively necessary to the welfare, if not tothe very existence, of every individual : but evencommunities of men, in an uncivilized state indeed,have existed, and in some parts of theearth are still existing, without any further aidfrom the mineral kingdom than that, whichthe common soil affords to the growth of thefood which supports them. But a civilized stateof society is the natural destination of man ;and such a state of society is incapable of arisingor being maintained, without the aid ofmineral substances : and this assertion holdsmore particularly with respect to the metallicspecies.In that department of civilized intercoursewhich consists in the exchange of the commoditiesof life, what other substance could be anequivalent substitute for gold and silver, or evencopper, as a medium of that exchange ? In what188 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSconstant use, and of what immense importance,are some of the commonest metals in agriculture,and in the arts ; or for the various purposesof domestic life ! Nor have any substances moresuccessfully exercised the powers of the mind,in the discovery or improvement of physicaltruths ; or more largely contributed to the benefitof mankind by the practical application ofthose truths. We owe it to the researches ofphilosophy, not only that new and highly valuablemetals have been discovered ; but that thegeneral value of the metals previously known,has been advanced by extended and improvedapplications of their inherent properties, or bythe invention of new metallic combinations oralloys.If a convincing and familiar proof of the extensiveapplication of the metals to the commonpurposes of life were required, we need onlyrefer to the case of many a common cottager,who could not carry on his daily concerns andoccupations without the assistance of several ofthe metals. He could not, for instance, make hislarger purchases, nor pay his rent, without silver,gold, and copper. Without iron he could neitherdig, nor plough, nor reap ; and, with respectto his habitation, there is scarcely a part of thestructure itself, or of the furniture contained init, which is not held together, to a greater or lessextent, by means of the same metal ; and manyTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 189articles are either entirely of iron, or of ironpartially and superficially coated with tin. Zinc,and copper, and antimony, and lead, and tin,are component parts of his pewter and brazenutensils. Quicksilver is a main ingredient inthe metallic coating of his humble mirror : cobaltand platina, and metals perhaps more rareand costly than these, as chrome, are employedin the glazing of his drinking cups and jugs.And if he be the possessor of a fowling-piece,which commonly he would be, arsenic must beadded to the foregoing list, as an ingredient inthe shot with which he charges it ; for it is arsenicwhich enables the shot, during the processof its granulation, to acquire that delicately sphericalform by which it is characterised. So thatthe whole number of metals made use of by societyat large for common purposes, amountingto less than twenty, more than half of these areeither directly used by the mere peasant, or enterinto the composition of the furniture and implementsemployed by him.In estimating the value of those mineral substanceswhich were considered in the precedingchapter, as applicable to the common purposesof life, their degree of hardness is the propertyof principal consideration : but, in addition tothis, metallic bodies possess some peculiar propertieswhich very greatly increase their value.Thus, under a force acting perpendicularly on190 ADAPTATION OF MINERALStheir surface, as under repeated blows of thehammer, or compression by rollers, many ofthem are capable of being expanded to a greateror less extent ; some of them to such an extentas to become thinner than the thinnest paper ;which property in its various degrees is expressedby the term malleability : others, though notpossessing any great degree of malleability, maybedrawn out into a wire, sometimes so fine asscarcely to be visible by the naked eye ; whichproperty is expressed by the term ductility. Allof them are capable of being expanded or contractedin every direction by an increase or decreaseof their temperature ; the degree of thisexpa7isibility, as of its opposite effect, dependingon the degree of the temperature. And lastly,in connexion with certain points of temperature,all the metals are capable of existing eitherin a solid or in a liquid state : and their propertyof passing from a solid to a liquid state,in consequence of the agency of heat, is calledtheir fusibility .Into the detail of the different degrees inwhich these properties are possessed by differentmetals, it belongs to the chemist to enter.What we have at present to consider is, the advantageaccruing to society from these propertiesthemselves, and from their existence in thatparticular degree in which they actually do existin the different metals : to shew, for instance.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 191that those metals which possess malleability inagreater ratio than ductility, or ductility in agreater ratio than malleability, are of infinitelygreater value than if the converse were true :and so with respect to the property of fusibility.Thus gold, being comparatively scarce, and principallyvaluable on account of its colour, its resplendency,and its remarkable power of resistingthe action of the air, and of various agentswhich readily tarnish or rust the more commonmetals, (all which properties reside on the meresurface,) a given quantity of such a metal isconsequently more valuable in proportion to thedegree of its malleability ; because it may beextended over a greater surface : and no metalpossesses this property in so high a degree asgold ; so that, as far as the eye is the judge, themost ordinary substance may be made to representthe most costly, at a comparatively triflingexpense: while in the degree of its ductility,which in gold would be, for general purposes, oflittle moment, it is inferior to most of the metals.c It should be kept in mind that this observation is applied tounalloyed or pure gold ; for when alloyed, this metal is capableof being dra^vn out into a comparatively fine wire. Dr. Wollastonindeed suggested a method of drawing out even pure goldinto an exceedingly fine wire, by enclosing it in a mass of a highlyductile metal, drawing out the mixed metal into fine wire, anddisengaging the gold from the metal in which it was enclosed, byany acid which would dissolve the latter without affecting thegold itself.192 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSIron, again, is malleable to a degree whichrenders it most valuable as a material for fabricatingall kinds of instruments for mechanical,domestic, or philosophical purposes ; and it iscapable of being hardened by well known processessufficiently for the numerous and importantworks of the carpenter and mason, and theequally important purposes of war, agriculture,and the arts. A greater degree of malleability,in a metal employed for such purposes as thosefor which iron is usually employed, especiallyas this metal is very easily corroded by rust,would clearly have added nothing to its practicalvalue : while its degree of ductility, whichexceeds that of every other metal, combinedwith its capability of being hardened in variousdegrees, occasionally confers a value on it greatlysuperior to that of gold.From the difference in the degree of fusibilityof different metals, aided by the dispositionwhich they have to unite so as to form an alloy,arises the possibility of covering one metal in asolid state with a superficial coating of anothermetal in a state of fusion. I am not aware thatthis method is employed, at least to any extent, inany other instances, than in the application oftin to the surface of copper or of iron : but, werethere an hundred similar instances, they wouldnot lessen the value of this, as affording an illustrationof that principle which has been borneTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN, 193in mind throughout this treatise. Consider onlythe respective degree of abundance of each ofthe three metals just mentioned, and the differencein some of their qualities with respect toexternal agents, and we shall have ample reasonfor being assured that, on this as on every otheroccasion, we may say of the Creator of materialthings — *' In wisdom hast Thou made them all'*And not only is it true thatThe world by difference is in order found f**but the difference is so adjusted in every instance,that, if it were varied, the value of thesubstances in which the difference is observablewould be destroyed. Thus, of the three metalsnow under consideration, iron and copper, fromthe degree of their malleability, are easily formedinto those various vessels which are of daily usefor culinary and other purposes ; while tin possessesthe property of malleability in comparativelya slight degree : and, correspondently withthe extent of their use, iron and copper arefound in great abundance and in almost everypart of the world ; while tin is of very rare occurrence.Again, the two former metals are easilyrusted ; and, from the poisonous quality of therust of copper, fatal effects on human health andlife would be frequently occurring, used so extensivelyas that metal is for the construction ofvessels in which our food is prepared, were it notdefended by that superficial coating of tin, whicho194 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSis commonly applied to the inner surface of suchvessels ; tin being neither easily rusted, nor capableof communicating any poisonous qualityto substances brought into contact with it. Letus then suppose that the respective degree ofmalleability, or of fusibility, were reversed inthese metals ; and observe the inconveniencethat would ensue. Let the tin have that degreeof malleability, for instance, which would renderit capable of supplying the place of the iron, orthe copper, in the construction of various economicalvessels and instruments ; yet, from thesmall quantity in which it occurs in the world,the supply of it would soon be either exhausted,or its price would be so enhanced that it couldnot be purchased except by the rich. And,even if the supply were inexhaustible, yet, fromthe softness of the metal, the vessels made of itwould be comparatively of little use ; and fromthe low temperature at which it melts, it couldnot be readily used for the generality of thosepurposes to which copper and iron are commonlyapplied. On the other hand, let the copper orthe iron be as fusible as tin ; and let the tin beas refractory under the action of heat as ironand copper are : in that case, how could the tinbe applied with any degree of economy to thesurface of either of the other two ; while theythemselves would be unfit, from their easy fusibility,to withstand that degree of heat to whichTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 195they are necessarily exposed in many of the economicaluses to which they are applied ?There remains to be considered one propertyof metals with respect to their fusibility, whichis of the highest practical importance ; for onthis property depends the possibility of unitingtogether portions of the same, or of differentmetals, without fusion of the metals themselves.If two metals be melted into one uniform mass,the compound is called an alloy; and in thegreater number of instances, if not in all, thealloy is more readily fusible than either of thecomponent metals : and hence it easily becomesa bond of union between the two metals, or differentportions of either of them. Such an alloy,when so employed is called a solder. Inconsidering the present subject, we cannot overlooka remarkable analogy between metallic substancesand building stones, with reference toone mode in which they may respectively beunited to each other, so as to form one solidmass ; mortar being to stones what solder is tometals. Thus, in uniting two metallic surfacesby means of solder, it is requisite that the lattershould be in a fluid state, or melted; and, inuniting the surfaces of two bricks or stones bymeans of mortar, the latter must be, if not in absolutelya fluid, yet in a soft and yielding state:and the final hardening of each is the efficientcause of permanent union. The period indeedo2196 ADAPTATION OF MINERALSrequisite for the due consolidation of the unitingmedium is very different; the solder becomingfixed in a few seconds, the mortar requiring somehours, perhaps days, for its consolidation : butinthe end proposed, there is no essential difference; for the mortar, if originally tempered wellandwell applied, as firmly unites the stones, assolder the metals : so that mortar might be calleda slowly acting solder ; and solder, an extemporaneousor quickly acting mortar.It would appear a paradox, if not an absurdity,to affirm abruptly that a liability to rapiddecay is among the most important propertiesof any substance in general use : and yet thismay be truly affirmed of iron. For though, inone sense, its liability to rust diminishes thevalue of this useful metal, because it is consequentlyalmost impossible to preserve it verylong in an entire state ; yet, indirectly, thisproperty, though detrimental to individuals, isbeneficial to the community : for, in the firstplace, the presence of iron ore is so general,and its quantity so abundant, that there is noprobability of any failure in its supply : and, inthe next place, numerous branches of trade arekept in continued employ, both in working theore, and in meeting the constantly renewed demandfor implements made of iron, owing to therapid corrosion of this metal.Among the metals there is one, the history ofTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 197which ought not to be overlooked on the presentoccasion, from the very circumstance thatits value in a great measure depends on the absenceof most of those properties which renderall other metals valuable. Quicksilver is themetal in question : and what an anomaly doesit not present in the general history of metals ;existing, under all common variations of temperature,in a fluid state, while all other metals,with which we are familiar, are, under the samevariations, solid ; nor indeed are they capableof becoming fluid, but by an elevation of temperatureto which they are hardly liable to beexposed, unless designedly : lastly, in consequenceof its fluidity, destitute of malleabilityand ductility ; which are among the most valuableproperties of the metals taken collectively?This state of fluidity, however, is the very pointon which the value of this metal in a great measureturns: for hence it is successfully employedfor many purposes, to which, were it solid, itwould be inapplicable. How valuable is its usein the construction of the common thermometerand barometer ; the value, in the case of theformer instrument, depending entirely on itsfluidity, and on the physical characters of thefluid itself — the equable ratio, for instance, ofits contraction and expansion under widely varyingdegrees of temperature ; and its propertyof remaining fluid through a greater range ofo3198 ADAPTATION OF MINERALStemperature than any other known substance ^.And, in the case of the barometer, what fluid isthere which could supply the place of quicksilver,with any degree of convenience? since,from the great specific gravity of this metal, acolumn of the perpendicular height of aboutthirty inches, sufficiently answers the intendedpurpose ; which column in the case of almostevery other fluid, would amount to as manyfeet. And as, in such a case, the column mustnecessarily be contained in a glass tube, in orderto make the alterations in its height visible, howwould it be possible to render such an instrumentportable? and yet, if not portable, it wouldoften be of no use when most wanted.In those numerous philosophical experimentsin which it is requisite to insulate portions ofvarious gaseous substances, for the purpose ofexamining their properties, how could the experimentalistproceed without the use of themetal now under consideration ; which by itsfluidity readily yields its place to the variouskinds of gas which are to be transferred to vesselspreviously filled with the quicksilver ; and,having no chemical affinity for the greater numbQuicksilver does not become solid till exposed to a temperatureabout seventy degrees below the freezing point in thescale of Fahrenheit ; nor does it pass rapidly into a state of vapourtill exposed to a temperature equal to nearly three hundredand seventy degrees above the boiling point of water onthe same scale.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 199ber of gaseous substances, is calculated to retainthem in an insulated and unaltered state foran indefinite length of time? nor let us forget toobserve, how the properties of the metal, whichis necessarily in contact with the gaseous substancesin question, conspire with the propertiesof the glass vessels containing those gaseous substances,to facilitate the observations of the philosopher: for, if the glass were not both a transparentbody, and equally devoid as the quicksilverof any chemical affinity for the gas containedin it, the metal itself would be of little use for thepurpose intended ; since we are not acquaintedwith any other substance that could supply theplace of glass — with the exception perhaps ofrock crystal ; which however could only be procuredin small quantity any where, and couldnot be worked into a convenient form but at amost enormous expense.SECT. VII.Common Salt, Sc.It does not appear that the mineral kingdomcontains a single species capable of being employedas food : but there is one mineral species,which indirectly contributes to the nourishmentof many other animals as well as man ; and thatis common salt ; the flavour of which, to a certainextent, is not only grateful to the palate,but, practically speaking, mankind could noto4200 ADAPTATION OP MINERALSexist, or at least never have existed, without theconstant use of it. Thus, though employed invery small quantities at a time by any individual,and almost exclusively for the purposeeither of preserving or of rendering his foodmore palatable, this substance may fairly beclassed among the principal necessaries of life :and, correspondently with this statement, wefind that nature has supplied it in abundance,indeed in profusion often, in various parts ofthe globe : for, to say nothing of those apparentlyinexhaustible masses which occur amongthe solid strata of the earth, and which havebeen constantly quarried through successiveages from the earliest records of history, theocean itself is a never-failing source of thisvaluable substance. In other instances saltsprings afford the means of a ready supply :and, throughout a considerable part of the sandydistricts of Africa and Asia, the soil itself aboundswith it ^. The abundant supply of common salt^ It does not belong to our present purpose to describe thecommon processes by which the salt is obtained either from thesea, or from any other liquid that may hold it in solution : butthe following account of a particular process,, for this purpose,so well illustrates the ingenuity of the human mind in takingadvantage of natural hints, if the expression may be permitted,that no excuse can be necessary for its introduction. In Guianathere is a very common species of palm, the flowers of which areenveloped by a sheath capable of holding many pints of water ;and the density and general nature of the sheath is such, thatTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 201coincides with its extensive utility. It is everywhereindispensable to the comforts of man ;and it is every where found, or easily obtainedby him. And, though not to the same extent,the same observation holds with reference tomany other natural saline compounds. Thuscarbonate of potash, and natron or carbonate ofsoda, alum, borax, sal ammoniac, and sulphateof iron, or green vitriol, which are most extensivelyuseful salts in many processes of the arts,are either found abundantly in various parts ofthe world, or may be obtained by very easymeans : while a thousand other saline compounds,which are rarely of any practical importance,are scarcely known to exist in a native state.And it is probable that that useful metal, copper,in consequence of its frequent occurrence in anative state, was employed long before the modeof reducing iron from its ores had been discovered; as Werner (and Hesiod, and Lucretius,ages before him ^) conjectured.the water contained in it may be heated over a lire without destroyingits substance : and the Carries actually employ thesesheaths, in evaporating the sea-water for the purpose of obtaininga quick supply of salt. (Diction, des Sciences Nat. tom. xxxvii.p. 283, 4.)^ XoXko) 6' ipyd^ovTO, fiekas 5* ovk ease (Tibrjpos.EPr. Rai KM. line 151.Posterity Ferri vis est, presque report.Et prior iris erat quam Ferri cognitus usus.Lucre. V. 1285.202 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESCHAP. VIII.Adaptation of Vegetables to the PhysicalCondition of Man,SECT. I.General Observations on the Vegetable Kingdom,THE vegetable kingdom has this distinctionwith reference to the subject of the present treatise,that its productions are among the first objectsthat forcibly attract the attention of youngchildren ; becoming to them the source of gratifications,which are among the purest of whichour nature is capable ; and of which even the indistinctrecollection imparts often a fleeting pleasureto the most cheerless moments of after-life.Who does not look back with feelings, whichhe would in vain attempt to describe, to the delightfulrambles which his native fields and meadowsafforded to his earliest years? Who doesnot remember, or at least fancy that he remembers,the eager activity with which he was usedto strip nature's carpet of its embroidery, norceased to cull the scattered blossoms till his infanthands were incapable of retaining the accumulatedheap ? Who, on even seeing the firstviolet of returning spring, much more on inhalingits sweetness ; or in catching the breeze thathas passed over the blossom of the bean or ofthe woodbine, does not again enjoy the very delightsof his early childhood ?TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 203It may be said indeed that the pleasure ofsuch recollections is for the most part of a moraland intellectual nature ; and, so far, is foreignto our present object : but the pleasure of theoriginal enjoyment appears to be principally of aphysical character ; and is no doubt intended toproduce, at the moment, a highly beneficial,though merely physical effect : for while theeye of the child is attracted by the unexpectedforms and colours of the plants and flowers presentedto his view, and his mind is instigated togratify the eager desire of possessing them, henecessarily subjects his limbs to that degree ofexercise and fatigue, which contributes to thegeneral health of his body. Nor let such pleasuresbe undervalued in their consequence : theygive that moderate stimulus to the whole system,which even the early age of infancy requires; and, by shutting out the listlessness thatwould arise from inactivity, they become eventuallythe source of moral and intellectual improvement.With reference to the primary wants of mankindat large, the vegetable kingdom is of thehighest importance. Let the earth cease to produceits accustomed fruits, and every form ofanimal life must be soon annihilated : for allanimals either derive their nourishment directlyfrom vegetable food, or feed on those animalswhich have themselves fed on vegetables. And,204 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESwithout the aid of the same productions, weshould be deprived of various substances whichare now employed for clothing, and fuel, andthe construction of our habitations. But theadaptation of the vegetable kingdom to the artsand conveniences of life is visible in numerousother instances : and the principal difficulty, inillustrating this point, is the selection of appropriateexamples, and the order of their arrangement.SECT. II.The Cocoa-nut Tree^includmg the formation of Coral Reefs,For the purpose of introducing in a more particularmanner the general subject of this chapter,and as an impressive example of the importantends which nature often accomplishesby the simplest means, I propose to considerthe mode in which the cocoa-nut tree is spontaneouslypropagated in the coral islands of theIndian Archipelago and elsewhere : nor will it beanundue anticipation of a subsequent departmentof this treatise, if I previously give a briefdescription of the process by which those islandshave themselves been brought into existence.The account of their origin indeed belongs morestrictly to the history of the animal than of thevegetable world ; but the two subjects are sonaturally connected, that it would be injudiciousto separate them.It may be collected from the observations ofTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 205the French navigator, M. Person, (Ann. du Mus.torn. vi. p. 30, &c.) that almost all those countlessislands of the Pacific Ocean, which are foundto the south of the equator between New Hollandand the western coast of America, areeither entirely or in part made up of coral : andall the adjacent ocean abounds with coral reefs,which, constantly augmenting, are constantlychanging the state of bays, and ports, andgulfs ; so that new charts are continually requiredfor the same coasts. From Barrow alsoit appears, (Barrow's Cochin China, p. 167,) thatthe formation of coral reefs or isles is very commonin the tropical parts of the Eastern and PacificOcean. And Captain Flinders says thatthe quantity of coral reefs between New Hollandand New Caledonia and New Guinea, is such,that this might be called the Cornelian Sea.(Flinders's Voyage, vol. ii. p. 314.)Many more references might be made, toothers as well as the above-mentioned voyagers,in order to shew that the formation ofcoral islands is effected by nature on a very extensivescale : but, for the present purpose, thepreceding references may be considered sufficient.Let us now therefore describe the generalcharacter and mode of formation of theseislands.Forster says that the low islands of tropical8 Forster's Voyage round the World, p. 14, 15.206 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESseas are commonly " narrow, low ledges of coralrock, including in the middle a kind of lagoon ;and having here and there little sandy spots,somewhat elevated above the level of highwater, on which cocoa-nuts thrive :" correspondentwith which description is the accountgiven by captain Cook, on the occasion of discoveringone of these coral reefs ; which was atfirst mistaken by him for land. " This proved tobe," he says, " another of those low or half-drownedislands, or rather a large coral shoal,of about twenty leagues in circuit. A very*' small part of it was land, which consisted oflittle islets ranged along the north side, andconnected by sand-banks and breakers. These** islets were clothed with wood, among which thecocoa-nut trees were only distinguishable. Weranged the south side of this shoal at the distance of one or two miles from the coral bank,against which the sea broke in a dreadful surf.In the middle of the shoal was a large lake, orinland sea, in which was a canoe under sail."(Cook's Voyage, 4to. 1777. vol. i. p. 141, 142.)Coral, considered as an individual substance,is a natural form of carbonate of lime, producedby an animal of the polype kind. The particlesof carbonate of lime, however produced, arecemented together so firmly by a glutinous secretionof the same animal, as to acquire a degreeof consistence, which not only forms a safeTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 207habitation for a race of animalcules, from theirsoft texture most obnoxious to external injuries ;but which is calculated to resist the utmost actionof the sea, and in many instances to protectthe original surface of the earth itself from itsassaults. Thus almost all the tropical islands,which Cook saw in the South Pacific Ocean, areguarded from the sea, to a greater or less extent,by a reef of coral rocks, extending out from theshore to the distance of six hundred feet andfarther ; and on this reef the force of the sea isspent before it reaches the land : and thus naturehas effectually secured these islands fromthe encroachments of the sea, though many ofthem are mere points when compared with thatvast ocean ^.As the specific gravity of coral is greater thanthat of sea-water, the structure of a coral reefnecessarily commences either from the naturalbed of the ocean, or from the surface of somesubmarine rock ; and, as may be collected fromthe nature of the soundings among coral reefs,the whole structure is very frequently disposedin the form of a crescent ; sometimes even approachingto a circle. This crescent is, on theconvex side, built up throughout in very nearlya perpendicular direction ; so as to form a wall,which is exposed to that quarter from whence astormy sea most frequently prevails. The in-h Cook's Voyage, 1777, 4to. vol. i. p. 212.208 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESterror of the structure seems gradually to shelveoff; so that about the centre of the inclosed, orpartially inclosed space, the sea is found of itsnatural depth. Correspondent with such anarrangement, it happens usually that the soundingsgradually lessen from the centre of the areainclosed by a coral reef, towards the exteriorridge ; and then suddenly sink to two hundredfathoms or more.To the foregoing observations I shall subjointhe opinion of captain Flinders on theprocess observed by nature in the formation ofcoral reefs. " It seems to me," he says, " that** when the animalcules, which form the coralat the bottom of the ocean, cease to live, theirstructures adhere to each other by virtue** either of the glutinous remains within, or ofsome property in salt water ; and the intersticks being gradually filled up with sand andbroken pieces of coral washed by the sea,which also adhere, a mass of rock is at lengthformed. Future races of these animalcules** erect their habitations upon the rising bank,*' and die in their turn ; to increase, but princepally to elevate, this monument of their wontearful labours. The care taken to work perpendicularly,in the early stages, would mrj-ka surprising instinct in these diminutive creatures.Their wall of coral, for the most partin situations where the winds are constant.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 209being arrived at the surface, affords a shelter; to leeward of which their infant coloniesmay be safely sent forth : and to this, theirinstinctive foresight, it seems to be owing, thatthe windward side of a reef, exposed to theopen sea, is generally, if not always, the highestpart ; rising almost perpendicularly, sometimesfrom the depth of two hundred and perhapsmany more fathoms. To be constantlycovered with water seems necessary to the existenceof the animalcules ; for they do notwork, except in holes upon the reef, beyondlow-water mark : but the coral sand, and otherbroken remnants thrown up by the sea, adhereto the rock, and form a solid mass with it, ashigh as the common tides reach. That elevationsurpassed, the future remnants, beingrarely covered, lose their adhesive property ;and, remaining in a loose state, form what isusually called a key upon the top of the reef.The new bank is not long in being visited bysea birds ; salt plants take root upon it, and asoil begins to be formed ; a cocoa-nut, or thedrupe of a pandanus, is thrown on shore; landbirds visit it, and deposit the seeds of shrubsand trees ; every high tide, and still more everygale, adds something to the bank ; the form ofan island is gradually assumed ; and, last ofall, comes man to take possession \"i Flinders's Voyage, vol. ii. p. 115, 116.P210 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESIn the base of a coral island of the abovedescription, captain Flinders distinguished notonly the sand, coral, and shells, formerly thrownup, in a more or less perfect state of cohesion ;but also small pieces of wood, pumice-stone, andother extraneous bodies, which chance had mixedwith the calcareous substances when the cohesionbegan, and which in some cases were stillseparable from the rock without much force ^.Such sand-banks are found in different stagesof progress ; some being overflowed with everyreturning tide ; some raised above high-watermark, but destitute of vegetation ; some, lastly,habitable and abounding in trees.Let us here pause for a moment to contemplatethe wonderful effect produced by apparentlythe most inadequate means. And wonderfulindeed is the effect, even if the processabove described were now to cease for ever ; butmuch more, if we look to its probable extension :for, reasoning on what has already been accomplished,and on what is at this moment rapidlyadvancing, it is evidently probable that a newhabitable surface of land may be eventuallyproduced, equal in extent to the whole of Europe,and produced by the agency of a tribe ofanimals, which occupy very nearly the loweststeps in the scale of animal creation, and which^ Flinders's Voyage, vol. ii. p. 116.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 211in every other respect are the most inefficientand helpless of creatures. For, fixed as theyare, both individually and collectively, to a completelylocal habitation ; or, rather, buried as itwere in a strong mass of coral, their general appearanceand mode of growth so little resemblethe animal character, that, for a long time, manyof the species were considered as of vegetableorigin ; and are, even now, very commonly calledzoophytes, or animated plants.Nor let us fail to observe, in the foregoingaccount, the physical fitness for each other oftwo very different departments of nature. Thesame geographical climate which gives birth tothose animals, whose labours produce this previouslyunexpected habitable surface, gives birthalso to those vegetables, which, at the same timethat they are capable of growing on so looseand poor a soil, are capable besides of supplyingits future inhabitants not only with nutritiousfood, both in a liquid and a solid form,but with materials for constructing their habitations,and for many other useful purposes.And in the mean time the fowls of the air, andthe very winds and waves, are all employed inadministering to the beneficent intentions ofProvidence. Of little use would be a new habitablesurface, were it never to be tenanted byhuman beings ; and in vain would man attemptto colonize that surface, were it barren of ve-p2212 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLEStable productions: but the seeds of variousplants, as we have seen in the foregoing descriptions,are either brought by birds, or driftedby the wind and waves, to a soil calculatedto support them.Among the vegetable productions of coralislands, the cocoa-nut tree stands preeminent invalue ; containing in itself nearly all those importantproperties, which are found at large inthat natural family of plants, the palms : andvaluable indeed are those properties, if we mayrely on the accounts which have been given ofthem by different authors ; and of the truth ofthose accounts there is no sufficient reason todoubt. Johnston ^, speaking of the abundanceof the cocoa-nut tree in India, where he saysit occurs to a greater extent than the olive inSpain, or the willow in Holland, affirms thatthere is no part of the tree which is not appliedto some useful purpose. Not only the cabins ofthe poorer natives, but large houses, are constructedentirely with materials afforded by thistree ; the trunk, when split, supplying rafters,&c. ; and the leaves, when plaited, makingroofs and walls, which are impervious to windand rain. The statement of Johnston is confirmedby captain Steely, in his account of El-horae',who says that " when he was stationed at1 Johnston de Arboribus, p. 146, &c.m London, 1824, 8vo. p. 284.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 213Goa, in 1809, he lived, as many others did, inacocoa-nut-leaf house ; and that although theperiod was in the very height of the monsoon,** and the house was on the sea coast, it wascomfortable and warm. He believes that notanail was used in the whole building : therafters and supporters, &c. were fastened onwith string made of the fibrous envelope of** the cocoa-nut shell ; the wood was the treeitself; the roof, walls, doors, and windowswere the leaf." From the same authority welearn that the fibres, enveloping the shell ofthe nut, may be woven into a cable by whichships of seventy-four guns have safely rode outheavy gales of wind, when European cableshave parted.In the Wernerian Memoirs, vol. v. p. 107, &c.,is a very interesting account of the cocoa tree ;in which the author states that this tree will growon the sand of the sea-shore, where scarcely anythingelse will vegetate : which corresponds withthe account of an author above mentioned, who,speaking of its growth, says, " radical habettenui spatio porrectam ; et quae quasi contrafidern terrae inherent "." And these statementsare quite in accordance with the observations ofcaptain Flinders.From other sources we learn that this tree» Johnston de Arboribus, p. 145.p 3214 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESbears fruit twice or thrice in the year; thatthe half-ripe nut contains sometimes three orfour pints of a clear aqueous fluid, fragrant, andpleasant to the taste ; and that the nut itself,from its highly nutritious qualities, is used as analiment in all inter-tropical countries p. In thevolume of the Wernerian Memoirs above mentioned,it is said that in 1813 the number ofcocoa trees cultivated in Ceylon, along a lineof coast of about 184 miles, was ten millions,and that that number was increased in followingyears ; that this tree is fruitful from its eighthto its sixty-fourth year, and sometimes bearsfrom eighty to one hundred nuts annually ; thatelephants are fed on cocoa-nut leaves ; and thatthe ashes of the tree contain so great a proportionof potash, that the native fishermen ofCeylon use them instead of soap ^.In the Nov. Diet. desist. Nat. tom. vii. p. 297,&c. it is stated, that, as in other palms, if the extremityof the sheath from whence the flowers ofthe cocoa arise be cut off* while young, a whitesweet liquor distils from it, which is used extensivelyas a beverage in India under the nameof palm divine ; that this liquor, if concentratedby boiling, deposits a sugar ; that if exposed tothe air it acquires vinous properties at the endof twelve hours, and at the end of twenty-four"" Nov. Diction. desist. Nat. tom. vii. p. 297. 298.P Ibid. q Went. Mem. vol. v. p. 110-127.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 215hours becomes vinegar ; that an oil may be obtainedfrom the nut, which is not inferior tosweet almond oil, and which is used almost exclusivelyin India ; and that the shell is formedinto cups and various other small articles.Almost all that has been said of the cocoa treemight be repeated of the date tree, making anallowance for the specific differences of the two ;and with respect to the palms in general, Humboldtsays it would not be easy to enumerate thevarious advantages derived from them. " Theyafford wine, vinegar, oil, farinaceous food,and sugar ; timber also, and ropes, and mats,and paper ; and," he adds, that " no trees areso abundant in fruit, even without the aid ofcultivation ; and that the Franciscan monks,who live in the vicinity of palm plantations,near the banks of the Orinoco, observe thatthe native Indians give evidence of a fruitfulpalm year, by the corresponding improvementin their health and appearance ^."I shall conclude this part of the subject with atranslation from the Flora Atlantica of Desmondfor the introduction of which no apology,I trust, is necessary. In describing the naturalscenery of groves of palm, the author concludeswith the following beautiful passage : " Thesepalm-groves, being impervious to the sun's** rays, afford a hospitable shade, both to man andr Humboldt, District. Geog. Plant, p. 216-240.p 4216 Adaptation OF VEGETABLESother animals, in a region which would otherwise be intolerable from the heat. And underthis natural shelter, the orange, the lemon, the** pomegranate, the olive, the almond, and thevine grow in wild luxuriance ; producing, notwithstandingthey are so shaded, the most desvicious fruit. And here, while the eyes are fed** with the endless variety of flowers which deckthese sylvan scenes, the ears are at the sametime ravished with the melodious notes of numerousbirds, which are attracted to thesegroves by the shade, and the cool springs, and** the food which they there find ^"SECT. III.Vegetables as a Source of Food.It appears from various statements of authority,that the species of vegetables alreadyknown amount to about sixty thousands thoughthere is reason to believe the actual number isabove a hundred thousand ^ : and, from the generalanalogy of nature, we may fairly concludes" Palmer radiis solis imperial, umbra in regions calidissimahospitale incomes, victorious, neque ac animantibus ministrant.Forum dense sub teeming, absque ordines crescent urania,"^ lioness pumice, olese, amygdali, rites, quae cursu geniculatosaepe trances palmar scandunt. Hse omnes fructus suavitylicet obumbratae, ferunt; ubique mira forum et fructusvarietate pascuntur oculi ; simulate festive avium continents,quae umbra, aqua, virtus alliciunt, recreant acres."Desfontaines^ Flora Atlantica tom. ii. Append, p. 439.t Conversations on Vegetable Physiology, vol. ii. p. 108.Decandolle, Theorie Elm. de laBotanique, 8vo. 1819,p.25.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 217that no species exists without its use in theeconomy of the earth. Of many indeed wewitness the direct use, either for the variouspurposes of civilized society, or for the sustenanceof animal life : but for the present letus confine our attention to the latter point intheir history; and, although whatever is adaptedto the sustenance of animal life in general, is indirectlyadapted in a great measure to the actualcondition of man, and would therefore justlycome within the scope of this treatise ; yet, thatwe may not extend the subject too far, let usconsider those species only which constitute thedirect food of man; subject indeed frequently tosuch culinary preparations as make our food notonly more palatable, but also more nutritious.Among the numerous species of vegetableswhich supply food to man, by far the greaterproportion consists of those which may be consideredupon the whole as mere luxuries ; or atmost, as affording an agreeable and sometimesuseful variety. Of those species which affordthat kind of nutritive matter which is containedin what has been emphatically called the staffof life, or bread, the number is very small ; leguminousplants, and wheat, and rice, the fruitand pith and other parts of some of the palmsand bananas, and such farinaceous roots as thepotato, &c. comprising nearly the whole amount.It would be unnecessary to point out more218 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESparticularly the importance of some of the foregoingspecies, to any one at all conversant withthe general mode of life of Europeans as tofood : and a slight acquaintance with the historyof the world is sufficient to shew us, that,what Heat and the potato are to Europe, riceis to a considerable portion of Asia, Africa, andAmerica; and the products of the date andcocoa, palms, &c. to the inter-tropical countriesof the whole earth. But there are some naturalanalogies afforded by those species, with referenceto the animal kingdom, which are wellworthy of observation.In the animal kingdom all those species whichserve extensively for food, as oxen and sheep andswine among quadrupeds ; the turkey, the commonfowl, and the duck, &c. among birds ; andthe salmon, cod, herring, &c. among fish, areeither naturally of a gregarious nature, or areeasily kept together, by human means, in largebodies ; and therefore are much better adaptedto the purpose of supplying food to man, than ifthey were either solitary, or scattered into smallgroups. And so it is with respect to the vegetablespecies above described : they are capableof being cultivated gregariously as it were, withcomparatively little labour and attention. Thusin our own, and other European countries, thedaily labourer, after his hours of hired workfor others, can cultivate his own private field ofTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 219wheat or of potatoes, with very little additionalexpense of time or trouble. And as to the cultivationof the tropical fruits, scarcely any labouris required for that purpose : so that to the lesshardy natives of those climates the assertion ofthe poet is strictly applicable,"Pundit hume facile victim justitia tellus'"A further analogy is observable in the degreeof fertility of the respective vegetables and animals.Among the animals which are destinedfor the food of man, the species are upon thewhole prolific in proportion as they are eithersmall in size, or inferior as to the nutritive qualityof their flesh. The cow, which is a largeanimal, produces one usually at a birth ; thesheep very commonly two ; swine, several.Poultry, which are comparatively small, arecapable of rearing a numerous brood ; and fish,which are of a less nutritious nature, and generallysmaller than quadrupeds, are still moreprolific. And, similarly, in the vegetable species,which are destined for the food of man, thenumerical quantity of the product in a givenarea is greater or less, in proportion to the individualsize of the fruit produced. Dates, whichare smaller than cocoa-nuts, are produced ingreater number than the latter ; and in a squareyard of soil, a much greater number of grains ofrice or wheat is produced than of roots of thepotato.220 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESLastly, another analogy may be observed withreference to the palate. The taste of the fleshof those species, which constitute to man thestaple as it were of animal food, is acceptableto most palates. And it is neither so rich assoon to cloy the appetite on the one hand, orinvite it to luxurious indulgence on the other ;nor so devoid of flavour, as to deter us fromtaking a proper quantity. And is it not thesame with respect to those vegetable species,which are among the most ordinary and mostnecessary articles of our food ? If corn, and thepotato, and the cocoa-nut, had the pungency ofeuphorbia, the nauseating quality of ipecacuanha,the heat of pepper, or the lusciousness ofsugar, on the one hand, or the insipidity ofpowdered chalk on the other ; what an undertakingwould it be to satisfy the craving ofhunger with any one of those vegetables ^ !It will be in vain to urge, in opposition to theforegoing position, that custom in particular instancesrenders many things tolerable, and evenpleasing to the taste, which at first were disgusting; for it would be found that in such instancescustom has usually arisen from necessity,which often brings us acquainted with strangeOn many occasions however, pungent, or aromatic substances,as garlic, mustard, and spices, added to food comparativelyof little flavour, as rice, &c. make it more palatable, andmore easily digestible.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 221companions ; or from a depraved taste. Nonehave ever consented voluntarily to feed on theflesh of vultures or of ravens ; and caviare willalways be caviare to the multitude.Next in importance to those vegetable specieswhich either afford the material of bread, or anequivalent for it, may be classed those whichcontribute partly to the nourishment of man, andpartly to his health and solace. The human systemcertainly may be, and too often from necessityabsolutely is, supported solely on the nutrimentafforded by the former species : but if weview the actual state of society, we find thatmany vegetable species and products may nowproperly be classed among the necessaries oflife, which for many ages remained either undiscovered,or were only locally known, orsparingly employed ; of which it will be quitesufficient to mention tea, and sugar, and thepotato. The sugar cane has for such a lengthof time usurped the prerogative of supplying theworld with sugar, that other sources have beenlittle considered : but even in cold climates thereare plants capable of affording it in considerablequantities. There is, for instance, a species ofmaple cultivated in North America for the sakey During five years, beginning with 1826, about one hundredand fifty million pounds of tea were sold at the East IndiaHouse, the average annual consumption being, according to thepreceding statement, thirty million pounds.222 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESof the sugar obtained from its sap, which iscapable of returning a very great profit to itscultivator ; of which the following document,copied from a note by Dr. Hunter in his editionof Evelyn's Silva, is a sufficient proof; therebeing no reason to suspect any fraud ^. It isadded in the same note, that a single family,consisting of a man and his two sons, on themaple-sugar lands between the Delaware andSusquehanna, made 1800lbs of maple sugar inone season. The whole note, consisting of eightclosely printed quarto pages, which appears tohave been furnished by Dr. Rush of Pennsylvaniauniversity, is well worth the perusal.If we consider the subordinate wants of theanimal economy, we must in reason allow thatthose succulent fruits and vegetables, which areabundantly produced in almost all parts of theworld, are destined by Providence for an importantend with reference to the food of man.The very form and arrangement of our teeth,2 " Received, Cooper's Town, April 30, 1790, of W. Cooper,sixteen pounds, for 640 pounds of (maple) sugar, made withmy o^vn hands, without any assistance, in less than four weeks;besides attending to the other business of my farm, as provideing fire-wood, taking care of the cattle, &c.'' Witness R. Smith." " John Nicholls."Silva, 3d ed. by A. Hunter, York, 1801. vol. i. p. 190.^ The tree commonly called the sycamore, which is really aspecies of maple, yields a sweet sap which has occasionally beenused to supply the place of malt in brewing. lb. p. 200.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 223and the structure of our stomach, shew, that oursystem is naturally adapted to a mixed food : andalthough those of our teeth which resemble thecorresponding teeth of carnivorous animals, areso little developed as to make it in that respectdoubtful whether nature intended us tolive on flesh ; yet our stomach, and the rest ofour apparatus of digestion, aided moreover byculinary preparation, certainly approximate usfully as much to the carnivorous as to the herbivorousclasses. It is obvious, moreover, thatwe have an ample array of teeth for cutting andgrinding vegetable matter. This then being thecase, we might antecedently expect that our naturaltaste would lead us to enjoy the flavour ofvegetable, as well as animal food ; and that naturewould supply us with a variety of the one as wellas of the other ; for variety itself is salutary.And on this as on every occasion, we have anopportunity of seeing how Providence not onlymeets all the wants of mankind, but meets themin such a way as their local situation requires.Thus wheat, which contains a more strengtheningprinciple of nutrition than the product ofthe palms and arrow-root, and is therefore bettercalculated to support the hardier efforts of theinhabitants of temperate or cold climates, willnot grow readily in inter-tropical climates; and,reciprocally, the palms and cognate plants of^ Desfontaines, Flora Atlantica, toni. ii. Appendix, p. 438.224 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESinter-tropical regions cease to be productive, ifcultivated much beyond the tropics. And theorange, the lemon, the water-melon, the grape,and the fig, which are easily cultivated in warmclimates, by the abundance of their juice, areenabled both to allay the sensation of presentheat and thirst, and to repair the loss of thatnatural moisture of the body, which is continuallypassing from it in the form of either sensibleor insensible perspiration. Even in thetemperate climate of our own island, how manydays are there, during the summer, in whichsuch fruits are most refreshing : and to gratifythe desire of that refreshment we import suchspecies as are capable of bearing a long voyage; among which the orange is a very principalarticle of import : nor would it be easy tocalculate the myriads of that fruit which areannually consumed in this country. But the<^ Were. Mem. vol. v. p. 112.^ An interesting fact is related in the " Conversations on Vege-'^ table Physiology" respecting an artificial mode of ripening thefig. " In hot climates the fig-tree produces two crops of fruit :and the peasants in the isles of the Archipelago, where the figtree abounds, bring branches of wild fig-trees in the spring,^^ which they spread over those that are cultivated. These wildbranches serve as a vehicle to a prodigious number of smallinsects of the genus called cynics, which perforate the figs inorder to make a nest for their eggs ; and the wound they in-'' flint accelerates the ripening of the fruit nearly three weeks ;'^ thus leaving time for the second crop to come to maturity indueseason." (vol. ii. p. 41, 42.)TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 225cognate fruit, the lemon, at the same time that,on account of the grateful and aromatic flavourof its juice, it is occasionally as eagerly soughtas the orange, serves a still higher purpose : forthe acid contained in it has been successfullyemployed, as an antidote and a remedy for oneof the most dreadful diseases to which marinersare subject. Sea-scurvy in fact has all but disappearedsince the general adoption of this remedy^.SECT. IV.Vegetables as applicable to Medicine.If vegetables are valuable on account of theirpower of affording sustenance and keeping thebody in a state of health, they are also valuableon account of their power of restoring healthwhere it has been impaired : for, however scepticalsome minds may be as to the powers of medicinein general, and however ignorant even themost sagacious and experienced medical practitionersmay be as to the precise mode in whichany medicinal substance acts on the human constitution; yet this at least is certain, that, in byfar the greater number of instances, certain symptomswhich indicate a disturbed state of the systIt is probable that fresh vegetables of any kind are sufficientto prevent or to remove scurvy : for it is stated in Sauer's accountof Billings's expedition, that that disease disappeared, evenin so high a northern latitude as the Aleutan islands, as soon asthe new vegetation sprang up in April (p. 276) ; and many otherevidences of the same fact might be easily adduced.Q226 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLEStern are mitigated, and finally subdued, in consequenceof the exhibition, to use a technicalterm, of certain reputed remedies. And it isopen to the observation of almost every one, thatthe vegetable kingdom is the most fertile source,not only of the commonest and least efficient,but of some of the most powerful medicines withwhich we are acquainted. Nor can we doubt,when we see similar effects resulting from theuse of the same medicines in individuals of verydifferent constitutions, that the peculiar qualitiesof those substances, with respect to the effectsthey produce in the human system, wereimparted to them by nature with a view to theirapplication to those ends.It may have happened to any one in the courseof the last few years, during which intermittentfever or ague has prevailed very generally inthis country, to witness the severe nature of somesymptoms of that disease ; paroxysms of dreadfulrigour or shivering; nausea; intense headache,with delirium ; paralytic affections of thelimbs ; and burning heat of the whole body, terminatingin profuse perspiration : and whoeverhas witnessed such symptoms, recurring in thesame individual at stated intervals, has probablyseen their return at once arrested by a few dosesof Peruvian bark, in the state of powder ; theeffect of which remedy, in subduing a violentdisease, compared with the small quantity of itTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 227employed for that purpose, has been not inelegantlythough playfully illustrated by that passageof the Georgic, in which the husbandmanis taught to allay the occasional contests andagitations of the bees, by scattering a handfulof dust among them.Hi motus atque haec certaine tantaPulverised exigui jactu compressa quiescence''And, if the vegetable kingdom had failed toafford any other medicinal substance than this,mankind would have still had ample cause forthankfulness.But, even in the instances of those remediesfrom which nothing beyond a present or temporaryalleviation is expected, the benefit usuallyaccruing cannot easily be estimated at toohigh a rate : and one remedy there is, of thisnature, for which mankind is indebted to thevegetable kingdom exclusively. How often hasnot opium lulled the most excruciating agoniesof pain ? how often has it not restored the balmof sleep to the almost exhausted body; or quietedthose nervous agitations of the whole system,the terrors of which none perhaps can duly appreciatebut those who have experienced them ?There are however diseased or unnatural statesof the body, in which no direct remedy can beapplied, and all soothing means would not onlybe ineffectual, but fatal : in such states thosesubstances, which are directly opposed in 228 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLEScity to opium, and irritate instead of soothingthe surfaces to which they are applied, are valuableprecisely on that account : they rouse thesystem, for instance, from a state of lethargy,which otherwise would probably terminate indeath ; or they stimulate the stomach to reject,any substance of a poisonous nature, which mayhave been either intentionally or accidentally introducedinto it, and they thus contribute to thepreservation of life. Remedies of this character,though not exclusively belonging to the vegetablekingdom, are frequently afforded by it.But, in enumerating the medicinal auxiliarieswhich mankind derive from the vegetable kingdom,let me not omit the restorative virtue ofthat gift of Heaven, which, though by its abuseit may intoxicate the mental faculties and underminethe general health of the body, is calculatedmost assuredly, when rightly used, notonly to revive the drooping energies, but to rekindlethe almost expiring spark of life. Surveythe wretched subject of what is called typhus ,while oppressed by those symptoms which justifythe use of this restorative ; when the glazed eyeand squalid skin, the feeble circulation and mutteringdelirium, announce the near approach ofdeath, unless the proper medicine be interposed;and then watch the beneficial effect of this divineremedy. They who have witnessed the progressof typhus fever in some of its forms, andTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 229in individuals who have lived in crowded andill-ventilated habitations, will acknowledge thatin very many instances wine alone has, humanlyspeaking, rescued the patient from the grave.Nor will it be irrelevant to the general subjectof this treatise to consider the natural origin ofwine : by which I mean, not the mode or timeof its discovery ; either of which it would be asuseless as vain to attempt to investigate, sincethis liquid was in common use at a period longantecedent to history : but by its natural originI mean the circumstances under which it isusually produced. There is a law in nature, bywhich organised bodies, vegetables as well asanimals, are disposed to undergo spontaneousdecomposition very soon after they have ceasedto live ; the ultimate result of which is, a resolutioninto their elementary principles ; in otherwords, they putrefy and perish. But even inthis state, in which they are deprived of all theirformer properties, they administer to the goodof man ; and, under the name of manure, areknown as the principal means of fertilizing theground ; from whence all his food is ultimatelyobtained. The circumstances, however, whichaccompany this change in vegetables, differ verymuch from those which attend the correspondingchange in animals ; and may be well illustratedby a reference to the process of making anycommon wine.q3230 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESIf a sufficient quantity of the juice of ripegrapes, or of any other saccharine fluid, be exposedto a moderately warm temperature, an internalmovement of its particles soon begins totake place ; which is technically called fermentation: and during the period when this is goingon, the sugar of the liquor is, in part, convertedinto wine. If the fermentation be now arrestedby the proper means, the whole mass of the liquidmay be preserved in nearly the same statefor a longer or shorter period, in proportion tothe quantity of wine contained in it : but if, afterthe vinous fermentation, as it is called, has beencompleted, the temperature be to a certain degreeincreased, the wine is converted into vinegarby a continuance of the process of fermentation: and, ultimately, the acid taste andodour of the vinegar are lost ; and the wholemass of the liquor becomes first vapid, and thenputrid.That such a process as putrefaction shouldtake place in organised bodies after their death,might in reasoning be antecedently expected ; forthe purpose of administering to the growth oftheir successive generations in the case of vegetables;and to prevent the indefinite accumulation^ " Haud igitur penitus permit quicunque videntur :Quando alit ex alio deficit Natura, nee uUamRem gigni patitur^ nisi morte adjiitam aliena."Lucre. I. 263-5.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 231of SO much dead and useless matter in the caseof animals : but we could not have anticipated,that, while animal matter at once passes into astate of putrefaction, vegetable matter shouldpreviously pass through two intermediate states ;accompanied with products which in their naturediffer both from each other, and from thesource from which they were derived : both,however, as we might very reasonably expectfrom the known wisdom and beneficence of theCreator, of the highest importance to mankind.From wine, to say nothing of the advantagesresulting from its proper use in its commonstate, is derived that useful fluid called alcohol,or spirit of wine : among the most valuable propertiesof which, may be ranked its power ofdissolving resin, and other vegetable principles ;and of preserving organised matter from theputrefactive process. In consequence of the formerpower, it is employed to extract from variousvegetables some of those parts in which ,their medicinal virtues reside ; and to preservethem in a convenient form for immediate use,at any moment, under the technical name oftinctures. And with respect to its importanceas a preservative of animal and vegetable matter,but particularly of the former, I need onlypoint out any one of those collections of anatomicalpreparations contained in the museumsof every medical school in Europe. But if anyq4232 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESsingle instance of its application to this purposebe demanded, who can hesitate to namethat astonishing proof of the genius and industryof the great English physiologist, JohnHunter, the Collection preserved in the RoyalCollege of Surgeons ? on the pedestal of whosebust, placed within the walls of the museumof that college, might well be inscribed, as Ibelieve has been often suggested, those appropriatewords,Cujus monumentum si quaere, circumspect."SECT. V.Vegetables as applicable to the Arts, 8fc.In considering the application of natural substancesto the various purposes of life, it is ofteninteresting to compare the simplicity of theoriginal contrivance with the complicated manipulationsof the process by which, at the presentday, a material, destined for a specific use,is brought into a fit state for that use. Letfine writing-paper be taken as an instance ; andlet us compare the history of a piece of suchpaper with that of the simple material on whichmany Oriental manuscripts are written — the mereleaf of a tree, probably some species of palm —which after having been cut into the requisitesize and form, seems to have undergone no otherpreparation than simple pressure; partly withthe view of forcing out its natural moisture, andTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 233partly of smoothing its surface. How different thehistory of the paper that is daily fabricated inany of the large manufactories of this country ;and how little would its origin and numerouschanges of state be conjectured from its presentappearance ! Heaps of linen rags of every colour,when indeed that colour can be distinguishedthrough the dirt which adheres to them,are brought from almost every quarter of Europe;each rag having probably been part ofsome article of dress, which, as it grew viler byuse, passed from a more to a less respectablepossessor ; till it at length became the tatteredand threadbare covering of the poorest mendicant.From such a material is the finest papermade : and, in the commencement of the process,each individual rag undergoes an examinationwith respect to its size, and is cut into twoor more pieces according to that size. Separateheaps are then mechanically shaken together,and sifted, in order to clear them from adheringdust : they are subsequently washed, mechanicallydivided into small shreds, bleached, thenthrown into vats of water, and there reduced toa fine pulp by the application of powerful machinery.This pulp, by very delicate yet simplemeans, is kept in a state of close and equablediffusion over an even surface, and is made topass between successive pairs of smooth metallic234 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLEScylinders ; all of which, by pressing out themoisture of the pulp, bring its particles moreclosely together, and thus tend to give it therequisite degree of firmness and cohesion ; thelast pair being heated sufficiently to dry thepaper during its passage between them.Such are the numerous and elaborate processes,by which a heap of sordid rags is convertedinto the beautiful material of which wehave been speaking. And if, to the accumulatedprocesses to which each rag is submittedduring its fabrication into paper, be added itsprevious history, as the cultivation and subsequentdressing of the flax of which it was made,the formation of the fibre of the flax into thread,the weaving of the thread into linen, and, in themajority of instances, the dyeing of the linen ;if all these points be collectively considered,what food for a reflecting mind does not theminutest particle of the resulting paper afford!Many plants are capable of yielding a colouringmatter, which by chemical means may bereadily made to combine with various substances,as linen, woollen, silk, and leather. Thisproperty, which sometimes resides in the stemand branches, sometimes in the leaves andflowers, may be classed among those propertiesof plants, which, if we consider the actual stateof society in all the civilized parts of the world,TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 235are productive of the greatest advantage tomankind. Hence, for instance, has arisen anart, the art of dyeing, which not only opens awide field of employment to a numerous classof workmen, in every large city ; but gives adegree of activity to general commerce, whichcannot but surprise the mind of any one previouslyignorant of the circumstance. Thus thequantity of indigo, accumulated in the extensiverepositories of the East-india company, isfrequently so great as to make the occasionalobserver wonder that it should ever find a market: and the following statement will shew howimportant this single substance is as an articleof commerce. During the last five years, thequantity of indigo imported into London amountsto at least one hundred and twenty thousandchests; the average weight of the contents ofeach chest equalling 270lbs, and the averageprice of each pound being five shillings. Theestimated value therefore of the indigo containedin the 120,000 chests would be rathermore than eight millions sterling.If I am correct in supposing that blue, red,and yellow, are the colours most abundantlysupplied by vegetables, it cannot fail to strikea mind of the least reflexion, that these areprecisely the elementary colours which a dyerwould have antecedently selected, in order to beenabled to practise his art to the greatest ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESvantage ; since from these three, all other coloursor tints may be obtained. And with respectto black, which must practically be consideredas a distinct colour, though not admittedas such theoretically, it is worthy of observation,that, although scarcely any vegetablesubstance yields it directly; yet, by the interventionof almost any form of iron, and thismetal is in some shape or other present everywhere,it may readily be produced from a verynumerous class of vegetable substances. In almostevery instance where a vegetable substancehas an austere and bitter taste, it willwith iron give a dye of a black colour. Thusthe bark of the oak, and of many other trees,and that vegetable excrescence called the gallnut,produce an ink by the addition of any salineform of iron.From the earliest and least civilized times,and through every intermediate stage of societyto the present period of refinement the productionsof the vegetable world have been in constantrequest for the most common purposes oflife. The simplest dwellings not only of theuninstructed savage, but of the peasantry ofmany parts of modern Europe, are constructedalmost entirely of wood ; the simplest implementsof husbandry, the plough, the spade, andthe hoe, could hardly be employed without theaid of a wooden frame-work or. handle : and theTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 237same observation holds good with reference tothe tools of the most necessary arts of life. Howgreat would be the inconvenience, and how increasedwould be the labour of the carpenter,or the smith, or the mason, if, instead of wood,the handles of his implements were of iron! Norare substances of vegetable origin of less importance,or less generally employed, in manyof the higher arts of life. Examine the structureof a man of war — its hulk, of oak ; its masts,of fir ; its sails and ropes, of flax ; its caulking,of tow and of tar. All is of vegetable origin fromthe top-mast head to the keel itself. With theexception indeed of the iron which is occasionallyused in the construction, no metallicsubstance is necessarily employed ; for the coppersheathing, though highly useful, is certainlynot necessary.It would require volumes to describe all theeconomical uses to which vegetables are applied.How many important trades arise fromthis source. How many families, now existingin opulence, originally derived their surnamesfrom their occupation, and that occupation connectedwith vegetable materials ; for instance,Cooper, Carpenter, Dyer, Tanner, Turner,Wheeler, Weaver, Barker, Hayward, Gardener,Cartwright, Miller, Fletcher, Bowyer !And then, to answer the various purposes towhich they are to be applied, how widely do238 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESthe qualities of different vegetable productionsdiffer from each other! How well the rigidfibre and compact texture of the oak enablethe bulky vessel to resist the buffeting of thewaves ! The ash, the beech, the fir, the yew,each has those appropriate qualities which makeit individually preferable to the rest. The flexibilityof hemp and flax renders them capableof being woven and formed into sails and cordage; and, exposed as the sails and rigging areto the vicissitudes of the weather, how well arethey protected by being covered over with tar,itself of vegetable origin !Some woods very readily split with that regularityof surface which we observe in commonlaths ; and of the utility of that kind of materialin almost every kind of building no one can wellbe ignorant. Other woods, as the willow, veryreadily bend, with a considerable degree of elasticity,in every direction ; and hence are of valuein the fabrication of what is known under thegeneral name of wicker-works.g The art of making wicker-work is often successfully cultivatedat a very early period of civilization. Thus in the neighbourhoodof California some of Captain Beechey's officers weresupplied with " water brought to them in baskets, which theIndians weave so close, that, when wet, they become excellent^' substitutes for bowls." (Beechey's Voyage, p. 385.) And weknow that, not long after the conquest of Britain by Caesar, theornamental wicker-work of the natives was highly prized atRome.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 239In this department, again, though not to thesame extent as in the case of some of the metals,is seen the effect of human labour in advancingthe value of the original material. Compare, forinstance, the mercantile value of a piece of finelace with the original value of the material ofvrhich it is made.There are many plants, which, though theyneither produce fruit of any value nor are capableof being applied to any of the commonpurposes of the arts, are yet of the highest valueas a natural defence to cultivated lands againstthe incursions of cattle ; and sometimes evenagainst the attacks of disciplined troops.The quickset of our common hedges is an instanceof the former application ; and of its utilityin this country no one can doubt, unless hehappen to live exclusively in those districts, asin certain parts of the Cotswold and similarranges of hills, where stone supplies a moreready material for a fence. Of the extent ofits application, it would not be easy to makea correct estimate : but, when we consider howmany public roads, and how many private enclosuresare bounded by a fence of quickset, it becomesprobable that the linear extent of hedgesof this kind is, in England alone, equal to manytimes the circumference of the whole earth. Indescribing one of the most important fortressesin the Deccan, captain Steely, in his account of240 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLESthe temples of Ellora, states that the town,which stands about 1020 yards from the fortissurrounded by a hedge of prickly pear, nearlyeighteen feet high, and thick in proportion.This natural defence around towns and villageson the western side of India is very common ;and it offers to a predatory body of horse or foota formidable barrier: for the sharp and longthorns, which project from the stem and leaf,not only act as an immediate defence; but, ifbroken off, they exude a liquid which often producessevere inflammation.In a part of Normandy, lying between Caenand Falaise, is a district called " Le Bocage"petit lois), which "derives its name from thehigh and bushy hedges with which it abounds ;and which are designed to afford shelter fromthe stormy winds of the Atlantic. There are** but few trees in those parts ; but the hedges,being from eight to ten feet in height, are suffancient to protect the crops from the boisteroussea-breezes : and they thence bear the name of*' brise'Vent\^'The last point in the history of vegetableswhich I propose to consider is their applicationas fuel ; and many nations entirely derive theirsupply of fuel, for culinary and other domesticpurposes, from the vegetable kingdom alone :h p. 522.• Conversations on Vegetable Physiology, vol. ii. p. 232.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 241and even where such a supply is in a greatmeasure needless, on account of the abundanceof coal, yet, for many purposes, various forms ofwood, either in a recent or in a charred state,are preferred, on account of the injurious effectsarising from the sulphur with which coal isusually contaminated ; in the heating of bakers'ovens, for instance, in the drying of malt, andin numerous processes of the arts. Around theshores of the Arctic Ocean, where scarcely anytraces of native vegetation are observable, theinhabitants are amply supplied by drift-wood,(Sauer's Account of Billings's Expedition, p.104-259). And captain Beechey says, that driftwoodis to the Esquimaux what forests are tous; being in such abundance and variety, thatthe inhabitants have the choice of several sortsof trees. All this drift-wood about the mouthsof rivers, on the north coast of America, appearsto be brought down by those rivers from the interiorof America : but from the occurrence ofmany floating trees to the southward of Kamchatka,and from other circumstances, it is probablethat much of the drift-wood, found at adistance from the mouths of rivers, comes veryfar from the southward (p. 575-580).Nor does the benefit, arising from vegetableforms of fuel, terminate with their consumption.The residuary ashes are useful, as a manurefor the land, on account of the alkaline matterR242 ADAPTATION OF VEGETABLES &C.which they contain : and that alkaline matter isalso to many a poor peasant a substitute for soap ;the lixivium, or ley, which may be obtained byfiltering water through the ashes, owing its detergentquality to the alkali which it has dissolvedin its passage. In those parts of theworld indeed, as in North America, for instance,where it is requisite to clear the land of wood,for the purpose of bringing it into cultivation,the ashes of the forests, which are necessarilyburned for this purpose, afford an enormousquantity of alkaline residuum ; and this is thesource of much of that alkali of commerce,which, from having been obtained by evaporationof its solution in iron pans or pots, is commonlyknown under the name oi potash.That other alkali of commerce, called soda, isderived from a similar, though indeed a muchmore humble source ; for, in this case, the alkalidoes not result from the combustion of statelyand aboriginal forests, but from the combustionof heaps of sea-weed ; which, in various parts ofthe coast of Europe, has been collected from thesurfaces of the adjoining rocks ^.^ In some instances loose stones are intentionally placed onthe sea-beach for the purpose of affording a substratum for thegrowth of various sea-plants which attach themselves to thestones so placed.ADAPTATION OF ANIMALS &C. 243CHAP. IX.Adaptation of Animals to the Physical Conditionof Man,SECT. I.General Observations on the Animal Kingdom.THE same remark may be made with regardto the general utility of animals, which has beenmade in the case of vegetables : for we havesufficient reason for believing, that, among themyriads of species of animals which exist uponthe face of the earth, there is not one whichdoes not act an important part in the economyof nature ^ And yet, if it be correctly statedthat out of about a hundred thousand speciesof animals, the number supposed to have beenhitherto discovered, eighty thousand are of theclass of insects ""; it will be evident that themass of mankind is ignorant of the very existenceof nearly four fifths of the whole animalkingdom : for, with the exception of the fly,It is the opinion of Mr. Scores, (Account of the ArcticRegions, vol. i. p. 179, 180.) that the olive-green colour of thewater, observable in many parts of the Greenland sea, is o^vingto the presence of numberless quantities of very small medusaeand other minute animals. "These small animals," he says,apparently afford nourishment to the sepia, actiniae, and othermollusca which constitute the food of the whale : thus producinga dependent chain of animal life, one particular link ofwhich being destroyed, the whole must necessarily perish."ni The number is probably greater.r2244 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSthe bee, the wasp, the ant, and perhaps tenortwelve more species, few but professed naturalistsare acquainted with the specific differencesof this class of animals ; so small arethey in size, and so apparently insignificant toa common observer. But, if we have reason forbelieving that not a single animal species existswithout its use in the general economy of nature,we have a certainty that there are many,the absence of which would be almost incompatiblewith the continuance of the existenceof the human race. If, for instance, the dutiesof the shepherd and herdsman could no longerbe exercised, in consequence of the extinctionof the two species of which they have now respectivelythe care, into what misery would notthe population of a great part of the world beplunged, cut off* at once from some of the mostsubstantial forms of animal food, and the mostgeneral and effectual sources of clothing !And, if we consider the subject in anotherpoint of view, how fitly are the natures of thesespecies, from the individuals of which such immenseadvantage accrues to man, accommodatedto that end ! If, for instance, the sheep and theox were carnivorous, instead of herbivorous, howcould the species be preserved : or, supposingfor a moment that a sufficient quantity of animalfood could be procured for them, underthat supposition how could it be convenientlyTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 245distributed to the flocks and herds scatteredover a thousand hills ; which now, without anyconsequent trouble to the shepherd or the herdsman,leisurely crop the grass, as they slowlytraverse the surface from their morning to theirevening range of pasture.Let us suppose, again, that the horse were tobecome extinct. In that event how greatlywould be in a moment altered the condition ofthe whole civilized world? for by what othermeans could there be kept up that general communication,between distant parts of the sameempire, the rapidity and facility of which contributeat the same time to national prosperity,and to individual wealth and comfort; sincethat recent invention, the steam carriage, thoughcapable of supplying the place of horses alongthe course of regular roads, would be inapplicablein most other situations ? Consider, again,the position of contending armies, whose fateoften is determined by the evolutions of unitedsquadrons of this noblest of all the inferior animals; and sometimes even by the speed of theindividual charger whose rider conveys the com-rand which is to determine those evolutions :or, to descend into the less important thoughnot less interesting scenes of domestic life, letus imagine, what we may perhaps have witnessed,the ecstasy of an afflicted parent, whohas been enabled by the speed of this all butR 3246 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSfriend of man to reach the couch, and to receivethe dying embraces of a beloved child;or to obtain those means of human aid, whichhaply may have averted the stroke of impendingdeath.But in this, as in many similar instances, wecan at once perceive (what we may always inreasoning presume) that an alteration in theconstitution of any department of nature wouldbe incompatible with that harmony of the whole,the existence of which is evident to all thosewho are capable of observing and interrogatingphilosophically the phenomena of creation. Andif it should be said that some species of animalshave actually become extinct, and others aregradually becoming more and more rare ; yet,in such instances, we shall find the fact to beeither the result of a providential adjustment, ifthe expression may be permitted ; or, of the originalrarity of the species themselves, as in thecase of that uncouth bird the dodo ; or, as might» It is not without reason that the epithet uncouth has beenapplied to the dodo ; for two distinguished naturalists in theirday, maintained for many years that such a form had never existed,,but in the imagination of the painter. One of these individualshowever at length had an opportunity of inspectingthe well-known specimen of the head of the dodo, which is preservedin the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford ; and was then convincedthat such a bird had existed. But so far was he fromproducing the same conviction in the mind of his friend, by thedescription of the specimen , that he incurred the charge of anTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 247possibly happen, with respect to that still moreremarkable animal of New Holland, the orni-thorhynchus paradoxes : in each of which instancesthe locality of the species appears tohave been always extremely limited.On the other hand there are species of animals,which, though so minute, and so far removedfrom common observation, as to bescarcely known to mankind at large, much lessemployed for any useful purpose, would yet beproductive of great inconvenience were theypermitted to increase indefinitely : and hence,although they may perhaps previously accomplishsome important end in the scheme of nature,they are destined to be the food of otheranimals, which, being much larger than themselves,necessarily consume them in great quantity.There is hardly a bird, or a reptile, or afish, the contents of whose stomach would notbear witness to the truth of the assertion justmade : and even among quadrupeds there aremany species, as the mole, the hedgehog, theman's, and the ant-eater, which, from the natureof their food, are grouped into a distinctfamily, called insectivorous,intentional deception ; and the result was, that an interminablefeud arose between them : for though they were attached to thesame institution, and lived within its walls, (not indeed withoutother companions, or absolutely under the same roof, as theirprototypes in the Eddy stone light-house,) they never againspoke to each other.R 4248 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSSECT. II.Geographical Distribution of Animals.Among the strongest evidences of an intentionaladaptation of the external world to thephysical condition of man, may be classed thegeographical distribution of animals, taken inconnexion with certain points in their generalhistory. Thus the elephant, which lives exclusivelyon vegetable food, is found naturallyin those climates only, where vegetation is soluxuriantly abundant as easily to meet the largesupply, which numerous individuals of suchenormous bulk require : and then the tractabilityand docility of the animal are such, thatits amazing strength may be easily directed toforward the purposes of man ; and often is sodirected, in the conduct of military operations,as well as on various ordinary occasions : andlastly, the increase of the species advancesslowly ; for, in by far the greater number of instances,only one individual is produced at abirth. Now had the elephant been equallyadapted to colder climates, where vegetation iscomparatively scant, the difficulty of supportingthe individual animals in such climates wouldhave diminished the value of the species : or,were elephants as intractable and indocile, asthey are the reverse, what destruction wouldthey not be continually dealing around them;TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 249witness the scene which took place a few yearssince in a public menagerie of London ; wherea company of musketeers was introduced, in orderto subdue a single individual of this species,which had become infuriated from accidentalcircumstances ! Or, lastly, had the elephantbeen as prolific as the swine, (and it should beobserved that they are branches of the samenatural order,) how could the increased numbersof individuals have been maintained, inthe case of a species which is not naturally capableof emigrating to a different climate ?SECT. III.The Cainel.Of all animals, the camel perhaps is mostexactly adapted both to those peculiar regionsof the earth in which it is principally, if notexclusively, found ; and to those purposes forwhich it is usually employed by man : to whosewants indeed it is so completely accommodated,and apparently so incapable of existing withouthis superintendence, that while on the one handwe find the camel described in the earliest recordsof history, and in every subsequent period,as an a state of subjugation to man, andemployed for precisely the same purposes as atthe present day ; on the other hand, it is doubtfulwhether the species has ever existed in awild or independent state.250 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSWith scarcely any natural means of defence,and nearly useless in the scheme of creation,(as far as we can judge,) unless as the slave ofman, it forms a remarkable parallel to the sheep,the ox, and other of the ruminating species ;which are also rarely, if ever, found, but underthe protection of man, and to that protectionalone are indebted, indeed, for their existenceas a distinct species. Let us compare then theform, and structure, and moral qualities of thecamel, with the local character of the regionsin which it is principally found ; and with thenature of the services exacted of it by man.The sandy deserts of Arabia are the classicalcountry of the camel ; but it is also extensivelyemployed in various other parts of Asia, and inthe north of Africa : and the constant communicationthat exists between the tribes whichborder on the intervening sea of sand, couldonly be maintained by an animal possessingsuch qualities as characterize the camel — " theship of the desert," as it has emphaticallybeen called. Laden with the various kinds ofmerchandise which are the object of commercein that region of the world, and of which a partoften passes from the most easterly countries ofAsia to the extreme limits of western Europe,and from thence even across the Atlantic toAmerica, this extraordinary animal pursues itssteady course over burning sands during manyTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 251successive weeks. And not only is it satisfiedwith the scanty herbage which it gathers bythe way; but often passes many days withoutmeeting with a single spring of water in whichto slake its thirst.In explanation of its fitness as a beast of burden,for such desert tracts of sand, its feet andits stomach are the points in its structure whichare principally calculated to arrest our attention: and its feet are not less remarkably accommodatedto the road over which it travels,than is the structure of its stomach to thedrought of the region through which that roadpasses. The foot of the camel, in fact, is soformed that the animal would be incapable oftravelling, with any ease or steadiness, overeither a rough or a stony surface ; and equallyincapable is it of travelling for any long continuanceover moist ground, in consequence ofthe inflammation produced in its limbs fromthe effect of moisture. It is observed, by Cuvier,that these circumstances in its physicalhistory, and not the incapability of bearing acolder temperature, account for the fact, that,while the sheep, the ox, the dog, the horse, andsome other species, have accompanied the migrationsof man, from his aboriginal seat in centralAsia to every habitable part of the globe,the camel still adheres to the desert.And now observe how its interior structure252 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSmeets the difficulty of a region, where water israrely found. As in the case of all other animalswhich ruminate or chew the cud, the stomachof the camel consists of several compartments; of which one is divided into numerousdistinct cells, capable of collectively containingsuch a quantity of water, as is sufficient forthe ordinary consumption of the animal duringmany days. And, as opportunities occur, thecamel instinctively replenishes this reservoir ;and is thus enabled to sustain a degree of externaldrought, which would be destructive toall other animals but such as have a similarstructure : nor is any other animal of the oldworld known to possess this peculiar structure.But if we pass to the inhabited regions of theAndes in the new world, we there meet withseveral species of animals, as the lama, thevigogna, and the alpaca, which, though muchsmaller than the camel, correspond generallyin their anatomy with that animal, and particularlywith reference to the structure of thestomach : they resemble also the camel in docility; and, to complete the parallel, they wereemployed by the aboriginal inhabitants in thenew world for the same purposes as the camelin the old.Of the two species of camel, the Bactrian andArabian, the latter is that with the history ofwhich we are best acquainted; and thoughTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 253there is reason to believe, that, whatever is saidof the qualities of the one might with truth beaffirmed of the other also, on the present occasionwhatever is said is referable to the Arabianspecies °. The camel, then, not only consumesless food than the horse, but can sustain morefatigue. A large camel is capable of carryingfrom seven to twelve hundred weight, and travellingwith that weight on its back, at the rateof above ten leagues in each day. The smallcourier camel, carrying no weight, will travelthirty leagues in each day, provided the groundbe dry and level. Individuals of each varietywill subsist for eight or ten successive days ondry thorny plants ; but after this period requiremore nutritious food, which is usually suppliedin the form of dates and various artificial preparations: though, if not so supplied, the camelwill patiently continue its course, till nearlythe whole of the fat, of which the boss on its° The Bactrian species, which has two bosses on its back, ismore peculiar to Tartary and northern Asia. The Arabian,which has only one boss, is not confined to the country fromwhich it is named, but is the same species with that which prevailsin northern Africa. As in the case of all domesticatedanimals the varieties of these two species are numerous : and itis a variety of the Arabian species, of a small height, to whichthe ancients gave the name of dromedary, from its employmentas a courier: but in the magnificent work of St. Hilaire andCuvier, (Hist. Nat. des Mammif^res,) the term dromedary isadopted, in a specific sense, for all the varieties of the Arabiancamel.254 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSback consists, is absorbed ; whereby that protuberancebecomes, as it were, obliterated.The camel is equally patient of thirst as ofhunger : and this happens, no doubt, in consequenceof the supply of fluid which it is capableof obtaining from the peculiar reservoir containedin its stomach. It possesses moreover apower and delicacy in the sense of smell, (to thatsense at least such a power is most naturallyreferable,) by which, after having thirsted forseven or eight days, it perceives the existenceof water at a very considerable distance : and itmanifests this power by running directly to thepoint where the water exists. It is obvious thatthis faculty is exerted as much to the benefit oftheir drivers, and the whole suit of the caravan,as of the camels themselves.Such are some of the leading advantages derivedto man from the physical structure andpowers of this animal : nor are those advantagesof slight moment which are derived from itsdocile and patient disposition. It is no slightadvantage, for instance, considering the greatheight of the animal, which usually exceeds sixor seven feet, that the camel is easily taught tobend down its body on its limbs, in order to beladen : and, indeed, if the weight to be placedon its back be previously so distributed, as tobe balanced on an intervening yoke of a convenientform, it will spontaneously direct itsTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 255neck under the yoke, and afterwards transferthe weight to its back. St. Hilaire and Cuvier,from whom the substance of much of the precedingaccount is taken, assert, that, if afterhaving laid down and received the intendedfreight, the camel should find it inconvenientlyheavy, it will not rise till a part has been takenoff; and that, when fatigued by long travel, itwill proceed more readily and easily if thedriver sing some familiar tune. This howeveris a quality not peculiar to the camel.Considered only thus far in its history, thecamel easily stands preeminent, as the mostuseful, among all the species of ruminating animals,in the bodily or mechanical services whichit renders to man : it is almost indeed the rivalof the horse, even when compared in a generalpoint of view ; but more than its rival in its particulararena, the desert. The reindeer assiststhe individual wants of the Laplander by conveyinghis sledge over the frozen surface of thesnow ; and the ox, on a more enlarged scale oflabour, is employed in some countries in ploughing,or in the draught of heavy weights : butthe camel was from time immemorial, up to acomparatively recent period, almost the sole in-tertium of the principal part of the commerceof the whole world. Thus the spices and otherrich merchandise of the East, being brought tothe confines of Arabia, were conveyed on the256 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSbacks of camels across the desert, and thencefinding their way to the trading cities of Phoenicia,while they yet flourished — and subsequently,after their destruction or decay, toAlexandria — they were distributed over the continentof Europe ; enriching whole nations bythe profits of the mere transfer : for thus Venicebecame not only the mistress of the Adriaticand Mediterranean, but in a measure the arbitressof the whole world —*' And such she was ; — her daughters had their dowersFrom spoils of nations, and the exhaustless EastPour in her lap all gems in sparkling showers.In purple was she robed, and of her feastMonarchs partook, and deemed their dignity increased."And when, in consequence of the discoveryof the Cape of Good Hope, Alexandria ceasedto be the main emporium of India and Europe,Venice declined in its riches and power ; andthe Portuguese, the Dutch, and lastly the English,acquired the political influence which Venicehad lost : so true is the observation of sirWilliam Temple, that whatever nation is in possessionof the commerce of India must necessarilyhave a preponderating influence in theaffairs of the whole world ^.But, although the route by the Cape has in aP Child Harold, Canto IV. Stanza 2.q For an account of the traffick between India and Europe,see Niebuhr, Descript. de Arabia, p. 246, &c.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 257great measure superseded that by Alexandria,the commercial intercourse carried on by meansof the camel between opposite confines of theAfrican and Asiatic deserts is still sufficientlyextensive to make the importance of that animalvery considerable : so that even now, asages and ages since, the riches of an individualare estimated by the number of camels he maypossess : and he still uses his camels either inwar, or for the transport of merchandise, or forthe purpose of selling them.But it would be found, upon pursuing thehistory of the camel, that, while under the pointof view which has been just considered, thisanimal contributes more largely to the advantagesof mankind than any other species of theruminating order, it scarcely is inferior to anyoneof those species with respect to other advantageson account of which they are principallyr It cannot be considered an irrelevant, and certainly not initself an uninteresting digression, here to observe, that therewas a period in the commercial history of England, within thelast century even, when the horse served the purpose in thisisland, which the camel serves in Arabia and other parts ofthe world : and a distinct trade then existed, that of the packer ;the occupation of which was to make up bales of goods in aform convenient for carriage on the back of the jmckJiorse ;and the trace of that mode of conveyance is still to be recognisedin the sign of many inns in those parts of Englandwhere that mode of conveyance was prevalent. The same modeof conveyance is still very extensively employed in the northeasternparts of the Russian dominions.S258 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSvaluable. Thus the Arab obtains from thecamel not only milk and cheese and butter,but he ordinarily also eats its flesh, and fabricatesits hair into clothing of various kinds.The very refuse indeed of the digested food ofthe animal is the principal fuel of the desert ;and from the smoke of this fuel is obtained thewell-known substance called sal ammoniac, whichis very extensively employed in the arts ; andof which indeed, formerly, the greater part metwith in commerce was obtained from this sourcealone, as may be implied from its very namesSECT. IV.Domestication of Animals.Nature has implanted a disposition in almostall animals to be domesticated by man ; andalso a capability of becoming adapted to thevarious climates into which they accompanyhim ; and this disposition and adaptation necessarilyextend the utility of these animals. Thereis, moreover, a consequent effect of domesticationwhich is obvious to the commonest observer; and which extends still further thebenefits arising from the practice. In a stateof nature, almost all the individuals of the samespecies of animals have, at any given period ofs Amnion, an ancient name of a part of the African desertsituate to the west of Egypt, supplied formerly much of thesal ammoniac of commerce.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 259their life, so close a resemblance to each otherin form, size, and colour, that it is difficult todistinguish them at a little distance : but wheneverany species has been long domesticated, orsubjugated to the dominion of man, we usuallyfind a proportional variety in those points. Inproof of the foregoing assertion it will be sufficientto make a comparison between wild andtame rabbits ; or between the domestic and wildcat;and to refer to the differences observablein all those animals which are constantly underthe care of man, as the horse, the dog, andthe ox.The alteration which is produced in suchcases, and which depends partly on climateand food and general regimen, but still more onthe intermixture of the breed, is in many instancesof the highest utility to man. Supposefor a moment that, in the case of the horse, anyoneof the existing varieties, the dray-horse forinstance, or the Shetland pony, were from henceforthto determine the permanent character ofthe species; and observe what would be theconsequence. What a waste of power, and whatan inconvenient increase of trouble and expense,both with respect to stable-room andfood, would there be in using the dray-horse,where the Shetland pony would be sufficient;and, on the other hand, how ill would the Shetlandpony supply the place of the dray-horse,s2260 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSwhere enormous weights were to be set inmotion !Again, in the case of the dog, were all othervarieties of this most useful animal to be annihilated,and only one form to prevail, its valuewould be proportionally lessened. If no varietyof the dog existed but the small spaniel or theterrier, the miserable inhabitant of the northcould no longer travel over his native tracts offrozen snow : nor could the victim of Alpinefrost in Switzerland be hereafter rescued from apremature death, as he often now is, by the sagacityand strength of the mastiffs of that region.And, in another element, how many a life, whichmust have been otherwise lost, has been savedfrom a watery grave by the joint sagacity andpowerful strength of the Newfoundland dog !What would the shepherd do without the assistancewhich he now derives from his faithfulcompanion? Instead of that compact phalanxwhich we have often seen advancing over thedistant downs, under the direction of the shepherd'sdog ; and from time to time, in obedienceto its intelligent commander, still altering its directionin advancing, as steadily as a ship insail obeys the helm ; we should see a confusedand scattered multitude, which all the shepherd'sskill and activity could hardly restore to order.Nor let me be accused of inhumanity if I hereinstance the assistance which is given to manTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 261by those varieties of the dog which are principallyused in the chase. Those feelings, whichwould spare the inferior animals unnecessarypain, are ever to be respected in others andcherished in ourselves ; as those feelings whichdelight in cruelty are to be abhorred : but undoubtedlythe desire of inflicting pain is not theincentive to the pleasures of the chase ; andtherefore, with reference to himself, the hunteris free from the charge of cruelty. With respectto the animal which is the object of the chase,the charge of cruelty is reasonably obviated bythis highly probable consideration, that mancan hardly inflict on the weaker animals amore cruel death than that, to which they areobnoxious by the very law of nature : for, ultimately,they will almost necessarily be huntedand destroyed by beasts of prey ; or, if you supposethem to die either of disease or of old age,what misery must they not undergo in enduringthis latter period of their life ! In fact, unless inthe case of acute disease, the occurrence of whichin wild animals there is reason to think is extremelyrare, they must, through mere helplessness,perish by hunger.An ethical discussion is to be avoided on thepresent occasion ; and I shall only therefore observe,that, with respect to the infliction of painon the inferior animals, in the particular casenow under consideration, the grand question iss3262 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSthe consequent effect on our own moral feelings ^If we are conscious that we are inflicting pain,we shall do right to abstain from what otherwisewould be an innocent amusement ; for such abstinencewill be a legitimate extension of thescriptural precept, " A righteous man regard eth*' the life of his beast :" and if, by neglectingthe suggestions of our original feelings, we haveblunted the edge of the moral sense, doubtlesswe are culpable in a high degree. And thisprobably was the case in the gladiatorial exhibitionsof antiquity ; and is equally the case inthe disgusting exhibitions of the bull-fight inSpain, and the more vulgar and not less disgustingspectacle of pugilistic engagements, orbaiting of the bull, in our own country. But,omitting such palpably indefensible sports, itdoubtless may be affirmed as a general truth,that the amusements of hunting or of fishingare not accompanied by any consciousness of awanton infliction of pain. And, although theoccasionally concomitant habits of such sportsmay eventually blunt the benevolent feelings ofour nature, we have not the least evidence thatt The same observation is applicable to philosophical experimentson living animals ; respecting experiments of which natureShakspeare justly observes,. . . " Your highnessShall from this practice but make hard your heart."Cymbal. Act I. Sc. G.TO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OP MAN. 203there is a necessary tendency in those amusementsto produce that lamentable effect. Therethen remains, in support of the propriety of suchamusements, the argument from the healthinessof the stimulus which they communicate to themind as well as to the body; thus invigoratingboth : while they act as a present recreation,which in some shape or other is required by all.But if the pursuit of smaller and weaker animalsshould appear objectionable to any one, therestill remain, in other countries at least if not inthis, the wolf, the wild boar, and the tiger : andin subduing these, to which no one will probablyobject, the dog lends most effectual assistanceto man. He is indeed of all animals the mostundaunted and courageous. Mr. Purcell, whoduring his long residence in southern Africa hadfrequent opportunities of witnessing the characterof this faithful guardian of man, has assertedto the author of this treatise, that he has, againand again, seen the fiercest and strongest animalsshrink from the defiance of the dog ; buthe never saw the dog shrink from the defianceof any other animal ".^ Linnaeus, in enumerating the characters of the lion, makes,by implication, a somewhat similar observation with respect tothe dog. " Leo esuriens preedatur eques et alias majorisanomalies ; — omnibus cocrcdur." (Lii. System. Gmelin.torn. i. p. 76.)s4264 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSSECT. V.Animals as a Source of Food.Although the inhabitants of very warm climateslive principally and often entirely on vegetables; in the colder climates animal food usuallymakes a part of the daily sustenance of all whoare not oppressed by poverty : and nature hasnot only provided amply for this want, but hasafforded the easiest means of supplying it. Thedisposition of those animals, which afford thegreat bulk of the supply that is required, as ,thesheep, the ox, and the swine, is such, that theyare not only disposed to live gregariously, butare readily brought under obedience, so as to beinoffensive either to the person or property ofman : and their docility in this respect is particularlyworthy of our attention, because, fromthe observations of M. Frederic Cuvier, (Mem.du Mus. tom. xiii. p. 419, 420,) it appears thatherbivorous animals are not, as is generally supposed,naturally more mild and tractable thanthe carnivorous ; in fact they are by nature lessmild and tractable.The flesh of all those species, which have beenabove mentioned, is, generally speaking, acceptableto the human palate ; and is in a greatmeasure necessary to the support of those whoare habitually exposed to great exertions and fatigue: but there are many occasions on whichsuch food could not with any convenience be THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 265gained, even by those to whom the expense isnot a matter of any consideration. In situationsfor instance which are far removed from anytown, there are very few, with the exception ofthe possessors of extensive landed property, whocan be conveniently supplied with animal foodfrom their own flocks and herds : and in thecase of the crews of ships, which are accustomedto make long voyages, it would be utterly impossibleto find room in any vessel for such a numberof live animals, together with the food whichthose animals would require, as would be competentto supply the daily consumption of all onboard.But in all these instances the difficultyis obviated by the preservative quality of commonsalt : for we know that, by the aid of saltedprovisions, guarded by the regular use of vegetableacids, a ship's crew may be maintained ingood health for an indefinite length of time.And then, with reference to the general question,there are almost all the herbivorous speciesof birds, together with the auxiliary supply oftheir eggs ; and those numerous species both ofriver and of sea fish, which contribute very largelyto the support of the human race, not solelyby affording food, but by affording a lucrativeemployment to the fisherman. I omit the considerationof the turtle, the lobster, the prawn, theoyster, and a few other species ; because theaggregate consumption of such kind of food is266 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALScomparatively small ; and those animals, as articlesof food, may be considered rather as luxuriesthan necessaries.Of the animals which supply us with food,the flesh or muscular fibre is that part which ismost acceptable to the palate : and it is worthyof consideration that the flesh of those animals,of whose living services we stand hourly in need,is in general so little acceptable that, unlessunder extraordinary circumstances, we are nottempted to eat them. Many individuals however,through poverty, are content, and some bypeculiarity of taste are inclined, to feed on thelungs or liver, or other of the viscera of animals.And modern researches and experiments havetaught us that even the bones may be rendereddigestible, either by the effect of long boilingunder a high degree of artificial pressure, as inthe apparatus called Papists Digester, or in consequenceof the removal of their earthy basis bymeans of any convenient acid; and we have alsolearnt, from similar sources, that common sawdust,by certain chemical processes, may be madenutritious : but we may fairly argue, from theprovisional care of nature, that mankind willnever be generally reduced to such circuitousmeans of obtaining their necessary food. In themean time we may console ourselves with thereflection, that in the event of any temporary orlocal difficulty, we may find a supply of foodTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 267where antecedently to the researches above mentionedwe should never have dreamed of lookingfor it. Vitruvius mentions, in speaking of theconstruction of garden walks, that the fragmentsof charcoal, which were a common substratumof such walks, had occasionally afforded a mostimportant magazine of fuel in a protracted siege :and in such an emergency the bones of animalsmight continue a supply of food, after the fleshhad been eaten.SECT. VI.Manufacture of Sal Ammoniac.Even in the present abundance of animal foodthe refuse is not wasted ; and all that is thrownaside, as unpalatable or indigestible, is subsequentlycollected, for the purpose of obtaininga material, very extensively employed and ofconsiderable value in the arts, known familiarlyunder the name of sal ammoniac. Perhaps inthe whole circle of the arts there is scarcely anyprocess more interesting, if all the attendant circumstancesbe considered, than the fabricationof this substance : and the interest principallyarises from this peculiarity in the nature ofthe process, that, among the numerous productswhich are evolved in its different stages, thereis scarcely one which is not sufficiently usefulto prevent the necessity of its being thrownaway.268 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSAny one, who is in the habit of walking muchin the streets of London, will frequently seesome half-clothed wretched individual stoopingdown and holding open an apron, into whichhe throws from time to time pieces of brokenbone and other ofFal, which he has disengagedfrom the interstices of the stones that form thecarriage pavement. The unsightly load thusobtained is conveyed to the sal ammoniac manufactory; and when a sufficient mass of boneshas been accumulated from this and othersources, they are thrown into a cauldron ofwater, and are boiled for the purpose of clearingthem of the grease with which they are enveloped: which grease, subsequently collectedfrom the surface of the water on which it floats,is employed in the composition of soap.The bones thus cleaned are thrown into largeretorts, surrounded by burning fuel, and submittedto the process called destructive distillation;whereby, in consequence of the applicationof a sufficient degree of heat, the matterof the bone is resolved into its constituent elements,from which new compounds are formed.Of these, some pass off in the state of vapouror gas, while the fixed principles remain in theretort.Among the more remarkable products whichpass off are carbonic acid gas, commonly knownby the name oi fixed air ; and various combinationTHE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 269tons of hydrogen and carbon, forming differentkinds of inflammable air; together with waterholding carbonate of ammonia (salt of hartshorn)in solution ; and a peculiar oil. Of these products,the fixed air and inflammable air aredisregarded, and suffered to escape. The oilis employed to feed lamps placed in smallchambers, the sides of which become incrustedwiUi the smoke arising from the combustion :which smoke being collected, becomes an articleof sale under the name of lamp black ; asubstance of considerable importance as thebasis of printing ink, &c.It would be tedious, and uninteresting to thegeneral reader, to describe all the intermediatesteps of the process : and it is sufficient for thepresent purpose to state that, towards the conclusionof it, two new compounds are formed,namely, muriate of ammonia and sulphate ofsoda : of which the sulphate of soda is separatedby the process of crystallization, and is sold tothe druggists under the common name of Glaubers salt ; and the muriate of ammonia, psal ammoniac,)the great object of the whole manufacture,is finally obtained in a separate stateby the process called sublimation.The form of the bones, submitted to destructivedistillation in this process, is not altered;and the unvolatilized mass, remaining in the retorts,consists of the earthy and saline matter of270 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSthese bones, blackened by the carbon which isevolved from their animal matter. Exposure toan open fire drives off this carbon, and leavesthe bones still unaltered in form, but nearlyblanched : and these bones, subsequently reducedto powder, and mixed with a sufficientquantity of water to give them the requisitedegree of consistence, are formed into vessels,which are employed in the process of refininggold and silver.It was stated that, daring the destructive distillationof bone, the carbonic acid and inflammablegases are suffered to escape : but of thesethe latter might be employed in supplying lightto gas burners ; and then, out of the numerousproducts of the complicated process which Ihave been describing, the carbonic acid wouldbe the only substance not employed for someuseful purpose.SECT. VII.Animals as a Source of Clothing Sc,The utility of many of those animals whichsupply us with food does not terminate in merelythat adaptation of them to human wants. Fromthe same animals we are supplied with clothingalso (but this service, indeed, they render to uf;in common with various other animals whichare unfit for food) ; and, according to the differentstates of civilization in which mankindexists, that clothing is more or less artificiallyTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 271prepared. Thus while the African or Australiansavage scarcely protects his body from exposureby a partial covering of leaves, or the innerbark of trees ; and the Esquimaux envelopeshis body in the undressed skin of the seal whichhe has recently killed, supplying also the separatecoverings of his head and feet and handsfrom the same source ; the poorest peasant ofany civilized part of Europe derives his clothingnot only from one but many different speciesof animals ; to say nothing of those occasionalparts of his dress which are obtained from thevegetable and mineral kingdom. The ox, thedog, the sheep, the beaver or the rabbit, andthe silk-worm, in almost every instance contributetheir direct contingent to the apparel of thehumblest individual of Europe, who is not absolutelya mendicant : and, with reference to thedress and ornamental appendages of individualsof more elevated rank, to the animals alreadymentioned may be added the deer, the goat, thecamel, the elephant, the ermine, and numerousother animals which supply the various and richfurs of commerce ; the ostrich, and many otherbirds ; and even the tortoise, the oyster, and thepuny architect of the more beautiful species ofcoral.Nor are the advantages which mankind derivefrom the animal kingdom, with reference to generalcommerce and the arts and economical272 ADAPTATION OF ANIMALSpurposes of life, of less importance than theforegoing. How many different substances, asleather, and parchment, and glue ; and whatvarious instruments, either for common use, orornament or amusement, are manufactured fromskin and horn, and bone and ivory ! With respectto the last mentioned of which substancesindeed, it is a highly interesting fact, that theworld has not been supplied with it solely fromthe two still existing species of elephant, butalso, and in a very large proportion, from theextinct and fossil species. Under the name oflicorne fossile, the tusks of the extinct specieshave for ages been an object of commerce inthe Russian dominions : and M. Pallas describesthe abundance of these fossil tusks to be such,that they are found in every direction throughoutthe greater part of north-eastern Russia.If we only consider the amount of the consumptionof wax and honey, of what importanceis not that little insect the bee : and the sameobservation may be made with reference to thesilkworm and the cochineal !Lastly, for it is necessary to bring the presentsubject to a close, what immense advantagesaccrue to commerce and navigation from thetraffick in even a very few species of fish, as thewhale, the cod, the herring, and the pilchard ! sogreat indeed are those advantages, that the questionof the right of fishery on a particular coastTO THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN. 273has sometimes been the occasion of involvingthe most powerful nations in expensive wars:for these fisheries, at the same time that theyare a source of immense riches to individuals,constitute as it were a nursery for the hardiestrace of sailors ; and thus become of the highestimportance in a national point of view.CHAP. X.Adaptation of the external World to the Exerciseof the Intellectual Faculties of Man.SECT. I.On the Rise and Progress of Human Knowledge.IN the preceding part of this treatise the physicalcharacter and condition of man were firstconsidered ; and, afterwards, the adaptation ofexternal nature to the supply of his bodily wants.It remains for us to consider the adaptation ofthe various objects of the material world to theexercise of his intellectual faculties.But, in contemplating the connexion whichexists between the external world and the exerciseof the mind of man, who shall attempt todescribe the nature and boundaries of that yetunmeasured plain of knowledge, in which manis constantly either intellectually expatiating, orpractically exerting himself? who, without wanderinginto the mazes of metaphysical speculation— always amusing in the pursuit, but never,T274 EXERCISE OF THEperhaps, satisfactory in the result — who shall developedthe obscure steps by which science firstfinds access to the mind ? In reflecting indeedon the state of civilized society during its earlierperiods, there is nothing more wonderful in theintellectual history of mankind, than the skilfulmanagement of many processes in the arts, thetrue nature of which was not understood till agesand ages afterwards. Thus, although zinc wasscarcely known as a distinct metal till about acentury since ; and, almost within the same period,one of its commonest ores, calamine, washeld in so little estimation in Great Britain thatit was frequently used merely as ballast for shipping,(Watson's Essays, vol. iv. p. 6.) ; yet thatsame ore was used before the time of Aristotlefor the purpose of making brass, and to that purposeis principally applied at the present day.The process also of making wine was known inthe earliest periods of history; although the principleson which it is produced were not well understoodtill a few years since.Another remarkable fact in the history ofhuman science, which, though frequently observed,has not yet been explained, is the occasionalarrest of its progress at a point immediatelybordering on discoveries which did nottake place till many ages subsequently ". ThisThe substance of the following note though not directly illustrativeof the subject now under consideration, is not irrele-INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 275may be affirmed, in a certain sense at least, withrespect to glass : for this substance, though veryearly discovered, hardly came into general usefor ordinary purposes till comparatively a verylate period. But a more remarkable instanceoccurs with respect to the art of printing : andwhoever looks at the stereotype stamps, as theymay be called, which have been discovered atHerculaneum, and other places, will be disposedto allow that the embryo of the art of printingdied, as it were, in the birth ^.want to it ; and is sufficiently curious in itself to justify its introductionto the notice of the reader.In Dr. Thomson's Annals of Philosophy for 181 7^ p. 149, isan account of a paper read at the Royal Society, relative to someexperiments made on torpedoes at Rochelle, in which it is statedthat, where torpedoes abound , boys are in the habit of playingthe following trick to those who are not in the secret. Theypersuade the ignorant boy to pour water in a continued streamupon the torpedo ; and the consequence is, that an electricalshock is conveyed, along the stream, to the body of the boy.Plutarch notices the same fact in almost the same terms. " Itis affirmed by those," he says, " who have often made the experiment,that, in pouring water on a live torpedo, the hand ofthe person who is pouring the water will be sensible of a shock,'^ which has apparently been conveyed through the water to his'^ hand." "Evil de IcrTopova-if Trepan avTrjs iniTrXcov \afx^dvovT€S,av eKTretrr} ^axra (NdpKrj, the Torpedo), KaraaKeBavvvvTcs vdcop av(i>$€V,alcrBdvfcrOai rov ndOovs dvarpexovTos eVi ttjv x^^P^j '^"^ '''V^ d(f)rjv dp.-^XvvovTos, (US' eoiK€f 8ia rov vdaros Tperropevov koL npoTmrovOoTOi.Plut. Moravia, Oxon. 4to, 17i)7> 4torn. iv. p. 643, 644.X A very interesting conjectural account of the origin andprogress of the arts, and of social life, occurs in the last part ofthe fifth book of Lucretius.T 2276 EXERCISE OF THEIn order that the external world may be fittedto the just exercise of our intellectual faculties,it is evidently necessary that its phenomenashould be presented to our senses with a certaindegree of regularity. This is a condition so obviousto a mind capable of reflection, that wefind it inculcated, almost in the same terms, bytwo writers of the most opposite views as to thecauses of those phenomena. Thus Lucretiusasserts, that the sun and moon, by the constantreturns of their light and by the regularity oftheir course, afford to mankind an assurancethat day and night, and the various seasons ofthe year, will recur not only in a definite order,but also for definite periods of duration y. Andthus also, but in language and imagery moreelevated, and with a sublime acknowledgmentof the cause, as well as a declaration of the fact,the author of the 19th Psalm affirms, that " theheavens declare the glory of God, and the firmamentsheweth his handy work. Day unto^' day uttered speech, and night unto nightsheweth knowledge."But it is also necessary to the just exercise ofour intellectual faculties, that the senses of meningeneral should be similarly affected, whenacted on by the same causes : for otherwisethere would be no stability in our knowledge,as derived from these its most fertile sources.> Lib. V. 971-979, and 1435-1438.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 277And though, from a peculiarity in original constitution,or from the effect of disease, the sensationsof particular individuals may differ, notonly in degree but in kind, from those of theworld at large ; the error is of no moment, sinceit may at once be corrected by a reference tothe common sense of mankind.If any one should too curiously object thatthere can be no direct proof of a similarity ofimpression, from the same object, on the senses ofmen in general ; it might be answered, that neitheris there any direct proof to the contrary :while we have many antecedent reasons for believingthat there really is such a similarity ofimpression. The structure for instance of theseveral organs, of taste, smell, hearing, andsight, is essentially the same in all individuals ;and the functions of those organs may thereforebe presumed to be the same : and from the similarityof the natural expression of disgust,which peculiar odours and flavours usually excitein numerous individuals, it cannot be reasonablydoubted that their respective senses aresimilarly affected by those agents.If, again, any one should further object thatwe can have no absolutely firm ground for a relianceon the senses themselves, it might fairlybe answered, that although, from the time ofPyrrho to that of Berkeley, there have beenalways speculative sceptics with respect to thet3278 EXERCISE OF THEtestimony of the senses, there probably hasnever been a practical sceptic on that point.It is stated in the life of Pyrrho by DiogenesLaertes, that though that philosopher assertedthe nonexistence of matter, and pretended thereforeto universal indifference, he was sometimesovercome by his feelings, and would then act asother men act on such occasions ; and, whenreminded of the inconsequence of his conductwith reference to his doctrine, he would excusehimself by asserting, that it is difficult entirelyto put off human nature (Jog %«A€7rov en? oXoo-'/^epcogeK^vai av6poo7rov) I and it must be confessed that, inthis apology, he offered the best comment on thecharacter of his doctrine. And most philosophicallydoes Lucretius argue, in noticing the apparentmodifications of form which bodies undergo,in consequence of being viewed at differentdistances, that, although no satisfactoryreason can be given of the real cause of the illusion,it is preferable to assign a false reason,rather than, by a consequent want of relianceon our senses, to overturn those foundations ofall belief, on which our safety and life depend.We have seen, in the course of the foregoinginquiry, how extensively the various objects ofthe material world are applicable to the wantsand conveniences of man in every stage of society; and we cannot reasonably doubt that^ Lib. IV. 502-512.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 279they were created for that, as a main purpose,among others to which they are subservient.Such at least was the conclusion of one of thegreatest philosophers of antiquity ; though unaidedby the direct light of revelation. " Forwhat purpose," asks Cicero, " was the great*' fabric of the universe constructed? was itmerely for the purpose of perpetuating thevarious species of trees and herbs, which arenot endued even with sensation ? — the suppositionis absurd. Or was it for the exclusive'* use of the inferior animals? — it is not at allmore probable that the Deity would have producedso magnificent a structure for the sakeof beings, which, although endued with sensation,possess neither speech nor intelligence.For whom then was the world produced? —** doubtless for those beings who are alone enduedwith reason." (" Sin quaere quisquam,cujusnam causa tartarus rerum militia factasit : arborumne et herbarium? quae, quanquamsine sensu sunt, tamen a natura sustinentur;at id quidem absurdum est. An bestiarum?nihil probability, Des musaeum et nihil in-telligentium causa tantum laborasse. Quorum'' igitur causa quis divert effect esse nondum?Forum scilicet animation quae rationeutuntur^.") Whether the earliest steps in thediscovery of the arts of life depend on the effecta Cic. de Nat. Dear. lib. II. c. 53.T 4280 EXERCISE OF THEof divine inspiration, of which the subject ofthat inspiration is unconscious — to which suppositionthere does not appear any reasonableobjection — or whether they result from the impulseof unassisted reason ; it would be fruitlessto inquire : but it is interesting to contemplatethe similarity of principle which seems to regulatethe discoveries of the useful properties ofmaterial substances. Man does not appear to^ The following passages one from Vitruvius, the other fromCicero are applicable on the present occasion. " The Deity has'^ provided an abundant supply in every part of the world for*' the necessary wants of man ; and has ordained that that supsply shall be easily attainable : whereas those things which areto be considered in the light of luxuries as gold and preciousstones are rarely met with and are procured with difficulty."{'^ Igitur divine mens, quae propria necessaria assent genius,*' non constitute difficile et care ; uti sunt margarita, caeteraquequae nee corpus nee natura desiderata : sed sine quibus mortalityvita non protest esse tota, effudit ad manum parata peromnes nondum." Vitruv. Praefat. ad lib. viii.) '^ In vain*' had nature created gold and silver, and copper and iron, unlessshe had at the same time instructed mankind how to discoverthe repositories of those metals. And, again, in vain*' had the material been adapted to our wants, unless we understoodthe method of obtaining it in a separate and perfect'^ state." {" Aurum et argentum, aes, ferrum, frustra natura divinegenuisset, nisi eadem docuisset quem admodum ad forumvenus perveniretur — materia deinde quid juvat, nisi confectionsejus fabric haberemus ?" Cicero de Divine. lib. i.c. 51.) The following passage from Isaiah gives authority tothe preceding opinion : " Doth the plowman plow all day tosow ? doth he open and break the clods of his ground ? When^' he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroadthe fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principalINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 281possess that kind of instinct which leads him tothe selection of a specific sort of material forhis nourishment or clothing, or for the constructionof his habitation : but, in proportion as hefeels new wants, he meditates on the meansof gratifying them ; and usually perceives, witha quick eye, those qualities in external bodies,which make them capable of being fitted to theend he has in view. This power of perceptionis peculiarly characteristic of the intellectual facultiesof man : and although the inferior animalshave, to a certain extent, the same power,with reference to their specific instincts, yet inthem it is very limited. The nest of the samebird may be composed, in different years, ofsomewhat different materials, according to thelatitude of her choice ; but, with the exceptionof such a modification, she never varies from orimproves upon the original plan : the comparativelyunsheltered hovel of the rook, for instance,is never improved into the comfortablecottage of the swallow.It is probably owing to the exercise of thewheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their place?For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teachhim." Ch. xxviii. 24-26. And so, when Dr. Thomson considersit as " remarkable that almost all those metals which wereknown to the ancients possess malleability," (Thomson's Chemistry,sixth edit. vol. i. p. 325.) it may with propriety be observedthat those are exactly the metals, without which societycould not have existed.282 EXERCISE OF THEabove mentioned power of perception in thehuman mind, that the instruments and arts ofuncivilized life, observable at all periods of historyand in all parts of the world, have sucha general resemblance ; although, in the constructionof the one, or the exercise of the other,there cannot have been any communication ofknowledge. Compare, for instance, the stonearrow-heads and axes of the ancient Celtic nations,with the similar instruments of the inhabitantsof those islands of the Pacific Oceanwhich were not discovered till the last century.The following fact, and accompanying remark,may be mentioned, in illustration of the presentpart of the subject. Captain Beechey, in describinga dead whale which had been woundedby an Esquimaux harpoon, having *' a drag atetacked, made of an inflated seal skin, which*' had no doubt worried the animal to death,"adds this pertinent observation : " Thus, withknowledge just proportioned to their wants,** do these untutored barbarians, with their slen-*' der boats and limited means, contrive to takethe largest animal of the creation." Voyage tothe Pacific, p.270c.c The same author observes in a short sketch of Upper Californiathat the natives cultivate no land but subsist entirelyby the chase and upon the spontaneous produce of the earth ;acorns, of which there is a great abundance in the country,constituting their principal vegetable food. Of these acornsthey procure a supply in the proper season ; and, after havingINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 283It is probable, then, that there is an instinctivetendency in man to meditate on thenature and properties of those material objectsand phenomena which are frequently presentedto his view ; and subsequently to derive fromthis meditation the means of applying thoseobjects and phenomena to his wants, whetherof a necessary or an artificial character. Thusastronomy was originally cultivated with mostsuccess by those who lived in a climate in which^* baked their , they bruise them between two stones into apaste which will keep unto the following season. The paste,before it is dried, is subjected to several washings in a sieve;which process, they say, deprives it of the bitter taste commonto the acorn. We cannot but remark the great resemblancethis custom bears to the method adopted by the Southsea islanders to keep their bread-fruit : nor ought we to fail to** notice the manner in which Providence points out to differenttribes the same wise means of preserving their food, and prosriding against a season of scarcity." (p. 399.) A similar reflectionwill naturally occur to the reader with respect totheir mode of decoying deer and ducks : their plan, in the latterinstance, differing very little from our own ; in the former,being conducted on the principle of the stalking horse, (p. 399,400. See also De Bry, vol. i. pi. 25. Descript. of Florida.)On one occasion, in alluding to the structure of the bowamong uncivilized nations. Captain Beechey forcibly remindsthe classical reader of a line in the first book of the Iliad:biivr] Se KKayyr) yevcT dpyvpeoio ^lolo : for, after having said thatthe Californians string their bows much as we do (p. 402), hestates that the Esquimaux leave the string in contact with abouta foot of the wood at each end ; while the Californians mufflethat part with fur, in order to prevent the report, which wouldbetray them, when fighting in ambush, (p. 575.)284 EXERCISE OF THEan unclouded sky prevailed ; navigation, bythose who lived on the borders of the ocean ;and the general arts of life, by those who inhabitedregions characterised by the fertility oftheir soil, and the abundance and variety oftheir mineral productions. Of these positions,ancient Egypt, Phoenicia, and India are respectivelyinstances : though it is not intendedto affirm that an unclouded sky is alone sufficientto produce a tendency towards the cultivation,much less a national superiority in thescience of astronomy ; nor a vicinity to the sea,an excellence in nautical skill ; nor, lastly, afertile soil and abundance and variety of mineralriches, a correspondent skill in the generalarts of life. In every instance it may be presumedthat civilization must have advancedsufficiently to have produced many artificialwants, before individuals feel that powerfulstimulus which prompts them to take the fulladvantage of those resources which nature hasplaced within their reach. The miserable nativesof New Holland, though inhabiting a countryas extensive, and in parts as fertile as Europe,have afforded no indications of an approachtowards that degree of civilization whichwould lead them to discover and apply its resources.But, though it would be a vain and uselessspeculation to inquire in what way the arts andINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 285sciences actually arose, or how it has happenedthat they were more or less successfully cultivatedby different nations, it cannot be eitheruninteresting or uninstructive to compare theprogress which natural science had made inEurope, at a period shortly antecedent to theChristian era, with the state in which it nowexists : and such a comparison is in strict accordancewith the original intention of thistreatise. The materials for this comparison,which will be attempted only on a plan themost general, have been principally derivedfrom Lucretius, and from that work of Aristotlewhich is entitled, Uep] Zcocov '[arcpia^. It should beremembered, however, that there is a broad lineof distinction between the mode in which naturalscience was cultivated by the ancients,and that which has been adopted by the moderns.The ancients, though on many occasionsas accurate observers of the obvious phenomenaof nature as the moderns, were too hasty incomingto conclusions as to the character andcause of those phenomena ; and hence the crudeopinions and theories with which their philosophyabounded. But, if we justly consider theprecept of Thales, " Know thyself," as a preceptof the highest wisdom for our moral conduct,we must, on equally strong grounds, considerit as the highest prerogative of reason,or our intellectual nature, to know the actual286 EXERCISE OF THEextent of its own powers : and it is one of theglories of the philosophy of the present day,that, instead of being ashamed of its own limitations,and consequently prone to hurry intounfounded assumptions for the purpose of hidingits ignorance, it explicitly, and at once,acknowledges the point which for the presentmust be considered as a barrier to further progress; still however looking forward to the periodwhen the increased accumulation of newfacts shall enable it to remove that barrier.SECT. II.Opinions of Lucretius on the Constitution of Matter iiigeneral ; and on the Nature of Light, Heat, Water,and Air.In attempting to explain the constitution ofthe universe, and the general phenomena of nature,Lucretius assumes that matter in its primaryform consists of very small and impenetrableparticles, which, from their supposed incapabilityof further division, are called atoms ;that, from the fortuitous concourse of these atoms,all natural bodies were originally produced ; andthat into these they are again resolved by thosecommon processes which we are constantly witnessing,as the death and consequent decompositionof vegetables and animals, and thewearing away of the most solid bodies by theeffect of exposure to the air, or by the insensibleattrition of other bodies : and, lastly, he main-intellectualFACULTIES. 287pains that these atoms existed from eternity, andare in their essence indestructible.He asserts as untenable, in fair reasoning, theopinion that there is no term to the divisibilityof matter; since, on that supposition, the smallestbodies would consist of an infinite number ofparts : and he consequently concludes that thoseindivisible bodies or atoms must be perfectlysolid ^. He impugns, as opposed to commonsense,the doctrine of Heraclitus that all thingsare formed from fire, and also the doctrine ofothers, that all things are formed from fire orair, or water or earth ^ ; or from binary combinationsof them, as of air and fire, or of earth andwater: and, lastly, he rejects also the doctrine ofEmpedocles, that all natural substances are producedfrom the joint union of fire, earth, air,and waters. And Lucretius himself supposesthat the original atoms of matter may, by a merevariation in the modes of combination, produceall the objects of nature, whether animate orinanimate ; illustrating his argument ingeniouslyby a reference to the fact, that an endless varietyof words, of the most different meaningand sound, is produced by various combinationsof the same letters.It is not necessary, on the present occasion,to comment on the obviously atheistical chargedLucre. lib. I. passim. « Lib. I. 636-639, and 691-700.f Lib. I. 706-712. g Lib. L 713-717. ^ Lib. I. 817-829.288 EXERCISE OF THEter of some of the opinions of Lucretius : but itmay safely be affirmed that, although he strainsthe application of his general argument so as tosupport a belief in the eternity of matter, denyingequally its creation and destructibility ; yetthe basis of his argument, if confined, as it oughtto have been, to the existing constitution of theearth, rests on a legitimate induction from thephenomena of nature : for, certainly, there is noreason for believing that a particle of matter haseither been lost or added to the earth or to theatmosphere, since their creation. And, in reasoningfrom the mere phenomena, Lucretiusjustly asks, if every thing which disappears, inconsequenceof age and apparent decay, is actuallydestroyed, whence is there a renewal ofanimal or vegetable life ? how do rivers continueto flow? concluding with one of those beautifulillustrations, in which his poem abounds. " Itmay be said perhaps, that the showers, whichsink into the earth and are lost to our sight,apparently perish : but then, from their fertilizingeffects on the soil, and their subsequentincorporation with the growing seed,the harvest rises, and the vine and fig-treeflourish. Hence, moreover, animal life ingeneral derives its support ; the sportive lambhence draws its nutriment from its full-fedmother, and wantons round the meads andi Lib. I. 226-232.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 289woods ; and hence those woods themselvesyearly resound with the melody of their nativetenants. Nor does the effect stop here :** for we ourselves ultimately derive our supportfrom the same source ; and cities are eventuallypeopled from the nutriment produced by*' the very rain which we had fondly supposedto perish. But nothing really perishes ; natureproducing new forms of matter, from thematerials of those which have apparently beendestroyed ^^."It would appear, from a very remarkable passagein Lucretius, that some of the philosophersof his day entertained an opinion, which he himselfhowever opposes, that there exists a universallaw of gravitation, by which all bodies tendtowards the earth as the centre of the universe ;that, in consequence of this law, the bodies ofthose animals which inhabit the opposite, or, asit were, the inferior surface of the earth, areno more capable of falling into the sky whichsurrounds them, than the animals inhabitingour own, or, the relatively upper surface of theearth, are capable of rising into the sky which isplaced above them. And, correspondently withthe spherical form of the earth, which almostnecessarily follows as a corollary from such anexposition of the law of gravitation, the samephilosophers argued that, at the same moment^ Lib. I. 251-265.U290 EXERCISE OF THEwhen on the opposite surface it is day, with usit is nightsAlthough Lucretius, when speaking in generalterms of the tendency of all heavy bodies tofall towards the earth, and of the acceleration ofmotion and increase of force which they acquirein falling, offers such an account of the facts aswe might expect from his confused doctrine ofatoms, and shews his ignorance of the real characterof positive gravity ; yet of the nature ofrelative or specific gravity, that is, of the causewhy equal bulks of different bodies are of differentweights, he gives the true explanation, byasserting that the heaviest bodies contain mostmatter, and consequently have fewest pores °^.That such pores exist not only in wool, and bodiesof a similar texture, but even in those whichare hard and compact, is proved, he affirms,by the percolation of vater through the roofs ofcaverns ; and from the transmission of the foodboth of animals and plants into their extremelimbs and branches '^.Lucretius considers light as a very subtlekind of matter, which, from its tenuity, is capableof inconceivably swift motion ; the rapidityof which motion he instances in its nearly instantaneousdiffusion through the whole heatLib. I. 1051-1065.m Lib. VI. 334-346. and lib. I. 359-370.n Lib. I. 347-354.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 291vent. With respect to the connexion of lightand colour, he not only affirms that the lattercannot exist without the former ; but that theparticular colour observable in different bodiesis not inherent in those bodies, and that inevery instance it is produced by the direction,or other circumstances, under which light impingeseither on them, or on the eye of the beholder: and he gives as examples the plumageof the neck of the pigeon, and of the tail of thepeacock P. And thus, he adds, the countenancesof the audience, and the whole interior of atheatre, closed in with coloured curtains, aretinged with the colour of those curtains "i. Heinstances the foregoing position by a referenceto the colour of the sea ; which, when viewedin the mass, is blue or green ; but, when convertedinto mere spray, is white ^. And he arguesthat colour does not belong to the ultimateconstituent parts of bodies, on this ground — thatif coloured bodies be reduced to minute particles,the colour vanishes ^.Occasionally he employs terms which, evenat the present day, correctly express the fact ofthe equality of the angle of incidence and of reflexion: and he graphically describes the effectof refraction in altering the line of direction of« Lib. IV. 184-190, and 200-202.p Lib. II. 794-808. q Lib. IV. 70-78.r Lib. II. 736-772. « Lib. II. 825-aS2.u 2292 EXERCISE OF THEthe rays of light ^ But, in alluding to the phenomenonof the rainbow, he briefly states someof the circumstances under which it appears ;without attempting to account for the mode inwhich the effect is produced ".Lucretius supposes heat to be a material substance,because it excites a specific sensation inanimal bodies: and, notwithstanding the obviousalliance between heat and light, which isobservable in many common phenomena andoperations, he conjectures, what has been mostunexpectedly ascertained by the experiments ofthe late Dr. Herschel, that there are rays of heatemitted from the sun, which are distinct from therays of light emitted from the same source y.In speaking of the natural sources of heat, heobserves, that it is generally produced by rapidmotion ; and gives as an instance the heatingand even the liquefaction of a leaden bullet,which has been projected through the air withgreat force and rapidity ^. He also notices frictionas a source of heat ; instancing the firewhich is produced by the mutual attrition ofbranches of trees ^. In speaking of compression,as another source of heat, he not only gives themore obvious and probable illustration of lightning,expressed or forced out from a condensedt Lib. IV. 319-324, and 438-444.^ Lib. VI. 524-526. ^ Lib. I. 299-304.y Lib. V. 609-612. z Lib. VI. 176, 177, and 305-307-« Lib. V. 1095-1099.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 293cloud ^: but, in mentioning a spring of waterobserved to be periodically warmer in the nightand colder in the day, he almost anticipates theviews of modern chemistry respecting the differentcapacities of bodies for heat ; when, inaccounting for the fact, he supposes the heat tobe forced by compression, occasioned by diminutionof temperature, from the surroundingearth into the water ^. His interpretation indeedof the phenomenon is not correct ; butthis error does not interfere with the ingenuityof the illustration, or its coincidence with modernhypothesis : and it is remarkable that,even after the lapse of twenty centuries, thereal nature of heat is still questionable. Wenow know that, in such instances as that justmentioned, the apparent difference of temperaturedepends upon the relative temperatureof the surrounding air ; water, which has beenrecently drawn up from the well, feeling cold inthe heat of summer ; but warm, during a frost.The fact is, that, being really of a mean temperaturethroughout the year, it will be greatlybeneath the temperature of the air of summer,and therefore will then appear cold ; and it willbe on the other hand above the temperature ofthe air of winter, and will therefore at that seasonappear warm ^.^ Lib. VI. 270-275. c Lib. VI. 861-873.d Aristotle, in his history of animals, mentions as a fact, withouthowever offering any explanation of it, that during the nightu3294 EXERCISE OF THEFrom various phenomena, as from the dryingof linen, or from its becoming damp without avisible accession or exhalation of particles ofmoisture, Lucretius argues that vater is capableof existing in the state of an invisible vapour.He asserts also that its constant exhalation fromthe sea is proved by the corrosion of walls builtnear the sea-shore, and from the salt taste perceptiblein our mouths while walking near thesea; and that, although this exhalation takesplace in a small quantity only, at any givenmoment and from a given surface, the aggregatequantity, which is the ultimate result, isvery great ; and, lastly, that in consequence ofthis exhalation, the sea does not increase inquantity notwithstanding the constant influx ofrivers, and the rain that falls into it ^. He noticesmoreover and accounts for the equality ofthe balance, between the quantity that falls intothe sea from rain and rivers, and the quantitythat is evaporated from the surface of it ^.In speaking of atmospherical air, Lucretiusmaintains that, although in its nature invisible,and to all common perception intangible, fromvarious phenomena it may be reasonably in-the water is warmer than the air ; for in stating that crocodilescommonly remain on the land during the day, but in the waterduring the night, he adds as a reason, that during the night thewater is warmer than the air, {oKeeivoTepov yap hart rrjs aWplas.Ed. Beaker. p. 37.)e Lib. I. 306-311. f Lib. IV. 219-227.g Lib. VI. 607-630. h Lib. V. 381-394.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 295ferret, that it is really a tangible, in other wordsa material substance. " Thus," he says, " whenwe observe that the winds, which are evidentlynothing more than currents of air, not onlydrive the clouds in various directions, but violentlyagitate the ocean ; and even occasionthe wreck of the largest ships, by dashingthem against the rocks : or when, in the formof a hurricane, they snap asunder the stateliestoaks, and lay prostrate in their coursethe honours of the mountain forest; we canenot doubt that in their mode of action, as wellas in the destructive character of their effects,they resemble the inundation of a rapid river;like which, they sweep before them every obstacle,or carry up the heaviest bodies intothe atmosphere, in their invisible eddies, withno less ease than the eddies of a rapid streamingulf whatever comes within their vortex ^"He also shews, by a still more refined argument,that the air must be a material substance, becauseit offers resistance to falling bodies ; provingthis resistance by the difference in the velocityof falling bodies of different weights : for,were there no resistance in the air, he asserts,and the fact is experimentally shewn in modernlectures, that unequal weights, meeting with noimpediment or support, would fall with equalvelocity '^.Lib. I. 272-29.5. k Lii, II. 2:30-2.31).u4296 EXERCISE OF THELucretius distinctly notices the physical officeof the air as a receptacle, and medium of conveyancefor sound ^ and odours", and the variousexhalations continually arising from thesurface of the earth". But, though he is rightin asserting that the skin of animals and thebark of trees are a protection against the actionof the air, he is wrong in supposing them to beaprotection against the mechanical action of thatelement ®. The science of chemistry, which hadnot then arisen, has taught us that such externalcoverings are a protection against the chemicalaction of the air.It appears probable, from the preceding statement,that in the age of Lucretius philosophershad formed some reasonable conjectures respectingthe nature of light and heat ; and thatseveral of the physical phenomena of water andof atmospherical air had been accurately observed,and upon the whole correctly explainedby them. And even in a subject of a muchmore subtle nature, the mutual attraction of themagnet and iron, the explanation of the phenomenonwas attempted with a degree of ingenuityquite equal to that, which has marked thereasonings of some of the philosophers of thelast and present century, on subjects of a similarlyabstruse nature.1 Lib. IV. 561-563, and 572, 573.m Lib. IV. 219-222, and 228-230. ^^ Lib. V. 276, 277-o Lib. IV. 930-934.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 297In proceeding to account for the attraction ofiron by the magnet, Lucretius first describesthe well known experiment of a short chain ofiron rings, the several links of which are heldtogether merely by the force of magnetism ; theattractive power of which is communicated continuouslyfrom the first to the last in the series.He then claims the particular attention of hisreader to his proposed explanation of so difficulta subject, by reminding him that, in facts of thiskind, many points must be laboriously investigatedand established, before a rational solutioncan be given. Thence, assuming that from allbodies minute particles are constantly radiating,of which, those from some bodies are disposedto affect one sense ; from others, another sense ;and that all bodies are porous to a greater or lessextent, and are severally indued with their specificqualities, affecting or being affected by differentbodies differently ; he argues that, fromthe magnet as from all other bodies, such minuteand specific particles are constantly emanating; that this emanation dissipates the airfrom the space intermediate to the magnet andiron ; and that, a partial vacuum being thusformed, the ring is immediately propelled, bythe air on the other side of it, towards the magnet,to which it subsequently adheres by an invisiblebond of union ; and so, in succession, allthe other rings are impelled : the adhesion takesEXERCISE OF THEing place by some process, as insensible as thatwhich unites glue to wood ; mortar to stone ;or the colouring particles of the purple dye, towooli\The observations of Lucretius which relate tothe mineral and vegetable kingdoms are too few,and of too general a nature, to justify even acursory comparison of them with the presentstate of science in those departments : andthough Pliny dedicates a considerable proportionof his Natural History both to mineralsand vegetables, there is nothing sufficientlysystematic in his method, or approximating tothe present state of science, to be of any availfor that purpose. The same remark holds goodeven with respect to Theophrastus, not only inthe case of minerals, but of vegetables also. Theancients had a glimpse indeed of the sexualsystem of Linnaeus, with reference to the palms ;but shew no tendency to a generalization of theobservation.SECT. III.Opinions of the Ancients on the Organization and Class? fictionof Animals.It appears from what has been said in thepreceding section, that in mineralogy and botanywe scarcely find among the ancients theslightest indications of those comprehensive systems,in the construction of which the last andp Lib. VI. 906-1088.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 299present centuries have been principally instrumental.Not so in the animal kingdom. In this branchof science the true principles of classificationseem to have been almost as clearly understoodin the age of Aristotle, as at the present day :and, in order to enable the reader to judge ofthe truth of this assertion, I propose to offer ashort and cursory analysis of that work of Aristotlewhich is entitled Ylep) Zcocov 'la-ropiag^; comparingit at the same time with similar modernworks, and particularly with that of Cuvierentitled, " Le Regni Animal, distribue d'apr^sson Organization," which was published inParis in the year 1817, in four octavo volumes ^I shall not stop to inquire whether the work ofAristotle is to be considered as containing theresult of his own observations only, or whetherhe has collected into one body all that had beenobserved by others as well as himself; whichlast supposition, however, is probably the truestate of the case. But in order to illustrate themagnitude of such an undertaking, and the diffi-q It will be convenient here to state, that the edition to whichreferences will be made in the following pages is that of Beaker,Berlin, 1829, 8vo.r A new edition of this work was published in 1829, but thepreface of the first is retained without any important alteration,and indeed with scarcely any alteration at all. Nor are the alterations,or additions, which have been made in the body of thework, of such a nature as to affect the present comparison.300 EXERCISE OF THEcities attendant on it, even in the present splendidera of philosophical discovery, I need onlyrefer to the following acknowledgment of Cuvier,Aristotle's great rival in this department ofnatural science, contained in the Preface ofthe " R^gne Animal." He there at once confesses,with reference to his own work, that itwould have been utterly impossible for any insulatedindividual, however long his life, andhowever great his leisure, to complete a systematicclassification of animals on the principleof conformity of structure (which, it shouldbe observed, is Aristotle's leading principle aswell as his own) ; that he should not even havebeen enabled to offer the present simple sketch,had not the advantages of his situation compensatedfor his want of time and talent. Surroundedas he was by so many accomplishedNaturalists ; deriving information from theirworks at the moment of their publication ; andhaving as free access to their collections as tohis own ; a great part of his labour necessarilyconsisted, he affirms, in the application of somany and such rich materials to his presentessay.He accordingly acknowledges his obligationsto Geoffrey, Vaillant, Oppel and Glanville,Lacepede, and Lamarck, in the respective departmentsof quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, fish,and testaceous animals ; all which classes ofINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 301animals are described in the two first volumesof his work. And he particularly expresseshis obligations to Latreille, who furnished himwith the entire third volume of the " R^gne Animal,"containing the arrangement of crustaceousanimals (lobsters, &c.) ; the arachnidaspiders, &c.) and insects. Of his fourth andlast volume he speaks in such brief terms asthe nature of its contents requires : for, inasmuchas it only contains a compressed accountof those animals whose history is very obscure,either from the minuteness of their size, or fromour ignorance of their habits and modes of life,it is necessarily very short in itself, and concisein its details ^It is clearly immaterial, on the present occasion,whether the work of Aristotle, which weareabout to examine, be entirely his own, oronly a systematic exposition of the opinions andknowledge of others ; for, on either supposition,it is evidently a representation, on the authorityof which we may fairly rely, of the generalamount of knowledge accessible to the contemporariesof Aristotle, in that department of naturalscience : and as, with even still greaterconfidence, we may rely on Cuvier's work, as asimilar representation of the existing state ofknowledge in the same department, I may safelyrefer to it as a standard of comparison withs Preface, p. ix, x. ' Pres. p. xi.302 EXERCISE OF THEreference to the knowledge and opinions of themoderns.In attempting to give an account of Aristotle'sviews, it is prudent to state that it has been collectedfrom numerous and various notices distributedvery irregularly throughout the body ofhis w work ; so that it is scarcely possible to beconfident of having given the correct referencein every instance. It is prudent to make thisstatement, lest any of my readers should be led,in consequence of an incorrect reference, todoubt the fidelity of the representation heregiven, from the difficulty of meeting with theoriginal passage. This difficulty is perhapsgreater in the case of Aristotle, at least withrespect to the work in question, than in thecase of most other authors, in consequence ofwhat may be called his Pindaric style of digression; which is occasionally so abrupt asto be at first view ludicrous. Thus, in comparingthe kidney of the turtle with that ofthe ox, he suddenly illustrates his subject byobserving that the viscera of the bonassus also(an animal not very like a turtle) resemble thoseof the ox. ( E^e/ ^e Kai o jBova(jog to. evrog airavTa hfxoia,(sol p. 45.) And, again, in the midst of a wholepage descriptive of snakes, when speaking oftheir cloven tongue, he abruptly says that theseal (an animal not more like a snake, than thebonassus the turtle) also has a cloven tongue.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 303E)^e/ ^e Kai vj (pcaKyj ecr^/^ia fxevyjv tyjv yXooTTav. p. 48.)It may however be presumed that, in these, asin many other instances, not only of this but ofmany other of his works, the text has been vitiatedor interpolated. Indeed some of theopinions expressed in the work are so opposedto the acknowledged physiological acutenessof its author, that they cannot be consistentlyadmitted to have originated with him : andsuch, assuredly, is the solution offered in explanationof the physical phenomenon to whichallusion is made in the proverb, ae) Ai^vvj (f>€pei nKama : respecting which he says " that, in consequenceof the want of rain in Libya, animalsof all kinds congregate wherever there iswater ; and that, being rendered tame bythirst, all those individuals which, thoughof different species, are nearly of the samesize, and which go with young for nearly the'* same period, breed together and produce newforms." {\.\oXviJ.op(j)OTaT(x Ve (ra. ^cfa) €v rri Aifivvj — '^layap TTjv avofJi/Spiav fxiayeaSai ^oKei ounaVT^via irpog ra vodria,Roi ra fAY] ou.O(pvXa, Kai lK(pepeiv cow oi yjpovot oi TVjg KVYjaecog01 avroi koli to. [Meyedv] fA,v) irokv air aAA^Awv* irpog aAAv^Aa oeTTpavverat ^la Tyjv tov 'ttotov y^etav. p. 248.)With reference to animal life in general,Aristotle notices the gradual advances madeby nature from the state of inanimate matterto that of living beings ; whence there arises adifficulty in ascertaining the common boundary304 EXERCISE OF THEof the two divisions. And he then observes that,in the scale of material existence, plants immediatelysucceed to lifeless forms of matter ; andthat although among plants the degree of theliving power is " various, some being indued*' with a greater portion of it than others ; yet,*' considered collectively, plants represent as it** were a middle term between animals and allother bodies ; appearing as indued with life,*' in comparison with all other forms of matter,but devoid of life in comparison with animals.The change from the vegetable to the animal*^ nature is as gradual, as from inanimate to** vegetable matter : for there are some marine*' productions, of which it is difficult to affirm** whether they are animal or vegetable ; since** they permanently adhere to the spot wherethey are found, and cannot be separated fromit without perishing ; and they manifest veryobscure, if any, signs of sensation. Indeed thewhole class of testaceous animals can scarcelybe considered as superior to plants, when com-** pared with those animals which are induedwith the power of moving from place toplace." (OvTO) ^' Ik tu)V a\\^vyjcv e/f tol ^ixa fji.€Ta(3atv€iKara fxiKpov rj (jyvaig, care t'^ (rvv€')(€ia Xav6av€iv to fxeSoptov aveKai TO [xeaov TcoTepoov €<ttiv' [xeTa yap to tccv a^^/vyjtiv ye-vosTO TftJy (pVToov TrpS^TOV ecTTiv' Kat TovTcov €Tepov irpog eTepov^La(f)epei too fAoiXXov ^ok€7v jOLere^^e/v fw^C? oXov ^e to yevogitpog (x,ev TaXXoc crcofxaTa (paiveTai a'x^e^ov oxrirep €ix\pv')(0Vf irpogINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 305^e TO Twv fcoajv aipv/ov, rj ^e fXiTa/Saaig ef awToiv €<V ra fcSaa-vvex^^ ec7T/v — eva ya? t«v €V t^ da^drry} ^laTroprjaetev avTig TTOTepov ^mv ea-rtv vj (f)VTOv' TrpoaTrecpvKe yap, koI xwp/j'o'-/Aeva TToXka ^ia(f>9€ipeTai toov toiovtcov — oXcog ^e Tray to yevogTO T(av oa-TpaKo'^epfxcov (f)VTo7g eoiKe irpog tol iropevTiKa tcSv fcowvKai irepi aiaByjO-e^g^ tol fxh avTm ove %v ai^fxaiv€Tai. p. 212,213.)Again, if we regard the substance of the lowerspecies of marine bodies, though in some in-'* stances, as in sea-nettles, it approaches to thecharacter of flesh ; in others, as in sponge, itclosely resembles a vegetable matter. And,** lastly, as different bodies appear to partake,in different degrees, of life itself; so do they'' differ with respect to the degrees of activityin the functions of life. Plants, for instance,seem to be incapable of effecting much beyondtheir individual nutrition, and the continuationof their species : and the same observationholds with respect to the lowestspecies of animals. By the addition of sensibilityin different degrees, the pleasure andactivity of life are increased ; first in the gratificationarising from mutual intercourse ; andfurther, in the natural affection which the parentfeels for its offspring, and in the care ofproviding food for it." ('H U tov o-ccfMaTog himaapKiic^rjg eaTi (pvcrig, olov to. re KaXovfxeva. Trflva. koli to twvaKaXr)(f)oov yevog' o ^e airoyyog TravTeXcog coiKe To7g (f)VTo7g.aei ^e koltol fxiKpav ^La(f)opav erepa Trio Wkpm yi^ri (paiveTaiX306 EXERCISE OF THEfxakXov ^oorjv ^yjjvra Kai kivyj(71v. Kai Kara Tag tov jBiov ^€Trpa^eig tov olvtov e^/^et Tpoirov. tcov re yap cf>vT(av epyov ov'^evakXo (paiveTai ttAo^v olov avTO Troi^crai iraKiv eTepov, haa ytv^Tai"^la (77T€pfj.aTog' Ofxoiiog ^e Kat raja ^coot)v evicov irapa t^v yeveaivov^ev ecTTiv aXko XafSeiv epyov — 7rpo(7ov(7V]g ^' alcrO'^a-ecog ^'^rj,Treat re t>;v oyeiav ^/a t^v tj^ovyjv ^lacpepovcriv avTWV ol jSioi,Kai irepi Tong TOKOvg Kai Tag eKTpo(f)ag tS>v t€Kvoov. p. 213.)Some animals, then, merely extend theirspecies, after the manner of plants, at statedseasons ; and take no care of the individualsproduced by them. And even of those animalswhich provide nourishment for their offspring,the greater number exercise their carefor a definite period only ; that is, till theiryoung are capable of providing for themselves: after which, they forsake or have no'* further communication with them. Some in-** deed, apparently indued with a higher degreeof intelligence, enter into a social communion,and establish a kind of polity with their spring. ' (Ta fjiev ovv airXcog, ccawep (pvTa, Kara Tagcopag airoTeXei t>/v ciKeiav yeveatV to, ^e Kai irepi Tag Tpo(f)ageKTTOveiTai tS)V TeKvcov, OTav ^ aTroTdXeavi, yjopi^ovTai KaiKoivcovidv ov^efxiav er Tioiovjrai' Ta ^e avveTooTepa Kai koivw-vovvTa fjLV^fxyjg viri itXeov kui TroXiTiKcoTepov '^(^pcovTai To7g utto-yovoig. p. 213.) And he makes a distinction inanother part of his treatise between such animals,and those which are simply gregarious ;the former being characterised by the dispositionto contribute collectively to the completionINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 307of some one work ; as man, the bee, the ant, &c.(iroXniKo. ^ e(7T/v <x>v €v t/ Kai koivov yiverai TravTwv to epyov'over ov iravra iroiei ra ayekaia. eari ^e toiovtov avdpamo^f[xeXiTTa, o"(^^f, fxvpfJLYi^. p. 4.)With the exception of the opinion that inanimatematter graduates into life, nothing advancedby Aristotle in the foregoing observations,if considered in the light of a generalstatement, is contradicted or set aside by ourpresent knowledge. For no opinion perhaps ismore prevalent, among those who are capableof fairly investigating the characters of naturalobjects and phenomena, than that there aregradations of excellence in the various forms ofmatter ; although the limits of distinction areoften obscure. Who, for instance, that has comparedthe respective structures and qualities ofthe bodies, can doubt that the most splendidmineral indicates, humanly speaking, an infinitelyless effort of creative and superintendingpower than the most simple vegetable ? In themineral we find a perfect similarity, or rathersameness, of character, pervading all the integrantparticles of the mass ; the order of theirunion being the result of a mere external force,which, having once brought them together, ceasesto have any further effect. In the vegetable wefind a most curiously arranged system of internaltubes or pores, which attract and separatethe elementary principles of the soil and of theX 2308 EXERCISE OF THEatmosphere in which the plant is placed ; givingrise to structures the most wonderful, and, if wecontemplate different individuals of the vegetablekingdom, more variegated than the mindcould have imagined — the bark, the wood, theleaves, and lastly the flowers, fragrant with athousand odours, and emulating the brightestcolours of the rainbow. Or, again, if we comparethe character of the vegetable, fixed to itsnative soil, without any inherent power of movingitself, either totally or partially ; insensibleto the influence of those agents which beget asuccession of new feelings and emotions in animals; how contracted in its sphere of relationsmust we consider the former body, when comparedwith the latter; and how incalculably agreater power of creation do the phenomena ofanimal organization indicate ! Gorgeous as arethe lilies of the field, so that even Solomon in allhis glory was not arrayed like one of these, yetwhat are they in the effect they produce on thehuman mind, compared with the lightning ofthe eagle's eye, or the fire-breathing nostril ofthe horse ? Most assuredly, in our estimation ofexcellence, the intellectual and moral image willalways bear the preeminence ; and, whether ornot the physical conformation may eventuallybe found to correspond, philosophers have actuallyclassed animals in such an order, that thosewhich manifest the higher degree of intelligence.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 309and of moral feeling, are comparatively higherin the scale.As instances of the equivocal character ofthose particular forms of organized matter towhich Aristotle alludes, when speaking of theobscure boundary that separates animals fromvegetables, corallines and substances of thatkind may be adduced among animals ; and,among vegetables, those green, and in appearancegelatinous conserve which are found inabundance in stagnant ditches during the summer.And these, and similar examples, seemto shew that, after the lapse of more thantwenty centuries, the difficulty of defining theboundary between animal and vegetable organizationstill exists ; a difficulty which is fullyadmitted by the principal physiologists of thepresent day".In examining, however, more particularly thepreceding opinions of Aristotle, there is onewhich does not accurately agree with the presentstate of our knowledge: there is not, namely,that continuity of gradation which he expressesby the term awexeia.^. There is probably noSee Maclean's Horse Entomological, p. 191.X A modern parallel to this opinion may be found in the geologicalhypothesis that the simplest forms of animal life occuronly in the older strata ; more and more complicated forms appearingin the more recent formations. The progress of geologyhas shewn that this is not really the case. See Prof. Sedgwick'sAddress to the Gaol. Soc. p. 2.x 3310 EXERCISE OF THEliving philosopher who advocates the opinionthat gradual advances may be traced from thestate of inanimate matter to that of life : foreven Lamarck, who entertains the opinion of agradation in structure among animals to a veryextraordinary extent, considers that the differencebetween organized and unorganized matter,in other words between living and lifelessmatter, is extreme ; so that they cannot possiblybe ranged in the same line. And he also believesthat, however remarkable may be the apparentaffinity between plants and animals, theymay always be distinguished y.But a regular gradation of form cannot evenbe traced in one and the same kingdom of nature: for, with reference to animals, Cuvier disclaimsany attempt to class them so as to formasingle series descending gradually from thehigher to the lower classes. Such an attempthe thinks absurd ; and is far from supposingthat, even in a separate class, the last in orderare the lowest in the degree of their organization; and still farther is he from supposing thatthe last of a higher class are more highly advancedthan the first of the class immediatelysucceeding. He merely allows that a regularlygraduated scale is occasionally observable to acertain extent ; and maintains that the universaly Lamarck Philosophy. Zoology. torn. i. p. 377j. 384 ; and398, in note lINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 311application of such a principle is inadmissibleon any philosophical grounds'. And Lamarckhimself agrees with Cuvier in this opinion.The only formal terms of classification employedby Aristotle are ei'^of and yevo^-, of thefirst of which he gives a remarkably precise definition.That definition is really, though notin literal order, as follows : — " an animal speciesis an assemblage of individual animals, inwhich not only the whole form of any one re-** semble the whole form of any other, but eachpart in any one resembles the correspondingpart in any other. Thus every horse not onlyresembles every other horse generally, but theeye or the hoof of every horse resembles theeye or the hoof of every other horse. And thesame statement is applicable to man and other*' animals. They are therefore the same in thecharacter of their individual parts." CExex l\Twv ^coajv via {MV iravra to, [xopioc Tavra. akXviXQig, evia ^€Tepa, iavra de ra ^ev eiOei twv [xopia)v ecrriv, oiov avbpxirovpig Kai 0(f)QaXixo<; avSpcoirov pii Kai ocpOakixi^, Kai aapKi rrap^Koch 0(JT<X> OCTTOVV' TOV UVTOV ^6 TpOTTOV Kai ITTTTOV Kai TWV fcowv, oaa tw €;^€/ Tavra Aeyo/xev earwig' Ofxoicog yapao-Trep TO oXov ej^e/ Trpog to oXqv, Kai tccv [xopia^v e)(ei (KaaToviipog €Ka(TTOv, p. 1.)In comparing the preceding definition of Aristotlewith the corresponding definition of Cuvier,we find that there is no essential difference.z Regni Animal, pres. p. xx, xxi.x4312 EXERCISE OF THECuvier says, " every organized body has, exclusivelyof the common qualities of its tissue, apeculiar or proper form ; not only generallyand externally, but even in the detail of thestructure of each of its parts ^. And all theindividuals belonging to one of these definedforms constitute what is called a species''Aristotle thus defines the term yevog. " A genusis an assemblage of individuals, in which anyonebears, upon the whole, an obviously perceptibleresemblance to any other. Thus birdsand fish constitute two distinct genera ; eachcomprehending several species. But the correspondingparts, in the different species of thesame genus, usually differ in colour, form,number, size, or proportion. In different gee7iera, indeed, the difference of correspondingparts occasionally proceeds still further ; theonly resemblance being that of analogy, as** between a scale and a feather ; a scale beingto a fish, what a feather is to a bird." (Ta TeTanto. [xev eo'Ttv, '^ia(f)€pei ^e KaS lirepoyyiv Kai eXXeiipiv, occovTO yevog eaTi ravTOV. Keydi ^e yevo(; olov opviSa koli lyBwTovToov yap eKarepov ep^ef 'hia:j)opav koltcl to yevog, Kai ccttiva Chaque corps organise, outre les qualities communes de sontissu, a une forme propre, non-seulement en general et a I'ex-terrier , mais jusque dans le detail de la structure de chacune deses parties. Tom. i. p. 16.^ Et tons les metres appurtenances a I'une de ces formes constituentce que Ton appelle une espece. Tom. i. p. 19.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 313€i^Y] TrXetci) tySvcov Roi opviScov. Aia(p€p€i ^e ap^e^flv ra 7r\e7a-ratZv fxopicov €V avToig Traps rag toJv iraByjixaTUiV evamr/ajo-e/f, oTovyjpcafxarog Kai ayvj^arog, toJ ra fxev frnWov avTot. TTeirovOevat to,^e ^TTov, €Tt ^e TrkyjBei Kai okiyoTyjTi koi [xeyedei koi a-fJUKpo-TYiTi Kai oAfiDf vTiepo'/yj Kai eWdxpet. p. 1. 'AAA' a>g elves rairXeiara Kai e^ oov fxcpcov o drag oyKog avveaTyjKeVf rj Tavra €(t-Tiv r) "^tacpepet roTg havrioig Kai Ka vTrepoyyjv Kai eXkciipiv. — -tibia 0€ T(i)v ^cacov ovre eioei ra fxopia ravru eye ove Eauvirepoyriv Kai ekXeirpiv, aWa Ear avaXoyiav, olov TreirovBev-*—7rpog TTTcpov Xeirig' b yap ev opviBi itTepov, tovto h I'/Bvi€(TTi Xeirig. p. 2.)But although Aristotle uses the term yivog, inits primary sense, as applicable to an assemblageof different species having a general resemblanceto each other ; he extends it indefinitely,so that it is practically applicable to themodern and more comprehensive terms of tribe,family, order, or even class: for, as we have justnow seen, he distinctly applies it to the class offish,and of birds. And it is remarkable that hesometimes uses the term yevog as synonymouswith eilog, or even a still lower denomination ;implying, that is, merely an accidental variationin a species.The following are instances of an undefined useof the term yivog. Having spoken of red-bloodedand vertebrated animals, he adds, to. Te Xonrayevv) Twv fcoojv eo-ri [xev rirrapa '^iY]pY][j.eva eig yev^ \ (p. 104.)in which passage yevog is first equivalent eitherto the species or to the gems ; and afterwards to314 EXERCISE OF THEthe order, or to the class, of modern zoologists. Inanother passage he says, ho) l\ yevri tcSv ixeXirimnXeico; (p. 287.) where yevog is evidently used as ei%^,Aristotle was quite aware of the necessary connexionbetween the blood, or a fluid analogousto it, and the life of an animal. " Every animal,"he says, " possesses a vital fluid, the loss of whichoccasions its death :" (ep^e; ^e koi vypoTYjTa Tray^ooov, y]g a-Tepio-KOfxevov — (pBeiperai. p. 7.) and aS thecolour of this fluid in the higher classes of animalsis always red, (eor; le tyjv cjyva-iv to aJfJia — e^oy —TO xP^fj-a. €pv6pov, p. 75.) hence, for the purpose ofdistinctive description, he assumes the colour asan essential quality; and calls those animalswhich have red blood evaifxa, and those whichhave not red blood avaifxa. And thus he establishesa fundamental natural division, answeringto the red-blooded and white-bloodedanimals of modern zoology : and it is of greatimportance, with reference to his principle ofclassification, to bear in mind that he placesthe evaifxa, or rcd-bloodcd animals, in the upperpart of his scale.Aristotle was also aware that there is a naturalconnexion between the existence of redblood, and of a spine or back-bone, made up ofseveral distinct portions called vertebrae ; (Travrade Ta ^ooa, oaa evaifxa, eariv, e^e/ pa'/^iv, p. OO, avyKeirai oyj pdxig Ik a(l>QvUxoiv. p. Qb.) and he saw, consequently,the coincidence of these two conditionsINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 315in the classification of animals : and hence wefind vertebrated animals occupying the first divisionin his scale, as well as in the scale ofmodern naturalists; though, in consequence ofhis desultory method of treating the subject, itrequires some care to ascertain the order of hisarrangement.Aristotle begins his work with some observationson the characters of the different componentparts of the bodies of animals, (and theseare subsequently repeated in a more detailedform,) which forcibly remind us of the tissuesof modern anatomy : " of the component partsof animals," he says, " some are of the sametexture throughout : of which the most generalare the blood, and the blood-vessels— the flesh—bone — skin — membranes — hair — fat, &c. (TCvev Told ^caoig fjioptccv to, [xev eariv aavvOeTa, oaa ^laipeirat eig6u.oiou.epYj, p. 1. Tojv ^ ofji.otofji.epoov koivototov [xev eari tocAnticipations of modern physiological opinions are occasionallyobservable in Galen also. Thus the following passageclearly contains the germ of Chat's doctrine of organic sensibility." In vegetables there is a peculiar power of sensation,^' by which, though incapable of sight, or hearing, &c. they are'^ capable of distinguishing between those particles of matterwhich will nourish them, and those that will not ; attractingthe one, and rejecting the other." {"Erepop hart yivos ala-Brjo-fcosiv This (j)VTo'i5 — ovre yap tS)V oparav, pyre tS)v aKovoTiKav k. t. X.€X^i didyvcoaip, ak\a fiovou rcov Tp€<f)€iv i) p.f} Tpe<f)eLU dwafievoV to fi€Pyap Tp€(f)CLV 8vvdp.€va irpos eavrrju eX/covcra k. t. X. /xfro^oXXei nos t6oIkcIov ttJs Tp€(f)opL€vr)s ovcriaSj to. Se p-fj ^vvdpeva Tp€(j>€ip ov irpo<rierai~—Galen Op. Kiihn, vol. iv. p. 764.)316 EXERCISE OF THEalfjux — Kai TO [Jiopiov ev co 7re(f)VKev eyyiveaBcu (tovto t\ KaXeT-Tou (pXeip), — Kai 7] aap^ — qg-tqvv — ^epfxa, vfxvjv — Tpiy(ei — tti-fxeXv}, p. ^b.)He then distributes the several classes of animalsinto those which have blood, and thosewhich have not blood : and though in the firstinstance his distribution is very confused, yet,when adjusted by subsequent statements, theorder of arrangement is as follows. Amongthose which have blood, are man, viviparous andoviparous quadrupeds, birds, fish, cetaceous animals,and serpents, (Ta fjXv 'ivaifxa — avSpcoirog re Not Ta^ixoTOKo, Tcov TeTpairo^oov, €ti ^e Kat Ta xoTOKa tojv Terpariro-^(i)v Kai opvig Kai ly^vq koli Kr(Tog, Kai — 0(^>ig, p. 42.)Among those which have not blood, are animalsnaturally divisible into segments, as insects; animalsof a soft substance throughout, as ,&c.; animals having comparatively a softshell, as lobsters, &c.; and those which have ahard shell, as oysters, &C. ("AAAo Te yevog ear) ro TcovocTTpaKodepfJioov, o KaXeiTai oarpeoV aXXo to tcov [xaXaKoaTpd-Kcov — oiov KapajSoi Kai yevv] Tiva KapKivoov Kai aaTaK^V aXXoTO Tav fxaXaKicov, oiov — aYjTriai' eTepov to tccv evTOfj-ccv. Tanta^€ iravTa /xev eor/v avaifxa. p. 10.)He proceeds then to say, that " after havingconsidered the common attributes and actualdifferences of animals, we must endeavour tofind out the causes of these ; for only by a** demonstration and comparison of the peculiaritiesof individuals can we hope to arriveINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 817at a natural method of classification." (UpSiTcv ravirapyova-ag ^lacpopag scat ra o-vfL/SelSyjKOTa iraa-i Xa^0D[X€v,Mere oe tovto rag alriag tovtcov ireipareov evpeTv, ovtoo yapKara (f)vaiv eari iroieTadai tyjv fxedo^ov, vTrapy^ovcrvjg Tfjg Ioto-pig TVjg Tree] eKaarov. p. 11.) "And, first, WC mustcompare together the several component membersof animals ; for the chief differencesamong animals will be found in the presenceor absence of particular members, and in theirorder or position ; or in their form, proportion,the analogy of their uses, or the peculiaritiesof their colour, &C." (Aypn-eov ^e TT/JOTOV ra fJi^pv] rawfajojv e? cyv avvecrTVjKev, Kara yap ravra fxaXicrra Not TrparraQia(pepet Kai ra oXa, vj tw ra fxev f%e/v ra be fXYj ep^e^v, ^ rr]6ecr€i Kai TJj ra^ei, yj Kai Kara rag elpvjfJievag itporepov ^ia(po-pag, ei^ei Kai Wepoyyi Kai avaXoyla Kai rm TraOvjfAaTcav evav-TiOTyjTi. p. 11.)In the same philosophical spirit, and in termsnot essentially different, Cuvier affirms that, inthe attempt to establish a natural classification,he examined one by one all the species thathe could procure ; and then classed togetheras a subordinate generic group all those which,resembling each other in the more importantparts of their structure, differed only in size,or in colour, or in other points of little importance."(J'ai examine une k une toutes lesspaces que j'ai pu me procurer en nature; j'aireproche celles qui ne differaientl'une de 1 'autreque par la taille, la couleur, ou le nombre de318 EXERCISE OF THEquelques parties peu importantes, et e'en ai faitce que j'ai nomme un sous-genre. Pres. p. xii.)In the examination of the component membersof animals in general, Aristotle selects manas a standard of comparison ; alleging as areason, that, as merchants estimate the value offoreign coin by a comparison with that of theirown country, because best known to them ; soinmaking a classification of animals we naturallyemploy man as a standard, because we aremore familiar with the human form than withthat of any other animal. {UpooTov ^e ra tov dv6pco7rov[J^epv] XYjTTTeoV noaTTep yap t« vofxtcrfxaTo. irpog to avTotg€KaaToi yvicpifxooTaTcv '^oKifJia^ovcriv, ovtoo ^yj Kai ev Tong a\~kong' V avdpooTTQg toJv ^cocov yvdopijxoiTarov yjfjiiv ef avayKTi^cctt/v. p. 11.) And, man being admitted as thestandard of comparison, it necessarily followsthat, as a general rule, viviparous animals, birds,reptiles, and fish, would respectively come nextin succession: and that order, as we have justseen, Aristotle actually observes. In one instance,indeed, he for a specific reason invertsthe order of arrangement ; and, commencingwith those animals which least resemble manin their organization ; and proceeding with thosewhich bear a nearer and nearer resemblance tohim ; he terminates his description with man, ashaving the most complicated structure of allanimals. (metres ^e ^lyjprjTai ra bevvy irpuTov, rov avTOv rpo-TTOV Kai vvv ireipaTeov TroieiaQai tvjv decopiaV irXrjv Tore /xevINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 3197Yjv ap-)(y]v €7roiovfxe6a crKoircvvTec Tree] tcSv fxepuv av avQpuiTrov,vvv ^e Tuepi tovtov TeXevraTov XeKriov ^la to 'TrketaTyjv (EveivTTpayfxaTeiav. p. 112.) And he then enumeratesthe several classes in the following order ; ** aniemale having a hard shell ; animals having asoft shell ; mollusca, or animals of a soft substancethroughout ; insects ; fish ; birds ; oviparousand viviparous quadrupeds ; and man :** by inverting which order we arrive at a correctview of his original arrangement." (rioaJT&v S*apKTeov air toov oarpaKo^epfMcov, fera ^e Tavra irepi tZv fjia-XaKocrpaKoov, koli to. aXXa ^€ tovtov tov Tpoicov e^ej^f * ear ^eTO. re fJLaXaKia Kai tol evTOf^a, Kai facta Tota to tSov lyBvcovyevo$, TO T€ ^cooTOKov Kai TO cooTOKOv avTcaVf eha to tccv opvi6a)v'[Ji€Ta he TCLVTCL 'Trepi tcov ^refcSv XeKTeov, oaa re ^ccoTOKa Kai ora(jooTOKa. ^cpoTOKa ^ eaTi twi T€Tpa7rohoov evia, Kai avBp'jmoiTftJv 'hlTTo'boOV [MOVOV. p. 112.)It is remarkable that, from the age of Aristotleto nearly that of Linnaeus, no systematicclassification of animals was attempted ; none,at least, was generally adopted. Soon after thecommencement of the last century Linnaeus directedhis attention to the subject; and distributedthe whole animal kingdom into six classes,mammalia, birds, reptiles, fish, insects, andworms : in which distribution Lamarck observesthat he improved on Aristotle, first, by usingthe more distinctive term mammalia, and placingthe cetacea in that class ; and, next, by makinga distinct class of reptiles, and arranging320 EXERCISE OF THEthem between birds and fish. If this alteration,which has been subsequently adopted by allother zoologists, be made, Aristotle's arrangementof vertebrated animals agrees with that ofthe present day. And in distributing all otheranimals into four classes, which Linnaeus distributesinto tito only, Aristotle must be consideredas having proceeded upon the more philosophicalprinciple ; because the species of these animals,taken collectively, are much more numerous, andmuch more diversified in their form and structure,than the species of vertebrated animals.Lamarck's objection to Aristotle's arrangement,on the ground of its commencing withanimals of a more complicated instead of thoseof a more simple structure, is, for more thanone reason, of little weight : for, in assertingthat such an arrangement is contrary to theorder of nature, he makes a peculiar hypothesisof his own the basis of that assertion ; and,with the exception of Lamarck himself, almostif not all modern naturalists, including Cuvier,adopt the same principle of arrangement as thatof Aristotle.Lamarck objects with more justice to theterms Ivaiixa and avaifxa, as also to the supposedimprovement of some modern naturalists by thesubstitution of the equivalent terms, red-hoodedand white-hooded ; because in the second ofthose two divisions some species are included, asINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 321worms, &c. which have red blood. On this groundLamarck proposed to divide all animals into thosewhich have, and those which have not, vertebrae ;or into vertebral and vertebral animals ^. Andhe extended the two vertebral classes of LinnaeusXofive^ and subsequently to ten ^.With reference to the classification of Aristotle,as expressed in his first book, it has beenoccasionally observed by literary men, who werenot familiar with the details of his history, thatquadrupeds in general and reptiles are excluded.The most comprehensive groups into which** the greater number of animals may be distributed,"he says, " are these : one, of birds ;one, of fish ; one, of whales and other cetaceousanimals ; all of which have blood.There is another group of the oa-TpaKo^epfxa ; another,of the fxaXaKoo-rpaKa ; another, of the pz-XaKia ; and another, of the evrofxa ; all of whichare without blood. Of those animals which donot come within the foregoing arrangement,there are no comprehensive groups ; for noindividual type comprehends many species :and there is one type which is unique, affordingonly a single species, namely, man. Sometypes afford different species without a differenceof specific denomination : thus there are'' red-blooded quadrupeds, of which some areviviparous, and others oviparous." {Tevrj ^6 [axedPhilos. Zool. torn. i. p. 116, &c. « Ibid. p. 121, 122.Y322 EXERCISE OF THEtiara toov ^odcuv, eig a oivjpvjTai Tanna ^oja, rah ecrr/v, ev fxevopviScov, ev ^ lyBvoov, aXXo ^e KVjTOvg, Tavra /xev ovv Ttavra evai-fj.d eaTiv. akXo ^e yevog part to tojv otTipaKo^ep^av — ago toTcSi/ fxaXaKoaTpaKCtiv — ago to toov fxakaKioov — erepov to t^vcvTOfJioov. Tavra ^e Trdvra fxev earth avaifxa — TCv ^e XotTroovfwwv ovKeTi ra yevYi ^eydXoL' ov yap irepLeyei, irokXa ei^yj evciOog, aXKa. to fxev ecTTiv dirXovv olvto ovk eyov ^ta<pQpav toe/dof, oiov avopccTTog, Ta yet fxev, aXX av(i)vv{JLa Ta eibv]. EjCttiyap Ta TeTpdno^a Kai fjiv] TTTepcaTa evaifxa ^Jtev irdvTa, dXXa to,fMv ^cfoTOKa Ta ^' mTOKa avT(t)v. p. 10.) " And though*' there are many species of viviparous quadrupeds,yet they have no collective denomination; but each is distinguished, as in the caseof the human species, by its proper name ; asthe lion, deer, horse, &c. on which account we'* cannot describe them collectively, but must** consider the individual nature and characterof each," (Tov ^e yevovg tov Tthv TeTpairo'^oov ^oocov Kal^(jootokcjov ei^fi fxev ecTTi ttoXXoc, dvoovvfJM. ^e* ada Ka eKatJTOVavTMv oig eiTreiv, ooo'Trep avSp'jyirog eipvjTatf Xecov, eXacpog, imrogAio Kai yjfipig Xaf*./3dvovTag avayKV] Secopel'v eKoiaTov tyjv (f)v~atv avTS>v, p. 10.)It is interesting to observe that even Cuvieroccasionally experiences a similar difficulty inhis classification ; and expresses himself, withreference to the difficulty, in nearly the sameterms as Aristotle. Thus, in introducing histhird order of the mammalia, called carnivora,he says, *' The forms of the different genera ofthis order are so various, that it is impossibleINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 323to range them in the same series : they aretherefore divided into several families." Andof one of these families, the marsupialia, to whichthe opossum and kangaroo belong, he observes,that " the genera of that family might form adistinct order, so very peculiar is their structures."And on another occasion he adds, withrespect to this same family, that " although thevarious species so closely resemble each otherin many points as for a long time to have beenclassed in one genus only; they yet differ so*' widely in their feet, and teeth, and organs ofdigestion, that, considered with reference tothose parts, they might be distributed, notinto one but several orders; — and might constituteeven a separate and parallel class ofmammalia ^"f " Les Carcasses. — Leurs formes et les details de leur organisationvarient beaucoup — au point qu'il est impossible de'' ranger leurs genres sur une meme ligne, et que Ton est obligedien former plusieurs families qui se lient diversement entre^' elles par des rapports multiplies." torn. i. p. 121.g ** Les Marsupiaux — pourraient presque former un ordre a** part, tant ils offrent de singularities dans leur economie." torn. i.p. 169.h " Maugre une ressemblance generale de leurs species entreelles, tellement frappante, que Ton e'en a fait long-temps*' qu'un seul genre, elles different si fort par les dents, par les*' organes de la digestion et par les pieds, que si Ton seen tenantrigoureusement a ces characters, il faudrait les repair entredivers ordres." p. 170.» " On dirait, en un mot, que les marsupiaux forment une classedistincte, parallel a celle des quadrupeds ordinaires." p. 171-y2324 EXERCISE OF THEIn addition to the natural groups, enumeratedin the distribution above described, Aristotle refersto a few marine animals which principallybelong to the zoophytes of Cuvier, without comprehendingthem under a distinct name. OftPiat extensive class of animals, called at thepresent day polypes, which are the fabricatorsand inhabitants of every variety of coral, hesays nothing : and of that still more extensiveclass, if the term class be not too confined, theanimals infusoria, he was almost necessarily ignorant;most of the species being microscopic.It appears, from a few scattered notices, thatAristotle had a faint idea that the specific charactersand dispositions of animals might bealtered, from the effect of food and other circumstances: (tojv foowv Twv reTpoLTTO^cav TToXXyjv ai 'scopasTTOiovai dia(popav ov [movov irpog rriv akkfjv rov croofxaTO^€V7}{jLeptav aXka Kat '7rpo<; to irkeovaKig oy^evecrdai Kai yevvav,p. 122. Oaa fxh ovv ^aXccKag e')(^ei Tag Tpi')(ag, €v/3ocriayj)xu,eva G-KXYjooTepag I'J'/ei, oca ^e aKXvipag, fxaXaKooTcpagKai (XaTTOvg. Aiacfyepovai ^e Kai Kara rovg TOirovg rovg Sep"fxorepovg Kai xpv^pOTepovg, p. 68. Ev/ore ytverai toov fJLovo-yjiocDV €K fxekdvcov re Kai fXikavTepoov XevKa — €k te toov Xev-Kuv yevcov ovk coTrrai elg fAeXav fxeTajSaXXov. p. 71.) Andhe mentions particularly one instance of thiskind, though his reasoning on the occasion isnot admissible in the present state of physiologicalknowledge. In observing that, " as theactions of animals are determined by their na-intellectualFACULTIES. 325** tural affections and physical powers, so theirmoral habits, and even some of their physicalcharacters, are capable of being altered bytheir actions ;" he says, that *' the commonhen, if she have fought with and vanquishedthe cock, will begin to crow, and to imitatethe cock in various ways ; and her comb willincrease, and her plumage alter to such a degreeas to make it difficult to determine whethershe be really a hen : even spurs, thoughsmall, will sometimes grow on her legs."Q^dTrep ^e rag 'irpa^etg Kara to. Trddv) avfxISaiyei TroieTadaiTract To7g ^cooig, ovtco iraXiv Kai ra YjSrj fxeTafSdWovai KaraTag irpd^eig, iroXXaKig ^e koli toov (xoptcov evia, olov dirt roomopvi6(ov a-v[xl3aiv€i. Ai re yap dXeKTopi^eg oral ytKYja-aai rovgdppevag, kokkv^oucti re fxiixovfj.€vai rovg appear Kat oyeveiv€7ri')(^eip(jv(7if Kai to re KoiWaiov e^aipeTat avTalg Kat to ovpo'TTvyiov, wcrre jw.>; pa^icog av eiriyvavai gti B-qXeiai eiaiv' eviaig^€ Kai TrXvjKTpd Tiva fXiKpa eTravearTyj, p. 302.)The fact is nearly as Aristotle states it ; and,to a certain extent, similar facts are observablein the human species as well as in other animals;namely, that the peculiar characters ofthe female are occasionally obscured, with respectboth to the physical form and the moralhabits. But, in reasoning on the phenomena,Aristotle mistakes the effect for the cause. Thecircumstance of having fought with the cock isnot the determining cause of the change in theexternal form of the hen : but the alteration 326 EXERCISE OF THEself in the external form is dependent on, orat least coincident with an imperfect development,or a subsequent alteration, of the internalstructure ; which imperfect development orsubsequent alteration determines that degree ofmasculine courage which prompts the hen tofight, and to imitate the male in other actions.And so it sometimes happens that, in femalesof the human species, the feminine formis either never originally developed, or, by ageor other causes, becomes so much altered as tolose its usual characters ; (yw^^ ^e rag Itt) toS yeve/wov cf)vet rpiyag' ttXyjv eviaig yiyvovTai oXiyai, oral ra a-TYJ. p. 70.) and, correspondently with theseexterior traces of virility, there is often in suchcases a masculine temperament of the mind,which marks the character of the virago. And,on the other hand, from analogous causes analogouschanges are found to take place in themale of our own species, or of any speciesnearly resembling our own : for, in such instances,the tone of the voice and the generalform of the body acquire a feminine character ;and that firmness and resolution, which belongnaturally to the male, subside to a greater orless degree into a feminine gentleness.Aristotle, then, had no philosophical notion ofthe laws which regulate the occasional variationin the specific form of animals ; much less ofthe limits of that variation : for the accurate de-intellectualFACULTIES. 327elopement of which, the scientific world, andmore than the scientific world, are deeply indebtedto the skilful researches and correctreasonings of Cuvier ; whose fame will rest securelyon this natural and imperishable basis,when his own and all other artificial systems ofclassification, for artificial we can see them tobe even in the present state of our knowledge,will probably have been overturned by the forceof those new views of nature, which must necessarilyresult from the contemplation of the numerousand varied phenomena which are rapidlyaccumulating in this department of knowledge.The field, indeed, in which Cuvier haslaboured, with such advantage to science aswell as honour to himself, is the investigation ofthe conditions which accompany the developmentof individual and specific form : and theresult of his labours has afforded a splendid instanceof the wonderful effect which the powersof the human mind are capable of producing, inasubject apparently of the least intrinsic interestand of the most unpromising aspect. Theexplanation of his views which I shall now attemptto offer, while it may tend to make knownthe particular merits of this philosopher to aclass of readers, who at present are acquaintedwith little more of him than his great name, willcertainly accord with the general object of thistreatise.Y 4328 EXERCISE OF THEIn the preliminary discourse of his work entitled*' Siemens Fossiles," he states that thegreat principle in the study of comparative anatomyis this — that in every animal the severalparts have such a mutual relation, both in formand function, that if any part were to undergoan alteration, in even a slight degree, it wouldbe rendered incompatible with the rest ; so thatif any part were to be changed, all the otherparts must undergo a corresponding change :and thus any part, taken separately, is an indexof the character of all the rest. This lawof the co-relation of parts is indeed so defined,that even a portion of a bone may often serveto verify the species of the animal to which itbelonged (p. xlv).We know how successfully Cuvier has appliedthe foregoing principle in establishing the truecharacter of fossil species, of which the imperfectremains, or fragments of remains, are bothfew and of rare occurrence. The permanencyhowever of specific character does not hold inevery part of the organization ; and hence thereis an occasional impediment to the applicationof the principle : but the variation never proceedsbeyond certain limits ; and therefore no moreinterferes, eventually, with the uniformity of thespecific character of animals, than the periodicaloscillations of the celestial bodies counteract thegeneral regularity of their motions.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 329We are now therefore to consider the natureof the disturbing cause, if I may borrow that expressionfor a moment, which occasionally interfereswith the uniformity of specific character.And, with respect to specific forms, it may be remarked,that, although it is to a certain extenttrue that all organized bodies have the power ofproducing beings resembling themselves, yet circumstancesof temperature, and of quantity orquality of food, and other causes, have usuallysome influence in the development of the bodyof each individual ; thereby producing some correspondingvariation in the form : and, consequently,the resemblance between the parentand offspring is never perfect. But — and thisis a fact of the highest importance — there is noground for believing that such variations proceedbeyond certain limits ; no ground thereforefor believing that any of the above mentionedcircumstances could have produced all the differencesperceptible in organized bodies ; couldhave advanced for instance, by a gradual alterationof structure, a lower to a higher species.Experience, on the contrary, founded on an examinationof the records of remote antiquity,seems to shew that the limits of variation wereever the same that they are now. It appearsfor instance from the mummies of Egypt ^, thatk Vit. Cuvier, Loss. Foss. i. Disc. Prelim, p. 75, SO.330 EXERCISE OF THEthe general form, and size, and proportions Aversethe same three thousand years since, that theyare at present ; as well in various other animalsas in man ; and in all physiological probabilitytherefore were the same three thousand yearsbefore that period : so that we cannot refuse toadmit, that certain forms have, without exceedingthe limits above described, been perpetuatedfrom the creation.From various circumstances, however, as hasbeen already stated, the offspring never exactlyresembles the parent ; and by the extension ofthose causes which occasion a difference of character,the variation from the common parentmay possibly become so great, and so permanentin individuals of the same species, as to exceedin some respects the difference observablein individuals of different species. Such appearsto be the fact, when, in the dog species,we compare the greyhound with the turnspit ;or the Newfoundland-dog with the Blenheimspaniel : and yet, even in such instances, whichperhaps may be considered as comprising theextreme limits of variation, the specific characteris never so far obscured, but that a childwho had been accustomed to see a variety ofdogs, and also of other animals, would recognisethe character of the dog in each individual ofthat species.It is true, indeed, that it would be difficult notINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 331only for a child, but even for the most experiencedobserver, to define those characters bywhich the specific resemblance is recognisedupon a transient view of the animal. Yet, althoughnot obvious on a superficial examination,nature has not left this point undefinable :for, in almost every instance, the form andnumber of the bones are so accurately preserved,that, however the colour, or the sizeand the general form of the body may be altered,we have satisfactory criteria of the speciesin the points just mentioned. But, of allthe constituent parts of the body, this observationholds most eminently with respect tothe teeth : and in the case of quadrupeds,which principally constitute the highest classof the animal kingdom, and in which classalone any considerable degree of variation islikely to be observed, we have almost alwaysa ready mode of judging of the identity ofspecific character by an examination of theteeth ; for they in almost every instance haveteeth, which are entirely wanting throughout thewhole class of birds, and often in reptiles andin fish.In investigating the remote causes of specificvariation, we find that domestication is the mostgeneral and extensive ; and that the effects areproduced principally by the joint operation ofthe following means, namely, diet, general regisEXERCISE OF THEmen, and the due selection of individuals for thepurpose of breeding ^.While animals exist in a state of nature, itdoes not appear that the circumstances in whichthey are placed give rise to much variation,even in their external and fugitive characters.A uniformity of size and colour is usually observablein the several individuals of the samespecies ; as in the instances of the wild cat andrabbit. Nor is the character liable to be changedby intercourse among individuals of differentspecies. Although, for instance, the hare andrabbit are so nearly allied in form and size andcolour, we never meet with a hybrid or mule ofthose species.In domesticated species a variation first incolour, and then in size, usually takes place, toan extent proportional to the degree of domestication.Cats, which are less subjugated tomanthan horses or dogs, vary little more thanin colour; scarcely at all in size. And in horses,»n Burckhardt observes, in his notes on the Bedouins, p. Ill,and 139, that in barren parts of the desert of Arabia, or in seasonsof scarcity, camels and sheep do not multiply so extensivelyas in fertile plains and seasons. A similar observation wouldprobably hold good with respect to the ratio of increase amongthe Tchutzki and other tribes of north-eastern Russia, and theinhabitants of New Holland or any other part of the worldwhere the supply of food is scanty.See, on this subject, a letter, published by sir John Brightin 1809, on the art of improving the breeds of domestic animals.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 333on the same principle, there is a less degree ofvariation than in dogs. In the dog, which is ofall species the most domesticated, the variationextends to the production of an additional toe,and corresponding metatarsal bone in the hindfoot ". And in the human species, in the individualsof which, from their varied intercourseand modes of living, the limits of variation mayantecedently be expected to have the widestrange, there are families having six fingers.In concluding this part of the subject, Iwould observe that the principle, which we havejust now been examining, is of very great importanceas the basis of a physiological argumentwith reference to the identity of the humanspecies throughout the world. For, inasmuchas all the variations in colour, form, andsize, of the different nations of mankind, comewithin the acknowledged limits of specific variationin the animal kingdom, we have hencesatisfactory physiological proof that all the varietiesof the human race may have proceededfrom one common parent. Of the truth of thegeneral position indeed, of which the humanspecies is a particular instance, the work ofAristotle now under consideration is in itself astrong argument : for, notwithstanding the lapseof ages which has taken place since it was written,the description of many species is so aucunAnn. du Mns. torn, xviii. p. 342. pi. 19.334 EXERCISE OF THErate, as to leave no doubt of the identity of thosedescribed by Aristotle with those to which thedescription is applicable at the present day ®.SECT. I v.On those Animal Forms called Monsters or Lusiis Nature.The subject of the present section is naturallyconnected with that of the latter part of the preceding: and, although the occasion neither requiresnor would justify even a brief examinationof the laws which regulate the formation of monsters,or lusus 7iaturcB, as they are often called,especially as they have been lately illustratedby that ardent French physiologist Geoffrey St.It can hardly escape observation or fail to excite surprise,that in the work now under consideration, Aristotle usuallycontents himself with stating facts : he very rarely reasons ontheir final causes ; thus omitting what Cuvier calls one of themost beautiful and useful points in natural history. The followingare, I believe, the only instances in which he deviates frommere description. He observes, when speaking of fish, that agreat proportion of the spawn of those animals is destroyed invarious ways ; and that if this were not the case the specieswould become too numerous. (Ta /xej/ ttoXXo aa ol appears dva-KaTTTOvai, TO. S' dnoXXvTai iv iSt vypa. ocra b av eKTeKcaariv els rowsTotters els ovs cKriKTOvcTif TuvTa crw^fraf el yap navra iaoi^ero, Tra/jLTrkrj-Bes av TO yevos ^u eKaaTav. p. 169.) On another occasion he observes,that though the spring is the general season for propagation,yet occasionally the rule is set aside ; where, for instance,the preservation of the offspring is the result. QoppL-qriKfOTara p.evovv ass inl to ndv elneiv Trpos ttjv 6)(eiav ttjv eapivrju apav icTTiV ov firjuTO. TvdvTa ye noielTat tov avTov Kaipov ttjs o;(etas, dXKa Trpos ttjp eKTpo-cfifjv Thou TeKvcdP iv Toes KadrjKovari Kaipo7s. p. 181.)INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 33.5Hilaire ; it will nut be perhaps considered impertinentto make a few observations on thoseremarkable productions, considered with respectto one of the probable final causes of their existence.The term lusts naturce is applied to those naturalproductions, which vary in any remarkabledegree, with respect to form, colour, structure,size, &c. from the general character of the individualsof the same species. The term, literallytaken, implies a sportive effort of the creativepower of Nature ; and for the purpose of generaldescription there is no objection to this term,being, as it now is, familiarized by long continueduse. But as we have no ground for supposingthat nature, or, to use the more properexpression, that the providence of the Creatorever acts without some wise and beneficent purpose,we must consider the term in a philosophicalpoint of view, as expressing an effect, ofthe natural cause of which we are ignorant.What, then, is the real character of those unusualproductions which are denominated lusiisnature, or monsters ; or, in other words, for whatend has Providence ordained that such productionsshould be formed and subjected to ourobservation ? And here, as has been observedin another part of this treatise, it will be found,upon even a cursory examination, that in a lususnaturce the character of the species, however336 EXERCISE OF THEobscured, is never lost. There is no ground, inshort, for supposing that nature has ever producedsuch an individual as a chimera or centaur.And Lucretius's scepticism in this pointis justified on truly philosophical principles; onthe difference namely of the physical constitutionof the horse and of man : the horse at theend of his third year being full-grown, whileman is yet almost an infant ; and the horsebeing decrepit in his twenty-fifth or thirtiethyear, when man is in his full vigour p.In pursuing this investigation, it would be obviousto ask, what are the limits which separatea lusus naturce from the ordinary individuals ofthe same species ? and we shall soon find thatthese limits are, in the majority of instances, undefinable.If, indeed, in comparing the several organs,agreement with respect to number be the criterion,the limits are for the most part fixed.Thus the human hand so very generally consistsof five fingers, that an instance of an individualhaving more or less than five fingerswould be justly esteemed an instance of a lususnaturce. But even number is not always an Sed neque Centauri furent, neque tempore in illoEsse quest duplicity natura , et corpore binEx alienigenis members compacta potestas —Principio circum tribus acts impiger annieFloret eques, puer haud qua quam, &c.Lib. V. 876—889.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 337knowledged criterion ; for, with respect to theteeth, though thirty-two is the usual number inthe human subject, yet the instances of personshaving only twenty-eight are so frequent, thatwe can scarcely class them as deviations fromthe common law.But if size, or colour, or form be made thecriterion, we evidently cannot then fix the limits;for in all these points there is an endless varietyin individuals of the same species : so that itmight perhaps be truly asserted, that out of thecountless myriads of human beings that inhabitthe earth, nay even out of all that have existedsince the creation, no two individuals would befound to resemble each other, exactly, in evenany one of those points. And in this wonderfuldiversity the infinite power of the Deity is distinctlymanifested ; for, in the exercise of humanskill, the most accomplished artist, as soon asheceases to copy an actual individual, fallsinto that general similarity of outline by whichwe are enabled to ascertain his style upon thefirst view.If, in the pursuit of our inquiry, we appeal tothe distribution of the internal organs of thebody, we shall find, that though with respect tomany the position is determinable with considerableprecision, yet with respect to others,the smaller veins and arteries, for instance, thevariation is endless. But — and this most highly338 ON THE INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES.deserves our attention — if we consider the usesof the parts with reference to the precision oftheir position, we shall find, that the position ofthose is most constant, the uses of which aremost important ; while the distribution of thoseparts, the position of which may differ to a considerableextent without inconvenience to theindividual, is found to be continually varying.Now as this law of deviation from the usualstructure does not seem at all to depend on theconstruction of the parts themselves ; and asthe result is necessarily connected with the wellbeing,and even the life, possibly, of the individual; we cannot consider this result as the effectof chance, or want of design : for, if chancecould be admissible as the cause, why shouldone class of phenomena be so much more frequentthan the other? And with equal or stillgreater force we may apply the argument tothe existence of those productions emphaticallycalled monsters. Probably then, or rather assuredly,these anomalous productions may, inaddition to other ends, be considered as proofsof a particular or constantly superintendingProvidence ; and, like the storms which occasionallyravage the surface of the earth, mayawfully recall to our minds the power of theDeity, while they at the same time convince us,by the rarity of their occurrence, of the mercifulbeneficence of his nature.CONCLUSION. 33,9CHAP. XI.Conclusion.IT has been the immediate object of the precedingtreatise to demonstrate the adaptation ofthe external world to the physical condition ofman : and, either in considering him merely asan individual, or as a component member ofany stage of society, it may be freely admittedthat every step in the investigation has tendedto confirm this general conclusion, that — whetherfrom chance, (if any philosophical mind acknowledgethe existence of such an agent as chance,)or from deliberate design — a mutual harmonydoes really exist between the corporeal powersand intellectual faculties of man, and the propertiesof the various forms of matter whichsurround him ; the material constituents of allnature being as evidently adapted to the supplyof the wants of his body, as the contemplationof their causes and relations to the exercise ofhis mind.We have seen that from the surroundingatmosphere he is constantly supplied with thatrespirable part of the air, which alone can supportthe breath of life ; and which is demandedfor that purpose during almost every moment ofhis existence. We have seen that from the samesource are derived those universal and importantagents, water and heat and light, which arez2340 CONCLUSION.equally though not so immediately necessary, asair, to the wants of man. We have seen again,that the mineral kingdom, though it does notdirectly contribute to the support of life, yet inthe form of natural soils sustains the growth ofevery kind of vegetable ; and that on the nutrimentderived from this source all animal lifeessentially depends : we have seen that thesame source also supplies those various metallicand earthy bodies, the uses of which are mostextensive and important in promoting many ofthe arts of civilized society. And, lastly, thatthe advantages derivable from the vegetableand animal kingdoms are, eventually, neitherof less extent and importance, nor their adaptationto the physical condition of man less obvious,than those of the mineral and atmospherical.It would have been easy to demonstrate thatan equally obvious but infinitely more importantharmony exists between the external world,and the moral condition of man, as betweenthat world and his physical condition : but thisprovince had been assigned to others ; and allsystematic reference to that harmony has thereforebeen studiously avoided — though the constantlyrecurring difficulty has been to abstainfrom such a demonstration.But, it may possibly be observed, both thephysical and moral relations of man are in-CONCLUSION. 341suitably soon cut short by death : and though, inmany instances, societies continue to be benefitedthrough successive ages in consequence ofthe efforts of individuals, who have long sinceceased to live, yet in many instances, on theother hand, the memorial not only of individuals,but of nations also, entirely perishes;and all things apparently proceed, as if thoseindividuals and nations had never existed.Shall we then, in concluding this treatise,simply admit the existence of that harmony,the illustration of which was its professed object; and in admitting that existence shall weat the same time express our gratitude to thatPower, which has thus amply provided for thephysical wants of man, and for the dew elopementof his intellectual faculties ? That indeedwould have been incumbent on us under anycircumstances; and without any qualificationarising from the partial occurrence either ofdisease, or famine, or any other form of physicalevil.But, since they, to whom this treatise is addressed,are conscious that some ulterior causeexists for the adaptation of the external worldto the nature of man, beyond the transient supplyof his physical wants, or even the exerciseof his intellectual faculties ; to have exhibitedthe bare fact of that adaptation, without somereference to its final cause, would have been toz3342 CONCLUSION.leave the whole argument without its just conclusion.Avoiding however the presumption of speculatingon the nature of a future state of existence,we may, without any impropriety, assert,on the authority of revelation, that the happinessor misery of that state will depend muchon the use we have made of that external worldwhich surrounds us ; and will coincide with theprevailing character of those habits which wehave contracted in this life.This then is the sum of the whole argument.The Creator has so adapted the external worldto the moral as well as the physical condition ofman, and those two conditions act so constantlyand reciprocally on each other, that in a comprehensiveview of the relation between the externalworld and man, we cannot easily lose sightof that most important connexion. And, if weextend our views to a future life, we are taughtthat the moral state, which has been induced byour prevailing animal or intellectual habits inthis life, will be continued and perpetuated eternallyin the next — " that in the place where thetree falleth, there it shall be" — that "it is appointedunto men once to die ; but after this,the judgment."Have we then, to refer first to our animalwants and desires, have we indulged withoutrestraint in the pleasures of sense ; shrinkingCONCLUSION. 343from every breath of heaven, unless previouslytempered with luxurious warmth, and impregnatedwith the perfumes of the east ? Have weweakened our intellectual faculties, and brutalizedour moral feelings, by habitual inebriation ;abusing that gift of Heaven, which was intendedas a restorative of exhausted nature ? Instead ofsimply satisfying the calls of hunger by plainand moderate diet, have we provoked and pamperedthe appetite by all the luxuries whichthe animal and vegetable kingdoms can supply,till at length all appetite has been destroyed ;pain and disease have been induced ; the humanform and feature have been lost under a mass ofloathsomeness and corruption ; and death, longwished for, yet dreaded, has arrived at last?we shall awake hereafter in another world, butinunaltered misery; without the hope of anysecond offer of release from the impurity andeverlasting punishment of sin.Or, to refer to the intellectual part of our nature,in contemplating for instance the starryfirmament, and in calculating the unerring motionsof the heavenly bodies, have we been contentto characterise the certainty and regularityof those motions as the result of necessity, or ofthe laws of an undefined agent called nature?And in thus failing to acknowledge explicitlythe Author of those laws, though not indeedformally denying his existence, have we, likez 4344 CONCLUSION.the nations of old, worshipped the creature,rather than the Creator; and bowed down ourknee, as it were, to the host of heaven? — wemay in that case hereafter suffer the penalty ofour intellectual pride, in a mode severely just.The mind, which in this life failed to exerciseits highest functions by adoring the Deity inthe contemplation of his works, may be forbiddento extend the exercise of those functionsin the next ; and, while it looks back with unutterabletorment to the forfeited pleasures ofits former state, may be condemned, with tormentinfinitely increased, to expatiate eternallythrough new fields of knowledge, without thecapability of even putting the sickle to theboundless harvest which they present.But if, happily, we have pursued a wisercourse ; if, with Newton, we have delighted todeduce from the contemplation of the mechanismof the heavenly bodies the power of Himwho made them, and who alone sustains anddirects their motions ; we may, and with facultiesinfinitely expanded, cultivate with him thesame pure pleasures, which even on earth abstractedhis desires from earthly wants; and,enraptured with the harmonious movements ofthose endless systems, which neither our presentorgans can see, nor our present facultiesapprehend, we may continue to be constantlyacquiring new knowledge, constantly absorbedCONCLUSION. 345in new wonder and adoration of that Power, fromwhom, both in this world, and in that which isto come, all knowledge, and every other goodand perfect gift are alone derived.APPENDIX.XxAVING considered in the preceding pages the generalopinions of Aristotle respecting the physiology and classificationof animals, I propose in this Appendix to makea selection from his descriptions of some natural groupsand individual species of animals, for the purpose of comparingthem with the corresponding descriptions of Cuvier ;confining myself, however, exclusively to the mammalia,which constitute the first class of vertebrated animals. And,as an introduction to that selection, I shall prefix a comparativeview of the observations of the same two authors onsome points connected with the general physiology of animals;presenting the whole in the form of two parallelcolumns, as the most convenient mode of exhibiting thecomparison. In each column I shall endeavour to give afree but faithful translation of the original passages, followedby the original passages themselves.However extensive may have been the information of theancients in that department of natural science which is nowunder consideration ; and however capable a mind like thatof Aristotle must have been of deducing general conclusionsfrom a systematic examination of facts, (sufficiently numerousand various,) for the purpose of effecting a natural classificationof animals, it could not reasonably be expected that,antecedently to the knowledge of the circulation of theblood, and of the true character of respiration, and also ofIn order to abridge as much as possible the number and length of the extracts,I have occasionally merely stated a conclusion drawn from several separateparagraphs. In such instances I must claim credit for having rightlyunderstood, and fairly represented, the context.348 APPENDIX.the physiology of the absorbent and nervous systems, a naturalclassification could have been accomplished on principlesso satisfactory as at the present day. And those individualspay a very absurd homage to antiquity, who, onoccasions like the present, would place the pretensions ofthe ancients upon an equality with those of the moderns :for the question does not regard the original powers of themind, but the amount of accumulated knowledge on whichthose powers are to be exercised ; and it would indeed beextraordinary, if, inverting the analogy of individuals, theworld should not be wiser in its old age, than it was in itsinfancy.In comparing, then, the zoology of Aristotle with that ofthe moderns, it has not been my intention to prove that theclassification of the one is built upon equally clear and extensivedemonstrations as that of the other ; but t-o shew, as inharmony with the general object of this treatise, that, evenin the very dawn of science, there is frequently sufficient lightto guide the mind to at least an approximation to the truthto a much nearer approximation, indeed, than could havebeen antecedently expected by those who are not accustomedto reflect philosophically on the uniformity of the laws ofnature. Thus, as has been already mentioned, the advancementof science has shewn the existence of such a generalcoincidence and harmony of relation between the severalcomponent parts of an individual animal, that even apartial acquaintance with the details of its structure willfrequently enable the inquirer to ascertain its true placein the scale of organization. And hence, although Aristotleknew nothing of the circulation of the blood, or of thegeneral physiology of the nervous system, and even comparativelylittle of the osteology of animals, yet subsequentdiscoveries have scarcely disturbed the order of his arrangement.He placed the whale for instance, in the same naturaldivision with common quadrupeds, because he sawthat like them it is viviparous, and suckles its young, andrespires by lungs and not by gills; and with viviparousAristotle AND CUVIER COMPARED.quadrupeds it is still classed : the circulation of its blood,as well as the arrangement of its nervous system, being essentiallythe same as in that class of animals. And, notwithstandingthe difference of its form, its osteology, whichholds an analogy throughout with that of quadrupeds, isthe same actually in a part where it would be least expected :for, with the remarkable exception of the sloth, all viviparousquadrupeds have exactly seven cervical vertebrae, andso has the whale ; whereas fish, to the general form of whichthe whale closely approximates, having no neck, have nocervical vertebrae ; and the deficiency of the neck in fish wasrecognised by Aristotle b.GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY.Aristotle.In some animals there is amutual resemblance in all theirparts; as the eye of any oneman resembles the eye of everyother man : and it is the samewith respect to the constituentparts of the horse, or of any otheranimals which are said to beof the same species : for in individualsof the same specieseach part resembles its correspondentpart as much as thewhole resembles the whole."E;^?! 5e TCdv ^(ocov evia [xev iravraTO. fiopia ravTO. aKkriKois, evia SCuvier, tom. I.Every organized body hasits peculiar form ; not only generallyand exteriorly, but evenin the detail of the structureof each of its parts ; and allthe individuals which agree inthe detail of their structureare of the same species.Chaque corps organise a uneforme propre, non-seulementerepa. ravTo. 6f ra fiev etsi tmv en general et a Exterior, maisfiopicou iarlv, olov dvOpayrrov pis jusque dans le detail de laRoi 6(f)6a\p6s dvdpcoTrov pivX koL6(f)BaXp,a, Roi (TapKi crap Roi octtS)ocTTOvV rov avTov di rponov KaliTTTTOV Roi ru>v aXkoiV Ccoojv, oars tScTSei ravra Xcyo/xei' eavroTy* ofioiasstructure de chacune de sesparties, p. 16. et tons les metresappurtenances a Tune de cesformes constituent ce que Tonappelle une espece. p. 19.*» Au^ivK y euitit ipc^t Ix'^uS' p. 40.APPENDIX.Aristotle,yap axrirep to oKov ej^et repos tooXoVf Roi tS>v fiopicav e^ct eKaoTovTTpbs €KacrTov. p. 1 .Cuvier, torn. I.All animals have certaincommon organs, by means ofsome of which they lay holdof, and into others of whichthey convey, their food. Theorgan by which they lay holdof their food is called themouth ; that, into which theyconvey it, the stomach : butthe other parts are called byvarious names. The form andrelative proportions, structure,and position of these parts, arethe same in the same species,but vary in different species ofanimals.UavTOiv d eVri tcov ^cocov kolvo./xopta, G) BexcTai t^v Tpo^riv kol€15 6 desert' — KoXfTrai 5' jjfie Xap^dvci, (TTopa, els 6 de KoiXia' TO de Xoittov tto-Xvavvfiov i(TTLV. — Tavra S' eVrtravTo. Ka eTepa Kara toys elprj-fXeVOVS TpOTTOVSf tj KttT ctdos fj KttffVTTcpoxqv Tj Rut avokoylav r) ttjOeacL diaipepovTa. p. 6.The leading character ofanimals is derived from theexistence of a reservoir fortheir food, that is, an intestinalcanal, the organization ofwhich varies according to circumstances.De la (le reservoir d'ali-mens) derive le premier characterdes animaux, ou leur caviteintestinal. — Organisationde cette cavite et de ses appartenancesa du varier selon lanature des aliens. p. 21, 22.In addition to the mouth The lowest animals have noand stomach, most animals other outlet for the refuse ofhave other common parts by their food, than that by whichwhich they exclude the refuse they admit the food itself,of their food : but in some animalsthese parts are wanting.Mere Be Tanta aXKa Khiva fxopia II n y a que les deniers desIARISTOTLE AND CUVIEE COMPARED.Aristotle.?;^€t ra TrXeiora tcoi/ ^cocov TrpbsTortoise, J] dcjiirjari to irfpiTTdfiaTTjs Tpo(f>rjs — ov yap Traciv vndp~X^i rovTo. p. 6.There are fibres of a peculiarkind in the blood ; by the removalof which that fluid isprevented from coagulating :but if they are not removed, itdoes coagulate. And throughdefect of these fibres the bloodof the deer and of some otheranimals does not coagulate.*Eo"Tt §6 Roi aXXo yevos lva>v, bylverai fie iv ainari' — (ov i^aipov-fiepcov €K Tov aip-aros ov nr^ywrai toaifia, idv Se /u.77 e^aipedwcri, .p. 64. 'Ei fxev ovv rw twv likd-trrcoj/ alfiaTi ^cocov evetfriv, iv be rwTqs iXd(f)OV Kol TTpOKOS Kol ^ov^a-\ibos KoX aWcov TLvS)v ovK eueicivives' Bio Roi ov TTqyvvTai avTav t6aifia 6[ioia)s Tots aXkois, dWa tofiev Ta>v e\d(f)a)V TrapanXrja-ias twTau da(rv7r6d(ov c. p. 65.Cuvier, torn. I.animaux ou les excrement resortedpar la bouche, et dontI'intestin ait la forme d'un sacsans issue, p. 41.The blood contains a principlecalled fibrine ; which,within a short time after theblood has been withdrawn fromthe body, manifests itself inthe form of membranes or filaments.(Le fluid nourricier, ou lesang) — contient la fibrine etla gelatine presque toutes disposesa se contracter et aprendre les formes de membranesou de filaments qui leursont propres, du moins sunlit-ild'un peu de repos pour quellesey manifested. p. 27.The particular senses are The most general externalfive in number, sight, hearing, sense is that of touch; its seatsmell, taste, and touch. Of is the surface of the whole« It is deserving of notice, that the animals whose blood is said not to coagulateare such as are usually killed in hunting ; and it is understood by physiologistsin general, that excessive exercise and violent mental emotions, bothwhich occur in hunted animals, prevent the blood from coagulating. Two ofthe species here mentioned by Aristotle (<r^o| and iatrvxauf or ^etyuif) arementioned by Homer as commonly hunted :xytvtffxo* >ioi eiii^^tsATyat it' uy^ori^aff rih\ ff^ixast ^^* Xaya/avf. OdYSS. P. 295.APPENDIX.Aristotle.these the sense of touch isalone common to all animals ;and is so generally diffusedover the whole body, that it isnot said to reside in any specificpart. All animals do notpossess all the senses; somepossess only a part of them.But no animal is without thefifth sense that of touch.Eicrt S' ai (^aladrjaeis^ TrXelcTTaijRoi Trap* as ovdeixia (paiverai thos€Tepa^ TTevre top dpiOpop, oyjris,axo^, ^(rcPprjcris, y evens, acprj. p.100. Uaai 5e rot? ^(oois alcrdrjcrisfia virdp)(€L kolvt] povq rj d(f)rj,mare scat eV ca avTJ] p-oploi yivecrdairrecfyvKfv, dvavvpov icmv. p. 7*Ov yap Spoils ndcriv vndpxovcriv(^aladrja-ets^ , dXXa tons pew TrdcraiTols 5' eXaTTOVS. p. 100. Tr)V SeTrepTTTTjv cucr6r)cnv rrjv dcf)f}v koKov-pivrjV — irdvT e;(ft ^wa. p. 101.All animals which draw inand breathe out the air havelungs. Those animals whichemploy water analogously toair in respiration, have girls."OXoiS be ndvra oaa tou deabexdpiva dvanvet kol eKTTPel, ttdv-r€^€1 TTvevpova, p. 43. Ta pew ovvdvaXoyov rfj dvairvofj ^pcapeva r<5vypa ^pdyxia fX"* P* 215.Cuvier, torn. I.body. Many animals are withoutthe sense of hearing, andof smell, and of sight. Somehave none of the senses exceptthat of touch, which is neverwanting.Le sens exterior le plus generalest le toucher ; son siegeest a la peau, membrane envelopingle corps entier. p. 36.Beaucoup animaux manquentd'oreilles et de marines;plusieurs d'yeux ; il y en a quisont recruits au toucher, lequelne manque jamais, p. 37.When the element subservientto the process of respirationis the air, the organ of respirationis the lungs : whenwater, the gills.Quand cet element est deI'air, la surface est creuse, et^Q TiOXiXTXiQ potion ; quand c'estde I'eau, elle est vaillant, etappelle franche. p. 43.Animals in general appearEven the most perfect animalsare infinitely inferior tointellectual power, and some are man in the intellectual facultyhave a certain degree of in-ARISTOTLE AND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle.capable of instruction. Someanimals are cautious ; someare cunning. Man alone iscapable of meditation and reflection.Many animals possessmemory : no animal butman is capable of recollection.^aivovrai yap (era fwa) i)(OVTdTiva bvvafiiv — neri re (fipovrjcrivKoL evrjOiiav — tria be Koivavel rivesasia Roi nadTjaeays Roi 8i8a(rKa-Lias. p. 251. To. p.ev (ppovifxa —TO, 5' eTTLJBovKa' — BovXcvtikov defiovov avdpconos ecrrt tcov ^coa>v.Roi fivrjfjLTjs fiev koi 8i8axrjs iowaKoivavei, dvap,ip.PT]crK€<r$ai 8e ovdevaX\o dvvarai irXfjv avBpamos. p. 6.In the greater number ofanimals there are traces of themoral affections of man ; forsome are mild and some arefierce. And the same thingmay be very readily discernedin children, for in them weCuvier, torn. I.ties ; although it is certain thattheir intelligence performs similaroperations to those of thehuman mind: and they are capableof instruction. Man hasthe faculty of associating hisgeneral ideas with particularimages of a more or less arbitrarycharacter, but easily imprintedin his memory,, whichserve to recall to him the generalideas which they represent.Les animaux les plus parfaitssont infiniment au-dessousde I'homme pour les facultiesintellectuelles, et il est cependantcertain que leur intelligenceexecute des operationsdu meme genre — ils acquirementpar Inexperience une certaineconnaissance des choses.p. 51, 52. Homme a lafaculty d'associer ses idees generalesa des images particulieret plus ou moins arbitraires,aisles a graver dans lamemoire, et qui lui servent arappeler les idees generalesquelle represent. p. 50.Animals are susceptible ofemulation, and jealousy, &c.In short, we may observe inthe higher animals a certaindegree of the reasoning faculty,which appears nearly the sameWith that of infants beforeAaAPPENDIX.Aristotle.may perceive the germs oftheir future habits; and indeedthe dispositions of humanbeings at that early period oflife do not differ from thoseof the inferior animals."EveaTi yap iv rois TrXfiaroisKa ra>u aXKa>v ^^<ov 'ix^rj rSivnell TTjv ^vx^jv rpoTTcov, arret eVlTav avOpoynoiV ej^ei (f)av€ pare pasTas 8ia<f)opds. p. 212. To. fiivyap tarn trpaa — to. be Bvp.a>br). p.6. ^avepoiTaroi/ 5' eWi to roiov-rov iii ttjp tcoi/ Traiboiv rfKiKiav^Xeyjraaiv' iv tortoise yap Tap p-evvarepov e^eav eaopevcov €0-tlv Iddvslop txvTj Roi criveppaTa, diacj^epei5' ovdep oas elTrelp f] '^XV '^^ ''®*'Brjpicop ^X^^ icara top xpopop tov-top.p. 212.As man possesses contrivance,and wisdom, and comprehension;so some animalspossess a certain natural power,which, though not the same as,in some respects resembles,those faculties.*Qs yap ip dpOpama Text] ital(ro(f)ia Ka crvpeais, ovTcoi epioisTop ^aXOP icTTL TLS cTcpa TOiaVTr}(jyvaiKfj dip apis. p. 212.All animals which have redblood have a spine or backbone: but the other parts ofthe bony system are wantingCuvier, tom. I.they have acquired the powerof speech.lis sont susceptibles emulationet de jalousie — en unmot, on aper9oit dans les animauxsuperiors un certaindegree de raisonnement avectons ses efFets bons et mauvais,et qui parait etre a pen pres lememe que celui des enfantlorsqu'ils n'ont pas encore apprisa parler. p. 52.In a great number of animalsthere exists a faculty, differentfrom intelligence, which iscalled instinct.II existe dans un grandnombre animaux une facultydifferent de Intelligence ;c'est celle qu'on nomme instinct,p. 53.The first general division ofanimals includes all those whichhave a spine or back-bone consistingof separate portionsARISTOTLE AND Cuvier COMPARED.Aristotle.in some species and present inothers. The spine is the baseor origin of the bony system :it is composed of vertebrae,which are all perforated; andextends from the head to thehips : and the cranium is a continuationof its upper or anteriorextremity.YidvTa de to. ^©a oaa tvaxfidfOTiv, €)(ei paxtv — rii 5' aXKa tS>v ootcov €Vlois fiev ioTiv,iviois d' ovK eariv. p. GQ. *A.pxr]de f) paris icrrXv iv nati toes e-)(pv-aiv oar a. avyKcirai S' 17 pox ts ck(r<j}ov8v\(ov, Teiv€i S' aTzo Très «fe-<PaXrjs P'^XP'' "pos ra 1<tx'-^' °* M^"ovv <T<f)6v8v\oi navies rerprjpdvoi(Icrlv, ava Se to ttjs KecfyaXrjs octtovv(rvv^x^s ferri rots ecrxciTois (r(f)ov-dunois, o KoXelrat Kpaviov. p. 65.Cuvier, torn. I.called vertebrae. The animalsof this division are called vertebrated.They have all ofthem red blood : their body iscomposed of a head trunk, andmembers : the spine, which iscomposed of vertebrae, havingeach an annular perforation,and moveable on each other,commences at its upper or anteriorextremity from the head;the lower or posterior extremityusually terminating in atail.Dans la premiere de cesformes [generales] , qui est cellede I'homme et des animaux quilui ressemblent le plus, le cerveau,&c. sont referees dansune enveloppe osseuse, qui secompose du crane et des vertbred. p. nous appletonles animaux de cette formeles animaux vertehres. p. 58.Leur sang est toujours rouge,p. 63. Leur corps se composetoujours de la tete, du troncet des membres. Repine estcomposed de vertebrae mobilesles unes sur les autres, dontla premiere porte la tete, etqui ont toutes une partie annular.p. 62, 63. Le plussouvent repine se prolonged enune queue, p. 63.mRed-blooded animals whentheir perfect state haveTheir extremities never exceedtwo pair in number :A a 2S56APPENDIX.Aristotle.either no extremities, or theyhave one or two pair. Thoseanimals which have more thantwo pair are not red-blooded.In some animals the correspondinglimbs are different inform,but analogous in use.Thus the anterior extremitiesof birds are neither hands norfeet, but wings. Fish have nolimbs but appendages, calledfins, commonly four in number,sometimes two.To. ^ev evaifia rvyxavei ora —ocra rj anode eari reXea ocra {cnvovvbe <})v(r€i early epai/JLOV ire^ov tot5>v S(f>eo>v yevos, p. 10.) ^ diirobarj T€Tpa.7ro8a. to. 8' avaifia — Trdvdocra TrXeiovs nodes e^et Terrdpcov.p. 7" "Evil Se TMV C^cov ovre eiSeiTO, fjLopia Tavrd exei ovre Ka6^ vrrep-oxrjv Roi eWeiyjnv, a\Xd kutdvaXoyiav. p. 2. Xctpas S' oveTToSay TrpoaOiovs ex" (°' opviOes),dXXa nrepvya^ 'Ibiov repos rd akXa^aa. p. 38. Avx^va S' ovbels e'xetIxOifS, ove KcoXov ovdev — idiot dexovai — rd Trrepvyia, ol p.ev TrXeT •CTToi TcTTapa, ol be TrpoprjKeis bvo.p. 40.The red-blooded animals areman, viviparous and oviparousquadrupeds, birds, fish, cetaceousanimals, and snakes, &c.Cuvier, torn. I.sometimes one pair is wanting,sometimes both.The form of the extremitiesvaries according to the uses towhich they are to be applied;the anterior extremities beinghands, or feet, or wings, orfins; the posterior, feet or fins.II n'y a jamais plus de deuxpaires de membres ; mais ellesmanquent quelquefois Tune ouAutre, ou toutes les deux, etprennent des formes relativesaux mouvement quelle toi ventexecuter. Les membres arteriespeuvent etre faits enmains, en pieds, en ailes ou ennageoires; les posteriors, enpieds ou en nageoires. p. 63.The division of vertebratedanimals includes man, themammalia consisting of viviparousquadrupeds and the ,birds, reptiles of allkinds, many of Which, thoughARISTOTLE AND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle.*EoTt Sc ravra (C^a evaifxa) avere Roi ra ^(ooroKa tcjv re-TparrodcoVy en 8e Roi to. ootoku rayTerpairodav koi opvis Roi Ix^i^s RoiKTJTOS Kol 0(f)lS. p. 42, 43.Animals of the largest sizeare found among those whichare red-blooded. All animalswhich have colourless bloodare smaller in size than thosewhich have red blood; with theexception of a few marine animals,as some of the sepia ^.TovT(o 8ia<f)ep€i ra fxeyiara yevr}nos TO. \oi7ra tcov oKXcov ^axBf, ratTO. p.ev evaifxa to. S' avaifia eiuai.p. 42. UdvTa Se ra avaipa eXarro)TO, preyed] ecrrl t5>v ivaip.a>v C^cou'ttXtjv oXiya iv rfj BaXdrrr] pei^ovaavaipA i(TTLv, olov tS>u paXaKiayv(Via. p. 9-All red-blooded animals havethe five senses."hvOpoTTos pew ovv-aipLU KoX ^(ooTOKa, TTovra (f)aiveTai?;^oj'Ta ravras Tracra? (^alcrdrjaeis^ .p. 100.Cuvier, torn. I.oviparous, are quadrupeds, andfish.Subdivision des animauxVertebra. Homme — lessinges, &c. — les ceases — lesoiseaux — tortues — serpens —poissons. Tom. i. 67- — ii.^51.Vertebrated animals, all ofwhich have red blood, attainto a much larger size thanthose whose Blood is colourless.C'est parmi eux (les animauxvertebrae) que se trouventles plus grands des animaux.p. 62. Le sang esttoujours rouge, p. 63.Vertebrated animals havealways two eyes, two ears, twonostrils, the integuments ofthe tongue and those of thewhole body.Les sens exterior sont toujoursdeux yeux, deux oreilles,deux marines, les tegumens dela langue, et ceux de la tota-litedu corps, p. 64.^ See a curious engraving in Montfort, Hist. Nat. des Mollusques, torn. ii.p. 256, representing a gigantic sepia grasping a ship and its rigging.AaSAPPENDIX.MAMMALIAAristotle.No animal which is not viviparoushas breasts : and evenof viviparous animals thoseonly have them which producetheir young alive at once,without the intervention of anegg-themilk is not, as theblood is, a fluid which animalspossess from their birth, but asubsequent secretion; and iscontained in the breasts. Andall those animals have breastswhich are essentially or directlyviviparous ; as man, andsuch quadrupeds as are coveredwith hair ; and also cetaceousanimals, as the dolphin, theseal, and the whale.Ov$CV tS>V fXrj ^(OOTOKOVVTOiV(e^fi fiacrroiis), ode to. ^aoTo-Kovvra Tzavra, dXX' ocra evdvs ivaVTols ^(OOTOK€L KOI flT} tpOTOKflirpStTOV. p. 40. TS>v 8e ocf^eoov 6fife €)(is ^aoroKci e^co, iv aera7rpS>Tov aoTOKr}(Tas. p. 151. Ai/xavypov (TVfi(f)VT6v iaTL toIs Crois'v(rrep6y€V€S fie Roi anoKCKpLpivovairaaiv, oral ivjj, ei/eort, to yoKa'—^X.€i 8e, ocra e;^ft to yaXa, ivrots patrols. pxiCTTOvs §' e^et ocra^(OOTOKO. Kan iv avTols koX e^co, oXovoaa re Tpi^as e^ei, Saitep avdpco-iron KOI tTTTTOy, KOI TO. KTJTT}, olovBeacons Roi <})a>Krf koi (f)aXatva' RoiCuvier, tom. I.The animals of the classmammalia are essentially viviparous; inasmuch as a directcommunication is establishedbetween the embryo and theparent immediately after conception.The new-born offspring isnourished for a time by milk,which is a special and temporarysecretion from the mammae;organs, so exclusivelypeculiar to this class, as tohave determined the distinctiveappellation mammalia. Thisclass includes all the commonviviparous quadrupeds ;together with the seal, andthe dolphin, and other ceta-celageneration dans tous lesmammiferes est essentiellementvivipare; c'est-audire quele foetus, immediatement acresla conception, descend dans lamatrice, enforce dans ses envelopes— qui establishment entrelui et sa mere une communication,d'ou il tire sa nourriture.p. 75, 76.Les petits se nourishment pendantquelque temps, acres leurnaissance, d'une liqueur particuliera cette classe (le lait),laquelle est produce par lesmammelles — qui ont valu aARISTOTLE AND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle,yap ravra fiaarovs ex* '^'** yaka.p. 77.Cuvier, torn. I.cette classe son nom de mam-ifeyes, attendu que lui extantexclusivement propres, elles ladistinguent mieux qu'aucunautre character exterior. p.76. De la classe des mammaseyes sont homme — les singesle cheval — les piques — ledauphin — les baines, &c. p.79—284.MAN.All animals which have limbsresembling those of man, havetheir legs and thighs and hipssparingly covered with flesh ;whereas in man these parts aremore fleshy than any other.Of all animals man has, inproportion to his size the largestbrain ; and the smallest intervalbetween his eyes; andthe most delicate sense oftouch and of taste.No animal but man has itsbreasts in the front of thechest ; the elephant, like thehuman female, has two breasts,but they are placed on theside.No animal but man has thefaculty of articulate speech ;The muscles which extendthe foot and thigh of man aremore powerful than those ofany other animal: and hencethe calf of the leg is particularlyprominent. The partcalled the pelvis,, situate betweenthe hips, is altogetherproportionally larger in manthan in any other animal.No quadruped has so largea brain as man. His eyes areso placed as to be necessarilydirected only forwards. Inthe delicacy of the sense oftaste and touch man excels allother animals.The female breasts are placedin front of the chest.He possesses an advantagepeculiar to himself in the oraa 4APPENDIX.Aristotle.which consists of vowels pronouncedby means of the larynx,and of consonants formedby the tongue and lips : thedolphin, therefore, which hasavoice in consequence of itspossessing lungs, and a larynx,cannot articulate, because itstongue is not readily moveable,and it has no lips.Tlavra de ra Terpdiroba outcast;TO. a-KeXr) e;(ei — koX acrapKa — moribiKaLavla^ia. — 6 Se avOpccnos toV'vavTiov' (rapicoidi] yap e^ei (rxebbv/xaXicrra tov cra>p.aTos to. la-)(ia icaXToes fir)povs Kol Tas KvrjfMis. p. 29."^xet 8e (eyAce^oXoi/) anavrao<Ta €X€i alia — Kara tenedos 86px)ia>s ex* avOpamos TvKiicrTOv eyep. 19. Ta 8' paraiXaxicTov Kara tenedos buaTrjmvdvBpainco Ta>v ^cooiv. e)(€i 8' UKpi-^eardTTjv avOpoiiros r<i)V aladrjcrecopTrjv d(^r)V, bevrepav Se rr)v yevcrw.p. 18, 19.Cuvier, torn. I.guns of voice ; for he alone iscapable of uttering articulatesounds ; a power which apparentlydepends on the formof his mouth, and the greatflexibility of his lips.MaoToyff 8' ovk ex^'- ou^ev ev toTvpocrOev aXX' tj av6pa>7ros' 6 8eXetjias e;(et p€V paarovi 8vo, dXXLes muscles qui retiennentle pied et la cuisse (de I'homme)dans D'etat extension sontplus vigoureux (que ceuxaucun mammifere); d'oii re-suite la sallies du mollet et dela fesse — le bassin est pluslarge, p. 82.Aucun quadrupeds n'ap-proche de lui pour la grandeuret les replis des hemispheresdu cerveau. p. 84. Ses deuxyeux sont diriges en avant ; ilne voit point de deux cotes ala fois comme beaucoup dequadrupeds. La delicatelyde Todorat doit infer surcelle du gout, et I'homme doitd'ailleurs avoir de Advantage,a cet regard, au moins sur lesanimaux dont la langue est re-vetus d'ecailles ; enfin, la finessede son toucher result,et de celle de ses tegumens,&:c. p. 85.Ses mammelles, au nombrede deux seulement, sont sinusessur la poitrine. p. 88.ARISTOTLE AND CUVIER COMPARED.Cuvier, torn. I.Homme a une preeminenceparticulier dans les organesde sa voix ; il pent seul articulardes sons ; la forme de sabouche et la grande mobilityde ses livres en sont probablementles causes, p. 86.Aristotle.ovK iv Tw (TT-dei dWa poi t^(TTTjdfl. p. 26.Ta de ^woTOKa Roi Terpdnoba^c5a «XXo oWtjv d(f)ir](ri cf)(i>vr}v,didXcKTOu 6' ovdcv e-)(€L, aXX' 'ibiovTout dvBpuinov eariv (p. 107.)didXcKTos 8' T] Tes (pavrjs eoTi r^yXaTTTj dtdpdpaKTis. to. fiev ovv(jicovrjevTa 17 (f)a>uf] Roi 6 Xdpvy^dipirjaiv, TO. S' a<poiva t) yXcorraNol rd x^'^V ^^ ^^ V dt-dXcKTOSi(TTi.v. p. 105. 'A<pir](n Be koL 68e\(f)\s rpiyfiov koi fiv^et — eari yapTOVTcp <p(Ovr] — dWd rrjv y\5>TTavOve aTToKeXvpev-qv (e^ei) ove X^'^Vmare apOpov ti rrjs (pcovrjs Trowel.p. 106.APES, &c.The feet of apes are pecu- The hind feet of the quad-liar,and resemble large hands,,the toes being like lingers, andthe under surface of the hindfoot like the palm of the hand,but terminating in a badlyshaped heel. Hence they oftenuse their feet as hands. Theirarms resemble those of man,as also their hands, and fingers,and nails ; and they bend theirextremities in the same directionas man does. The upperpart of their body being largerthan the lower part, as is thecase with decided quadrupeds;and their feet partaking of theeThe same is true of quadrupeds in general : in most of which, however,Aristotle mistook the joint at the heel and wrist, for that of the knee and elbow.romana (to which order apesbelong) have a thumb capableof being opposed to the othertoes, which are as long and asflexible as the fingers ; whencethey are capable of climbingwell: but they do not easilywalk, or support themselves inan erect position, because theirpelvis is narrow, and the planeof the under surface of theirfeet is not horizontal.APPENDIX.Aristotle.character of hands ; their pelvismoreover being small; theyare from these joint causes incapableof continuing long inan erect position.Like man they have twomammae on the chest ; andtheir internal anatomy resemblesthe human.Cuvier, torn. I.Some of the apes (tti^koi)resemble man in many points,as to their face : for they havenostrils and ears ; and boththeir front and back teeth notmuch unlike those of man.Ot fie Tvi6r)K0i — Ib'iovs toys noses(exovaiy elcrl yap olov X^'^P^^^(yaXai, koI oi daKTvKoL axnrep olt5)v X'^ipaiv, 6 fieaos fiaKporaros,Roi TO KaTO) rod nodes X^ *P** op.oLOv,irKrjv cTTi TO firJKOs to ttjs ;^eip6seVt TO. eo-xciTa Teivov, KaOdnep 6k-vap' Toto 5e eV ciKpov aKXijpoTe-pow, KUKas Roi dfivbpms p.ipovp.€VOvTTTepvrjv. KexpTjTai de Tols ttocIviir aficfxi), koi gods X^P°"^ '^'^^ ^^TTOcl, KoX avyKafXTTTei acnrep ;^et-pas. — "^X^*- ^^ '^"^ ^paxiovasaxTTTcp avOponTTOs, nXrju decrees'Kol KafXTTTei Kol TOVTOVS Kol TO.o-kcXt] axTirep avOponTtos — irpos BeTovTois ;^eTpap koX daKvvXovs koiovvxas 6p.oiovs a.vBpai7T<o, rrXfjVTtavTa Tota iii to OrjpioodeCTTfpop.In the character of their intestines,,in the direction oftheir eyes, and in the positionof their breasts, they resembleman ; and the structure of theirfore-arms and hands enablesthem to imitate us in many oftheir gestures and actions.The higher species of apeshave flat nails ; and teethvery much resembling the humanboth in number and arrangement,and also in form :and they have no tail.Les quadrants differentde notre espece par le charactertres-sensible, que ses pieds dederriere ont les pouces libreset opposites aux autres doigts,et que les doigts des pieds sontlongs et flexible comme ceuxde la main; aussi toutes lesspecies grimpent-elles aux arbresavec facilite, tandis quellene se tiennent et ne marchentdebout quaver peine, leur piedne se posant alors que sur letranchant exterieur,et leurbas-sin detroit ne favoring pointI'equilibre. p. 100.ARISTOTLE AND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle.Ta S av(o rov Caro) ttoKv fiei^ovaf^ft, ftXTTrep TO Terpdiroda — scatSid re rata Kal 8ia tA toysn68as ex*" ofioiovs X^P'^'- — ^*""reXei roj/ 7rXeta> ;:^pdi'oi/ Terpdnovvov fxaXXov ^ 6p66v' Kol ovT i(r)(iaeXf- os TfTpdirovv ov. p. 35, 36.Ta 8 ivros diaipeSevra opoia€XOV(riv dvdptoTTco ndm-a to. roiav-ra. p. 36. "Ex^i S' €V ra (rrrjOeidvo $Texas fiaa-Totv fUKpS>v. p. 35.Cuvier, torn. I.To de TrpocrajTTov ?;(et TroXXotsofioiOTTjTas r&) rov dvOpoi-Kov' Kanyap pvKTTJpas koL cora TrapaTrXrjcria?Xft, Roi odours axrircp 6 auBpa-Thos, Kol TOVS TTpOCrdioVS Roi TOVSyop,cf)iovs. p. 35.THE HEDGEHOGPorcupines and land-echini,or hedgehogs, are covered withspines, which are properly tobe considered in these animalsas a kind of rigid and induratedhair ; for these spines donot serve the purpose of feet,as they do in sea-echini.TpiX'Sav ydp rt eiSoy BfTeov Roiras aKcofBciideis Tpixas, bias oi apellesont toutes des intestinsassez semblables aux notes,les yeux diriges en avant, lesmammelles sur la poitrine. p.100. La liberty de leurs avant-braset la complication de leursmains leur permettent a toutesbeaucoup reactions et de gestessemblables a ceux de Homme.p. 101.Les singes — ont a chaquem^choire quatre dents inci-siA'^es droits, et a tons lesdoigts des ongles plats ; deuxcharacters qui les rapprochentde Homme plus que les genressuivant; leurs molasses n'ontaussi, comme les notes, quedes tubercules jnousses. p. 101 .AND PORCUPINE.Hedgehogs have their bodiescovered with quills instead ofhair ; and so have porcupines.Les soissons et les pore-epicsont le corps convert deAPPENDIX.Aristotle,aaioi expvcriv ixivoi Roi ol varpt-X^es' Tpixos yap ^pf tc"' irapixova-iv ,dXX' ov TTobcov, Scnrep ot tS>v 6a-XaTTio)!/. p. 10.THEAll viviparous animals haveeyes, except the mole ; and eventhis animal, although it hasneither the faculty of sight,nor eyes readily visible, cannotbe said to be altogetherwithout eyes; for if its skin betakenois, you may distinguishnot only the natural situationof the eyes, but that black centralpart of the eye itself inwhich the pupil is contained ;as if these organs had been imperfectlydeveloped, and theskin had grown over them. Ifthe skin, which is thick, bestripped off from the head,you may perceive on its innersurface, and in the usual region,distinct eyes ; which,though small and shrunk, as itwere, have all the essentialparts of those organs, nam sly,a pupil placed in the centre ofthe black part of the eye, andthat black part surrounded bythe white f.ZaoroKa iravra (eX" 6(^6akp.ovs)irXriv daTTaXaicos. tovtov Se rpoirovCuvier, tom. I.piquant au lieu de polls, p.132 et 208.MOLE.The eye of the mole is sosmall, and so concealed by theskin, that for a long time thisanimal was supposed to bewithout eyes. The blind rat-molehas no visible trace of externaleyes; but in taking offthe skin, a very small blackpoint is observable, which appearsto have the organizationof an eye, without the possibilityof being employed as such,because the skin passes over itnot only in an entire state, butas thick and as closely coveredwith hair as in any other partof the face. This may probablybe the animal which, accordingto M. Olivier, gave theidea to the ancients of describingthe mole as totally blinds.Son ceil est si petit, et tellementcache par le poll, qu'onf KvxXuTtov (p. 101.) is evidently synonymous with XivKov. (p. 12.)By an examination of Aristotle's description it is evident that the ancientsknew the true state of the case, namely, that the mole has eyes.ARISTOTLE AND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle.fi€V Tiv €\€iv av Oeirj ris, o\a>s S'ovK fXftv. oKois fA€V yap oxjff opaovT e^fi (Is TO (f)avep6v drjXovs6(f)6aXp.ovs' d(f)aip€6euTos de rovdfpfiaros e;(ei rrjv re ^(copav rSiu op,-pdratv Roi rtov 6(f)daXpQ)v to. peXavaKara tov tottov koi ttjv xwp^v "^V^(f>v(r€i Tols 6(f)6akpo7s vTrdpx^ovcraviv Tw eKTOs, ass iv rrj yevearei ttt]-povpevmv koi i7ri(f)vop€Vov tov septp. 13. ^Acf)aipe6€VTos deTOV departs ovtos naxos dno rrjsK€(f)aX.rjs KaTU tt)V x^pap ttjv ceo)tSiv oppaTcov eacodev elcTLV ol ocj)-$a\po\ di€cf)6appevoLy iravr e\ovT(sTanto. TO. per] toIs akqOivols'exovcTL yap to T€ peXav Ka to tov peXavos, tt)u Ka\ovpevr)vKOpTJV, Kol TO KVkKcOTTCOP. p. loop101.Cuvier, torn. I.en a nie long-temps Existence.p. 137. Le rat-taupe aveuglen'a meme point du tout d'oeilvisible au dehors ; mais quandon enleve sa peau, on trouveun tres-petit point noir qui paraitorganise comme un oeil ,sans pouvoir servir a la vision,,puisque la peau passe dessussans s'ouvrir ni s'amincir, etsans y avoir moins de toilsqu 'autre part. — II se pourrait,comme le dit M . Olivier qu'ilexit donne aux anciens I'idee defaire la taupe tout-a-fait aveugle.p. 201.THE BEAR.The bear is an omnivorousanimals living on various fruitson honey, on ants, and on flesh;attacking not only the smalleranimals, but even wild boarsand bulls h. The feet of thebear resemble hands; and forashort time this animal canwalk erect on its two hindfeet.H 8 cipKTOs 7rap(f)dyov eari.The bear though so powerfulan animal is not disposedto feed on flesh, unless whencompelled by want of otherfood. Bears walk on the wholesole of the foot, and are thusenabled to raise themselveswith comparative ease in anerect position on their hindfeet.Les ours — maugre leur Its mode of engaging with the bull is thus described by Aristotle : " Inengaging the bull, the bear throws itself on its back ; and, while the bullis attempting to toss it, the bear takes the bull's horns between its paws,and thus overthrows its adversary."APPENDIX.Aristotle.Roi yap KapTTOV ia-OUi — Roi p,e\iRoi fivpfiTjKas, Roi crapKocjiayet.Bta yiip rrjv la")(yv eTrirideTai ovfiovov This €\a.(f)ois dWa koi toIsdypiois vcrlu — koX ross ravpois'ofiocTf xo>pr](Ta(Ta yap rat ravpcoKara 7rp6a-a>7rov virria KaTaTrlirrei,Kcu Tov ravpov rvTrreiv imx^ipovv-ros Toi fxev ^paxtoa-i ra KeparanepiXap^dvei, ra de a-Topari rrjvdKpa>piav SaKovcra /cara/SaXXei rovravpov. ^adl^€i S' eVt riva xpovovoXiyov Ka roi dvolv iroboiv 6p$rj.Cuvier, torn. I.tree force, ne mangent-ilsgu^re de chair que par necessity.lis marchent sur la planteentire, ce qui leur donne plusde facilite pour se dresser surleurs pieds de derriere. p. 141.224.THE SEAL.The seal brings forth itsyoung on shore, but passesmost of its time in the sea, andderives its nourishment fromthence. With respect to itsextremities, it may be consideredas an imperfect quadruped;for immediately in successionto its shoulder bladesit has feet resembling ha?ids^;and on each foot are five toes,and each toe has three joints :the hind feet in their shaperesemble the tail of a fish. Allthe teeth of the seal are sharpand pointed, as indicating theapproximation of their natureto fish ; almost all fish havingteeth of that character. Theseal has a cloven tongue.i From the shortness of the armoverlooked these parts.The feet of the seal are soshort, and so enveloped in theskin, that on land they onlyserve them for crawling ; but,as the interstices of the toesare filled up v/ith membrane,they act as excellent oars ; andhence these animals pass thegreater part of their life in thesea only coming to land forthe purpose of basking in thesun and suckling their cubs.They have five toes on each oftheir feet : and on the hindfeet the outermost and innermostare longest, the intermediatebeing shortest. All theirteeth have either pointed orcutting edges. Their tongueis indented at the extremity,and fore-arm in this animal, AristotleARISTOTLE AND CUVIEE Compared.Cuvier, torn. I.Leurs pieds sont si courts, ettellement envelopes dans lapeau , qu'ils ne peuvent, surterre, leur servir quia ramper ;mais comme les intervals desdoigts y sont remplis par desmembranes, ce sont des ramesexcellentes ; aussi ces animauxpassent-ils la plus grande partiede leur vie dans la mer, et neviennent a terre que pour sereposer au soleil, et aliterleurs petits. p. 163, 164. Lespiques ont — cinq doigts atous les pieds — au pieds dederriere, le pounce et le petitdoit sont les plus longs, et lesintermediate les plus courts.Toutes les dents sont translatesou conquest. p. 164. Leurlangue est lisse, et chancreau bout. p. 165.THE ELEPHANT.The elephant has five toes Elephants have on each footAristotle.*H de <{)u>Kr} — tUt€i iv rfj yfjfi€V — 8iarpi/3et Se tov ■^(povov tovTToXifV Roi Tp€(f)€Tai sic TrJ9 OdkcLT-Très. p. 167, 168. 'H fie (f><i>Kr}acnrep irdrqpapievov earl rerpd-TTOVV (vows yap e;^et /xera ttjvd>fio7r\dT~r]v rows 7ro8ay ofwiovs)(€pcr\v — TrevTadaKrvXot yap eli,Kal fKaoTos t5)p daKTvXcov SalinasfXei TpcTs — oi S' oTTicrOioi, — roi<rxT]fw.Ti TTapaTrK-qcTLOt rais rSiV l^-Bvcov ovpals ei(ri. p. 27» Kapxa-pohoVV icTTl IvdcTL Tols ohovCTlVyo)s iTToKKdrrovaa re yei/et rawixdva>v' ol yap Ixdves navTcs o-;^e-86v Kapxap68ovTes elcriv. p. 33.*E;^« Se — €(rxi(rp,evTjv Trjv y\S>TTav.p. 48.on each foot ; though the jointsof these are not very distinct.It has four teeth on each sideof its mouth, with which it tri-curatesits food, and makes itas smooth as bran : and besidesthese it has two very largeteeth. It has a long and powerfulproboscis, which it uses as ahand; for with this organ ittakes up and conveys to itsmouth both solid and liquidfood. Its intestines have ap-fivetoes, very well defined inthe skeleton, but so imbeddedin the callous skin envelopingthe foot that they can only berecognised externally by theirnails, which are attached to theedge of this hoof as it were.They have two tusks, whichsometimes grow to an enormoussize ; and either four oreight grinding teeth on eachside, according to the periodsof their development. TheAPPENDIX.Aristotle.engages, presenting the appearanceof four stomachs :and it has two mammae placedby the side of the chest nearthe axillae. The cub of the elephantsucks with its mouth ,and not with its proboscis."Eoti Se irfVTaSaKTvKov (6 eXc-<f)as^ — TO. re Trepi toys 8aKTvXovsddiapdpcoTorepa t-)(ei ray ttoScov.p. 25. 'O 8' iXe(f)as odours fieve;^ei Terraces ici eKarepa, ois kut-epyd^erai rfjv Tpo(pfjv (Xeaivei 8'tocTTrfp Kpt/xi/a), x^P''^ ^^ tovtq>vaXkovs dvo TOVS fieyaXovs. p. 34.Tiff de eX€(f)a(nv 6 pvKTTjp yiveraifxaKpos Roi laxypos, Roi xprjTai avaaanep X^^P'*-' TTpoardyeTai reyap Roi Xap^dveL rovroa Roi els to(TTopa 7rpo(r<p€p€Tai ttjv Tpo<f)rjV, KalTrjv vypdv koi Trjv ^r)pdv, f*6povtS)v (<p(ov. p. 14. 'O de e\e<PasevTepov ex^c crvficpixreis e'xoi', oxTTecj)aiveo-6ai TeTTupas KocXias '^X^^^-p. 47. 'E;^f4 ^^ TOVS pXKTTOVSbvo TTepl Tas p.ao'xdXas — ovk ev r<5OTTjBei dXXd TTpos Tw o'TTjdeL. p.30. et 26. 'O de (TKvp.vos oTavyevTjTai, drjXd^ei rw <rT6p.aTL Roi ovTa ixvKTTJpi. p. 191.Cuvier, tom. I.proboscis, terminating in anappendage like a linger, givesto the elephant a degree of addressequal to that which thehand of the ape imparts tothat animal. The elephantuses this proboscis for the purposeof conveying solid foodor pumping up liquids into itsmouth. The intestines of theelephant are voluminous ; ithas two mammae placed underthe breast, and its cub suckswith the mouth, and not withthe trunk.(Les elephant) out cinqdoigts a tous les pieds, biencomplets dans le squelette,mais tellement encroutes dansla peau callous qui entire lepied, qu'ils n'apparaissent audehors que par les ongles attachessur le bord de cette esp^cede sabot, p. 228, 229. Deuxdefenses qui sortent de labouche et prennent souventun accroissement enorme. p.229. Tanto une, tanto deuxmacheli^res de chaque cote,quatre ou huit en tout, selonles eques. p. 231. Unetrompe cylindrique — terminerpar un appendice en formede doit — donne a Elephantpresque autant deadness quela perfection de la main penten donner au singe. II seensert pour saisir tout ce qu'ilARISTOTLE AND CUVIEE COMPARED.Aristotle.Camper says that in almostall points the anatomy of theelephant is correctly representedby Aristotle; the apparentinconsistencies arisingfrom his having dissected ayoung elephant. Tom. ii. p.205, &0.Cuvier torn. I.veut porter a sa bouche etpour pompey sa boisson. p.229. Les intestins sont tr^s-voluminous — les mamelles, aunombre de deux seulement,places sous la poitrine. Lepetit tete avec la bouche etnon avec la trompe. p. 230.RUMINATING ANIMALS.All viviparous quadrupedswhich have horns are withoutthe front teeth in the upperjaw; and some indeed whichhave no horns have the samedefect with respect to theteeth, as the camel.Of viviparous quadrupedssome are cloven-footed andhave hoofs instead of claws, asthe ox, sheep, goat, and deer.The same animals have fourstomachs, and are said to ruminate.With the exception of thedeer, all ruminating animalshave horns which are partlyhollow, and partly solid; thehollow part grows out of theskin, of which it is indeed acontinuation ; but that partround which this hollow isfitted is solid, and grows outof the bone ; as in oxen.The horns of most animalsWith the exception of thecamel and the musk, all theanimals of this order havehorns ; and all are withoutfront teeth in the upper jaw.The feet terminate in twotoes, each of which is coveredwith a separate hoof, and isopposed to its fellow by a flatsurface; from whence they arecalled cloven-footed. The animalsof this order are calledruminating ; and have alwaysfour stomachs.The structure of the hornsdiffers in different species. Insome the solid osseous partwhich projects from the frontalbone is covered with a hollowcase, which grows over it fromthe skin, as in oxen, sheep,and goats.BbAPPENDIX.Aristotle.are, in their form, simple, andare hollow, except at their extremity; the horns of the deeralone are in their form arborescent; and, in their substance,solid throughout.The deer alone, from theage of two years, sheds itshorns annually; the horns ofother animals are permanent,unless separated by violence.Deer at the age of one yearhave merely the rudiments ofhorns, short sprouts, as it were,covered ^vith downy skin. Atthe age of two years they developedstraight horns likewooden pegs; and are hencecalled at that period TrarroXtat.At three years their hornshave two branches; at fouryears, more ; and in this waythe number of branches increasestill the animal is sixyears old; after which thenumber is not increased.The horn at first grows as itwere in the skin, and has a softvillous covering; and after ithas attained its full growththe animal exposes itself tothe sun, in order to ripen anddry up this covering.TerpoTToSa epai/xa kol ^aOTOKa-^ocra fxev earl Kcparo^opa, ovkafiffxiidovTa icrriv' ov yap exit rowsTTpocrOtovs eVt ttjs avco (nayovos.Cavity tom. I.In the various species ofdeer the osseous projections arecovered, during their growth,with skin resembling that ofthe rest of the head. This skinsubsequently perishes, leavingthe osseous horn uncovered;and, after a time, the hornsthemselves are shed; and aresucceeded by others which areusually larger than the preceding;and these again are shedin their turn and replaced byothers.The figure of the horn indeer varies according to theage and species of the animal.Les ruminans—ontTair d'etrepresque tons construits sur lememe mode, et les chateauseuls presentment quelques pegAND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle.coi 8* €Pia ovK dfX(f)a)dovTa RoicLKipara, olov KUfxrjXos. p. 32.Tci)V be Terpanodcov koi epalfiuvRoi ^(ooTOKCiv Ttt [xev icrri — diarxidrj,KoX dvrl Ta)v 6vvxa>v XV^^^ ^/t^*>(oanep irpo^arov kcu di koi €\a(f)osKOI ^ovs. p. 29.Kai Terraces ej^et dvopolas koi-vias' a df) Roi Xeyerai prjpvKd^civ.p. 46.Thou d €\6vT(i>v Kepas 8i oXovp€V ej^ei (TTfpeov povov Tkacfyos, todaXXa KoTXa p^xpt rives, ro 8'((Txarou crrepfop. to p^v ovv koI-\ov eK Tov departs Trt<j)VKe nell de [6] i tovto Trepirjp-poorai TO (TTepeov €k tcov oaTaVjslop TO. KtpaTa Tap soap. p. 30.Twp de KepaTcop to. pep TrXeicrraCuvier, torn. I.times exceptions aux characterscommuns. Le premier de cescharacters est de savoir d'iiici-gives quia la machine inferior.p. 246. Tout le restedes ruminant (excepte les chateau,&c.) a, au moins dansle sexe male, deux cornes,c'est-k-dire, deux prominenceplus ou moins longues desOS frontal. p. 252.Les quatre pieds sont terminuspar deux doigts et pardeux sabots, qui se regardentpar une face plate, en sortequ'ils ont I'air d'un sabotunique, qui aurait et fendu.p. 246.Le nom de ruminant indiquela propriety singular de cesanimaux, de macer une secondefois les aliens — proprietyqui tient k la structurede leurs stomach. lis en onttoujours quatre. p. 247-Dans le genre des boeufs, &c.les comes sont revenues d'untui — on donne en particulierle nom de corne k la substancede cet etui, et lui-meme portecelui de come creuse. p. 252.Dans le genre des cerfs, les preeminencecouvertes pendant untemps d'une peau value connieThere can be no doubt from the structure of the horns of oxen, &c. thatthe relative («') ought to be retained ; and the to xo7\ev Ik toZ Vt^f^xTOi is evidentlyopposed to the to (rn^ta* ix riy octtuv. But the question is (suite settledby the following passage from p. 67, tUv Tt xi^anwv, *. r. X.Bb237^ArPENDIX.Aristotle.KoTXd (OTLV dno rrjs TrpocrcpixreasTrepi TO €Vt6s eWe^VKoy €K ttjs K€-(fyaXrjs octtovv, in uKpov 8 e;^€t toCTTepeov, Kol ecTiv avrXa* to. betS)v i\a.(f)(ov fxova bi oKov CTepea RoiTToXvcrxi-brj . p. 67:, 68. 'ATTO/SaXXetde TO. KtpaTa p,6vou eXacjios kut€TOs, dp^dfievos dno dicTovs, RoiTrdXiv (jive to. 8' oXXa avvex^sfeet, edv fir] Ti /3ia 7rr]pa>6j}. p. 30.Ot fuv ovv ivLavaioL ov (pvovai K€-para, ttKtjv acrnep (TTjfjieiov X^P'-^dpx^v Alva' Toto S' eVrt ^paxvRoi dacrv. cftvovcri be bieTcis TrpcorovTO. Kcpara evOea, Kaddrrep Trarra-XoVS* bio Roi KoXovai t6t€ TTUTTa-vias avTOVs. Ta be TpiTco eTeibUpovv (Pvovai, TW be TeTdpTcoTpaxvTepov' Roi tovtov top Tpoirovde embiboaai ptXP'' ^$ eTotv. dnoTovTOV be opoia del dva<Pvov(riv.p. 258. Ta be KepaTa (jiveTaidJcTTrfp ev bepp.aTi to npaTov, Roiyivovrai bacea' oTav b* av^Tjdaxriv,■ffKid^ovTai, Iv eKTTeylraxri Roi ^rjpd-vaxTi TO Kepas. p. 259.Olivier, torn. I.celle du reste de la tete, ont aleur base un anneau de tuberculesosseux, qui, en grossis-sant, compriment et oblit^rentles vaisseaux nourrissiers decette peau. Elle se dess^cheet est eleven; la preeminenceosseuse mise a nu, se separeau bout de quelque temps ducrane auquel elle tenant ; elletombe, et Animal demeuresans armes. Mais il lui en repoussebenton de nouvelles,ordinaire plus grandes queles precedents, et destinies ksubir les menes revolutions.Ces cornes, present possesses,et sureties k des changelessperiodicals, portent le nom debois. p. 253. La figure de celois varie beaucoup — selonImage. p. 254.CETACEOUS ANIMALS.The dolphin and whale andother cetaceous animals, whichhave not gills, but a tube forconveying away the sea-waterreceived into their mouth, areviviparous; and they respireair, for they have lungs : andhence, if caught in a net, andunable to come to the surfaceCetaceous animals remainconstantly in the water; but,as they respire by means oflungs, they are obliged to comeoften to the surface for air. p.272. The ordinary cetaceapossess a remarkable apparatus,from which they are calledblowers, by means of whichARISTOTLE AND Cuvier Compared.Aristotle.for the purpose of breathing,they are suffocated.The dolphin utters a kindof murmur when it is in theair; for it has a voice, inasmuchas it has lungs, and anair-tube leading to them ; buthaving no lips, and its tonguebeing not sufficiently moveable,it is unable to utter an articulatesound.The dolphin has mammae,not placed in the anterior partof the body, but near the vent.The mildness and docilityof the dolphin are remarkable.These fish swim in largeflocks, and their swiftness isso remarkable that they havebeen known to spring over themasts (decks?) of ships.The cetaceous animal calledmysticetus has no teeth, buthairs instead, like hogs' bristles.AeXcfns di Roi (f)d\aiva koi to.ak\a KrjTT], ocra fife tx^i /3pay;^tadXKa ^va-rjTTJpa, ^(ootokov(Tiv. 'Cuvier,tom. I.they discharge through theirnostrils a large volume of waterwhich they take into theirmouth with their food. p.275.They have no prominent laminaein their glottis ; andhence their voice is nothingmore than a simple lowing,p. 276.Their mammae are placednear the vent. p. 276.The general organization ofthe dolphin's brain shews thatit possesses the docility usuallyattributed to it. p. 278.The common dolphin, whichis found in large flocks in everysea, and is remarkable for itsswiftness of motion, so that itoccasionally darts over thedecks of ships, appears evidentlyto be the dolphin ofthe ancients, p. 278.The upper jaw of the balaenajis furnished with thin transverselaminae closely set, formedof a kind of fibrous hornterminating in a bristly fringeat the border, p. 284.Les c^tac^s se tiennent constammentdans les eaux ; maiscom me ils resident par desAPPENDIX.Aristotle,and de Trdvra ova e\ei (pvarjTTJpa,Roi 8eX!^Tai tou dea' irXevfiovayap txpvKTLV. p. 167. Cato kcu Xap,-^av6[xepo9 6 deacons iv toIs 8iktvoisaTTOTTviyeTaL rax^eas dia to per) dva~irvelv. p. 215.*A<f)lrj(ri de Ka 6 8e\(f)is rptyp,6vKa fxv^et, oTav e^eXOrj, iv roi depteoTt yap rovra (})ci>vr)' e^ei yapKa TrXevpLOva Kal dprqpiav, cinnarr)v y\S)TTav ovk dTroXeXvfievrjvode X^'^V ^^T^ apdpov Ti ries <f)a)-ins TToieiv. p. 106.O d€\<fHs e^et factors dvo, ovkapa> 8 aXka TrXrjo'iov rate apdpcov.p. 40.Twv §6 6a\a(T(rlaiP TrXetora Xe-herat (TT]p.cla Trcpl rows d€\(f)lva5npaoTrjTos Ka fjp,€p6Tr]ros. p. 301.HSj; S' amrai dekcfiLViov /xe-yaXav dyeXt} fui koi p.iKpS)v.Aeyerat de Kal Trepl raxvTiJTOsairiOTa Tov ^aov cmdvTcav yapooKei eivai ^ma>v rdx^o'Tov, kail rwv€vv8pcov Kal Tcov x^po-ato)!/, KalCuvier torn. I.poumons, ils sont obliges derevenir souvent k la surfacepour y prendre de I'air. p. 272.Les c^taces ordinaires se distinguentpar I'appareil singulierqui leur a valu le nomcommun de snuffers. C'estqu'engloutissaiit;, avec leurproie, de grands volumesd'eau, il leur fallait une voiepour seen embarrassed ; elles'amasse dans un sac place kOrifice ext^rieur de la cavitydu nez d'ou elle est chasseavec violence — au travers d'uneouverture peruse au-dessus dela tee. p. 275, 276.II n'y a point de lames sail-lanesdans leur glotte, et leurvoix doit se require a de simplesmugissemens. p. 276.Leurs mamelles sont presde I'anus. p. 276.Toute Organisation de soncerveau annonce que le dauphinne doit pas etre d^pourvude la docility que les ancienslui attributing. p. 278.Cet animal, repaid engrandes troupes dans toutesles mers, et celebre par la velocityde son mouvement, quile fait s'elancer quelquefois surle lilac des navires, parait re-'Aristotle AND CUVIER COMPARED.Aristotle. Cuvier, torn. I.xmfpukXovrai he rrXoiav fxeydXav element avoir et le dauphinlarovs. [iKpia ;) p. 302."Eth de Roi 6 five TO lajroi 686v-Tas fxev iv ra OTofiari ovid cx^*jrpixas he ofioias veiais. p. 72.des anciens. p. 278.La machine superieure — ases deux cotes garnis de lamestransverses minces et series,former d'une esp^e decorne fibres, effigies a leurbord. p. 284.From the preceding comparison it appears that, with respectto those points in the history of animals the knowledgeof which was equally accessible to both writers, the descriptionsof Aristotle are hardly inferior in accuracy to those ofCuvier. Nor does this observation hold with reference tothe more common animals only : it is equally remarkablewith reference to those which are of comparative rarity ; insupport of which assertion I would refer, among other instances,to the description of the sepia, and of the chameleon,and of the evolution of the egg of the bird during incubation.But I have perhaps already extended this comparisontoo far, and will therefore here conclude.