ON THEPOWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE CREATIONOF ANIMALS AND IN THEIR HISTORY HABITSAND INSTINCTSBY THEREV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M.A. F.R.S. ETC.RECTOR OF BARHAM.VOL I\ n> iLONDONWILLIAM PICKERINGC. Nottingham, Took COURT, Chancery LANE.TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLECHARLES,BARON FARNBOROUGH,KMGHT GRAND CROSS OF THE ORDER OF THE BATH, A MEMBER OF HIS Majesty'sMOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL, AND ONE OF THE TRUSTEESOF THE BRITISH MUSEUM,,THE FOLLOWING TREATISE,BY HIS PERMISSION,IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,BY HIS LORDSHIP'S OBLIGED AND OBEDIENT SERVANT,THE AUTHOR.VOL. I.NOTICE.THE series of Treatises, of which the present is one, ispublished under the following circumstances :The RIGHT HONOURABLE and REVEREND FRANCISHENRY, EARL of BRIDGEWATER, died in the month ofFebruary, 1829 ; and by his last Will and Testament, bearingdate the 25th of February, 1825, he directed certainTrustees therein named to invest in the public funds thesum of Eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, withthe accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposalof the President, for the time being, of the Royal Societyof London, to be paid to the person or persons nominatedby him. The Testator further directed, that the person orpersons selected by the said President should be appointedto write, print, and publish one thousand copies of a workOn the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifestedin the Creation ; illustrating such work by all reasonablearguments, as for instance the variety and formation ofGod's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms; the effect of digestion, and thereby of conversion ;the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite varietyof other arguments; as also by discoveries ancient andmodern, in arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature.He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the saleof the works so published should be paid to the authors ofthe works.VlllThe late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determiningupon the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions ofthe Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrenceof a nobleman immediately connected with thedeceased, Mr. Davies Gilbert appointed the following eightgentlemen to write separate Treatises on the differentbranches of the subject as here stated :THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, Dad.PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH.ON THE POWER, WISDOM, AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE ADAPTATIONOF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL ANDINTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.JOHN Kidd, M. D. Fer. S.Rectus PROFESSOR OP MEDICINE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.THE REV. WILLIAM Wheel, M.A. F.R.S.FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS CONSIDERED WITHREFERENCE TO NATURAL THEOLOGY.SIR CHARLES BELL, K. G. H. F.R.S. LetheHAND : ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGN.PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.FELLOW OF AND SECRETARY TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.ON ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY.IXTHE REV. WILLIAM Auckland, D. D. F.R.S.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY IN THEUNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.THE REV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M.A. F.R.S.ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.WILLIAM PROUT, Med. F.R.S.CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTION OFDIGESTION, CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TONATURAL THEOLOGY.His ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX, Presidentof the Royal Society, having desired that no unnecessarydelay should take place in the publication of theabove mentioned treatises, they will appear at short intervals,as they are ready for publication.CONTENTSOF THE FIRST VOLUME.PageEXPLANATION OF PLATES xiiINTRODUCTION xviiCHAP. I. Creation of Animals 1II. Geographical Distribution of Ditto 43Migrations of Ditto 88Local Distribution of Ditto 1 30III. General Functions and Instincts of Ditto 138IV. Functions and Instincts. Industries 145V. Polypes 164VI. Radiaries 192VII. Tunicaries 218VIII. Bivalve Molluscans . 233IX. Univalve Molluscans 266X. Cephalopods 303XI. Worms 318XII. Annelidans 331APPENDIX 349NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS , . 364EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.VOLUME I.PLATE I. Industries.PageFIG. 1. a. Enchelis Pupa \b. Alimentary canal and stomach j2. Eosphora Nails 1563. a. b. c. d. Rotifera vulgaris 1534. Cancellaria multipunctata 3505. Cleopatra 3506. Discocephalus Rotator 349, ii. 97PLATE I. B. Industries.FIG. 1 . Vorticella cothurnata 3502. a. b. Zoobotryon pellucid 351WORMS.3. Botryocephalus bicolor 3274. Diplozoon paradoxes 357a. Ditto, natural size.b. b. Mouths and oral suckers.c. c. Caudal plates and suckers.5. Diplostomum volvens 3306. Eye of a perch infested by Diplostoma.PLATE II. POLYPES.FIG. 1 . Madrepora muriate 1 802. Sertularia volubilis 169a. a. Ovaries.EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.XlllFIG. 3. Cellar errata4. a. Fungi patellaris, under side.b. Ditto, upper side.PLATE III. Radiates. .FIG. 1 . Cephea mosaics . .a. a. Arms of ditto.2. Echinus esculent, portion of the shellshown externally.a. a. a. Groves.b. b. Alleys.c. c. The lateral groves.d. The intermediate one.3. Inside of the same shell.a. a. The dentated suture.b. The middle ridge marked out on eachside into transverse pieces.c. c. The alleys, with pores for the suckers.d. One of the frames to which the jawsare fixed.4. Spines of Echinus cedars.a. Muscular fibres inserted in the base ofthe spine, and surrounding the ball andsocket joint.b. The muscular capsule laid open, and themuscles attached to the base of the spineturned back.c. The origins of the muscles surroundingthe ball or tubercle.d. One of the tubercles.5. One of the suckers of E. esculent,a. The sucker ; the pore in the centre issupposed to be a spiracle connectedwith the respiration of the animal.b. The stalk of the sucker.6. The suture of a portion of the alleys at thelateral grove, in which the transversepieces are convex.PageXIVEXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.FIG. 7. The suture of a portion of the lateral groveuniting with the above, in which the transversepieces are concave.8. Suture of the intermediate grove divided atthe ridge (Fig. 3. b.). Teeth obtusan-gular.9. A circular space round the mouth, coveredwith little oblong scales. In thecentre is the mouth with its five convergingteeth.10. Outside of one of the five pyramidal jaws,in which the teeth are planted.a. The jaw. b. The tooth.11. Inside of ditto : a. the jaw, consisting internallyof two triangular transverselyfurrowed, and probably molars plates.12. A little bristle, terminating in a knob withthree awns, planted amongst the spineson the shell, and, according to Cuvier, 1a species of Polype (Pedicellaria).13. Another Pedicellaria? expanded like atripetalous blossom.14. One of the spines of Echinus esculent.Page>208 211PLATE III. B. CRINOIDEANS.FIG. 1. Pentacrinus Asteria vol. ii. 132. Portion of ditto, exhibiting the suckers on theunder side of the fingers 12PLATE IV. Luminaries.FIG. 1. Cynthia Momus 2302. Salpa cyanogastra 2233. Pyrysoma giganteum 2274. Cephalic Eowdichii 2225. Travelling borealis. . 2301 Reign. An. ii!. 297.EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. XVPLATE V. BIVALVE Mollusca.PageFIG. 1 . Solen Siliqua 240a. The foot. b. The shell.Neb. The two figures in outline shew variationsin shape assumed by the foot, underdifferent circumstances.2. Anomia Cela 262a. The tendon, b. The aperture of the uppervalve through which it passes.3. Anomia Ephippium.a. Aperture.4. Terebratula 263a. Aperture of the lower valve through whichthe tendon passes.5. Trigonia margaritacea 264a. Foot formed for leaping.b. b. b. Valves of the shell.PTEROPOD AND Heterodox Mollusca.6. Cliodites uniforms "j7. Polycarp capensis ^Oat8. Pterotrachea tufa }PLATE VI. UNIVALVE Mollusca.FIG. 1. Volta ethiopia, to shew the animal 282a. The eye, shewing iris and pupil.b. The right hand tentacle.c. The proboscis exserted.d. The frontal margin of the head.e. The respiratory tube or siphuncle.f. Appendage at its base. Analogous to thecrus infundityjli in Nautilus ? ' Owen.g. g. The two gills, of which the right hand onehas but one series of laminae.h. Termination of the alimentary canal.1 Owen's Mem. on Naut. Pampil. t. v. h.XVI EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.Pagei. i. The right hand margin of the mantle.k. The male organ./. /. The foot.FIG. 2. latina 291a. The mouth, composed of two vertical cartilaginouslips, minutely toothed at the margin.b. The shell.c. The air-vesicles forming an out-bigger.PLATE VII. CEPHALOPODS.FIG. 1. Loligo cardioptera.2. Spicula prototypes 316a. The shell.3. Ocypus unguiculatus. 1 308a. The suckers.b. The arms.PLATE VIII. ANNELIDANS.FIG. 1 . Peripatus Uniforms 3472. Anterior extremity of doa.Mouth.b. b. Eyes.c. c. First pair of legs.3. Bdella nilotica 336a. Anterior sucker.b. Posterior doc.Reproductive organs.4. Locris egyptian 3471 Referred to by mistake as au Octopus t 308.3 I Plot IPlait II.c * d c.3. dPlate IIIPlat* Il. BC M CuurtLi delUtkPlat,/rPlan. . VIIIt!via:tw (jujrtLf eit.iINTRODUCTION.THE Works of God and the Word of Godmay be called the two doors which open intothe temple of Truth ; and, as both proceedfrom the same Almighty and OmniscientAuthor, they cannot, if rightly interpreted,contradict each other, but must mutuallyillustrate and confirm, " though each in differentsort and manner," the same truths.Doubtless it was with this conviction uponhis mind, that the learned Professor, 1 fromwhom I have borrowed my motto, expresseshis opinion that in order rightly to understandthe voice of God in nature, we ought toenter her temple with the Bible in our hands.The prescribed object of the several treatises,of which the present forms one, is theillustration of the Power, Wisdom, and GoodsThe pious Heinrich Merits Garde, Professor of NaturalHistory in the University of Liege.XV111 INTRODUCTION.ness of the Deity, as manifested in the Worksof Creation ; but it is not only directed thatthese primary attributes should be provedby all reasonable arguments derived fromphysical objects, but also by discoveriesancient and modern, and the whole extent ofliterature. As the Holy Scriptures form themost interesting portion, in every respect,of ancient literature ; and it has always beenthe habit of the author of the present treatiseto unite the study of the word of God withthat of his works ; * he trusts he shall not bedeemed to have stepped out of the record,where he has copiously drawn from thesacred fountains, provided the main tenor ofhis argument is in accordance with the briefput into his hands.Those who are disposed to unite the studyof scripture with that of nature, should alwaysbear in mind the caution before alluded to,that all depends upon the right interpretation,either of the written word or created substance.They who study the word of God,and they who study his works, are equallyliable to error; nor will talents, even of the1 See Monograph Apud Anglice, i. 2, and Introdd. to Ent. i.Pres. xiii. &c.INTRODUCTION. XIXhighest order, always secure a man fromfalling into it. The love of truth, and of itsAlmighty Author, is the only sure guide thatwill conduct the aspirant to its purest fountains.High intellectual powers are a gloriousgift of God, which, when associated with thequalities just named, lead to results as glorious,and to the light of real unsophisticated knowledge.But knowledge puffetli up, and if itstands alone, there is great danger of itsleading its possessor into a kind of self-worship,and from thence to self-delusion, and thelove of hypothesis.It is much to be lamented that many brightlights in science, some from leaning too muchto their own understanding, and others, probablyfrom having Religion shown to them,not with her own winning features, nor in herown simple dress, but with a distorted aspect,and decked meretriciously, so that she appearswhat she is not, without further inquiry andwithout consulting her genuine records, haverejected her and fallen into grievous errors.To them might be applied our Saviour'swords, Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures.These observations apply particularly to twoof the most eminent philosophers of theXX INTRODUCTION.present age, one for the depth of his knowledgein astronomy and general physics ; andthe other in zoology. It will be easily seenthat I allude to La Place and Lamarck, bothof whom, from their disregard of the word ofGod, and from seeking too exclusively theirown glory, have fallen into errors of no smallmagnitude. It is singular, and worthy ofobservation, that both have based their hypothesisupon a similar foundation. La Placesays, " An attentive inspection of the solarsystem evinces the necessity of some centralparamount force, in order to maintain theentire system together, and secure the regularityof its motions." 1 One would expectfrom these remarks, that he was about toenforce the necessity of acknowledging thenecessary existence of an intelligent paramountcentral Being, whose goings forth wereco-extensive with the universe of systems, tocreate them at first, and then maintain theirseveral motions and revolutions, so as toprevent them from becoming eccentric andinterfering with each other, 2 thus-upholdingall things by the word of his power. But1 System of the World, E. Tr. ii. 330.2 Ibid. Appendix, concluding note.INTRODUCTION. XXIno when he asks the question, What is theprimitive cause ? L instead of answering itimmediately, he refers the reader for hishypothesis to a concluding note, in whichwe find that this primitive cause, instead ofthe Deity, is a nebulosity originally so diffuse,that its existence can with difficulty be conceived.2 To produce a system like ours, oneof these wandering masses of nebulous matterdistributed through the immensity of theheavens, 3 is converted into a brilliant nucleus,with an atmosphere originally extendingbeyond the orbits of all its planets, and thengradually contracting itself, but at its successivelimits leaving zones of vapours, which,by their condensation, formed the severalplanets and their satellites,' including therings of Saturn ! ! 4It is grievous to see talents of the veryhighest order, and to which Natural Philosophy,in other respects, is so deeplyindebted, forsaking the Ens Gentium, theGod of Gods, and ascribing the creation ofthe universe of worlds to a cause which,according to his own confession, is all but1 System of the World, E. Tr. ii. 328.2 Ibid 357. a Hid. 332. 4 ibid, 358.VOL. I. Cxxii INTRODUCTION.a non-entity. He speaks, indeed, of aSupreme Intelligence, but it is as Newton'sgod, whom he blames for attributing theadmirable arrangement of the sun, of theplanets, and of the comets, to an Intelligentand Almighty Being, 1 and of an Authorof Nature, not, however, as the preserverand upholder of the universe, 2 but as perpetuallyreceding, according as the boundariesof our knowledge are extended; 3 thus expelling,as it were, the Deity from all care orconcern about his own world.While the philosopher thus became vainin his imaginations, the naturalist attemptedto account for the production of all the variousforms and structures of plants and animalsupon similar principles. Lamarck, distinguishedby the variety of his talents andattainments, by the acuteness of his intellect,by the clearness of his conceptions, andremarkable for his intimate acquaintance withhis subject, thus expresses his opinion as tothe origin of the present system of organizedbeings. " We know, by observation, thatthe most simple organizations, whether vege-1 System of the World, E. Tr. ii. 331.Hid. 332. 3 Ibid. 333.INTRODUCTION. XX111table or animal, are never met with but inminute gelatinous bodies, very supple anddelicate ; in a word, only in frail bodies almostwithout consistence and mostly transparent."These minute bodies he supposes natureforms, in the waters, by the power of attraction; and that next, subtle and expansivefluids, such as caloric and electricity, penetratethese bodies, and enlarge the intersticesof their agglutinated molecules, so as to formauricular cavities, and so produce irritabilityand life, followed by a power of absorption,by which they derive nutriment from without.1The production of a new organ in one ofthese, so formed, animal bodies, he ascribesto a new want, which continues to stimulate ;and of a new movement which that wantproduces and cherishes. 2 He next relateshow this can be effected. Body, he observes,being essentially constituted of cellular tissue,this tissue is in some sort the matrix, fromthe modification of which by the fluids putin motion by the stimulus of desire, membranes,fibres, vascular canals, and divers1 Anirn. sans Vertebr. i. 174. - Ibid. 181.XXIV INTRODUCTION.organs, gradually appear ; parts are strengthenedand solidified ;* and thus progressivelynew parts and organs are formed, and moreand more perfect organizations produced ; andthus, by consequence, in the lapse of ages amonad becomes a man ! ! !The great object both of La Place andLamarck seems to be to ascribe all the worksof creation to second causes ; and to accountfor the production of all the visible universe,and the furniture of our own globe, withoutthe intervention of a first. Both begin thework by introducing nebulosities or masses ofmatter scarcely amounting to real entities,and proceed as if they had agreed togetherupon the modus operandi.As Lamarck's hypothesis relates particularlyto the animal kingdom, I shall makea few observations upon it, calculated toprove its utter irrationality.When, indeed, one reads the above accountof the mode by which, according to ourauthor's hypothesis, the first vegetable andanimal forms were produced, we can scarcelyhelp thinking that we have before us a receipt1 Anim. sans Vertebr. i. 184.INTRODUCTION. XXVfor making the organized beings at the footof the scale in either class a mass of irritablematter formed by attraction, and a repulsiveprinciple to introduce into it and form a cellulartissue, are the only ingredients necessary.Mix them, and you have an animal whichbegins to absorb fluid, arid move about asamonad or a vibrio, multiplies itself bysessions or germes, one of which beingstimulated by a want to take its food by amouth, its fluids move obediently towards itsanterior extremity, and in time a mouth isobtained ; in another generation, a moretalented individual discovering* that one ormore stomachs and other intestines would beaconvenient addition to a mouth, the fluidsimmediately take a contrary direction, and atlength this wish is accomplished ; next anervous collar round the gullet is acquired,and this centre of sensation being gained,the usual organs of the senses of coursefollow. But enough of this.Let any one examine the whole organizationand structure, both internal and external,of any animal, and he will find that itforms a whole, in which the different organsand members have a mutual relation andXXVI INTRODUCTION.dependence, and that if one is supposed to beabstracted, the whole is put out of order andcannot fulfill its evident functions. If weselect, as a well known instance, the Hive-beefor an example. Its long tongue is speciallyformed to collect honey ; its honey stomach toreceive and elaborate it either for regurgitation,or for the formation of wax ; and other organsor pores are added, by which the latter can betransmitted to the wax pockets under its abdomen; connected with these, are its means andinstruments to build its cells, either for storecells to contain its honey and bee-bread, or itsyoung brood, such as the form of its jaws,and the structure and furniture of its hindlegs. Now here are a number of organs andparts that must have been contemporary, sinceone is evidently constructed with a view tothe other : and the whole organization andstructure of the whole body forming thesocieties of these wonder-working beings, thatI mean, of the males, females, and workers,is so nicely adjusted, as to concur exactly inproducing the end that an intelligent Creatorintended, and directing each to that functionand office which he devolved upon them, andto exercise which he adapted them. Were weINTRODUCTION. XXV11to go through the whole animal kingdom thesame mutual relation and dependence betweenthe different parts and organs of the structureand their functions would be found.Can any one in his rational senses believefor a moment that all these adaptations of oneorgan to another, and of the whole structureto a particular function, resulted originallyfrom the wants of a senseless animal living byabsorption, and whose body consisted merelyof cellular tissue, which in the lapse of ages,and in an infinity of successive generationsby the motions of its fluids, directed here andthere, produced this beautiful and harmonioussystem of organs all subservient to one purpose; and which in numerous instances varytheir functions and organs, but still preservingtheir mutual dependence, by passing throughthree different states of existence.Lamarck's great error, and that of manyothers of his compatriots, is materialism ; heseems to have no faith in any thing but body,attributing every thing to a physical, andscarcely any thing to a metaphysical cause,Even when, in words, he admits the beingof a God, he employs the whole strength ofhis intellect to prove that he had nothing toXXviii INTRODUCTION.do with the works of creation. Thus he excludesthe Deity from the government of theworld that he has created, putting nature inhis place ; and with respect to the noblestand last formed of his creatures into whom hehimself breathed the breath of life ; he certainlyadmits him to be the most perfect ofanimals, but instead of a son of God, theroot of his genealogical tree, according tohim, is an animalcule, a creature withoutsense or voluntary motion, or internal orexternal organs, at least in his idea nowonder therefore that he considers his intellectualpowers, not as indicating a spiritualsubstance derived from heaven though residentin his body, but merely as the resultof his organization, 1 and ascribes to him inthe place of a soul, a certain interior sentiment,upon the discovery of which he prideshimself. 2 In one of his latest descriptions ofit, he thus describes the office of this internalsentiment : " Every action of an intelligentindividual, whether it be a movement or athought, or an act amongst the thoughts, is1 N. Diet. D 1 Hist. Nat. xvi. Artie. Intelligence , 344. comp.Ibid. Artie. Idee, 78, 80.Ibid. 332.INTRODUCTION. XXIXnecessarily preceded by a want of that whichhas power to excite such action. This wantfelt immediately moves the internal sentiment,and in the same instant, that sentiment directsthe disposable portion of the nervous fluid,either upon the muscles of that part of thebody which is to act, or upon the part of theorgan of intelligence, where are impressedthe ideas which should be rendered presentto the mind, for the execution of the intellectualact which the want demands." 1 Infact Lamarck sees nothing in the universebut bodies, whence he confounds sensationwith intellect. Our eyes certainly shew usnothing but bodies their actions and motions,their structure, their form and colour;our ears the sounds they produce ; our touchtheir degree of resistance, or comparativesoftness or hardness ; our smell their scent ;our taste their flavour ; but though our sensescan conduct us no further, we find a veryactive substance in full power within us thatcan. At a very early period of life we feela wish to know something further concerningthe objects to which our senses introduce1 N. Diet. D'Hist. Nat. xvi. Artie. Intelligence, 350.XXX INTRODUCTION.us, which often generates a restless desire inthe mind to gain information concerningthe causes and origin of those things perceivedby them ; now this is the result ofthought, and thought is no body, and thoughthe thinking essence inhabits a body, yetwe cannot help feeling that our thoughtsare an attribute of an immaterial substance.Thought, discursive and excursive thought,that is not confined to the contemplation ofthe things of earth, things that are immediatelyabout us, but can elevate itself toheaven, and the heavenly bodies, not only tothose of our own system, but can take flightsbeyond the bounds of time and space, andenter into the Holy of Holies, and contemplateHim who sitteth upon the cherubim, thethrone of his Deity. Thought, that not onlybeholds things present, however distant andremoved from sense, but can contemplate thedays of old and the years of many generations,can carry us back to hail with theangelic choirs, the birth-day of nature andof the world that we inhabit ; or looking intothe abyss of futurity, can anticipate thetermination of our present mixed scene-chequeredwith light and darkness, good andINTRODUCTION. XXXIevil and the beginning of that eternal sabbathwhich remaineth for the people of Godinthe heavenly kingdom of Christ : thoughtthat can not only take these flights, and exerciseherself in these heavenly musings ; butaccompanied as she is, in our favoured race,with the gift of speech can reason upon themwith a fellow mind, and by such discussionoften elicit sparks of truth, that may be usefulto enlighten mankind. Who can believe thatsuch a faculty, so divine and god-like andspiritual, can be the mere result of organization?That any juxta-position of materialmolecules, of whatever nature, from whateversource derived, in whatever order and formarranged, and wherever placed, could generatethought, and reflexion, and reasoning powers ;could acquire and store up ideas and notionsas well concerning metaphysical as physicalessences may as safely be pronounced impossible,as that matter and spirit should behomogeneous. Though the intellectual partacts by the brain and nerves, yet the brainand nerves, however ample, however developed,are not the intellect, nor an intellectualsubstance, but only its instrument,fitted for the passage of the prime messengerXXX11 INTRODUCTION.of the soul, the nervous fluid or power, toevery motive organ. It is a substance calculatedto convey instantaneously that subtileagent, by which spirit can act upon body,wherever the soul bids it to go and enablesit to act. When death separates the intellectualand spiritual from the material part,the introduction of a fluid homogeneous withthe nervous, or related to it by a galvanicbattery can put the nerves in action, lift theeye-lids, move the limbs, but though theaction of the intellectual part may thus beimitated, in newly deceased persons, stillthere are no signs of returning intelligence ;there is no life, no voluntary action, not atrace of the spiritual agent that has beensummoned from its dwelling. Whence itfollows, that though the organization is thatby which the intellectual and governingpower manifests its presence and inhabitation,still it is evidently something distinct fromand independent of it.Mr. Lyell has so fully considered that partof Lamarck's hypothesis which relates particularlyto the transmutation of species, andso satisfactorily proved their general stability,that it is unnecessary for me to enter moreINTRODUCTION. XXX111particularly into that subject, I must thereforerefer the reader to that portion of his work. 1Let us lastly enquire, to whom or what,according to our author, God has given upthe reins ; whom he has appointed his viceroyin the government of the universe. Natureis the second power who sits on thisviceregal throne, governing the physical universe,whom we should expect to be superiorin intellect and power to angel and archangelbut no he defines her to be " Anorder of things composed of objects independentof matter, which are determined bythe observation of bodies, and the wholeamount of which constitutes a power unalterablein its essence, governed in all itsacts, and constantly acting upon all parts ofthe physical universe' 2 And again, Naturehe affirms consists of non-physical objects,which are neither beings, nor bodies, normatter. It is composed of motion ; of lawsof every description ; and has perpetually atits disposal space and time. 3With respect to the agency of this vicesPrinciples of Geology, ii. c. 1,2.N. Diet. D'Hist. Nat. xxii. Art. Nature, 377.Ibid.XXXIV INTRODUCTION.gerent of Deity, he observes that Nature isa blind power without intelligence which actsnecessarily. 1 That matter is her sole domain,of which however she can neither create nordestroy a single atom, though she modifiesit continually in every way and under everyform, and causes the existence of all bodiesof which matter is essentially the base ;and that in our globe it is she that hasimmediately given existence to vegetables, toanimals, as well as to other bodies that arethere to be met with, 2From these statements, though he appearsto admit the existence of a Deity, and thathe is the primary author of all things, yet heconsiders him as having delegated his powerto nature as his vicegerent, to whose disposalhe has left all material subsistence, and who,according to him, is the real creator of allthe forms and beings that exist, and whomaintains the physical universe in its presentstate. It is not quite clear w r hat opinion heheld with respect to the creation of matter,as he no where expressly ascribes it to God ;though, since he excludes nature from it, we1 N. Diet. D'Hist. Nat. xxii. Art. Nature, 364.2 Ibid. 369, 376.INTRODUCTION. XXXVmay infer, unless he thought it to be eternal,that he meant it should be ascribed to theDeity ; but, if such was his opinion, he oughtto have stated it distinctly and broadly ;which he certainly would have done had hefelt any anxiety to prevent misrepresentation.As it is, his God is an exact counterpartof the God of Epicurus, who leaving all tonature or chance, takes no further care orthought for the worlds to which he had givenbeing.But what is this mighty and next to omnipotentpower,This great grandmother of all creatures bred,Great Nature ever young, but full of eld ;Still moving, yet unmoved from her sted ;Unseen of any, yet of all beheld ;Thus sitting in her throneas quaintly sings our great bard of allegory. 1Now this great-grandmother of the wholecreation, who, according to our author, takesall trouble off the hands of the God of Gods,sitting as it were in his throne, and directingand upholding all things by the word of herpower, what is she ? Is she not at. least1 Faerie Queene, B. vn. c. vii. st. 13.XXXVI INTRODUCTION.a secondary spirit, co-extensive with the physicaluniverse which she forms, and the limitsof which alone terminate her action? Thisthe various and wonderful operations attributedto her by this her worshipper wouldproclaim her to be. How then are we surprisedand astonished when studying andweighing every scruple of his definitions ofthis his great Diana of Ephesus, and castingthem up, we find at the foot of the accountthat she literally amounts to NOTHING. Thatshe is a compound of attributes without anysubsistence to hang them upon. His primarycharacter of her, on which he insists in everypart of his works, declares her to be an Orderof Things. What idea does this phraseconvey to the mind ? That of things arrangedand acting in a certain order. But no thisis not his meaning. She is an order of thingscomposed of objects independent of matter.These objects are all metaphysical, and areneither beings, nor bodies, nor matter. Butif she is not a being, she can have no existence.Yes, says our author, she is composedof motion. But what is motion consideredabstractedly, without reference to the moveror the moved ? Like its negative rest, it isINTRODUCTION. Xxxvinothing. He, Whose goings forth have beenfrom of old, from everlasting, is the FirstMover, and the motion which he hath generatedin his physical universe, was communicatedby Him to existences, which he hadcreated and formed to execute his will, andby them to others, and so propagated, as itwere, from hand to hand, according to hislaws, till the universe was in motion generally,and in all its systems and their severalmembers. The Deity, at once the centreand circumference of creation, going forthincessantly, all the systems that form thephysical universe, severally concatenated intoone great system, responding to his action,and revolving round and contained in thatcentral and circumferential fountain of ever-flowinglight and glory, 1 that Spiritual Sunof the whole universe of systems, of whichevery sun of every system is a type andsymbol. To Him be ascribed the Glory,and the Power, and the Kingdom, in secularsceculoru?n, Amen.Another object which Lamarck considersas constituting nature, is Law. But law1 Deus omnium capax, Herm. Pastor, 1. ii. And. 1. Iron.Adv. H ceres. I. ii. e. 55.VOL. I. dXxxvi INTRODUCTION.considered abstractedly is also nothing. Itmay exist in the Divine counsels, but till itis promulgated, and powers appointed andempowered who can enforce it ; as likewiseother objects brought into existence uponwhich it can act, or that can obey it ; it isa word without power or effect. As in orderto motion there must be a mover and somethingto be moved, so in order to a potentiallaw, as well as a promulgator, there must beabeing to enforce it and another to obey it.With regard to his third ingredient, spaceand time, the theatre and limit of Nature'soperations ; they give her no subsistence, shestill remains a nonentity; therefore, as definedby our author, she is nothing, and cando nothing.But although nature, as defined by Lamarck,consists merely of abstract qualities,independent of any essence or being, andtherefore can neither form any thing, noroperate upon what is already formed; yetwould I by no means be understood as contendingthat there are no inter-agents betweenGod and the visible material world bywhich he acts upon it, and as it were takeshold of it ; by which he has commenced andINTRODUCTION. XXXIXstill maintains motion in it and its parts ;causing it to observe certain general and locallaws ; and upholds, in the whole and everypart, those several powers and operations thathave been thus produced; that action andcounteraction every where observable, bywhich all things are maintained in theirplaces ; observe their regular motions andrevolutions ; and exhibit all those phenomenathat are produced under certain circumstances.Whatever names philosophers haveused to designate such powers, they have areal substance and being, and are a somethingthat can act and operate, and impart a momentum.Lord Verulam's two hands of nature,whereby she chiefly worketh, 1 heat and cold,synonymous, according to some, with positiveand negative electricity; 2 the plastic natureof Cudworth, and some of the ancients ; thespirit of nature of Dr. Henry More; 3 and theether of Sir Isaac Newton, all seem to expressor imply an agency between the Deityand the visible world, directed by him. Bacon's Works, iii. Nat. Hist. Cent. i. p. 69.See Lit. Gaz. January 7, 1835, p. 43.3 See VOL. II. p. 254.xl INTRODUCTION.traction and repulsion ; centripetal and centrifugalforces, or universal gravitation, allimply a power or powers in action, that aresomething more than names and nonentities,that are moving in two directions, and consistof antagonist forces.If we consult Holy Scripture with theview of ascertaining whether any or whatterms are therein employed to express thesame powers, we shall find that generallyspeaking, the word heaven, or the heavens,and symbolically the cherubim, are used forthat purpose. But upon this subject, whichhas considerable bearing upon the doctrine ofinstinct, I shall enlarge in a subsequent partof this introduction.Having stated Lamarck's hypothesis withrespect to nature, the Goddess which heworshipped, and which he decked with divineattributes and divine power, I shall, as brieflyas possible, give some account of his theoryof life. Life indeed is a subject that hathpuzzled, doth puzzle, and will puzzle philosophersand physiologists, probably till timeshall be no more. Thus much, however,may be predicated of it, that both in thevegetable and animal, like heat, it is a radiantINTRODUCTION. xliprinciple, shewing itself by successive developmentsfor a limited period, varyingaccording to the species, when it begins todecline and finally is extinguished : that sometimesalso, like heat, as in the seed of thevegetable and egg of the animal, it is latent,not manifesting itself by development, till itis submitted to the action of imponderablefluids, conveyed by moisture or incubation.But to return to our author. " We haveseen," says he, " that the life which we remarkin certain bodies, in some sort resembled nature,insomuch that it is not a being, but anorder of things animated by movements; whichhas also its power, its faculties, and whichexercises them necessarily while it exists. 1He also ascribes these vital movements to anexisting cause. Speaking of the imponderableincredible fluids, and specifying heat,electricity, the magnetic fluid, &c. to whichhe is inclined to add light, he says, it iscertain that without them, or certain of them,the phenomenon of life could not be producedin any body. 2 Now, though heat, electricity,&c. are necessary to put the principle of life1 Anim. sans Vertebr. i. 321. Ibid. i. 43.xlii INTRODUCTION.in motion, they evidently do not impart it.The seed of a vegetable, or the egg of a birdhave each of them, if I may so speak, apunctum salient, a radiating principle, which,under certain circumstances, they can retainin a latent state, for a considerable time ; butif once that principle is extinct, no applicationof heat, or electricity, under any form, canrevive it, so as to commence any developmentof the germe it animated. Experimentshave been made upon human bodies ; andthose of other animals, which, by the applicationof galvanism, after death, have exhibitedvarious muscular movements, such as liftingthe eye-lids, moving the arms and legs, &c.but though motions usually produced by thewill acting by the nerves upon the muscleshave thus been generated by a species of theelectric fluid, proving its affinity with thenervous power or fluid, yet the subjects of theexperiment, when the action was intermitted,continued still without life ; no return of thatpower or essence which was fled for ever,being effected by it,- which seems to renderit clear that neither caloric nor electricity,though essential concomitants of life, form itsessence.INTRODUCTION. xliiiI trust I may render some service to thecause of truth and science, if I again revertto the subject which I mentioned at thebeginning of this introduction, I mean thestudy of the word of God, together with thatof his works, with the view to illustrate oneby the other.The great and wonderful genius before alludedto, Lord Verulam, who laid the foundationupon which the proud structure of modernphilosophy is erected, who banished from sciencethe visionary theories of the speculator, 1and the unfounded dogmas of the bigot, andmade experiment, and, as it were, the anatomyof nature, the root of true physical knowledge ;warns the philosopher against making holyscripture his text book, for a system of philosophy,which he says, is like seeking thedead amongst the living. 2 I am disposed,however, to think that this illustrious philosopher,by this observation, did not mean toexclude all study of the word of God, with aview to discover what is therein deliveredconcerning physical subjects, for he himselfspeaks of the book of Job, as pregnant with1 Idohi Species. * De Augment. Sc. \. ix. r. 1. .>.xliv INTRODUCTION.the mysteries of natural philosophy ;* but hisobject was to point out the evil effects of asuperstitious and bigotted adherence to theletter of scripture, concerning which men werevery liable to be mistaken, and of inattentionto its spirit, which is averse to all persecution,so that persons of a philosophic mind mightnot be interrupted in their investigations ofnature, by the clamours or menaces of mistakenmen.In the dark ages, anterior to the Reformation,superstition occupied the seat of trueand rational religion. Ye do err not knowingthe Scriptures, was an observation almostuniversally applicable. The armed hand ofauthority was lifted up against all such asendeavoured to interpret either Scripture ornature upon just and rational principles.Every such effort was rejected, was reprobatedex cathedra, and persecuted as a dangerousand pestilent heresy : thus everyavenue to the discovery of truth, either inreligion or science, was attempted to beclosed. This evil spirit it was that proscribedthe system of Copernicus, and,i Ubi supr. 1. ix. c. 1, | 47, ed. 1740.INTRODUCTION. xlvbecause it appeared contrary to the letterof Scripture, persecuted Galileo for affirmingthat the earth moved round the sun. LordVerulam clearly saw the evil consequencesthat would result to the cause of true philosophy,if the sober study of nature, andall experimental research into the works ofcreation, were to be denounced as impious,because of some seeming discordance withthe letter of Scripture, or because a narrow-mindedtheologian could not discern wherethe writers of the Bible adopted popularphraseology, in condescension to the innocentprejudices and uninformed understandings ofthose to whom they addressed themselves ;and he therefore employed all the energy ofhis powerful mind to persuade the learnedtheologian, that for the discovery of physicaltruth we must have recourse to inductionfrom experiment and soberly conducted investigationof physical phenomena, while forspiritual we should seek to draw livingwaters from the fountain of life containedin Scripture. The Bible was not intendedto make us philosophers, but to make us wiseunto salvation.But it does not follow, because we are toxlvi INTRODUCTION.seek for religious truth principally in theBible, that we can derive none from the studyof natural objects ; nor, on the contrary,because we are not to go to the Bible forasystem of philosophy, that no philosophicaltruths are contained in it. The Scriptureexpressly declares that the invisible thingsof God may be understood by the thingsthat are made and if we may have recourseto the works of creation as well as to revelationto lead us to the knowledge of theCreator, we may, on the other hand, byparity of reason, without meriting any reprehension,inquire into what God has revealedin Scripture concerning the physical worldand its phenomena. Lord Bacon himselfobserves, that Philosophy is given to Religionas a most faithful handmaid ; since Religiondeclares the will of God, and Philosophymanifests his power, and he applies to thisour Saviour's reproof of the Jews. Ye doerr not knowing the Scriptures nor thepower of God. That is, ye have not endeavouredto know him by a right mode ofstudying either his word or his works. Thestudy of both is necessary to the right understandingof either we cannot rightly under-introduction.xlviistand God's word without a knowledge ofhis ivorks, and perpetual appeal is made tohis works in his word ; neither can we perfectlyunderstand his works without the knowledgeof his word.The penetrating mind of Bacon clearlyperceived, that if supposed statements ofScripture were made the sole test by whichphilosophical systems were to be tried, therewas an end of all progress in science, no usein making experiments, or pursuing a courseof inductive reasoning. And this was thetemper of the age in which he lived ; lightwas beginning to spring up, and because itwas novel, it was thought to be heretical andsubversive of Scripture. But men's mindsare now much altered in this respect, andthere is no danger of persecution on accountof heterodoxy either in religion or philosophy.In fact the tide seems turned the other way,and a clamour is sometimes raised againstpersons w T ho consult the revealed word ofGod on points connected with philosophy andscience. But surely if the Scriptures are, aswe believe, a revelation from the Creator ofthat world concerning which we philosophize,and if some parts of them do containxlviii INTRODUCTION.mysteries of natural philosophy, as Baconhimself contends they do, some respect anddeference are due to the word of God, andsome allowance may be claimed by those whoappeal to it on any point of science, even iftheir appeal originates in a misconception andmisinterpretation of any part of it ; the sameallowance as is made for those, and they aremany, who misinterpret nature.In the observations here made upon somedicta of the illustrious sage, who, unless weadmit his venerable namesake, Friar Bacon,to a share in that distinction, may be termedthe first founder of modern philosophy, Ihave not the most distant thought of detractingfrom the splendour of his merits, or ofdeducting any thing from the amount of thevast debt which science owes him ; but, asI have before observed, mankind, from theearliest ages, have been prone almost toidolize those to whom they were indebted forany weighty benefits, or to whom theylooked up as inventors of useful arts, ormasters of hitherto occult sciences. Gratitude,indeed, demands that great and originalgeniuses, whom God has enriched with extraordinarytalents, by the due exercise of whichINTRODUCTION. xlixthey have become benefactors of the humanrace, should be loved and valued highly fortheir services ; but when we look only atthe instrument, and see not the hand ofSupreme Benevolence that employs it for ourbenefit, we then overvalue man and undervalueGod ; putting the former into the placeof the latter, and making an idol of him ;and if any will not worship this idol, aclamour is raised against them, and they arealmost persecuted. Our great philosopherhimself complains of this tendency to overvalueindividuals as the cause and sourceof great evils to science : he considers it asakind of fascination that bewitches mankind.1Since the time of Bacon, philosophers andinquirers into nature have for the moststrictly adhered to his rule, if such it maybedeemed ; and, with the exception of asingle sect, who perhaps have gone too far1 Rursus vero homines a progress in scientific detinuit, etfere incantation reverential antiquities, et variorum, qui in philosophiamagna habit sunt, authority. Itaque morum nonest, si fascina ista antiquities, et author, et consensus,hominem virtute ita ligament, ut cum rebus isis (tanquam maleficiati) non potuerint. Nov. Organ.1. i. abhor. 84.INTRODUCTION.in an opposite direction, 1 have made littleor no inquiry as to what is delivered inScripture on physical subjects, or withrespect to the causes of the various phenomenaexhibited in our system, or in thephysical universe : but surely it is a mostinteresting, as well as novel field of study,for the philosopher to ascertain what hasreally been revealed in Scripture on thesegreat subjects. The opinions of the ancientsupon this head have been investigated andcanvassed, and an approximation traced betweenthem, in some respects, to those ofmodern philosophers: 2 if the same diligencewas exercised upon the Scriptures, we mightarrive at information with regard to the greatpowers that, under God, rule the physicaluniverse, which it is hopeless to gain by theusual means of investigation.But the great difficulty lies in the interpretationof those passages of Scripture thatrelate to physical Phenomena. Bacon oftenrepeats these words of Solomon, It is theglory of God to conceal a thing. As Moses,when he descended from the mount, was1 The Hutchinsonians.See Prof. Daubed's Introdd. to the Atomic Theory, 13.INTRODUCTION. liobliged to veil his face, because the Israelitescould not bear its effulgence ; l so the Deitywas pleased to conceal many both spiritualand physical truths under a veil of figuresand allegory, because the prejudices, ignorance,and grossness of the bulk of the peoplecould not bear them, but they were writtenfor the instruction and admonition of thosein every age whose minds are liberated fromthe misrule of prejudice, and less darkenedby the clouds of ignorance : but still itrequires, and always will require, much studyand comparison of one part of Scripture withanother, to discover the meaning of many ofthose passages of Scripture which relate tophysical objects.The Apostle to the Hebrews observes thatthe manner in which God revealed himselfto the ancient world and the Jewish nation,was by dividing his communications intomany parcels, delivered at different times;*and by clothing them in a variety of figures,and imparting them under different circumstances,3 so that in order to get a correctnotion of them it is necessary to compare1 Exod. xxxiv. 29, &c.Ill INTRODUCTION.one part of scripture with another, and toweigh well the various figures under whichthey are concealed, and the use of them onother occasions ; and also to consider themodes in which they were communicated tothe mind of the prophet, whether in a visionexhibited to him when entranced ; in a dreamwhen asleep ; or under certain acts, which hewas commanded, or by immediate inspirationexcited, to perform. So that if we wish toascertain the meaning of any particularsymbol, or of the terms in which any communicationis made from God in HolyScripture ; we must not be satisfied by studyingmerely the passage under our eye, but,comparing spiritual things with spiritual, huntout the meaning, as it were, by consideringall those passages where the same thing isalluded to.It is to be observed, that in all the communicationswhich it has pleased the Deityto make of his will to mankind, respect ishad to the then state of society, and theprogress of knowledge, arts, and civilizationlight was imparted to them as they wereable to bear it ; they were fed with milkwhen they could not digest strong meat.INTRODUCTION. liiiPrejudices take usually so firm a hold uponthe bulk of any people, that to attack themdirectly, instead of opening, closes all theavenues to the heart. Even the most enlightenedin some respects, in others are oftenunder their dominion ; and, therefore, it isonly by imparting truth Here a little andthere a little, as circumstances admit, andembroidering the veil, under which we areobliged to soften the effulgence of her light,with varied imagery, darkly shadowing outher mysteries, that a way is prepared for herfinal triumph and universal reception. Sheis often A. light shining in a dark place,gradually expelling prejudice and error, andshining more and more unto the perfect day.It was not so much necessary for the conversionand reformation of mankind to makethem philosophers as to make them believers.The great bulk of mankind were ignorant anduninstructed persons, whence in order to wintheir attention, it was necessary to addressthem in a language which they understood,and in a phraseology, with respect to physicalobjects, to which they were accustomed, andas those objects appear to the senses. Thusthe moon is called a great light, because sheVOL. i. eHv INTRODUCTION.appears so and is so to us, though really lessthan the planets and fixed stars ; the sun issaid to rise, and other parallel expressions,which are true with respect to us, and to theappearance of the thing, though not withrespect to the fact physically considered.When the sacred writers speak of the Deityin terms borrowed from the human figure, asif he had hands, eyes, feet, and the like, andas if he was agitated by human passions, it isfor the sake of illustrating the Divine attributesand proceedings by those passions,faculties, senses, and organs in man, by whichalone we can gain any idea of what may beanalogous to them in the Divine Nature.But though such condescension is shownby the Holy Spirit to the ignorance andimperfections of his people, by adopting, asit were, a phraseology founded upon theirinnocent errors, and those misapprehensionsof things into which they were led by theirsenses : it is not thence to be concluded thatthis popular language pervades the whole ofthe Holy Word ; or that it is impossible, oreven difficult, to distinguish things spokenad captum, from statements relating to thephysical constitution of nature which are toINTRODUCTION. IVbe received as spoken ex cathedra, and asdictated by the Holy Spirit. It should notbe lost sight of, that the great object ofRevelation was to reclaim mankind from thedebasing worship of those that were not godsby nature ; of those powers in nature, or theirsymbols, selected from natural objects, whichGod employed and directed as his agents inthe formation and government of the globewe inhabit, and of the whole universe. " Butwe," says Bacon, " dedicate or erect nocapitol or pyramid to the pride of men ; butinthe human intellect, lay the foundationsof a holy temple, an exemplar of the world." lThis passage is capable of an application thatmay lead us into an avenue terminating insuch a temple, which, though not erectedin the human intellect, may enlighten it inseveral points relating to physical truths concerningwhich it is now in darkness. TheMusical tabernacle and the Solomoniantemple were both erected not after theimaginings of the spirit of man ; but theformer after a pattern which was shown toMoses in the mount; 2 and the latter after1 Nov. Org. aphorism. 120.Exod xxv. 40, xxvi. 30.Vi INTRODUCTION.another given by David to Solomon, whichit is expressly stated he had by the Spirit,and which Jehovah made him understand inwriting (or commit to writing) by his handupon him. 1 Now, if these holy places wereerected after a pattern divinely furnished,that pattern doubtless was significant, andintended to answer some important purpose.The great end which the Deity had in viewby the selection of the Israelitish nation, wasto prevent all knowledge of himself, as theCreator and Governor of the world, frombeing totally obliterated from the minds ofmen, and to keep alive the expectation ofthe promised seed, who was to effect thegreat deliverance of mankind from the yokeand consequences of sin, and the dominionof Satan. Had it not been for this step, theworship of those powers and intermediateagents by which God acts upon the earthand the world at large, and produces all thephenomena observable in the physical universe;of their symbols; or of deified menand women, would have entirely supersededthe worship of their Almighty Author, andi 1 Chron. xxviii. 12, 19.INTRODUCTION. Iiithe whole earth would have been so coveredby this palpable darkness, that no glimpse oflight would have been left to foster the hopeand prove the germe of a future day of glory.The great object, therefore, of the Godheadbeing the assertion of his own supremacy,and to proclaim his own agency by thepowers that are known to govern in nature,it w r as to be expected that a tabernacle ortemple erected after a pattern furnished bythe Deity would conspicuously do this.But before I enter further into this mysterioussubject, it will be proper to obviatean objection that may be alleged, viz. that itis incongruous and out of place to introduce,into a work like the present, any inquiry intothe nature and contents of the Jewish temple,especially the meaning of those symbolicalimages placed in the Holy of Holies andcalled the Cherubim, but when it is furtherconsidered that these symbols are representedas winged animals with four faces, and thatthese faces are those of the kings and rulers,as it were, of the animal kingdom : namely,the ox, the chief amongst cattle ; the lion,the king of wild beasts ; and the eagle, theruler of the birds ; and lastly, Man, who hasViii INTRODUCTION.all things put under his feet, there seemsto be no slight connection between the cherubimand the animal creation. If we regardthe antitypes of these images as exclusivelymetaphysical, this argument will not hold ;but if, as I hope to prove from Scripture,they consist of physical as well as metaphysicalobjects, by which the Deity actsupon the whole animal kingdom, and particularlyin all instinctive operations, I trustI shall be justified in entering so fully intothis interesting subject. In this inquiry Ihave endeavoured to guide myself entirelyby the word of God, comparing spiritualthings with spiritual; at the same time takinginto consideration those arguments, wherethe case seemed to require it, that his workssupply.The Jewish tabernacle, which, as Philocalls it, 1 was a portable temple, every readerof Scripture knows was divided into twoprincipal parts, or, according to the apostleto the Hebrews, tabernacles ; the first ofwhich was called the Holy Place ; and thesecond, the Most Holy Place, or the HolyDe Vita Moses, 1. Hi.INTRODUCTION. Hxof Holies. This last tabernacle is expresslystated in Scripture to be a figure of heaven.For Christ is not entered into the holyplaces made with hands, which are the figuresof the true, but into Heaven itself, now toappear in the presence of God for us" ]Where allusion is evidently made to theannual entry of the Jewish high priest intothe second tabernacle, as representing Christ'sentry into heaven itself, where the presenceof God was manifested. Now if the secondtabernacle represented the Heaven of Heavens,the first we may conclude, in which theordinary service and worship of God weretransacted, was a symbol of this world or oursolar system. 2If we consider the furniture of the twotabernacles, we gain further instruction on thesubject we are considering. In the first wasthe golden candlestick with its seven lights,the table, and the shew-bread. Amongst theJews, the candlestick seems to have beenregarded as a kind of planetarium, representingthe solar system, at least those partsof it that were visible to the unassisted1 Heb. ix. 24. 2 ' Aytov xIx INTRODUCTION.eye. 1 It is worthy of remark that the centrallamp, which appears to be four times the sizeof the rest, is stated by Philo to representthe sun. The table and the shew-bread, in aphysical sense, may perhaps be regarded assymbolizing the earth and its productions, thetable which God spreads and sets before us.But as well as a physical, these things havea metaphysical or spiritual meaning. Thecandlestick symbolizing the church and itsministers, who are characterized as "Lightsin the world"* the churches as candlesticks,and the principal ministers of Christ asstars. 3The contents of the second Tabernacle, orMost Holy Place, are now to be considered ;these were an ark or chest containing thetwo tables of the decalogue, over which wasplaced a propitiatory or mercy-seat of puregold, at each end of which, and forming partof the same plate, was fixed a Cherub, orsculptured image so called. The directionsfor the fabrication of these images are not1 Joseph. Antiq. 1. iii. c. 7, comp. Philo De Vita Moses,1. iii. 518, Bec. Ed. Col. All. 1613.2 Philip, ii. 15. <Dw<rr/p tv3 Revel, i. 20.INTRODUCTION. Xiaccompanied by any description of them.They are spoken of as objects well knownto the Jews ; but in the prophecy of Ezekiel,they are described as each having four facesand four wings ; the faces were those of aman and a lion on the right side ; the face ofan ox on the left side ; and the face of aneagle ; with regard to their wings, two werestretched upwards, and two covered theirbodies. Many other particulars are mentionedby the prophet, which I shall not hereenlarge upon. 1A great variety of opinions have beenheld, both in ancient and modern times,concerning the meaning of these symbols,and what they are designed to represent,some of which I shall mention in anotherplace. By most modern theologians theyseem to be regarded as angels of the highestrank. The first mention of them in HolyScriptures is upon the occasion of the expulsionof our first parents from Paradise.And he drove out the man ; arid he placedat the east of the garden of Eden cherubim,and a flaming sword which turned every way,E/ek. i. 6, 10, 11.1X11 INTRODUCTION.to keep the way of the tree of life!' 1 Theword which in our translation is renderedplaced, means properly caused to dwell, orplaced in a tabernacle? and it was on thisaccount probably that in the Septuagint translation,the expression is referred to Adam.And he cast out Adam, and caused himto dwell opposite the garden of Eden. Andhe placed in order the cherubim, and theflaming sword which turned to keep the wayof the tree of life." 3 The word in questionis used by Jeremiah to denote God's presencein his tabernacle in Shiloh. 4 It may be remarkedalso that, in the original, the phraseis not simply that God placed cherubim atthe east of the garden of Eden, but, as isevident from the particles prefixed to it, thathe placed there the cherubim, namely suchobjects as were generally called by that name,and were familiar to the Jews. Had Godgiven it in commission to angelic beings tokeep watch and ward at the gate of Paradise,1 Genes, iii. 24. 2 Heb. pu3 Gr. Kcu f^tftaXf. TOV A^ct/z, KO.L KaTWKicrev avrovr irapaSeiffu rrjg rpv<f>r)g. teat ere TO. ^p/3tyu, KCU rr\v (ft\o-yivrjyi>, rr\v4 Jerem. vii. 12.INTRODUCTION. Lxiiiit would surely have been said upon this, asupon other occasions, that he sent them.When we reflect that these mystic beings,when only sculptured images, were symbolsof the divine presence, and that God manifestedhimself in his tabernacle and in histemple by a cloud and glory when the workwas finished according to the pattern, andthe cherubim with the ark and mercy-seatwere in their places, 1 surely some suspicionmust enter our minds that these cherubim,before the gates of Paradise, might be stationedthere for purposes connected with theworship of God after the fall. Indications ofthis are discoverable in other passages, aswhere it is said of Cain and Abel, that theybrought an offering unto the Lord ; a termimplying that sacrifices were not offered inany place, according to the fancy of theworshipper. Again, after the murder andmartyrdom of righteous Abel by his brother'shand, and the divine sentence passed uponthe latter, he says, " Behold, thou hast drivenme out this day from the face of the earth,and from thy face shall I be hid"' 1 Andi Exod. xl. 1838. 2 Chron. v. 714.Genes, iv. 14.Xiv INTRODUCTION.it is subsequently stated, " And Cam wentout from the presence of the Lord." 1 Fromthese passages it seems to follow evidentlythat God was present, in some restricted sense,in one particular place, by departing fromwhich Cain was hid from his face, whateverwas intended by that expression. In thislocal sense, a temple or tabernacle dedicatedto his worship, as prescribed by himself, mightbe called his presence ; or in a still morepeculiar sense, it might be so denominated,if in its sanctuary it contained any symbolicalrepresentation of God's universal dominion,and of his action every where ; or if any cloudor irradiation of his glory was there manifestedto his worshippers. 2With regard to the flaming sword, whichour translation seems to put into the handsof the cherubic watch, and which Milton hasso finely paraphrased :And on the east side of the garden place,Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,Cherubic watch, and of a sword the flameWide-waving, all approach far off to frightAnd guard all passage to the tree of life.i Genes, iv. 16. * E xo d. x l. 3438.INTRODUCTION. IxvAnd again,They looking back all th' eastern side beheldOf Paradise so late their happy seat,Wav'd over by that flaming brand, the gateWith dreadful faces throng'd, and fiery arms,The words in the original may either be understoodmetaphorically of a flame like asword, or it may be translated a consumingflame, a flame of burning heat ; the originalword 1 often signifying an exhausting andviolent heat. The word which we translateturned every way? is in Hithpael, and signifiesan action upon itself; it is used in the sameconjugation in other passages, where the senseseems to be that of revolving or rolling. 3Ezekiel in his vision of the cherubim, describingthe fire that preceded their appearance,says that it infolded itself. 4The last words of the passage in question,to keep the way of the tree of life, admit oftwo opposite interpretations either to shutit up from all access, or to prevent it frombeing wholly closed. Perhaps the followinginterpretation that the end for which the1 Heb. mn 2 Heb. cannon3 Judges vii. 13. Job. xxxvii. 12.4 Ezek. I. 4. Heb^nnp^riD w&Ixvi INTRODUCTION.cherubim and flaming sword were placed atthe east of the garden of Eden, was to closefor ever the way to the old tree of life, andalso to open the way to one better suited toman'saltered circumstances and situationwill reconcile both interpretations. As soonas man was expelled from Paradise, theoriginal covenant was ended, and he was cutofffrom all the means of grace and spirituallife that it held forth ; and therefore it mightbe expected that his merciful and beneficentCreator would, in pursuance of the greatscheme of salvation, through the promisedseed of the woman, which he had thrown outto him as an anchor of hope, would supplyhim with other means suited to his fallenstate, by which he might be renewed untoholiness, and gradually nourished in grace,so as at last to be prepared to undergo thesentence passed upon him with a prospectbefore him of entering into that rest thatremaineth for the people of God.Having, I trust, not upon slight grounds,made it appear probable, that the cherubim, bythe Deity himself, were placed in the originaltemple or tabernacle, and were intimately connectedwith that form of worship which wasINTRODUCTION. Lxviiinstituted by him in consequence of that sadevent, the fall of man from his primeval stateof holiness and happiness ; I shall next endeavourto ascertain what these multiformimages represented. But I must first premisea few observations upon the legitimate mode ofcollecting truths of this description from HolyScripture, and I must here recall to the reader'srecollection the observation of Solomon beforequoted It is the glory of God to conceal athing. A number of important truths aredelivered in Holy Writ, which are veiledtruths, which we shall never discover if weadhere to the letter, and content ourselveswith admiring the richness and beauty of thesetting, without paying any attention to thegem it encircles or conceals. Some writersrequire a clear, distinct, and explicit statement,before they will admit any thing asrevealed in Scripture, be the circumstantialevidence of the fact ever so strong. For instancesome eminent theologians deny theDivine origin of sacrifices, because no commandof God to Adam or Noah to offer themisrecorded to have been given ; yet oneshould think the practice of righteous Abel,and of Noah, perfect in his generations, andIxviii INTRODUCTION.God's acceptance of their respective sacrifices,1 was a sufficient proof that this was noact of will-worship, but one of obedience to aDivine institution. The circumstance thatGod clothed Adam and Eve in the skins ofbeasts, proves that beasts had been slain,which were most probably offered up asvictims representing the great atonement, thepromised seed and the clothing of them intheir skins was an indication that they wantedgarments, in the place of their own innocencyand righteousness, to cover their nakedness,and that they now stood as clothed in therighteousness of Him whose heel was to bebruised for them. The distinction also ofclean and unclean beasts directly sanctionedby the Deity, and which alone might beoffered in sacrifice, 2 is another circumstanceconfirmation of the common opinion.God, both in his word and in his works,for the exercise and improvement of the intellectualpowers of his servants, and thatBy reason of use they may have theirsenses exercised to discern both good andevil;" 3 has rendered it indispensable that those1 Genes, iv. 4. viii. 20, 21. 2 Ibid, and vii. 2, 3.3 Heb. v. 14.INTRODUCTION. Lxixwho would understand them, and gain a correctidea of his plan in them, should collectand place in one point of view things thatin Nature and Scripture are scattered overthe whole surface, so that by comparing onepart with another they may arrive at a soundconclusion. Hence it happens that, in Scripture,when any truth is first to be broughtforward, it is not by directly and fully enunciatingand defining it, so that he who runsmay read and comprehend it, but it is onlyincidentally alluded to, or some circumstancenarrated which, if duly weighed and tracedto its legitimate consequences, puts the attentivestudent in possession of it. Such noticesare often resumed, and further expanded, insubsequent parts of the sacred volume, andsometimes we are left to collect that an eventhas happened, or an institution delivered tothe patriarchal race, without its being distinctlyrecorded, from circumstances whichnecessarily or strongly imply it. In a trialin a court of justice it very commonly happensthat no direct proof of an event can be produced,and yet the body of circumstantialevidence is so concatenated and satisfactoryas to leave no doubt upon the minds of-theVOL. i. fIxX INTRODUCTION.jury as to the nature of the verdict theyought to deliver. It would be a great andirreparable loss to the devout and soberstudent of Holy Scripture, if in his endeavoursto become acquainted with the different partsof it, he is to be precluded from forming anopinion as to certain events and doctrines,because it has pleased the Wisdom of Godto record and reveal them not directly andat once, but indirectly, in many parcels, andunder various forms.To apply this reasoning to the subject Iam discussing. Having rendered it probablethat the cherubim placed in a tabernacle atthe east of the Garden of Eden, representedthe same objects, and were so farsynonymous, with those afterwards placed inthe Jewish Tabernacle in the most holy placeovershadowing the mercy-seat, and that theDivine Presence was more particularly to beregarded as taking there its constant station,and there occasionally manifesting itself bya cloud and a fiery splendor, I shall nextendeavour to show what the cherubic imagesreally symbolized.The word Cherub, in the Hebrew language,has no root ; for the derivation of itINTRODUCTION. Lxxifrom a particle of similitude and a word signifyingthe mighty or strong ones, which isproposed by Parkhurst and the followers ofMr. Hutchinson, seems to me not satisfactory.Archbishop Newcome 1 and othersderive it from a Chaldee root, which signifiesto plough, and the radical idea seems to bethat of strength and power, which will agreewith the nature of the derivative, as indicatingthe powers, whether physical or metaphysical,that rule under God. Other divines, as Godis said to ride upon the cherubim, and theyare called his chariot, would derive the word,by transposition, from a root which signifiesto ride ; 2 but if a transposition of the lettersof the word may be admitted, I should preferderiving it from a root which signifies tobless or to curse, 3 since, as we shall see, thecherubim are instruments of good or evil,according as God sees fit to employ them ;fruitful seasons and every earthly blessingbeing brought about by their ministry.The word Cherub, pi. cherubim, consideredas derived from any of the roots last mentioned,conveys therefore the idea of strength1 New. Ezek. c. i. 10, note.2 im 3-paLxxii INTRODUCTION.and power; of God's action upon and bythem, expressed by his riding or sitting uponthem, and inhabiting them ; as likewise byhis employing them as instruments both ofgood or evil, of blessing and cursing.That the cherubim are powers or rulersin nature is evident, as was before observed,from their symbols the man, the lion, theox, and the eagle. It is singular that amongstthe descendants of the three sons of Noah,the three last animals should be adopted intotheir religion, the ox, the Egyptian Apis,by the descendants of Ham; 1 the lion, a asymbol of light, by the Persians, 2 derivedfrom Shem ; and the eagle by the Greeksand other nations descended from Japhet*These powers, be they what they may, aredescribed in Scripture as forming a charioton which the Deity is represented as riding,1 Other descendants of Ham, as the Phoenicians, regarded theox or heifer as a sacred animal. Baal was worshipped as an oxas well as a fly. (Tobit, i. 5.)Mithras is to be seen with the head of a lion and the bodyof a man, having four wings, two of which are extended towardsthe sky, and the other two towards the ground. Montauban,i. 232. Comp. Ezek. i. 11.3 Every one knows that the eagle was sacred to the GrecianJupiter.INTRODUCTION. Lxxiiiand sometimes in such terms as bring to ourmind, to compare great things with small, thechariots and charioteers of mortals. Thuswe are told of The chariot of the cherubimthat spread out their wings, and covered theark of the covenant of the Lord. 1 And inEzekiel's mystic visions, the glory of Jehovahsometimes went up from the cherubic chariotto the temple, when The house was filled withthe cloud, and the court was full of thebrightness of the Lord's glory? And again,the glory of the Lord departs from the house,and stands over the cherubim, when mountingon high from the earth, The glory of theGod of Israel was over them above. 3 Acommon epithet of God, as king of Israel,was that of Insessor of the cherubim, 4 Whosename is called by the name of the Lord Godof Hosts that dwelleth between the cherubim;or he that sitteth upon, above, or between thecherubim ; or, as it may be rendered, In-habited the cherubim. These expressionsallude, not only to the presence of God in1 1 Chron. xxviii. 18.2 Ezek. x. 4. a Ibid. 19.1 Sam. xiv. 4. '2 Sam. vi. 2. '2 Kings, xix. 15. Ps.Ixxx. 1. xcix. 1, &c.Lxxiv INTRODUCTION.his tabernacle and temple between or abovethe sculptured and symbolical cherubim, butto his riding upon, sitting upon, or inhabiting,that is ruling and directing those powers ofwhatever description, which are symbolizedby those images, or signified by that name.When the Lord came to deliver Davidfrom his enemies, it is stated that he rodeupon a cherub ; 1 and the prophet Habakkuk,alluding probably to the delivery of theIsraelites by the destruction of the Egyptiansin the Red Sea, exclaims, Thou didst walkthrough the sea with thine horses, throughthe heap of great waters ; 2 and again, with aprospective view before him, perhaps, of somestill mightier deliverance of the church fromher enemies, " Was the Lord displeasedagainst the rivers ? was thine anger againstthe rivers ? Was thy wrath against the sea,that thou didst ride upon thy horses and uponthy chariots of salvation ?" 3 He uses thesame instruments when his will is to inflicta curse and execute judgments. The Lordwill come with fire, and with his chariots like1 2 Sam. xxii. 11. Ps. xviii. 10.2 Habak. iii. 15. ' Ibid. 8.INTRODUCTION.a whirlwind, to render his anger with furyand to rebuke with flames of Fire. 1 InEzekiel's vision, coals of fire were taken frombetween the cherubim to scatter over Jerusalem.2Having noticed the ideal meaning of thesemystic symbols, and their connection withand subservience to Jehovah of Hosts, as theGod of Israel, of Israel both according to theflesh and the spirit; 3 our next inquiry mustbe whether there are no physical or metaphysicalbeings or objects, concerning whichthe same things are predicated in HolyScripture, as concerning the cherubim; forif there are, as equals of the same are equalto one another, it follows that these thingsmust be synonymous.Every student of Holy Writ, when he turnshis attention to this observation, will immediatelyrecollect passages in which the samethings are predicated of the heavens ; thus itis said of God, as the God of Israel Whorideth upon the heavens in thy help, andin his excellency upon the sky.* And again,1 Isai. Ixvi, 16. Ezek. x. 2.3 1 Cor. x. 18. * Deut. xxxiii. 26.INTRODUCTION.Extol him that rideth upon the heavens. 1Him that rideth upon the heaven of heavensthat were of old? Every one knows that, inHoly Scripture, God is also perpetually describedas he who sitteth upon the heavens ; 3that the heaven is God's throne, and theearth his footstool;* that The Lord hathprepared his throne in the heavens ; 5 thathe dwelleth in the heavens, though they cannotcontain him; 6 that he falleth heaven andearth. 7With regard to Blessings and Curses, thatthe Heavens are the primary instruments bywhich God bestows the one and inflicts theother, is evident from many passages of HolyWrit. Thus it is said in Deuteronomy, 8 TheLord shall open unto thee his good treasurethe heavens, 9 to give the rain unto thy landin his season, and to bless all the work ofthine hand. The prophet Hosea has a passage,in which the hands by which blessingsand fertility are transmitted to man step byi Ps. Ixviii. 4. 2 Ibid. 33.3 Ibid. ii. 4. * Matth. v. 34, 35.5 Ps. iii. 19.6 Ibid, xxiii. 1. 1 Kings, viii. 27.7 Jerem. xxiii. 24. 8 Dent, xxviii. 12.9 Heb. D'Dtrm n non nyi nINTRODUCTION. Lxxviistep are strikingly described. Arid it shallcome to pass in that day, I will hear, saiththe Lord, I will hear the heavens, and theyshall hear the earth, and the earth shall hearthe corn and the wine and the oil ; and theyshall hear Jezreel. 1 Thus the blessing descendsfrom God by the heavens to the earth,producing abundance for the support andcomfort of man. And with respect to cursesit is said, The heaven that is over thee shallbe brass* Ye are cursed with a curse, saithMalachi, for ye have robbed me, even thiswhole nation. The curse alluded, was theshutting of the windows of heaven. 3From all these passages, it is evident thatthe same things are predicated both of theHeavens and the Cherubim, and that, therefore,they are synonymous terms, and signifythe same powers. But this leads to anotherinquiry. What are the heavens ? This isa query which at first every one thinks hecan answer, but yet when the term comesto be sifted, it will be found that few haveany definite idea of its real meaning. Generallyspeaking, the expanse over our heads,i Hos. ii. 21, 22. 2 Ibid, xxvii. 23.3 Malachi. iii. 9, 10.Lxxviii INTRODUCTION.and the bodies it contains, are understood bythe word Heavens ; but when analysed, itwill be found chiefly to indicate powers inactioncontained in that expanse, and whichact upon these bodies ; powers that in the varioussystems of the universe have variouscentres dispersed throughout space, each havinga local or partial action upon its own system,and all derived originally, and still maintained,from and by one parent fountain, thecentre of all irradiation, of all light, of all lifeand energy.In order to ascertain what the word heaven,or heavens, really means, the most satisfactoryway is to submit it to analysis. In theBible there are three terms employed to signifythe heavens and heavenly powers, one ofwhich 1 is usually rendered the Heavens ; another,2 the Sky ; and a third, 3 the Firmament.I shall consider each of these terms.1. Heaven, or the heavens. This word, inthe Hebrew language, is derived from a root, 4which signifies to dispose or place, with skill,care, and order, as say the lexicographers ; sothat literally the common plural term would beINTRODUCTION.the disposers or placers. It is singular, andworthy of particular notice, that the Pelagian,according to Herodotus, gave no othernames to their deities than that of gods, 1 socalling them because they were the placers* ofall things in the world, and had the universaldistribution of them. 3 We see here that theGrecian gods which, as has been proved inanother place, 4 were subsequent to the originalchaotic state of the heavens and the earthwhen the one was without light, and the otherwithout form and void were really synonymouswith those ruling physical powers whichGod employed as his instruments first in theformation of the heavenly bodies, and next inthat of their organized departure, whether vegetableor animal ; and lastly, in maintainingthose motions or revolutions in the bodies justnamed, which he had produced, and otherphysical phenomena which were necessary forthe welfare of the whole system and its severalparts. These powers, whatever name we callthem by, 5 form the disposers or placers, the1 Scot.Ditto TU TOLOVTU, onra TTCLVTO. Trprj-yfJLaTa KO.I Traaae vo/zag ei\pv. Euterp. c. 52.4 See Appendix, Note 1. 5 See above, p. xxxix.LxXX INTRODUCTION.heavens in action : these are the Jupiter, Juno,and Minerva of the Greeks and Romans, andthe various deities of other nations : For allgods of the nations are idols, saith the psalmistbut Jehovah made the heavens, or thepowers symbolized by the idols of the nations.These are those powers which, under Godwho, as the charioteer of the universe, directsthem in all their operations, whether in heavenor on earth, to answer the purposes of his providenceexecute the laws that have receivedhis sanction. These are the physical cherubimrepresented by the earthly rulers theman, the lion, the ox, and the eagle thesethe chariot and throne of the Deity; thehands also by which he taketh hold of materialthings ; the feet by which he treads on theearth and other planets.Those sublime metaphors of the prophet NahumJehovah hath his way in the whirlwind,and in the storm and the clouds are the dust ofhis feet* though at first sight appearing onlymagnificent figures, when analysed will befound literally true. Knowest thou the ordinancesof the heaven ? canst thou set the dotPs. xcvi. 5. a Nahum, i. 3.INTRODUCTION. Lxxximinion thereof in the earth ? l saith God ;showing that he, by his instruments the heavens,rules the earth : this is said in strongerterms, when the heaven is declared to be God'sthrone, and the earth his footstool, which impliesthat God acts upon the earth by what arecalled symbolically his feet those powerstherefore that produce whirlwinds and stormsin our atmosphere ; that by their impactupon our planet cause evaporation, and consequentlyform the clouds, are the metaphoricalfeet of Jehovah, so that the clouds with strictpropriety may be called the dust excited bythe tread of his feet. When the Psalmistsays of God, He sitteth upon the cherubim,let the earth be moved, what beauty, propriety,and force is there in the expressionwhen it is recollected that the physical cherubimare those powers that have complete dominionover the earth, and cause its motions.2. The Sky. The word we render by theterm sky, or skies, for it is always used in theplural, is derived from a root, 2 which signifiesto comminute, grind, or wear by friction, implyingpowers that come in contact from oppo-1 Job, xxxviii. 33. 2 pnu?Lxxxii INTRODUCTION.site directions, so as to be antagonist orconflicting powers. The cherubim placedat each end of the mercy seat had theirfaces inward, or looking towards each other, 1so that they appeared to symbolize antagonistpowers, as if one was a vis centrifugal, andthe other a vis centripetal. The pillars ofthe earth are the Lord's, and he hath set theworld upon them ; 2 and these two antagonistforces, that which flies from and that whichseeks the centre, form that, so called, universalgravitation, which, under God, upholds theuniverse, keeps all its wholes and their partsin their places, maintains their motions, andmutual actions upon each other. But thoughthese, as moving in an opposite direction, maybecalled antagonist or conflicting powers, yettheir opposition is not enmity, but universal harmonyand love. This Philo seems to intimate,when he says a station, 3 over against Paradise,was assigned to the cherubim, and theflaming sword, not as to enemies about tostruggle and fight, but as to those that weremost intimate and friendly. It is said of thecherubic animals, in Ezekiel, that they ran1 Exod. xxxvii. 8. 9. 2 1 Sam. ii. 8.3 De Cherubim. 85. F. G. Ed. Col. Allobr. 1643.INTRODUCTION. Lxxxiiiand returned as the appearance of a flash oflightning, 1 which seems to intimate a constantefflux and influx of inconceivable rapidity.Accordingly the effluxes of light and heatfrom the solar orb in our own system are neverintermitted, and their velocity, for that of lighthas been measured, exceeds that of any othermoving substance. With respect to the fuel,if I may so express myself, that maintains thisconstant expenditure, little seems yet to beknown of it philosophically ; and we can onlyform conjectures with respect to it derivedfrom the general analogy of nature, as far asit is submitted to the observation of our senses.On earth we know that there can be no combustionor evolution of light and heat withoutthe access of air to an ignited body ; and thata constant supply of some combustible substanceto replace the constant expenditure offuel is also necessary. Therefore, reasoningfrom analogy, something similar must takeplace at the great focus of light and heat.There must be an influx of air and a supply ofcombustible matter. That there is such aninflux is rendered further probable by other1 Ezek. i. 14.Lxxxiv INTRODUCTION.analogical arguments. In man, who is calleda microcosm, or world in miniature, there isas incessant a return of the blood to the heartin a negative state by one set of vessels, asthere is an issue of it in a positive state byanother. The lungs also inspire the air in onestate, and expire it in another : and by thisalternate flux and reflux life is maintained ;but suspend it beyond a certain period anddeath is the result. Again, the rivers are constantlydischarging their waters into the sea byone channel and receiving them back again byanother. Plants likewise, and animals, derivetheir nutriment from the earth and from theheavens, and under other forms return it againto the sources from which it flowed. So thatit seems to be a general law that where thereis an efflux there must also be an influx.3. The Firmament. The proper translationof the word, which our version, after theseptuagint, renders firmament, is the expansion.And God said, Let there be an expansion,and let it divide the waters, &c. Thecause of expansion is heat, which naturallydivides and separates that in which it acts ; aswe see in the case of evaporation and the ascentof steam : and not only this, but theINTRODUCTION. Lxxxvexpansive force consolidates that whereon itsimpact is, whence our translation renders theword, after the Greek, s-tpw/m, the firmament,that which renders all things firm, the actionof which produces the cohesion of the atomsof bodies, and their agglomeration round apartial or general centre : in this last acceptationit is synonymous with the term attraction,and in the former with that of repulsion.From these considerations we may readilyunderstand why the Psalmist calls it, TheFirmament of his power or strength. 1The terms expansion, then, and firmament,express the matter of the heavens in a state ofaction, going from or returning to its centralfountain ; for every system, as well as its ownsun and planets, has doubtless its own heavens,probably never stagnant, but incessantlyissuing from a centre of irradiation, as theblood from the heart in a positive state, andreturning in a negative state to that centrewhere it is, as it were, again oxygenated, andcirculates to the fiammantia iceni mundi ;and soriturj et labour in omne volubilis eevum,i Ps. d. 1.VOL. I. g1XXXV1 INTRODUCTION.But though every system probably forms adistinct portion of creation, yet, reasoningfrom analogy, and the general plan of theDeity, as far as we are acquainted with it,there is every reason to believe that theuniverse consists of systems so concatenatedas to form one great whole, the centre ofwhich may be the Heaven of Heavens, thepresence-chamber of the God of Gods andLord of Lords ; in whom and from whom isall motion, light, and expansion. What maybethe links that connect the several systemscan only be conjectured. It has been observedwith regard to comets, that they wanderfrom one solar system to another ; l if this bethecase they evidently belong to two systems,and their perihelion in one, will be theiraphelion in another, and thus they may formconnecting links between them. This concatenationof systems may also have a commonmotion round their glorious centre, formingthe grand cycle, or year, of the Universe.Having, I trust, made it evident, or atleast extremely probable, that the Heavensi La Place, System. &c. by Harte, ii. 337.INTRODUCTION. IxXXVliand the Cherubim, physically considered,indicate the same powers, I shall next advertto some passages of Scripture that seem tolift up the veil which covers these mysterioussymbols, and show us expressly what theyrepresent.In that sublime description of the descentof the Deity for the help and deliveranceof David in the eighteenth Psalm, we havethese words ; He rode upon a Cherub anddid fly ; yea, he did fly upon the wings of thewind. Here we have one of these symbolicalbeings introduced and explained as the latterhemistich of the verse is clearly exegetical ofthe former by the phrase, The wings of thewind. 1 If we next turn to the Psalm, in a parallel passage, we findan explanation of this latter metaphor. Hemaketh the clouds his chariot, and walkethupon the wings of the wind. Whence itappears that the wings of the wind, by anelegant economy, mean the clouds, consequentlythe clouds are a cherub. In variousparts of the Old Testament, God's presenceand glory are manifested by and in a cloud.1-Parkhurst renders these words, The wings of the Spirit, buthe stands alone in this.Lxxxviii INTRODUCTION.When he led his hosts from Egypt throughthe Red Sea, he went before them by dayin a pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillarof fire ;* when he was about to descend uponMount Sinai, he said Lo, I come unto theein a thick cloud. 2 When the tabernacle wasset up in the wilderness, and the work wasfinished, Then a cloud covered the tent of thecongregation, and the glory of the Lordfilled the tabernacle* When Solomon'sTemple was built, and the ark brought intothe oracle, and placed under the wings ofthe cherubim, and the priests were comeforth, then The cloud filled the house, so thatthe priests could not stand to minister becauseof the cloud : for the glory of the Lord hadfilled the house of the Lord* As God thuscame of old in a cloud, and by it manifestedhis presence to his people and in his house ; solikewise when he spoke to them, it was from acloud, as in the passage above quoted Lo,I come to thee in a thick cloud, that thypeople may hear when I speak with thee.And again, And a cloud covered the mount ;and the glory of the Lord abode upon Mounti Exod. xiii. 21. 2 /^^. x | Xt 9^ 16. 1 Kings, viii. 12.3 Exod. xl. 33, 34. 4 1 Kings, viii. 611.INTRODUCTION. LxxxixSinai, and the cloud covered it six days ;and the seventh day he called unto Moses outof the midst of the cloud. 1 And in anotherplace, And the Lord descended in the cloud,and stood with him there, and proclaimedthe name of the Lord? And the Lord camedown in a cloud, and spake unto him, andtook of the Spirit that was upon him, andgave it unto the seventy elders. 3 And in theNew Testament, at the Transfiguration, Beholda bright cloud overshadowed them, anda voice out of the cloud* From these passagesit appears to follow, that when theDeity thought proper to address his prophetsor his people by the voice of words, it wasfrom a cloud.But not only did God descend to communicatewith his people, and to reside as itwere amongst them in a cloud; but when ourSaviour went up into Heaven, it was upona cloud, which Athanasius calls mounting thecherubim ; 5 and when he comes again, itwill be in the same manner, attended by hisholy angels. When he is said, in the1 Exod. xxiv. 15, 16. 2 Ibid, xxxiv. 5.3 Numb. xi. 25. * Matth. xvii. 5.s Opera, ii. 3017, D.XC INTRODUCTION.Apocalypse, to ride upon a White Horse,and the armies which were in heaven tofollow him upon white horses ; l by thesewhite horses are meant white clouds, as isevident from other passages of Holy Writ;as where it is said Behold, he cometh withclouds. 2 Again, God's going to executejudgments upon any nation is sometimesrepresented by his riding upon a cloud. Sowhen the prophet pronounces the burden ofEgypt, his exordium is Behold, the Lordrideth upon a swift cloud, and shall comeinto Egypt.So immediate is God's action upon theclouds described to be in the Bible, that thethunder is called his voice, as in Job Hearattentively the noise of his voice, and thesound that goeth out of his mouth. He directedit under the whole heaven, and hislightning unto the ends of the earth Godthundered marvellously with his voice : 3 andwhen he descended upon Mount Sinai, it waswith mighty thundering. 4 Considering thebenefits and blessing that God confers uponRevel, xix. 11, 14.2 Ibid. i. 7, comp. Dan. vii. 13. Rev. xiv. 14. Acts, i. 11.3 Job, xxxvii. 25. * Exod. ix. 28.INTRODUCTION. Xcimankind by the ministry of the Cherub-clouds,his horses and chariots of salvation,we need not wonder at the Psalmist's expressionHis strength is in the clouds. 1 Actingby them, he causes it to rain upon one cityand not upon another* Are there any, saysJeremiah, among the vanities of the Gentilesthat can cause rain ? or can the Heavensgive showers ? Art not thou He, O Lordour God. 3The Deity superintends his whole creation,not only supporting the system that he hasestablished, and seeing that the powers towhich he has given it in charge to governunder him, execute his physical laws ; buthimself, where he sees fit, in particular instancesdispensing with these laws : restrainingthe clouds, in one instance, from sheddingtheir treasures ; and in another, permittingthem to descend in blessings. Acting everywhereupon the atmosphere, and those secondarypowers that produce atmospheric phenomena,as circumstances connected with hismoral government require. Thus it is thathis strength is in the clouds ; that his presPs. Ixviii. 34. 2 Amos, iv. 7.3 Jerem. xiv. 22.XC11 INTRODUCTION.sence, either to bless or to curse, is manifestedby them ; that his voice is heard fromthem ; his glory irradiates from them. Onthis account also they are called his paths. 1The Lord is said to come with fire, orrather in fire; 2 to descend in fire; 3 to be aconsuming fire; 4 to speak out of the fire; 5from all which passages it seems to follow,that fire or heat form also one of the physicalcherubim upon which the Deity sitteth, orwhich he inhabited, and by which he acteth.Light appears entitled to the same distinction; for God is said to dwell in the lightthat no man can approach unto, 6 and to coverhimself with light as with a garment. 7Lastly, air or wind, which God bringethout of his treasury; which is the type, and,on the day of Pentecost, was the precursorof the Holy Spirit, both in Hebrew andGreek 8 is expressed by the same word distinguishedonly by its adjuncts ; and is one1 Ps. Ixv. 14.2 Isai. Ixvi. 15. Heb. ttfKl, the Septuagint seem to haveread UNO.3 Exod. xix. 18. 4 Deut. iv. 24.Ibid. 36. 6 1 Tim. vi. 16.7 Ps. civ. 2. 8 niINTRODUCTION. XC111of the main instruments by which God actsupon our globe, both in dispensing blessingsand curses, and without which our life couldnot be sustained a moment, is evidently acherub, or ruling physical power, of the samerank with heat and light.The statement I have here given of thephysical cherubim, is singularly confirmedin Ezekiel's vision. / looked, says he, andbehold a whirlwind came out of the north,a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, anda brightness was about it. 1 Here we see theappearance of the symbolical animals waspreceded by that of the physical agents theysymbolized the wind, the cloud, the fire,and the light. The reason why the cloudsare particularly signalized as God's chariots,appears to be because they are instinct withallthose principles by which God acts uponthe earth ; and therefore they are describedas carrying him, since they are the instrumentsby which his will has full accomplishment.It is singular, and worthy of particularnotice, that God is also said to dwell in darkEzek. i. 4.Xciv INTRODUCTION.ness. The Lord hath said that he woulddwell in the thick darkness ; l and againMoses drew near to the thick darkness whereGod was. 2 In the Psalms it is said Hemade darkness his secret (or hiding) place?Darkness was the state of the original heavens,before God formed the light, to whichthis passage seems to be an allusion. InIsaiah, the term create is applied to darkness,and form to the production of light; 4 fromwhich it appears that it was out of darknessthat light was formed ; and these two oppositesseem to bear the same relation to eachother as positive and negative electricity, orheat and cold. Darkness was that in whichthe Divine Spirit operated, when by incubationmotion, followed by light and expansion,was educed, and the sea brake forthfrom the crust of the earth as from the womb ;when the cloud was the garment thereof, andthick darkness a swaddling band for it. 5In the different visions of the appearanceof the Deity, as the Insessor of the chariotof the cherubim, it is stated, that expanded1 2 Chron. vi. 1. 2 Exod. xx. 21.3 Ps. xviii. 11. 4 Isai. xlv. 7.5 Job, xxxviii. 8, 9.INTRODUCTION. XCVover their heads was a firmament like crystalor ice ; that above this firmament was a sapphirethrone; that one sat on this throne,round about whom was the appearance of arainbow. 1 So likewise in the vision of theapostolic prophet, St. John A throne was setin heaven, and one sat upon it, and there wasa rainbow round about the throne, and beforethe throne was a sea of glass like unto crystal ;and in the midst of the throne and round aboutthe throne were four cherubic animals, whichproclaim the Trisagium.* When Moses,Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israelwent up into Mount Sinai, and saw the Godof Israel, He stood upon what was like apavement of sapphire and as it were the bodyof heaven in its clearness. 3 In all these passages,the same idea seems to prevail withrespect to the firmament it is like ice or theterrible crystal in one a sea of glass likecrystal, or crystallizing, emitting the splendourof crystal in the other like the body ofheaven in its clearness in the third.The footstool of the Deity, the pavementon which his throne is placed, is over or abovei Ezek. i. 22, 26, 28. 2 Revel, iv. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8.3 Exod, xxiv. 10.Xcvi INTRODUCTION*the heads of the cherubim; and though wecannot comprehend exactly the precise meaningof the figures employed, yet the generalidea seems to be that of irradiation ; and bythese representations the claim of Jehovah theGod of Israel is indicated to supremacy andentire dominion over the physical cherubim,or the heavens in a state of action, and asthe sole fountain and centre of that incessantradiation and glory, and of those constanteffluxes by which the whole universe of systemsand worlds is maintained.It seems probable, therefore, that one of theprincipal reasons why the cherubic symbolsw r ere placed in the adytum of the Jewishtabernacle and temple was not only to representthose powers that govern under God innature, but likewise to indicate his Supremeand only Godhead, and that his people wereto beware of worshipping these powers or theirsymbols, because they derived so much benefitfrom their ministerial agency, but to worshipHim alone who created them, employed them,and operated in and by them.The ancients seem generally to have regardedthe name and symbols as indicatingand representing more than one object.INTRODUCTION. XCviiPhilo Judaeus, who has written a treatiseupon those placed at the east of the gardenof Eden, sometimes interprets them physically,and sometimes metaphysically. Physically,in one place, he considers one cherubas representing the sphere of the fixed stars,and the other that of the planets, 1 and inanother he asks, whether they may notsignify the two hemispheres, 2 both of whichamount to the whole universe. 3 The flamingsword, he conjectures, either represents thegeneral motion of the heavens and planets, orelse is a symbol of the sun. 4 Metaphysically,he considers the two cherubim as symbolizingthe Power and Goodness of the Deity, andthe flaming sword the Logos or his essentialWord; and this interpretation he seems tothink was divinely suggested to him. 5 Clementof Alexandria, in some degree, seems toincline to the opinions, on this subject, of hiscompatriot Philo, but he expresses himselfobscurely, 6 and, after alluding to other interpretations,concludes with mentioning " Theapologising spirits whom the cherubim semiDe Cherubim. 86. A. B. 2 Ibid. D.s Ibid. 85. G. * Ibid. 86. D. E. 5 /$#. p. G.6 Clem. Alex. Stroma. 1. v. 241. ed. Salzburg. 1592.VOL. I. g 7XCV111 INTRODUCTION.bolize" ' Irenaeus, the learned Bishop ofLyons, who had conversed with Polycarp,St. John's disciple, regards these mystic objectsas physical and ecclesiastical symbols,taking chiefly into consideration their number.The four quarters of the globe, the^b^r winds,the four gospels, the four universal covenantsgiven to man each of these he appears toregard as figured by the cherubic animals ; 2and he might have added the four physicalcherubim, spirit or wind, light, expansion,and the clouds. 3 Justin Martyr has a singularopinion on this subject. He thinksEzekiel's cherubim symbolized Nebuchadnezzarwhen he was driven out from thesociety of man as a beast : 4 when, accordingto the Septuagint which Justin used, he eatgrass like an ox, his hair was like a lions, andhis nails like a bird's or eagles. Athanasiushas a remarkable passage, before alluded to,in which he says of Christ, that when he appearedupon earth, He bowed the heavens andcame down, and that he again mounted the1 In allusion probably to Isaiah vi. 3, and Revel, iv. 8.2 Adv. Hares. 1. iii. c. 11.3 See Appendix, Note 25.4 Quasi, et Resp. ad Orthodox. Quest. xliv.INTRODUCTION. Xcixcherubim, and ascended into heaven, 1 fromwhence it should seem that he had adoptedthe opinion, that the heavens, and the cloudswere antitypes of the symbolical cherubim :yet in another passage of his works, he expresslyplaces the seraphim and cherubimamongst the highest of the heavenly essences,As we know," says he, " that there is adistinction of rank in the powers above, sothere are also differences of station and knowledge.The thrones, both the Seraphim andthe Cherubim, learn from God immediately,as higher than all and nearest to God, andthey instruct the inferior orders but the lowestrank are the angels, which are also theinstructors of men." 2It seems evident from this statement of theopinions of both ancient Jews and Christians,that the sculptured Cherubim, in their opinion,represented physical as well as metaphysicalobjects ; in fact, the most general interpretationseems to be that those powers that ruleunder God, either in his physical universe, orwhich, with regard to our planet, have powerin his church, or over his people ; and also1 Quest. ad Antioch. xxxvi.2 De commun. assent. ed. Paris, 1627, i. 238.C INTRODUCTION.those spiritual essences that approach nearestto him, in the purity of their natures, are theantitype of the cherubic forms. St. Paul,describing the creation of all things by theSon of God, whether visible or invisible, mentionsparticularly four ruling powers in natureand grace Thrones, dominions, principalities,and powers.* This may be interpretedof all rule and government both in heavenand upon earth; which is all derived fromChrist, as King of Kings and Lord of Lords,to whom All power is given in heaven andearth:* who therefore is the Insessor of thecherubim, acting by all the powers that hehath created, whether physical or metaphysical,whether civil, ecclesiastical, or spiritual ;for He upholder all things by the word ofhis power?In the prophecy of Isaiah, and in theApocalypse, 4 the six-winged beings called bythe former The seraphim, 5 and by St. John1 Colors. i. 16. 2 Matth. xxviii. 18.3 Heb. i. 3. 4 Isai. vi. 3. Rev. iv. 8.5 Heb. Dew This name, which literally may be renderedburners, physically would signify the heavens in the most intensestate of action ; they are stated to have six wings, theupper pair veiling their faces, the lower pair covering their feet,the intermediate pair being used for flight. See Isai. vi. 2.INTRODUCTION. Clliving-creatures 1 which by most ancientwriters are thought to be synonymous withthe cherubim are represented as repeatingthe Trisagium ; the latter says They restnot day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,Lord God Almighty, This triple ascriptionof Holiness is thought by many to intimatea Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, andthat the physical cherubim or seraphimsymbolically represent that mystery. ArchdeaconSharp, and after him ArchbishopNewcome, 2 have observed, that this opinionis inconsistent with these symbolical animalsfalling down and worshipping the Lamb, andascribing their redemption to him ; an objectionwhich appears to me not to have beensatisfactorily answered. It should, however,be taken into consideration that the cherubimare symbols not solely of physical, but ofall governing powers ; and that, therefore, inorder to interpret rightly any act of theirs, theWhen our Saviour says of the wind Thou hearest the soundthereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither itgoeth ; may not the same thing be meant as by Isaiah's Descriptionof the Seraphim ?1 Gr. Som.Sharp On the Cherubim, 305. Newcome's Ezekiel, i. 10,note.VOL. I. hCll INTRODUCTION.circumstances attending upon it should becarefully examined. If we consider the passagesin the Apocalypse here alluded to, weshall find that when praise is to be renderedto God as Creator and Upholder of the universe,they then are stated to proclaim hisTriune Deity, by saying Holy, Holy, Holy,Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, andis to come. This they do as the physicalpowers, under God, upholding the universe,especially as fire, light, and air ; all of which,in passages of Scripture above noticed, 2 appearto represent the Three Persons of theHoly Trinity. But when they are introducedas representing the governing Powers of theuniversal Church, as they are when they falldown and worship the Lamb, the case isaltered ; for those they then represent areamongst the redeemed.One of my objects in treating so much atlarge upon this mysterious subject, was tocounteract that tendency, often observable inthe writings of philosophers, to ascribe toomuch to the action of second causes, and themechanism of the heavenly powers ; as if1 Revel, ubi supr. * See above, p. xcii.INTRODUCTION. Callthey were sufficient of themselves, and withoutthe intervention of the First Cause, to doall in all, and keep the whole machine andall its parts together and at work. Insteadof regarding Him as receding further andfurther from our observation, 1 my desire is tobring Him nearer and nearer to us, that wemay see and acknowledge Him every whereasthe main-spring of the universe, whichanimates, as it were, and upholds it in all itsparts and motionsLives through all life, extends through all extent,Spreads undivided, operates unspent.Maintaining his own laws by his own universalaction upon and by his cherubim of glory.WITHOUT HIM THEY CAN DO NOTHING.I cannot conclude this Introduction withoutreturning my grateful acknowledgments tothe Board of Curators of the HungarianMuseum, for their kind permission to havedrawings taken of such subjects in thatsuperb collection as might answer my pureSee above, p. xxii.CIV INTRODUCTION.pose; and to Messrs. Cleft and Owen, theconservator and assistant-conservator of themuseum, for their readiness, on all occasions,to show and explain to me such articles undertheir care as I had occasion to inspect ; tothe friendly attentions of the latter gentlemanI am particularly indebted, not only for hisexertions to serve me in the museum, but forhis valuable information on numerous scientificsubjects, on which I had occasion to consulthim, which his deep knowledge of comparativeanatomy, and familiar acquaintancewith the classification of the animal kingdom,enabled him to give me. To the gentlemenconnected with the British Museum and thatof the Zoological Society, I have to makesimilar acknowledgments for the kindness andinformation with which my inquiries on severalsubjects have uniformly been answered.As the first volume of this work wasprinted before the publication of Dr. Roget'sadmirable Treatise, it will not be deemedwonderful that, in some instances, we havetreated of the same subject. The history,habits, and instincts of animals, are so intimatelyconnected with their physiologicalstructure, especially their external anatomy,INTRODUCTION. CVthat it is scarcely possible, in order to provethe adaptation of means to an end, to treatsatisfactorily of the former without occasionalillustrations from the latter. After the doctor'swork appeared, I removed many things ofthis kind from my MS., upon which he hadenlarged. The moult of Crustaceans, however,seemed to me, and to every friend whomI consulted, so necessary to make the historyof that Class complete, that, though mostlyderived from the same source as that of mylearned Co-nominee, I did not expunge it.ERRATA.VOLUME I.Page xi. 1. 20. for " 364" read " 365."xvi. 11. for " Spicula" read " Spicula."xvi. 13. dele note 1.xlix. 18. after " most" insert " part."Ixvi. 12. dele " would."Ixxx. 4. before " Gods" insert " the."Lxxxii. note 3. for ' 1643" read " 1613."Lxxxvii. 1. 22. for " economy" read " metonymy.'Lxxxix. note 5. for " 3017" read " 387."cv. 1. 7. " Crustaceans," see volsci. p. 51.100. 4. for " Mr." read " Dr."103. 4. for " decrement" read " decrement.'151. 7. after " this" insert " a."159. 24. for " that " read " which."164. 4. dele the first " that."171. 19. for " germs " read " germes."217. 24. for " than " read " that."240. 8. for " the" read " their."285. 1. for " possessing" read " possess."291. note 3. insert a comma after " achatina."293. 19. for " nothing " read " not at all."301. 9. for " those " read " these."316. 8. for " gives " read " give."344. note 1. for" Triguetra" read " triquetra."347. 1. 12. for " they " read " and."362. note 1. for " HIT " read " ml."379. 3. for nU"l " readVOLUME II.Page v. 1. 3. for " 2" read " 1."vii. 16. before " 292 " insert " 288."26. 19. for " by " read " upon."42. note 3. for " littered" read " litre."46. 1. 13. after " inwards " put a semicolon.61. note 3. for " Zostaree " read " Zosterte."ERRATA.Page 65. 1. 4. ^67. penult. S for " Miltiades" read " Millepedes."130. 1.24. J65. 18. for " resembles " read " resembling."67. 14. "for " instill " read " instil."85. note 1. for " Heraldic" read " Hierozoic."90. 1. 4. after " functions " put a comma.90. 9. for " fits "read" fit."92. 16. for " sheds " read " shed."94. note 4. for " volvens " read " volvens."95. 1. 23. for " leach" read " leech."114. before " Suckers" insert" 3.''127. before " Setae " insert " 4."131. before " Natatory legs " insert " 5."141. note 1. for" Pelham" read " Plumes."144. before " Wings " insert " 6."155. 1. 16. before " centre " insert " the."161. before " Steering Organs" insert " 7."165. before " Legs " insert "8.''205. 1. 3. for " Antilope" read " Antelope."216. antepenult, for " stretches" read "stretch."244. 1. 15. for " that" read "the."258. 23. dele " young."270. 22. after " and " insert *' are."325. note 3. for " Sarcophagi " read " Sarcophagi."326. 1. for " Se-vivipara" read " Musca carrara,"334. 1. 10. for " subsequent " read " subsequently."341. 25. for " like" read " as in."344. 25. for " its " read " their."357. note 2. for " 1JH " read " 1 W363. note 1. after " Mycetophagus" insert " Far."375. 1. 25. for " they inhabit " read " it inhabits."404. note 1. 1. 3. for " Mas" read " Mus."457. 1. 18. for " Phaleropes " read " Phalanges."459. note 4. for " geleatus" read " galeatus."493. 3. for " Mysitcetus" read " Mysticetus."517. 1. 21. after " and " insert " is."526. 21. for " was" read " were."527. 11. after " gives " insert " it."530. 6. col. 1. dele first comma.531. 39. 2. for " Ciripedes" read " Cirripedes."532. 5. 2. for " De Gear " read " De Peer."534. 5. 1. for " electrical" read " electricus."534. 31. 2. for " Homdineans" read " Hirudineans."535. 26. 2. for " Lanark " read " Lamarck."539. 43. 2. for " platycaula" read " platycauda."540. 44. 1. for " speculator" read " senoculata."542. 21. 1. for " Unger" read " Unger."THEHISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTSOF ANIMALS.CHAPTER I.Creation of Animals.IN no part of creation are the POWER, WISDOM,and GOODNESS, of its beneficent and almightyAuthor more signally conspicuous than in thevarious animals that inhabit and enliven ourglobe. The infinite diversity of their forms andorgans , the nice adaptation of these to theirseveral functions ; the beauty and elegance of alarge number of them ; the singularity of others ;the variety of their motions ; their geographicaldistribution ; but, above all, their preeminentutility to mankind, in every state and stage oflife, render them objects of the deepest interestboth to rich and poor, high and low, wise andunlearned, so that arguments in proof of theseprimary attributes of the Godhead, drawn fromthe habits, instincts, and other adjuncts of theVOL. I. B2 CREATION OF ANIMALS.animal creation, are likely to meet with moreuniversal attention, to be more generally comprehended,to make a deeper and more lasting impressionupon the mind, to direct the heart morefervently and devotedly to the maker and giverof these interesting beings, than those which aredrawn from more abstruse sources, though reallymore elevated and sublime. ^ sd biuThe history of the animal kingdom naturallycommences with the creation of animals, and thegreat events preparatory to it, for when theALMIGHTY CREATOR, in his wisdom, and by theword of his power, had first brought into being,and afterwards set in order, the heavens and theearth : had caused the latter to bring forth grass,and herb, and tree, and then had placed his sunin the former, that by constant irradiations oflight and heat from that central fountain, thelife, 1 and motion, which the FIRST MOVER hadbegun by the incubation of his Spirit, and whichnow manifested itself in the vegetable kingdom,might be maintained till it had run its destinedcourse. When all things were thus prepared,his next care was to people and enliven the earthwith a different and higher class of beings, inwhom to organization, and life, and growth,and reproductive powers, might be added sensationand voluntary motion. Unpeopled by anieSee Appendix, note 1.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 3male, the verdant earth in all its primitive anduntarnished beauty, though inlaid with flowersexhibiting, in endless variety, every mixtureand shade of colour that can glad the sight ;though fanned hy gales breathing Sabean odours,to gratify the scent ; though tempting the appetiteby delicious fruits of every flavour, stillwould be a scene without the breath of life. Nomotions would be seen but of the passing clouds,of the fluctuating waters, and the waving boughs ;no voice heard but of the elements.Was a single pair placed in this paradise,though at first it would seem that there wasgratification for every sense, and joy would possessthe heart, and admiration fill the soul withpleasure ; yet after the novelty of the spectaclehad ceased, and the effect of its first impressionwas obliterated, a void would soon be felt, somethingmore would seem wanting to animate theotherwise lovely scene ; a longing would arise inthe mind for some beings, varying in form andmagnitude, furnished with organs that wouldenable them to traverse and enliven the lowerregions of the atmosphere, others that mightcourse over the earth's surface, and others thatcould win their easy way through its waters, sothat all, by their numbers, and the variety oftheir motions, might exhibit a striking and interestingcontrast to the fixed and unconsciousvitality of the vegetable kingdom.4 CREATION OF ANIMALS.But it was not the will of the beneficent Creatorto leave such a blank and blot in his creation ;before he created man in his own image, and enthronedhim king of the new-made world, hedecreed that his dominion also should be animage of his own, over innumerable creatures ofevery form and grade, each in its place entrustedwith a peculiar office and function, and furnishedwith organs adapted to its work, contributing toits own and the general welfare; so that allshould operate, " though each in different sortand manner," to accomplish the great plan of anAll-wise Providence.What was the precise order of creation in theanimal kingdom is no where clearly revealed inHoly Scripture; and we can only conjecture,since the most perfect animal, and he who alonebelonged to the spiritual and invisible world byhis soul, as well as by his body to the visible, wascreated the last, that the progress was from thosethat were at the foot of the scale to those thatwere at the summit. We are told, indeed, ingeneral terms, that on the fifth day, at the divinebidding, the waters, hitherto barren and untenanted,produced abundantly " the moving creaturethat hath life," and fowl to traverse the firmament.In an instant, in obedience to that quickeningword, by the operation of Almighty Power,and under the guidance of infinite Wisdom andGoodness, the boundless ocean with all its tri-creationOF ANIMALS. 5butary streams became prolific, and broughtforth by myriads, in endless and strange diversity,its destined offspring, beginning, perhaps,with the viewless animalcule or the senselesspolype, half animal and half plant, and endingwith the half fish and half quadruped, cetaceans,and their kindred monsters. 1 Nor was the Oceanprolific of aquatic animals alone, and those whosehabitation was the restless world of waters, withallits streams, its caves, and its abysses, italso gave birth to all the winged and featheredtribes from the brilliant humming bird to themighty eagle and the giant vulture that peopleand enliven the atmospheric sea, and make it thefield of their excursions. The Animals createdon this day were destined to dwell or move,independent of the earth, in a fluid medium ofgreater or less tenuity, and for that purposewere fitted with appropriate and peculiar organs,in one case both for respiration and locomotion,in the other for locomotion only.Again the word of power was spoken, " Letthe earth bring forth" and instantly the varioustribes of quadrupeds issued from her teemingwomb, varying infinitely in size, from the minuteharvest-mouse 2 to the giant bulk of the elephantand hippopotamus ; then also the earth-born reptiles,whether four-footed, six-footed, eight-footed,1 See Appendix, note 2. 2 Mus nestorius.6 CREATION OF ANIMALS.or many-footed, started into life, and connectedthe terrestrial tribes with those produced from thewaters. In the majority of these, the fins of thefishes and cetaceans, and the wings of the birds,were replaced by legs best fitted for motion onthe theatre on which they were to act their part,and to fulfil the will of their Creator.The earth was now completely furnished anddecorated to receive her destined king and master.The sun, the moon, and the stars were sheddingtheir kindly influences upon her; she and herfellow planets had commenced their annual anddiurnal revolutions ; the plants and flowers, herfirst born progeny, had sprung out of her bosom,and covered her with verdure and beauty ; andthe fruit and forest trees flourishing in all theirglory of leaf, blossom, and fruit, were ready tominister to the support, comfort, and enjoymentof their future lord: the sea, the air, the earth,were each filled with their appropriate inhabitants,and throughout the whole creation wasbeauty, and grace, and life, and motion, and joy,and jubilee. But still, in the midst of all this apparentglory and activity of vegetable and animallife in the new created world, there was not asingle being endued with reason and understanding; one that could elevate its thought above theglorious and wonderful spectacle to the greatAuthor of it, or acknowledge and adore its Creator.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 7Amidst this infinite variety of beings there wasnot a single one which to a material body addedan immaterial immortal soul ; so that there wasstill a great blank in creation. A wonderful andmagnificent temple was reared, and shone inglory and beauty, but there was as yet no priesttherein to offer up incense to the Deity to whomit was dedicated.We are now, therefore, to consider the creationof him for whom this high office was reserved,who, as king and priest, was to render to thecommon Creator the praises due from all createdthings, and be the spokesman for all the inhabitantsof this terrestrial globe.The vast distance, on this account, interveningbetween man and the highest animals in the scaleof being, appears evident from the different circumstancesattending their creation. When theywere brought into existence, the word was " Letthe waters bring forth Let the earth bring forth"from which it should seem that God did not actimmediately m their creation, except by his agencyon those powers that he had established as rulersin nature, and by which he ordinarily takethhold, as it were, of the material universe. Butwhen a being, combining the spiritual with thematerial world, is to be created, all the personsof the Godhead unite immediately in the work,and without the intervention of any other agent,8 CREATION OF ANIMALS.Let us make man." He was therefore neithersea-born nor earth-born, as some ancient nationsclaimed to be, but born of God ; though, as Christmoistened clay when he was about to exercise hiscreative power, in the re-forming of an eye ;* sowas the humid earth used in the creation of thebody of man by his Maker, and when that wonderfulmachine, with its complex apparatus oforgans, both external and internal, was finished ;when a throne and presence chamber were preparedfor the intellectual and spiritual, and governingpart of his nature, and that wonder-workingpulp the brain, with its silver spinal cord andinfinitely divaricated threads, already fitted forthe mastery of every motive organ, was in a stateto transmit without obstruction, each flux andreflux of that subtile fluid, intermediate, as itwere, between matter and spirit, 2 which so instantaneouslyconveys and causes the executionof the commands of the will by every externalbodily organ ; when the heart was ready to beat ;the lungs to play; the blood to circulate; andevery other system to start for the fulfilment ofits prescribed errand. " Then the Lord Godbreathed into his nostrils the breath of lives, andman became a living soul." He was now installedinto his kingdom over the globe which he inhabited,and dominion was given him over the1 John, ix. 6. 2 See Appendix, note 3.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 9inhabitants of the water, of the air, and of theearth ; and the divine image, in which he was tobe created, was rendered complete.Now, the generations of the world were perfectand healthful, and God saw every thing that hehad made, and behold it was very good. Thatis, every individual essence, whether inanimateor animate, was fitted in every respect to answerthe end of its creation, and perform its allottedpart in contributing to the general welfare. Theentire machine was now in action, every separatewheel was revolving, and the will of Him whocontrived and fabricated it had full and uninterruptedaccomplishment. The instincts of thewhole circle of animals urged them, by an irresistibleimpulse, to fulfil their several functions ;I mean those that were necessary to the thenstate of things : for if the instinct of the predaceousones was not restrained, they would soonhave annihilated the herbivorous ones, even if,as Lightfoot supposes, they were at first createdby sevens. 1 They must, therefore, originally haveeaten grass ,or straw like the ox, and neitherinjured nor destroyed their fellow-beasts of amore harmless character ; this, indeed, appearsclearly from the terms of the original grant,To every beast of the earth, and to every fowlof the air, and to evert thing that creeper upon1 See Appendix, note 4.10 CREATION OF ANIMALS.the earth, wherein there is life, I have givenevery green herb for meat." And to this vegetablediet, before the close of the present scene,we are assured they shall again return so as torender the last age of the world as happy as theoriginal state of man in paradise. 1 This harmonyof the animal creation, continued probably longenough, after the fall, to allow sufficient time forsuch a multiplication of the flocks and herds,and flights and shoals of the gregarious animals,as would secure them from extinction but then,as the poet sings: ho ino mo it ?m-077Ell 3W JflflJ 9fi7Jf3 httfi fJbl O8 3Trf.Rofins or - - Discord firstDaughter of sin, among th' irrationalDeath introduced through fierce antipathy :Beast now with beast 'gan war, and fowl with fowl,And fish with fish ; to graze the herb all leaving,Devour'd each other; nor stood much in awe j{Of man but fled him, or with countenance grimGlar'd on him passing. These were from withoutTU i,- i, A AIe grpwmg miseries which Adam sawsiBJBt joinHad Adam not fallen, this sad change would,probably, never have taken place, for as theauthor of the book of wisdom argues : " Godmade not death, neither hath he pleasure in thedestruction of the living. For he created all thingsthat they might have their being ; and the generationsof the ivorld were healthful; and there is no1 Isaiah, Ixv. 25.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 11poison of destruction in them, nor the kingdom ofdeath upon the earth. When we consider therelative position of man and the animal kingdom,by the divine decree, subjected to his dominion,the harmony and good will that subsisted betweenthem, it appears improbable that immortal manwould have been afflicted by the appearance ofdeath and destruction amongst his subjects fromany cause, especially by the strong, and thosearmed with deadly weapons, attacking and devouringthe weak and helpless. Even now,fallen as we are from our original dignity, thereis no creature so fell and savage that we have notmore or less the power to subdue and tame ; nonatures so averse, that we are not skilled to reconcile;we can counteract even instinct itself,and make a treaty of peace and mutual goodwillbetween animals, whom nature, by a law,has placed in the fiercest enmity and oppositioni . T .,to each other. 1The Creator, indeed, foreseeing the fatal apostacythat plunged our race in ruin, and providingfor the circumstances in which our globe wouldeventually be placed from the too rapid increaseof various animals most given to multiply, furnishedthe predatory tribes with organs andoffensive arms, which, when he gave the wordand let loose the reins, would urge them to the1 See Appendix, note 5.12 CREATION OF ANIMALS.work of destruction, and impel them to attackand devour without pity, those amongst theweaker animals, that were likely to increase inadegree hurtful to the general welfare, thus fulfillinghis great purpose of generally maintainingthose relative proportions, as to number, of individualspecies, that would be most conduciveto the health and mutual advantage of all partsof the system of our globe.This too is the place to consider another circumstanceconnected with the appointment byProvidence of certain animals to certain ends.There are, as must be evident to every one whothinks or observes at all, large numbers of theanimal kingdom, which, considered in their individualcapacities, maybe regarded as positivelyinjurious to man ; and seem to have been createdwith a view to his punishment, either in his personor property. Of this description are thosepredatory tribes of which I have just spoken :but I here mean, more particularly, to advertto those personal pests, that not only attempt toderive their nutriment from him by occasionallysucking his blood when he comes in their way,as the flea, the horse-fly, and others, but thosethat make a settlement upon him or within him,selecting his body for their dwelling as well astheir food, and thus infesting him with a doubletorment.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 13Besides those insects of a disreputable name 1which, under more than one form, inhabit hisperson externally ; and those that, burying themselvesin his flesh, annoy him and produce cutaneousdiseases, 2 a whole host of others attackhim internally, and sometimes fatally. Can webelieve that man, in his pristine state of glory,and beauty, and dignity, could be the receptacleand the prey of these unclean and disgustingcreatures? This is surely altogether incredible,I had almost said impossible. And we musteither believe, with Le Clerc and Bonnet, thatall those worms now infesting our intestines existedin Adam before his fall, only under theform of eggs, which did not hatch till after thatsad event : or that these eggs were dispersed inthe air, in the water, and in various aliments, andso were ready to hatch when they met with theirdestined habitation : or, as some parasites arefound in the earth, 3 or the water, 4 as well as in thehuman species, that they are in general formedfor living in different stations : 5 or, lastly, thatthey were created subsequently to the fall ofAdam, not immediately or all at once, but whenoccasions called for such expressions of the divinedispleasure.With respect to the first of these hypotheses,1 Pediculi. 2 Sarcoptes Scabiei, Pulex penetrate, &c.3 Lumbricus. 4 Gordian aquatic.5 See Introdd. to Ent. iv. 229.14 . CREATION OF ANIMALS.it seems to me very improbable for this reason,that it supposes the first pair to have in themthe germes of all these animal pests, whichalthough, before the fall, they were restrainedfrom germination, after that event, were leftto the ordinary action of physical laws, so thatthen every one of these scourges must haveinhabited them and preyed upon them. Fallenindeed they were from glory and grace, but whocan think that all the accumulated evils that theirsin introduced into the world fell with concentratedviolence upon their own heads, that all thevarious ills that flesh is heir to were experiencedby them in their own persons before they weredivided, some to one and some to another,amongst their posterity? It is scarcely to besupposed that any single individual, from thattime to this, was subject to the annoyance ofevery one of these animals, and it seems incrediblethat Adam and Eve had experience ofthem all.That they had their existence originallyeither as germes or as perfect animals in theair, the earth, or the waters, and were takenin by man with his food, with respect to somespecies may, perhaps, be true. The earth-wormis often voided by children, and some otherthat infest animals are found in the water, butof those that are appropriated to man internally,none have as yet been found, except that justCREATION OF ANIMALS. 15mentioned, in any other habitation. Linne indeedassigns an aquatic origin to the fluke, the ascarides,and the tape-worm, but he seems to haveadopted this opinion upon very slight grounds.Bonnet very justly asks, with respect to the lastof these animals, which Linne states he foundonce in a kind of ochre. " M. Linne is the onlyone that has made this discovery, now if it wascertain that tape worms existed out of the bodyof man and other animals, would it be possible,after the numerous researches that naturalists ofevery country have made in a variety of places,both in the earth and the water, none shouldever meet with that insect T' 1 All Ornithologistsseem now to be of opinion that the solenatural habitation of these animals is that inwhich they are usually found, the human viscera.t)ili UJ J r J m# ,ii:We now come to the last hypothesis, that theseanimals were created subsequently to the fall : asingle instance from Scripture of such a creationwill be sufficient to render it probable that othersmay have taken place when occasions called forsuch expressions of Divine displeasure. Everyoneis aware that God by the wonder-workingrod of Moses converted all the dust of Egyptinto some punitive animal or genus of animals,for they attacked man and beast, concerningi (Euvr. iii. 138.VOL. i. B 816 CREATION OF ANIMALS.the kind of which interpreters differ ; l but thisdoes not affect the question, it is evident thathere is an instance of the creation of an animalin great numbers, and what is worthy of particularobservation, that this animal was not afterwardsagain annihilated as the frogs, and otherswere. What has evidently been done once undercircumstances that required it, though not recorded,may have been repeated, and thus allthe punitive species in question may have beenproduced.This is given merely as an hypothesis, to accountfor the existence of these animals, withoutdoing violence to probability ; and rather in accordancewith the word of God, than controvertingany thing delivered therein and if it excitesa discussion that may throw new light upon thesubject, which ever way the question is determined,I shall be well pleased my object beingrather to elicit truth, than to uphold opinion.Another inquiry also suggests itself with respectto the original animal creation. Are any of thoseanimals with which God peopled the earth, air,and waters, preparatory to the creation of man,now extinct? The answer to this question willprincipally depend upon that to another. Didany alteration take place in the climate and pro1See Appendix, note 6.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 17auctions of our globe in consequence of the fallof man from his original state ? We learn fromthe inspired penman, that God, induced by thatsad event, pronounced a curse upon the ground,and predicted that it should produce in abundancenoxious plants for the annoyance of the offendingrace of man, and that whereas the primeval earthbrought forth spontaneously her fruits andflowers, and afforded man a pleasant and delightfulrecreation and employment, without subjectinghim to toil and weariness ; this state ofthings should cease, and man, for the future,should earn his bread with difficulty by the labourof his hands and the sweat of his brows.From hence it seems to follow that at this timesome great change took place, both with respectto climate, and to that blessing from atmosphericinfluences which produces plenty and fertilitywith the lowest amount of labour. Geologistshave observed, from the remains of plants andanimals embedded in the strata of this and othernorthern countries, that the climate must formerlyhave been warmer than it now is. 1 Some changeor changes of this kind therefore would sooner orlater produce the extinction of such animals andplants, inhabitants of northern countries, as couldnot bear such a change of temperature, and atthe same time could not escape from it; and1 See Appendix, note 7.VOL. I. CJ8 CREATION OF ANIMALS.admitting this it would enable us to answer inthe affirmative to the query above statednamely, that there were species of animals originallycreated which have since ceased to exist.Being no longer necessary to bear a part in carryingon the general plan of Divine Providencewith regard to our globe, they were permitted orcaused to perish.One circumstance, which I have not seenadverted to, seems to confirm this hypothesis :that so few fossil remains, if any, of tropicalbirds have hitherto been discovered in coldcountries, while such numbers of the quadrupedsof warm climates, both viviparous and oviparous,are met with every day in a fossil state.Now the birds could readily shift their quarterssouthward, when the temperature grew too coldfor them, while the quadrupeds might be stoppedby seas, rivers, and other obstacles.Another question may be asked with respectto the subject I am discussing; might not theanimals now become superfluous have been excludedfrom the ark at the time of the generaldeluge, and so left to perish ? This would furnisha very easy solution of the difficulty, but the textof Scripture seems too precise and express toallow of such a supposition. For the commandto Noah is " Of every living thing of all flesh,two of every sort shall thou bring into the ark."But yet the terms here employed must be limitedCREATION OF ANIMALS. 19to those animals that required such shelter topreserve them from destruction by the diluvialwaters; so that the expression " of all flesh"necessarily admits of some exceptions.But there are doubtless very many animalsstill existing upon the earth and in its waters,that have not yet been discovered. When weconsider the vast tracks of terra incognita stillshut out from us in the heart of Africa, that fatalcountry hitherto as it were hermetically sealed toour researches, and from whose bourn so fewtravellers return ; how little we know of CentralAsia, of China, and of some parts of North America;we may well believe that our cataloguesof animals are still very short of their real numbers,even with respect to those of the largestdimensions. Purcell and Campbell appear tohave met with more than one new species ofrhinoceros in their journey from the Cape ofGood Hope into the interior ; J the same countrymay conceal others of the same gigantic or othertribes, which, when it is more fully explored, mayhereafter be brought to light.Again, with regard to the productions of thevarious seas and oceans that occupy so large aportion of our globe, we know comparativelyfew, especially of its molluscous inhabitants.What are cast up on the shores of the various1 See Appendix, note 8.20 CREATION OF ANIMALS.countries washed by their waves, and what thenet or other means may collect in their vicinity,find their way indeed into our cabinets ; butwhat are these compared with such as inhabitthe depths and caves and bed of the infiniteocean, which net never dragged, nor plumb-linefathomed. Who shall say what species lurk inthose unapproachable recesses never to be revealedto the eye of man, but in a fossil state.The giant Inocerami, the singular tribe of Ammonites,and all their cognate genera, as even Lamarckseems disposed to concede: 1 the Baculites,Samnites, Scaphites, and numerous others therehave space enough to live unknown to fame, whilethey are reckoned by the geologist as expungedfrom the list of living animals. I do not mean toassert that these creatures are not extinct, but Iwould only caution the student of nature fromassuming this as irrefragably demonstrated ;since we certainly do not yet know enough of thevast field of creation, to say dogmatically withrespect to any species of these animals that thisis no longer in being.But besides the unexplored parts of the surfaceof the earth, and of the bed of the ocean,are we sure that there is no receptacle foranimal life in its womb ? I am not going heretorevive the visionary speculations of AthenaIn N. D. D. H. N. vii. 553.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 21sins Richer in his Munus subterraneus, butmerely to inquire whether there are any probablegrounds for thinking that some creaturesmay be placed by their Creator at such a depthwithin the earth's crust, as to be beyond allhuman ken.When Laplace says, " It is certain that thedensities of its (the earths) strata increase fromthe surface to the centre, "it seems to follow that,in his opinion, there is no central cavity in ourglobe ; but as his object was chiefly to assert theincreasing density of the strata as they approachthe centre, perhaps his words are not to betakenstrictly, especially as in another place hespeaks of it merely as probable that the strataare more dense as they are nearer to the centre.Sir I. F. W. Herschel makes a similar, but lessexclusive observation, using the terms, " towardsthe centre," which is not inconsistent with acavity.But after all this is matter of conjecture builtupon the attraction of the earth, and cannot beascertained by actual examination ; as far as thathas been carried, it does not appear that in thepresent state of our globe the strata always lieexactly in the order of their densities ; in theoriginal earth probably they did. But now wetread upon the ruins of a world that has beenalmost destroyed and reformed. " The structureof the globe," observes an eminent grogramCREATION OF ANIMALS.pier, " presents in all its parts the features of agrand ruin ; the confusion and overthrow of mostof its strata, the irregular succession of thosewhich seem to remain in their original situations,the wonderful variety which the direction of theveins and the forms of the caverns display, theimmense heaps of confused and broken substances,the transportation of enormous blocksto a great distance from the mountains of whichthey appear to have formed a part," 1 do notlead us as he would intimate " to periods faranterior to the existence of the human race,"but to a mighty catastrophe by which the wholestructure of our globe has been dislocated, andits ancient strata broken up, and separated bythe intervention of new ones formed of animaland vegetable remains.When the Almighty formed our globe fromthe original chaos, and projecting it into spacebade it perform its diurnal and annual revolutions,he first weighed it in his balance, andmoulded it so as it might answer to the "actionof those mighty powers by whose constant impulseor impact those revolutions were to bemaintained ; and if a central void was necessary'he wanted not the means to produce and maintainit. When the power called attractiontended to drive all to the centre, the repellant1 Malte-Brim Syst. of Geog. L. i. 192.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 23principle might be so stationed as to counteractit, and keep the earth's crust at its assigned distance.To compare great things with small, hewho made the rain-drop made also the air-bubble,the one to fall, the other to rise.The word of God, in many places, speaks ofan abyss of waters under the earth, as distinctfrom the ocean though in communication withit, 1 and also as contributing to form springs andrivers. 2 Scientific men, in the present day,appear disposed to question this ; the Geologist,though he may regard the granitic strata asforming the base, as it were, of the crust of theearth, seems rather to view it as containing afocus of heat, than a magazine of infinite waters ;from whence are partly derived the springs andrivers that water the earth's surface, and ultimatelymake good to the ocean its whole loss byevaporation. 3 " Springs," says the author abovequoted, " are so many little reservoirs, whichreceive their waters from the neighbouringground, through small lateral channels." Heallows, however, that the origin of springscannot be referred to one exclusive cause, andassociates with that just mentioned, the precipitationof atmospheric vapours attracted by highlands,the dissolving of ice, the filtering of seatComp. Job, xxviii. 14, xxxviii. 16, 17. Genes, xlix. 25.Deut. xxxiii. 13. Jonah, ii. 6, &c.2 Ps. Lxxviii. 15, 16. Prov. viii. 24. 3 See Appendix, note 9.24 CREATION OF ANIMALS.waters, and the explosion of subterraneous vapours.He makes no direct mention of a storehouseof waters in the bosom of the earth as inany case the source of springs and rivers, butallows that " the phenomena of capillary tubesmay obtain in its interior. The sea-waters,deprived of their salt and bitter elements,may ascend through the imperceptible poresof several rocks, from which, being disengagedby the heat, they will form those subterraneousvapours to which many springs owetheir origin." A very slight alteration of thispassage would make it harmonize with theScripture account of the matter. If, for " somerocks," we substitute through the rocky strata ,and to the " sea waters " add received into theabyss, it would amount to nearly the same thing.It was an ancient opinion, mentioned in Plato'sPhaeton, that there is a flux and reflux of thewaters of our globe, a kind of systole and diastole,into and from Tartarus or the great abyss,which produce seas, lakes, rivers, and fountains. 1That all the causes mentioned above contributeto the formation of the rivers that water theearth, especially the clouds and vapours thatgather round the tops of the mountains and highhills I am ready to admit, at the same time Imust contend that the principal reservoir fromi Platonic Dialogue. Ed. First. Phaeton. .CREATION OF ANIMALS. 25which they are supplied has its station under theearth.Writers on this subject seem to speak as ifthe source of all rivers was in mountainous orhilly countries, but though the mightiest riversof the globe originate in such situations, thereis a very large number of considerable streamswhose source is not particularly elevated, especiallyin the flat parts of England ; and thereare few rivers that do not receive some supplyfrom lesser ones, having their rise in lowgrounds, in their course. The practice, in allcountries, of digging wells indicates a downwardsource of water.In the Mosaic account of the deluge it isstated, that the waters prevailed above the topsof all the mountains fifteen cubits now thehighest mountain in the globe, Dhawalagiri, apeak of the Himinaleh range in northern India,is five miles above the level of the sea, this willmake a sphere of waters, inclosing the wholeglobe as its nucleus, of five miles in depth abovethe level of the sea, but in calculating the immenseadditional body of water thus burying the wholeglobe, deductions must be made for the mountainsand the lands elevated above that level,which would considerably decrease the totalamount. But, even then, how vast would be theincrease. If two fifths of this body were deducted,a deluge of rain for forty days and forty26 CREATION OF ANIMALS.nights over the whole globe, would fall infinitelyshort of the amount of water required to cover itto this height. The mean quantity of rain thatnow falls upon the earth in the course of a wholeyear is short of three feet; there must thereforehave been an outbreak of waters from a sourcewhich could supply all that was necessary to accomplishthe will of the Almighty, and make theearth itself a ruin, as well as sweep off its inhabitants; and where shall we look for this but to theabyss that couched beneath the earth, whose fountains,as the sacred historian tells us, were brokenup. If w 7 e consider the diameter of our globe,and that the ocean in depth is not supposed toexceed the highest mountains, we may conceivethat in a spheroid, whose diameter is 8000 miles,allowing for the depth of the crust of the earth,there is space for a treasure-house of water, ofsufficient amplitude to supply what the heavenscould not furnish, to raise the diluvial waters tothe height decreed in the Divine counsels. Itseems now agreed amongst geologists and mineralogiststhat traces of the action of fire, as wellas water, are very visible amongst the presentstrata of this globe : when the waters of theabyss were sent out from their hidden receptacle,it must be by the agency of some potent causeemployed by the Deity, equal to the productionof the effect he intended.In the present state of the globe, volcanos, orCREATION OF ANIMALS. 27their traces are visible in various regions in allclimates, and in the islands of various seas, andin Iceland, near Hecla, the subterranean furnacesends vast columns of water into the air, sometimesto the height of a hundred feet, and at thebase of half that diameter. 1 These circumstancesrender it probable that fire was the agent, or oneof the agents, employed to send out the watersfrom the abyss ; and this is no new hypothesis.It is the opinion of geologists," says Laplace,that, originally, there existed in the interior ofthe crust of the earth, a great magazine of fire,which according to them was the cause of thedeluge." Some writers suppose that the air wasdriven downwards into the earth, being forcedthrough those chasms which opened towards thesky, and that then by its expansion it drove outthe water. 2He who willed the deluge, and the destructionof the primeval earth and heavens by it, 3 kept inhis own hands the reins, and guided the wholebody of means that he employed to fulfil thegreat purposes of his Providence, saying to everyagent, " Thus far shalt thou go, and no further."It must always be kept in mind that this was notan event in the ordinary course of nature, and aresult of the enforcement of her established code1 See Hooker's Recollections of Iceland, 120.2 Rev. W. Jones' Works, x. 264.3 Pet. iii. 6, 7, and see Appendix, note 10.28 CREATION OF ANIMALS.of laws, but a miraculous deviation from it, inwhich their action was suspended, and in consequenceof which, perhaps, some were abrogatedand new ones enacted in their room. I may herefurther observe, that probably, the whole bodyof waters which before the creation of the firmamentor expanse, with the earthy atoms suspendedin it, formed the primeval chaos, werenow again its masters ; descending and ascendingfrom every receptacle or storehouse to whichthat powerful expansion had been the meansemployed to guide them. Whatever waters weresuspended in the atmosphere, or could be formedin it, whatever were contained in the ocean, orthe womb of our globe, now united their forcesand subdued and destroyed the primitive earth,till they reduced it to the state, for the mostpart, in which we now behold it.I am next to inquire what has been said inscripture on the subject of subterranean animals.In the second commandment we are forbidden tomake any likeness of any thing that is in thehaters under the earth." These words, however,may be merely used to indicate the animals thatinhabit the ocean, considering the waters underthe earth as forming a part of it. But there isa passage in the Apocalypse, where the creaturesunder the earth are distinguished from those inthe sea. " And every creature ivhich is in heavenand on the earth, and under the earth, and such anCREATION OF ANIMALS. 29are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard Isaying? Blessing, and honour, and glory and power,be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and untothe Lamb for ever and ever" 1 Some interpretersunderstand this passage as relating to thosemen that were buried under the earth, or in thesea, but admitting they were meant in the spirit,the creatures in general are expressed in theletter, and therefore the outward symbol musthave a real existence, as well as what it symbolized.There is another place in scripture, whichthough highly metaphorical, seems to me, topoint, if rightly interpreted, at subterranean animals,and even a particular description of them.The passage I allude to is in the xlivth Psalm,Though thou hast sore broken us in the place ofdragons and covered us with the shadow of death." 2In these words the place of dragons and the shadowof death evidently mean the same thing ; and theobject of these metaphors is to express the lowestdegree of affliction, depression, and degradation ;equivalent to being brought down to hell or hadesin other passages. The shadow of death, properlyspeaking, is in the hidden or subterranean world.This appears from the passage of Job beforequoted, in which the abyss, the gates of death,and the gates of the shadow of death, are used asRevel, v. 13. 2 Ps. xliv. 19.30 CREATION OF ANIMALS.synonymous expressions. 1 The place of dragons,then, according to this exposition, will be subterranean.In another Psalm, David couplesdragons and abysses?We must next inquire what is meant by theword dragons. The Hebrew word usually thustranslated, but in some places rendered iv hales andsea-monsters, and in others serpents, 3 is derivedfrom a root, which signifies to wail or lament ;probably, alluding to the noise at certain timesemitted by those animals, that are more properlyregarded as dragons, by which I would understandthe Saurian race, without excluding theothers, which are sometimes certainly intendedby that word. Thus, when Jeremiah alludes,under the name dragons, to animals that givesuck to their young, it is clear that he meantsome of the whale or seal kind, which aremammiferous. Our translators, therefore, veryproperly rendered the word sea-monsters, or asin the margin, sea-calves. I may here observe,though at first sight, the crocodile and the whaleseem widely separated from each other, thatthere are certain species, at present found onlyin a fossil state, and fitted with paddles insteadof legs, which are stated to combine charactersobservable in the Cetaceans with those of the1 Job, xxxviii. 16, 17. 2 Ps. xlviii. 7.3 Genes, i. 21. Lament, iv. 3. Exod. vi. 9, 10.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 31Saurians, particularly the Plesiosaurus ; l theTestudo also of the Greeks 2 seems to approachsome of the seals. The word we are considering,in the first chapter of Genesis, is rendered byour translators, whales. In the version of theseventy, a word is used, 3 which the Greekwriters employ to signify any aquatic monster ;thus, Theocritus, when he describes the Nile asabounding in monsters, means the crocodile.Our Saviour, when he speaks of Jonah in thebelly of the fish, uses the same word, probably,for a shark, the dog Zacharias of the Greeks,which was fabled to have swallowed Hercules, afable, no doubt, derived from the history of Jonah.It appears clearly that the word is also usedfor a serpent, for it is employed to express theanimal into which the rod of Moses and thoseof the Egyptian magicians were transformed asrelated in the book of Exodus.The typical animal, however, if I may so employthat term, or the dragon proper of scripture,is undoubtedly a Saurian, especially the amphibiousones, such as the crocodile and its affinities.In the Septuagint version the Hebrew word issometimes rendered by the term Siren, whichin other places is used for the ostrich, 4 derived1 Mantel's Age of Reptiles. Sussex Gazette.2 Sphargis coriacea.3 TO. Krirrj TO. fjie-yaXa.4 Isai. xiii. 21. Job, xxx. 29, &c.32 CREATION OF ANIMALS.from a root which relates to its noise, but theSiren of the Greeks is very different from thatof these Jews the former being a fabulous, thelatter a real animal. Travellers describe thenoises of crocodiles and alligators as horrible.Crocodiles, during the whole summer, says Bos,but especially immediately after they emerge fromthe earth, that is in the spring and the epochof their amours, frequently send forth lowingalmost as loud as those of an ox. They respondto each other often by hundreds, especially inthe evening, which makes in the swampy foresta frightful and thundering din. Captain Hobsonsays, that those of the river Gambia utter criesthat may be heard from a great distance, whichseem as if they issued from the ground.The whale also, when it expels the water, isrelated to make a frightful noise, like distantthunder. Captain Cook represents the walrus,when in herds, as roaring or braying very loud,and some species of seals are stated to bellowlike bulls.The hissing of serpents agrees less with theradicalism of the word dragon, than the noisesof either of the preceding tribes of animals.The aquatic and amphibious Saurians occupying,as it were, a middle station between theCetaceans and Phidias, may be regarded,therefore, as the dragons par excellence.These, then, are the animals that I conjectureCREATION OF ANIMALS. 33may not improbably be still in existence in thesubterranean ocean ; I shall now, therefore, bringforward some arguments, independent of what Ihave alleged from Holy Scripture, which seemto afford grounds for such an hypothesis.It has been calculated that the depth of the seain any part does not exceed 30,000 feet, or a littlemore than five miles ; this, compared with thediameter of our globe, about 8000 miles, may beregarded as nothing. What a vast space then,supposing it really hollow, may be contained inits womb, not only for an abundant reservoir ofwaters, but for sources of the volcanic action,which occasionally manifests itself in variousparts, both of the ocean and terra firma. Reasoningfrom analogy, and from that part of theglobe which falls under our inspection, it will appearnot improbable that this vast space shouldnot be altogether destitute of its peculiar inhabitants.We know that there are numerous animals,on the surface of the globe, that conceal themselvesin various places in the day time, and onlymake their appearance in the night. It would,therefore, be perfectly consistent with the generalcourse of God's proceedings, and in exact harmonywith the general features of creation, thathe should have peopled the abyss with creaturesfitted, by their organization and structure, to livethere : and it would not be wonderful that someof the Saurian race, especially the marine ones,VOL. I. D34 CREATION OF ANIMALS.should have their station in the subterraneanwaters, which would sufficiently account for theirnever having been seen except in a fossil state.The organization of many reptiles favours theidea of their being fitted for a subterraneanhabitation. It has been observed of them, thatthey not only perceive objects at a great distance,but are furnished with a nictitant membranelike birds; and that the greater part can contractthe pupil like cats, which enables them tosee in the dark. Their other organs furnish themwith but few sensations : they communicate lessfrequently and less perfectly with externalobjects ; their blood is cold, and will circulate along time without communication with the air.They will bear very long fasts without injury;and those of some tribes, the Caledonians at least,will survive for a time the loss of their brain,their heart, and even their head. These circumstancesare found in those that only occasionallyseek subterranean retreats, or seclusion from thelight and the air ; but those whose existence iswholly subterranean, doubtless, like the Proteus,would be fitted by their organization for theirdestined abode. We see, in several of those weareacquainted with, except at certain times, aconstant effort to escape not only from observation,but from immediate contact with thelight and the air.This leads me further to observe, that there isone instance of a Saurian, at this time known to beCREATION OF ANIMALS. 35in existence, that is perfectly subterranean, whichnever makes its appearance on the earth's surface,but is always concealed at a considerable depthbelow it ; and, what is worthy of particular notice,by its structure, is connected with one of thelarger Saurians, now found only in a fossil state.It will immediately be perceived that I allude tothat most extraordinary animal, the Proteus cui-guinus, 1 which is found in subterranean lakes andcaves two or three hundred feet below the surfaceof the ground in Illyria, breathing both by lungsand gills, and presenting characters which connectit with the Saurian monsters before alluded to,whose remains have occasioned so much astonishment,appear to have puzzled in some measure themost acute geologists, and have given birth to anhypothesis I shall hereafter notice. Sir H. Davy,in his last singular work, thus expresses himselfconcerning the Proteus: " My reveries becamediscursive, I was carried, in imagination, back tothe primitive state of the globe, when the greatanimals of the Sacri kind were created under thepressure of a heavy atmosphere ; and my notionon this subject was not destroyed, when I heardfrom a celebrated anatomist, to whom I sent thespecimens I had collected, that the organization ofthe spine of the Proteus was analogous to that ofone of the Sacri, the remains of which are foundin the older secondary strata." Sir Humphrey1 PLATE xiv. FIG. 1.36 CREATION OF ANIMALS.probably here alludes to a celebrated fossil foundin the slate quarries of (Meninges, which Cherchercalled an antediluvian man, but which Cuvierregards as a giant species of Proteus.All the circumstances above stated being dulyweighed, and especially the discovery of a speciesin the depths of the earth, related to one of thefossil ones, I trust that my hypothesis of a subterraneanmetropolis for the Saurian, and perhapsother reptiles, will not be deemed so improbableand startling as it may at the first blush appear ;at the same time, I would by no means be thoughtto contend that none of these animals are extinct,but solely that all may not be so, and that theirnever having been found in a recent state mayhave arisen from the peculiar circumstances oftheir situation.I have been led into this discussion by Mr.Man tell's Hypothesis of &n Age of reptiles, whichI have seen only in an extract from one of theSussex advertisers for last year, which he was sokind as to send to me; in which he supposesthat the Saurians were the mighty masters, aswell as monsters, of the primeval animal kingdom,and the lords of the creation before theexistence of the human race. Since this hypothesis,as stated in the above extract, cannot bereconciled with the account of the creation ofanimals as given in the first chapter of Genesis,I shall not be wandering from the purposeCREATION OF ANIMALS. 37of the present essay if I devote a few pages tothe consideration of it.The hypothesis in question is based by itslearned promulgator chiefly upon the supposedage of the beds and strata in which the remainsof these fossil Saurians generally have beenfound, which he states as more ancient thanthose which contain the remains of viviparousanimals; and upon the myriads which appear,when they were the lords of our globe, to haveexisted. But it is clear from his own statementthat with the fossil remains of the Megalosaurus,a giant lizard, calculated to have been forty feetin length and eight in height, those of someviviparous quadruped related to the Opossumhave been found, which he acknowledges cannotbe satisfactorily explained. A fact that militatesstrongly against an insulated Saurian reign. Noris it altogether true that the remains of thesemighty lizards are found solely in what are denominatedancient deposits ; vertebral joints arenot unfrequently found in other situations. Ihave one between three and four inches indiameter, which, from its being cupped, ordeeply concave at each extremity, evidentlybelongs to one of these animals, which wasfound in a gravel-pit, at no great depth, in myown neighbourhood ; and I have seen similarones found in other parts of the county of Suffolk.These dispersed bones seem to indicate38 CREATION OF ANIMALS.that the individuals to which they belongedwere deposited in situations more exposed to theaction of the atmosphere, so as to decompose theligaments that kept the skeleton entire. Theinterment of these animals was therefore various,and evidently regulated by circumstances, sothat no satisfactory hypothesis can be built uponit. When the whole globe was submerged, andthe waters overtopped the highest mountains,the terrestrial animals would, in numberlesscases, float upon the surface, and be depositedin countries far distant from those which theyinhabited, while those that were aquatic, beingin their native element, must have owed theirdeath to other circumstances ; they must eitherhave been overwhelmed by some sudden forcethat they could not resist or escape from ; orsome cause that we cannot now appreciate mayhave overtaken and destroyed them.With regard to the numbers of these animals,which Mr. Mantel thinks prove their prevalence,we can only judge of it by those that arefound in a fossil state, and these, certainly, aresufficiently numerous ; but surely it cannot besafely affirmed that for one individual found inafossil state thousands must have been devouredor decomposed. These mighty monsters weremore likely to devour than to be devoured ; andeven the herbivorous ones, such as the vastJguanodon, supposed to be sometimes one hun-creationOF ANIMALS. 39dred feet long and ten feet high ! would havepuzzled the crocodiles and alligators and othercarnivorous ones to overpower and dispatch them.But, in fact, the question is concerning thosethat were alive upon this globe at the time whenthe great convulsion took place that buried them.The skeletons of all that were placed undersimilar circumstances would be found in asimilar state of preservation ; their flesh wouldbe decomposed but not their skeleton ; thedeluge would also interrupt all attacks of oneanimal upon another, every individual would beseeking to secure its own escape. But, settingaside these arguments upon the uncertain factson which this hypothesis is built, if we turn ourattention to the reason of the thing, who canthink that a Being of unbounded power, wisdom,and goodness should create a world merely forthe habitation of a race of monsters, without asingle rational being in it to glorify and servehim. The supposition that these animals werea separate creation, independent of man, and occupyinghis eminent station and throne upon ourglobe long before he was brought into existence,interrupts the harmony between the differentmembers of the animal kingdom, and dislocatesthe beautiful and entire system, recorded with somuch sublimity and majestic brevity in the firstchapter of Genesis.How grand and at the same time how simple40 CREATION OF ANIMALS.is this record, proceeding step by step from oneAlmighty operation to another ! each the naturalconsequence, as it were, of that which precededit. When the earth was formed, and planted,and was receiving the influences of the sunand other luminaries, and thus was prepared towelcome and maintain her locomotive inhabitants,the perfect sphere of animals, if I may so speak,adapted to the wants of the primeval state of theglobe of dry land and sea, both external and internal,and to the instruction and uses of man,each individual form gifted and fitted to play thepart assigned to it in the general plan of Providence,was brought into existence. The supposedextinct animals all exhibit a relationship to thosethat we now find existing, and many of themevidently fill up vacant places in the generalsystem, and therefore there is no cause to supposethat they were originally separated fromand anterior to their fellows. It is observed thatthose herbivorous Saurians now inhabiting thesurface of our globe, as the Monitor and Iguana,though these can scarcely be called herbivoroussince they live principally on insects, are pygmiescompared with their affinities, the Megalosaurusand Iguanodon ; and a similar disproportion obtainsbetween the existing Proteus and the fossilone. If any of these races are subterranean,perhaps these smaller ones may be regarded, asinhabiting the outskirts of the proper station, ormetropolis of their tribe.CREATION OF ANIMALS. 41It appears, I hope, from what has been observed,in the present chapter, on the subject ofanimals brought into being subsequent to thefall, and upon those that have since that sadevent become extinct from whatever cause, thatDivine Providence, after the first creation of manand the animal kingdom, did not leave all thingsto the action of the original laws which hadreceived his awful sanction before the fall, butaltered those by which this system, especiallyour own globe, was guided and governed beforethat fatal event, to suit them to what had takenplace, and to the altered and deteriorated moralstate of man. We learn from the Apostle SaintPeter, that the primeval globe and its heavensor atmosphere, perished at the deluge, 1 by whichexpression less cannot be intended, than that theatmosphere and the earth were then, as it were,new mixed, so as to render the former lessfriendly to life and health, whence would graduallyfollow the shortening of human, and probablyanimal life ; and subject to raging stormsand hurricanes ; to the fury and fearful effects ofthunder and lightning ; to the overflowing violenceof torrents of rain : while the latter, fromthe breaking up, inversion, mixing, depression,or elevation of its original strata, and the additionof new ones from animal and vegetable deposits, 2was rendered in many places utterly barren, and1 Gr. ciTrwXtro. 2 Pet. iii. 6. 2 See Appendix, note 11.42 CREATION OF ANIMALS.in others much diminished in fertility, so that thegeneral productiveness of the globe must havebeen considerably diminished, and the permissionto eat flesh must have been extremely useful inincreasing the amount of food, and diminishingthat of labour. Such a change having takenplace, both in the heavens and the earth, andvast countries being essentially altered both inthe temperature of the atmosphere, from whatevercause, and the productions of the soil, theextinction of many of the original animal forms,that were extra-tropical, or at least were inhabitantsof high latitudes, and were incapable ofbearing the changes, whether it was ante-diluvialor post-diluvial, would necessarily follow; andagain as man was become by his nature prone tosin, he as necessarily was made subject to evil.Hence he became exposed, from the new constitutionof the earth and atmosphere, to variousdiseases and sundry kinds of death, the term ofhis existence was shortened, and it was chequeredwith days of darkness as well as of light : andhe was infested by various animals, either newlycreated, or then first let loose against him andhis property.All these things indicate a change in the mechanicalas well as other original powers set andkept in action by the Creator, and a certaindependence of two distinct classes of events uponeach other. If a great alteration generally takesCREATION OF ANIMALS. 43place in the moral condition of man, a correspondingchange affects his physical one ; andthis alternation and conflict between good andevil, in this double series, after a long andarduous struggle, will finally be determined bythe destruction of this diluvial earth and heavens,which we are assured will, in the end, be replacedby " New Heavens and a new Earthiv her ein dwelleth righteousness."CHAPTER II.Geographical and Local Distribution of Animals.HAVING considered the first creation of the animalkingdom, and the larger features of its historyto the time of the Deluge, bringing us tothat era when our globe had assumed its presentgeneral characters, and its population was inthose circumstances that led to their present habitsand stations: the next subject to be discussedis their geographical and local distribution.What had taken place in this respect before theDeluge we have no means of ascertaining. Thatthe original temperature of the earth was oncemore equal than it is now, seems to be the generalopinion of men of science, however they44 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALmay differ as to its cause. 1 If this was thecase, as it probably was, any individual speciesmight have been located in any country, northor south, and suffer no inconvenience from unaccustomedheat or cold, so as to interferewith its complete naturalization : the only otherrequisite would be a kind of food suited to itsnature ; and it is singular and worthy of particularattention, that a large proportion of theplants, as well as animals, that are found in afossil state in our northern latitudes are of atropical type or character.After their creation, and perhaps the expulsionof the first pair from Paradise, we may supposethat the various animals of the antediluvian worldwere guided to those regions in which it was thewill of Providence to place them, by a divine impulseupon them, which caused them to move inthe right direction. Probably before the Delugetook place, the world was every where peopledwith animals : and perhaps, as Professor Buck-landhas suggested, the sudden change of temperaturethat destroyed the northern animalsmight be one of the predisposing causes of thatevent.Under the present head, the geographical distributionof our postdiluvian races of animals, thefirst thing to be considered is the means by which,1 See above, p. 17, &c.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 45after quitting the ark, they were conveyed to theother parts of the globe. The disembarkation ofthe venerable patriarch and his family, followedby all the animals preserved with him in the ark,a scene of universal jubilee to man and beast,such as the world till that day had never witnessed,took place on Mount Ararat : the streamof interpreters, ancient and modern, place thismountain in Armenia ; but Shuckford, after SirWalter Raleigh, seems to think that Ararat wasfurther to the east, and belonged to the greatrange anciently called Caucasus and Imaus,which terminates in the Himmaleh mountains tothe north of India. This opinion seems to receivesome confirmation from Scripture, for it is said,As they journeyed from the east, they found aplain in the land of Shinar " Now the ArmenianArarat is to the north of Babylonia, whereas theIndian is to the east. Again, as the ark restedupon Ararat more than ten weeks before the topsof the mountains were seen, it seems to follow thatit must have been a much higher mountain thanthe generality of those of the old world. The modernArarat (Agri-dash) is not three miles abovethe level of the sea, whereas the highest peak ofthe Himmaleh range, Dhawalagiri, is Jive, andthe highest mountain in the known world : so thatthe tops of a great number of mountains wouldhave appeared previously had the ark rested uponthe former Ararat, but not so if upon the latter.46 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALThe traditions also of various nations, given byShuckford, add strength to this opinion. In additionto these, the following lines, quoted in alate article on Sanscrit poetry, in the QuarterlyReview, shew what was the creed in India onthis subject:In the whole world of creationNone were seen but these seven sages, Menu and the fish ;Years on years, and still unwearied, drew that fish the bark along,Till at length it came where reared Himavan its loftiest peak ;There at length they came, and, smiling, thus the fish addressedthe sage :Bind thou now thy stately vessel to the peak of HimavanAt the fishes' mandate, quickly to the peak of Himavan :Bound the sage his bark, and even to this day that loftiest peakBears the name of Naubandhana.Both these opinions have their difficulties, whichI shall not further discuss, but leave the decisionof the question to persons better qualified thanmyself to direct the public judgment : I shall onlyobserve, that perhaps the Indian station was morecentral and convenient for the ready dispersion ofmen and animals than the Armenian one. Everynaturalist is aware that there are many animalsthat, in a wild state, are to be found only inparticular countries and climates. Thus theMonkey and Parrot tribes usually inhabit a warmclimate, the Bears and Gulls with many otherSea-birds, for the most part a cold one. The Kangarooand Emu are only found in New Holland ;DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 47the Lama in Peru ; the Hippopotamus and Ostrichin Africa. Now we may ask, how were all theselocal animals conveyed from the place of disembarkationto the countries and climates that theyseverally inhabit? In considering this question,we must never lose sight of HIM, according towhose will, and by whose Almighty guidance,they were all led to the stations he had appointedfor them, and with reference to which he hadorganized and formed them. Whatever secondcauses he might commission to effect this purpose,they were fully instructed and empowered by himto accomplish the work intrusted to them. I donot mean here to infringe the rule, Nee Deusinter sit nisi dignus venice nodus. Where thefaculties, senses, and wants of an animal weresufficient for its guidance, there was no need forDivine interposition, but where these are insufficientguides, the animal must attain its destinedstation under some other influence.What brought the various animals to the arkpreviously to the deluge? Doubtless a divineimpulse upon them, similar to that which causedthe milch-kine to carry the ark of the covenant toBethshemesh, with the offerings of the lords ofthe Philistines. Noah, though he probably selectedthe clean animals, at least those that weredomesticated, could have little or no influenceover the wild ones to compel them to congregateby pairs, at the time fixed upon for their entry48 (GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALinto the ark. So in the dispersion of animals,wherever man went he took his flocks andherds, and domestic poultry, and those in hisemployment for other purposes, with him : butthe wild ones were left to follow as they would,or rather as God directed.Every one who looks at a map of the world, onMercator's projection, can easily conceive howthe animal population of the greatest part of theold world made their way into the different countriesof which it consists, but when he looksat America and New Holland, he feels himselfunable satisfactorily to explain the migration ofanimals thither, especially those that can liveonly in a warm climate, at least as far as regardsthe former. How, he might ask, did the Sloths,the Anteaters, and the Armadillos get to SouthAmerica? If the climate of Behrings Straits,after the deluge, was as cold as it is at this day,they could never have made their way thither,and in those latitudes the temperature of whichwas adapted to their organization the vast Pacificpresents an insuperable barrier.The same question may be asked with respectto the indigenous animals of New Holland ; theKangaroo, the Cola, the Ornithorhynchus, theEmu, and several others that are found in noother country ; how did they, leaving the continentaltogether, convey themselves to this theirappointed abode ? It is true the difficulty is notDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 49so great in this last case, on account of thenumerous islands interposed between Malacca,Cochin-china, &c. and the North Coast of NewHolland, but then it is unaccountable, if thetransit of these animals was gradually effected bynatural causes, and following that of mankindfrom island to island, till they reached the countryto which their range is now limited, that theyshould have left no remains of their race in thecountries and islands which they must have traversedin their route ; and those that would haveaccompanied man would be a different tribe ofanimals, more fitted to minister to his wants, sothat with respect to these the difficulty still remainsthey could not have reached the countryunless under the guidance of Providence, andthe same power that accomplished their removalto that appointed for their residence, preventedtheir leaving any of their race in the regionsthrough which they passed.There is only one supposition that will enableus to account for the transport of these animalsin a natural way, which is this, that immediatelysubsequent to the deluge, America and New Holland,and the various other islands that are inhabitedby peculiar animals, were once connectedwith Asia and Africa, by the intervention of landsthat have since been submerged. Plato, in hisTheseus, relates a tradition concerning an islandcalled Atlantis, which he describes as bigger thanVOL. i. E50 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALAsia and Africa, situated before the pillars ofHercules, which after an earthquake was swallowedup by the sea. According to his statement,this account was given by the Egyptianpriests at Sais, to Solon, the Athenian legislator.Alcott, in his history of the deluge, seems to givesome credit to this tradition, and supposes thatPhaleg took his name, not from the confusion oftongues at Babel, and the subsequent division ofthe earth amongst the families of the three sonsof Noah, but from its division occasioned by thesubsidence of this great island, by which the occidentalwere separated from the oriental countriesof the globe. Philo Judaeus speaks of this catastrophein terms that imply he gave credit to it,as does also Tertullian ; but it appears to me torest on too uncertain a base, and to be too muchmixed with evident fable and allegory, to claimfull credit as a real fact in the history of ourglobe. Still that many violent convulsions havetaken place since the deluge is generally supposed.Our own island is thought once to haveformed part of the continent, Sicily to have beenunited to Italy, with many other instances mentionedby Pliny. It is equally probable that theislands of the Indian Archipelago were at one timejoined to that part of Asia. Whether such disruptionsfrom the continents were simultaneous,or took place at different periods, is uncertain ;but if such an event as the submersion of theDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 51vast island of Plato did really happen, it surelywould affect the whole terraqueous globe, produceconvulsions far and wide, and cause variousdisruptions in its crust, and elevations in otherparts from the bed of the ocean. It throwssome weight into this scale, that thus a waywould be open, though certainly a circuitous one,for the migration of those animals to America,that are found in no other part of the world, and,supposing Asia to have been disrupted from it atBehrings Straits, could scarcely have ascendedto so high a latitude, in search of their destinedhome.Malte-brun, in his geography, after provingthat the animals in question could have passedneither from Africa nor Asia, observes ' ' Nothing,therefore, remains, but the accommodating resourceof a tremendous convulsion of nature, witha vast tract of country swallowed up by thewaves, which formerly united America with thetemperate regions of the old world. Such conjecturesas these, however, being devoid of allhistorical support, do not merit a moment's consideration; consequently we cannot refrain fromadmitting, that the animals of America originatedon the very soil, which, to this present day, theystill inhabit."That it might have been the will of the Creatorto people the country in question by the immediateproduction of a new race of animals, suitede52 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALto its climate and circumstances, I will not deny,but I would only ask, is it consistent withwhat occurred at the Deluge ? Surely the taskof Noah would have been much less difficult andlaborious, had it been merely necessary for himto construct a vessel fitted for the reception ofhimself and family, and of food for their sustenanceduring their confinement ; and a new raceof animals had been created, adapted to the thenstate of the earth and mankind. But such wasnot the will of God, and, doubtless, for wise reasons.He would neither create a new race of men,nor a new race of animals, when the world mightbe repeopled by those already in being. Thiswould not have harmonized with the ordinaryproceedings of his providence. Whoever examinesthe animals of North America, will find avast number that correspond with European species,distinguished only by characters that markvarieties. On the Rocky Mountains, and in thecountry westward of that range, Asiatic types arediscoverable, both in the vegetable and animalkingdoms. 1 Several animals, likewise, of thesouthern part of that Continent belong to oldworld genera, and also species. I have receivedfrom Val Praise a beetle, common in Britain, 2and Molina mentions several other European genera,as natives of Chili ; so that part of the animal1 See Appendix, note 14. 3 Sphodrus Terricola.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 53population of the New World appears to havebeen derived from Europe and Asia ; and if so,there is a door open, through which Providencemight also have conducted those North Americananimals that are found in no other country.But besides the probable, or possible, modesby which the transit of animals to their respectivesettlements might have been accomplished,Mr. Lyell, in the second volume of his Principlesof Geology, has suggested one which might,amongst others, have been employed for thispurpose.Captain W. H. Smith informs me," says he,that, when cruising in the Cornwallis, amidst thePhilippine islands, he has more than once seen,after those dreadful hurricanes called typhoons,floating islands of (matted) wood, with treesgrowing upon them ; and that ships have sometimesbeen in eminent peril, in consequence ofmistaking them for terra firma." Mr. Lyellconjectures, not improbably, that by means ofsuch an insular raft, or wandering Delos, " ifthe surface of the deep be calm, and the raftscarried along by a current, or wafted by a slightbreath of air fanning the foliage of the greentrees, it may arrive, after a passage of severalweeks, at the bay of an island, into which itsplants and animals may be poured out as froman ark ; and thus a colony of several hundrednew species may at once be naturalized." Thus64 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALhe accounts for the peopling of the volcanic andcoral islands in the Pacific.It must be borne in mind that nothing reallyhappens by chance, or is the result of an accidentalconcourse of fortuitous events : secondcauses are always under the direction of the first,who ordered all things according to the goodpleasure of his will ; and therefore the elevation ofa new island from the bosom of the deep, whetherimmediately produced by volcanic agency, or byan earthquake, or built by Zoophytes, still maybedenominated his work ; so likewise the sameAlmighty Guardian of the universe, whose nameis Jehovah of Hosts, directs all the actions andmotions of the hosts that he hath created, to thefull accomplishment of every purpose that, in hiswisdom, he hath formed. When we are assuredthat the hairs of our head are all numbered, andthat not a sparrow falleth without our HeavenlyFather, we are instructed to look beyond secondcauses for the direction and management of eventsthat appear at first sight the most trivial, butwhich, in their immediate or remote consequences,may be productive of effects that areimportant to be attended to and provided for. 1We know that when animals of any kindexceed certain limits, though beneficial in theordinary exercise of their instincts, they become1 Appendix, note 15.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 55noxious. God alone knows when they approachthese limits ; it is he, therefore, that employs manorother animals to destroy a certain number ofthem, that they may bear a due proportion toother beings on which they act ; or if he wills topunish mankind, he suffers their numbers to increaseso as to answer this intention. But to allhis hosts, he says, " Thus far shall thou go andno further." Therefore, when the ocean, or firesbelow its bed, or other causes elevate islandsabove its surface, it is he that conducts to themthe population he intends should occupy them.The islands of Bourbon and Mauritius bothappear to be of volcanic origin : amongst theiraboriginal animal inhabitants was a most extraordinarygallinaceous bird, called the Dodo ;*this bird, like the ostrich and cassowary, hadonly rudiments of wings, and of course wasunable to fly ; being unfit for food, though ofthe gallinaceous order, and a very ugly and disgustingobject, it soon became extinct in thoseislands, and the only remains of it are a leg andfoot at the British Museum, and a skeleton ofthe head in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford.It has been contended that this bird, havingnever been discovered elsewhere, was peculiarto these islands, but there are reasons for be-leaving,that it was not the only species of its1 Nidus intus.56 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALgenus, for Nathan has included in it two others, 1both stated to have been found in Africanislands. This affords a strong presumption thatthe head quarters of the genus are on the continentof Africa, and that these three species havebeen conveyed to the islands they are stated tohave inhabited by some accidental cause. Bythe direction of Providence, a floating island,like that seen by Captain Smith, might be themeans of conveying this and their other inhabitantsto them.I think, therefore, that there is no necessityto have recourse to a new and more recent creation,to account for the introduction of its peculiaranimals into any given country.The fact itself, that almost every country hasits peculiar animals, affords a proof of design,and of the adaptation of means to an end,demonstrating the intervention and guidance ofan invisible Being, of irresistible power, to whosewill all things yield obedience, and whose wisdomand goodness are conspicuous in all thearrangements he has made. Wherever we see apeculiar class of animals we usually see peculiarcircumstances which require their presence.Thus the Elephant and Rhinoceros, the Lionand the Tiger, are found only in warm climates,where a rapid vegetation, and infinite hosts of1 Nidus solitudes and nazarenes.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 57animals, seem to require the efforts of such giganticand ferocious devourer to keep them incheck : but on this subject I shall have occasionto enlarge hereafter.There is another point of view, illustrative ofthe Divine attributes in this partial location ofvarious animals. If every region, or nation, containedwithin its limits the entire circle that constitutesthe animal kingdom, and the remarkmay be extended to every natural object, howweak and trifling would be the incitement forman to visit his fellow-men. Were the productionsof every country the same, there would belittleor no temptation for commercial speculation,therefore the merchant would stay at home ;the animal, and plants, and minerals would bethesame, therefore the naturalist would stay athome ; the astronomer indeed, and geographer,and the student of his own species, might betempted sometimes to roam, but the ocean w r ouldbe truly dissocial, and those ties that now connectthe different nations of the globe would, forthe most part, be broken. They are now linkedto each other, in a bond of amity, by the intercoursewhich their mutual wants produce, andthe body geographical, if I may use such a metaphor,as well as the body natural, is so tempered,and so furnished in every part, that constantsupplies of things, necessary or desirable,are uninterruptedly circulating, by certain changI. F,558 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALnews, through the whole system ; and thus keepup a kind of systole and diastole, which diffuseevery where a healthy temperament, and areuniversally beneficial. It is, moreover, calculatedto generate those kindly feelings whichought to reciprocate between beings inhabitingthe same globe, and sprung from the same originalfather. And the cultivation of these feelingsof mutual good will was, no doubt, the principalobject of the Deity in the distribution of variousgifts to various countries, endowing some withone peculiar production and some with another :so that one might not say to another, " / have noneed of you"Herein is the Divine wisdom and goodnessmost conspicuous. Had chance, or nature, assome love to speak, directed the distribution ofanimals, and they had been abandoned to themselvesand to the circumstances in which theyfound themselves in their original station, withoutany superintending power to guide them, theywould not so invariably have fixed themselves inthe climates and regions for which they were evidentlyintended. Their migrations, under theirown sole guidance, would have depended, fortheir direction, upon the season of the year, atwhich the desire seized them to change theirquarters : in the height of summer, the tropicalanimals might have taken a direction furtherremoved from the tropics ; and, in winter, thoseDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS.of colder climates might have journeyed towardsinstead of from them. Besides, taking into considerationother motives, from casual circumstances,that might have induced differentindividuals belonging to the same climates topursue different routes, they might be misledby cupidity, or dislike, or fear. On no otherprinciple, can we explain the adaptation of theirorganization to the state and productions of thecountry in which we find them I speak of localspecies but that of a Supreme Power, whoformed and furnished the country, organizedthem for it, and guided them into it.There is another question relating to localanimals which here requires some notice. Arethey really distinct species ? Have not the characterswhich separate them from their affinitiesbeen produced, in the course of years, by peculiarcircumstances in which they are placed, suchas climate, temperature, nature of the country,food, and the like? Every person who knowsany thing of the history of animals must admit,that great changes do take place in them from thelong action of these causes. For instance, somevarieties of the common ox are polled, havingonly rudiments of horns ; others have very shortand others very long ones ; in some they are notfixed to the skull, but attached to the skin, andmoveable with it. The same thing, likewise,takes place with sheep ; some have no horns,60 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALothers have two, and one breed, the Icelandic,is distinguished by having four. How thesevariations have been produced, and by whatcircumstances they are ruled, has not been ascertained,nor what differences, in other respects,obtain between the armed and unarmedvarieties. Linne indeed observed, with respectto the polled sheep, which he denominatesEnglish sheep, but whether they are strictlyentitled to that name is not clear, for in thepillars of Trajan and Antoninus, though thereare no polled oxen, there are polled sheep,that their tails and scrotum reach to the knees ;but this does not appear a certain and invariablefact. A young zoologist, when his attention isfirst arrested by these facts, will probably beinclined to think that animals, exhibiting suchstriking differences, cannot belong to the samespecies ; but in the progress of his experience,especially in what takes place in almost all animalsthat man has taken into alliance with him,he will see reason to change his sentiments.Again, the ears of some animals also exhibitdifferences that might seem to indicate specificdistinction. We see this both in the horse andthe swine. In the wild horse the ears lie back,in the domesticated or cultivated one they areerect. The horse was not originally a nativeof America ; but when the Spaniards and othernations obtained a footing in that country, theyDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 61carried this animal with them, which is nowbecome wild, and numerous herds of them arefound in the Llanos, these generally, we aretold, are of a chestnut bay, and have recumbentears. Those that are found wild in the Steppesof Tartary, have the hair of the mane and tailvery long and thick, and their ears also arerecumbent. A writer, quoted below, has concludedfrom some observations of Xenophon andVarro, that the military horses of the Greek andRoman republics were much nearer those in thewild state, as just described, than in a subsequentperiod. 1 In all the war horses, however,sculptured in Trajan's and Antoninus' pillars,the ears are erect, as I think also are those ofthe Elgin marbles in the British Museum atleast, none of them appear to be recumbent ; andin some figured in Hamilton's Egyptian? fromsculptures at Medina About, in Egypt, whichare still more ancient, the ears of all are erect.In England we have two breeds of swine, onewith large flapping or pendent ears ; of thisdescription are those fattened in the distilleriesin and near London ; the other with small, erect,acute ears, common in the county of Suffolk.When it is considered, that the varieties ofthe above animals with erect ears appear toexhibit altogether a better character, if I may1 Moulin. Anim. Domes. Ann. Des. Sc. Nat. xvi. 26.2 PI. viii. ix.62 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALso speak, than their less spirited brethren, whoseears are pendent or laid back, and that thiscircumstance seems to indicate some approachto civilization in them ; it may, probably, bedeemed to result from some development of thebrain produced by education, and present someanalogy to the effects of the latter in the humanspecies.There is a certain protuberance growing onthe back, between the shoulders, and consistingchiefly of fat, which distinguishes the Indianoxen, both the larger and smaller varieties, fromour own, which is known sometimes to attain tothe enormous weight of fifty pounds ; the ox ofSurat is stated to have two of these bosses, orhumps. Now, Burckhardt has observed, withrespect to the camel, that " While the humpcontinues full, the animal will endure considerablefatigue on a very short allowance, feeding,as the Arabs say, on the fat of its own hump.After a long journey the hump almost entirelysubsides, and it is not till after three or fourmonths' repose, and a considerable time afterthe rest of the carcass has acquired flesh, that itresumes its natural size of one fourth of thewhole body." This conjecture of the Arabsmay, very probably, be well founded, for it isknown that animals which become torpid in thewinter, are very fat and have several callsabounding in that substance ; but when theyOF ANIMALSawake from their long repose in the spring, *have absorbed a large proportion of it, tue: arecomparatively lean, and more fit for action.During their torpidity the fat is absorbed : ntthe system by means of the lymphatic vessel,and the ramifications of the veins. It is stated,however, that the Bear comes out of its winter-quartersas fat as it went into them, but that inafew days, it becomes very lean. 1 In thiscase it would seem as if there was little or noabsorption during liberation, and that it becomes^ very rapid upon the animal's emersionfrom its hiding place.Reasoning from analogy, the hump on theZebu may have some such use, and during thedry season, when the food is scorched up, mayminister to the nutriment of the animal. If thisbethe case, this variation from the commontype is evidently designed, and furnishes a proofof the care of the Creator for all his creatures,and likewise of such an adaptation of means toan end, as evince both the wisdom, power, andprescience of Him who has so arranged circumstancesand agents in every climate as to fulfilhis benevolent purposes.The anywise Governor of the universe, whenhe gave to the sheep its covering, appears tohave had in view not solely the protection of the1 Dr. Richardson, Faun. Bore all America. i. 16, 20.64 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALanimal from the effects of cold, but more particularlythe benefit of him whom he had enthronedat the head of his creation, by thusplacing at his disposal a material so inestimable,for his use and comfort, as wool. It has beenobserved that all the wild sheep are clothed withlong hair ; but the Guinea sheep, 1 which isfound in the tropical countries, both of Africaand India, is the most truly hairy of any, evidentlya provision of the Author of nature, suitedto the climate in which they are found. Thefine fleeces of the cultivated breeds appear tohave been engrafted, as it were, on the long hairof the wild ones, which, doubtless, have beenvery much improved by the attention paid byman to his flocks. The influence of climate,the quality of pasturage, a due supply of wholesomefood in winter ; and washing and shearingwhen summer approaches, have all, certainly,contributed to the improvement of this staple ofour commerce. But it was God who endowedthese animals with those facilities, if I may sospeak, of which man availing himself, mightproduce by culture the valuable article, in itshighest perfection, of which I am here speaking.What a difference between the hair of theGuinea sheep, and the beautiful fleece of theMerino, which even seems to be exceeded, in1 Ovifs aries african. L.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. (>')fineness and softness, by the straight wool of theParnassian breed.No animal, if indeed all belong to one originalspecies, varies more than one that is most domesticatedof any, the dog : some, as the water-dog, 1being covered with curled hair almost as thickas the fleece of a sheep, while others, the ,2 are absolutely naked ; others again, thegrey-hound, 3 being very slender, with longslender muzzle and legs, remarkable for theirvelocity and the quickness of their sight ; otherslastly, the hound, 4 more robust in form, lessswift in motion, with a short obtuse muzzle,depending chiefly upon their scent in pursuitof their prey. Whoever studies all thesesupposed varieties, and the diversified functionswhich they exercise in our service, as our faithfuland attached companions, the watchfulguardians and defenders of our property, thepurveyors of our table, and the ministers of ourpleasures, must acknowledge the wisdom, goodness,and power of the Creator in the productionof so versatile a race, applicable, in so manyways, to such a variety of purposes, many ofthem of the first importance. Without themsome nations would have no means of conveyancefrom place to place ; 5 and others would1 Canis familiaris aquatic. 2 Canis familiaris cegyptius.3 Canis familiaris grains. 4 Canis familiaris colossus.5 The Kamtchadales.VOL. I. F66 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALscarcely be able to supply themselves with asufficiency of food. 1Amongst the birds there is one tribe peculiarlydomesticated, which likewise is subject to numerousvariations (it will be readily seen that Iallude to our common poultry), but the differencesthat obtain in them are chiefly confinedto their plumage ; some are crowned with a tuft offeathers ; others, as the Friesland-hen, have thefeathers on their body recurved ; another breed,as the trumpets, have no tail ; the generalityhave their legs naked, but the bantams havethem covered with feathers ; and, to name nomore, the silk-hens, instead of feathers, areclothed with a kind of silken hair.We cannot state the object of all these differences,but probably it is connected with theclimate and other circumstances of the countryin which they were produced. India and itsislands appears to be the metropolis of thisvaluable species of fowl, and the jungle fowl issupposed to be the original breed ; but this is oneof those animals which will live and thrive inevery climate except the Polar ; and when weconsider the benefits we derive from them, weshall be disposed with grateful hearts to adoreand glorify our Almighty benefactor, who fittedthem, as well as so many other useful animals,1 Many of the North American Indians, Esquimaux, &c.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 07to become, like ourselves, denizens of the wholeearth. It is a remarkable circumstance, andworthy of particular attention, that the animalsmost subject to variation, are chiefly those whichman has taken into alliance with him from theiradaptation to his purposes. Now this tendency tovary multiplies their uses, or, at least, contributesto fit them for following him into different climates,enabling them to accommodate themselvesgradually to any change of circumstances towhich they may therein be exposed, withoutdiminishing their utility.Amongst the other races, especially the feline,this appears not to take place, at least only withrespect to colour. The cat, though every wheredomesticated, exhibits no other differences thanwhat obtain in the colour of her fur. If werecollect that this favourite quadruped is principallyemployed to destroy those minor animalsthat are noxious in and about our houses, towhich indeed her instinct impels her, and thatshe is solely led by that instinct, and adds nothingto it from instruction, her sole savage objectbeing, like that of her congeners, to seize anddevour her prey ; that she never assists manlikethe dog, as the companion of his sportsin various ways, but exercises her single functionalways in the same way, and under the sameinfluence : if we further recollect that these arethe general habits of the genus to which she08 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALbelongs, which appear subject to very trivial modificationsfrom altered circumstances, and thatalmost all animals that do not follow in the trainof man are equally constant, we may hence inferthat the Creator has not gifted them with thecapability of improvement, and the developmentof latent qualities not apparent in theirwild state.There is one circumstance, however, in whichpredaceous or carnivorous animals, when domesticated,shew some aberration from their instinct,they do not refuse farinaceous food. The catand the dog will both eat bread with greateagerness and thrive upon it.It has been questioned by some whether thepresent races of animals have not all, in thelapse of ages, undergone some alterations fromthe primitive types. The only way by whichthis can be at all ascertained is by consultingthe oldest descriptions of them, and the oldestsculptures; and these, I think, will prove thatno such alteration has taken place.In considering the general distribution ofanimals we may further remark that some arestationary, while others, at certain periods, migrateor shift their quarters from one climate orregion to another.In considering the former, I shall not hereenlarge on the stations of the different tribesfurther than as they are connected with the greatDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 69object, which it is my duty to illustrate. Withrespect to many it may be observed, that thoughperhaps widely dispersed, yet they have theirmetropolis. 1 Thus the gigantic whales, thoughthey are sometimes found in low latitudes, not,however, within the tropics, yet their grandrendezvous is in the arctic and antarctic seas ;furnishing a strong proof that in these they findthe greatest supply of their appropriate food.The giant terrestrial Mammalia, on the contrary,confine themselves to intra tropical regions, wherethe luxuriance of vegetation best corresponds withtheir enormous consumption of food. Amongstthe birds the Vulture, though one species, theLammer-Geyer, 2 comes as far north as the SwissAlps, generally most abounds in hot climates,and is often of essential service in preventing theinfection, likely to be produced by putrid animals; to these birds our Saviour's words, doubtless,allude, "Wheresoever the carcass is, there ivillthe eagles be gathered together;" the species hehad in his eye, was probably the Egyptian Vulture,3 the services of which in Egypt are strikinglydescribed by Hasselquist. After noticingits disgusting appearance, he says : " Notwithstandingthis, the inhabitants of Egypt cannotbe enough thankful to Providence for this bird.See Introdd. to Ent. iv. Lett. xlix. * Vultur Barbarous.3 Vultur percnopterus, L.70 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALAll the places round Cairo are filled with thedead bodies of asses and camels ; and thousandsof these birds fly about and devour the carcasses,before they putrefy, and fill the air with noxiousexhalations." Belon observes, which proves theirprevalence there, that in Palestine they devouran infinite number of mice, which would otherwisebe a great pest. The cognate tribe, theeagles, though they are widely dispersed, havetheir metropolis in more northern climates, andare distinguished also from the vultures, bymaking living animals chiefly their prey : forthis they are gifted with a wonderful acutenessof sight, and indomitable strength of wing, andof legs and talons, fitting them for astonishingvelocity of flight, and for resistless force, whenthey attack and bear off their prey. As theyhave no scent, their eyes are of infinite use, andenable them to discern a small bird at an almostincredible distance: and often to get a clearerview and more extensive horizon, when theyleave their mountain aeries, they ascend to agreat height. M. Raymond, when he had ascendedthe highest peak of the Pyrenees, sawan eagle soaring above him, flying directly inthe teeth of a violent south-wester, with inconceivablevelocity.Another genus of a tropical type, but not confinedto the tropics, forming a striking contrastwith the gigantic forms last adverted to, consistsDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 71of the numerous species of the brilliant and diminutiveHumming birds, which like the butterflies,whose analogues they are, suck the nectarof the flowers. This, strictly, American genus isin great force, also without the tropics, for theyabound in Mexico, and go northward as far asCanada, and southward as far as Patagonia.There is no northern metropolis for any analogousform, to these living gems, which constitutethe ornament and life of the new world. Butthe old shares with the new, in another beautifultype in the winged creation, I mean the Setaceousor Parrot tribes, which chiefly supportthemselves upon fruits, and abound in all tropicalcountries, these the Creator has not onlyinvested with the gayest colours and plumage,but gifted also with the power of speech, at leastof imitating the speech of man, when broughtinto contact with him. Their principal residenceis within the tropics, but not confined to them,as many are found in New Holland. The Aras 1are confined to the new world, and one of itsgreatest ornaments; their plumage being themost brilliant of any of the Psittaceans.An analogous tribe of mammiferous animalsinhabits the same station, and feeds on the samefood with the parrots, these are what Zoologistscall the Quadrants, or Four-handed beasts,1 Macrocercus.72 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALfrom their often using their hind as well as theirfore feet as hands, and many of them even theirtail. This tribe includes the Monkeys, Apes,and Baboons, and though these do not imitateman, by catching his phrases, like the birds lastnamed, yet they mimic all his actions. I haveoften thought, when I have examined figures ofthis tribe, that their features are typical of thedifferent kinds of face observable in the humanspecies : as far as relates to body they approachus, but in the spiritual part of our nature, elevatedby high expectations, and by knowledgenot confined to this globe on which we tread,but traversing the heavens, and penetrating inthought to the throne of Him who sitteth uponthem, we infinitely exceed them.Those animals that are of a predaceous or carnivorouscharacter, are more widely dispersed,than many of the herbivorous ones, in fact theyare co-extensive with their food, I do not meanspecifically, but generically. Though the Lionand the Tiger, and the larger feline animals aregenerally tropical, yet the Cat is naturalizedevery where. Though the Hyaena and the Jackalshrink from the temperature of the greater partof Europe, yet Wolves and Foxes, as well as thegreat majority of the canine race, are found indigenous,or have been formerly indigenous, inalmost every part of it.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 73Many more instances might be adduced provingthat animals have been placed originally incertainstations, adapted to the habits resultingfrom their organization and general structure,from which some of them have sent forth theircolonies far and wide, while others, owing topeculiarities in these respects, requiring a giventemperature and kind of food, or to local obstaclesstopping their further progress, have notwandered beyond certain limits.Having, in the preceding pages, endeavouredto account for the dispersion and present stationsof the various members of the animal kingdomat large, not to leave the subject incomplete, Imust next make a few observations relative tothat of the human race.It has been a favourite theory of some modernphysiologists that God " hath not made of oneblood all nations of men for to dwell on all theface of the earth," but that there are differentspecies of men as well as of animals : others,who do not go quite so far, suspect that at thelast great deluge, besides Noah and his familywho were saved in the ark, some others escapedfrom that sad catastrophe by taking refuge onsome of the highest mountain ridges of Asia andAfrica, and seem to insinuate that from thesearose the three principal races, the Caucasian,74 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALthe Mongol, and the Negro, that now hold possessionof our globe. 1 I shall say something incontroversies of each of these theories, beginningwith the last.This indeed furnishes a clue for its own refutation,since it admits three principal stems, whichis in accordance with the Mosaic account, thatfrom the families of the three sons of Noah, thenations were divided in the earth after the flood.The author of the above theory seems disposedto admit the truth of the Mosaic account, butinsinuates that it may have been only intendedto instruct the Israelites in the history of the raceto which they belonged, while that of other racesmay have been passed over in silence. It is toomuch the fashion, in this sceptical age, to evadethe facts that are most clearly revealed in scripture,by saying the language must not be takenstrictly nor interpreted literally, even when it isconcerning events in which there is no room formetaphor. One would think that the terms inwhich God foretold the deluge were of this description." And behold /, even /, do bring aflood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all fleshwherein is the breath of life from under heaven ;and every thing that is in the earth shall die."And again " And the waters prevailed exceedinglyupon the earth, and all the high hills thatwere under the whole heaven were covered : fifteen1 Outlines of Hist. Cab. Cycle. ix. 4.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 75cubits upwards did the waters prevail, and themountains were covered." It is also stated thatevery living substance, both man and cattle, &c.,was destroyed from the earth, and that Noah onlyremained alive, and they that were with him in theark. Can language be more definite and express?What can be more absurd than that an arkshould be necessary for the saving of Noah andhis family, and a world of animals, to be storedwith a vast supply of provision, when they mighthave escaped according to this hypothesis bytaking refuge on the summit of some lofty mountainto which Divine Wisdom might have directedthem ?There is no occasion whatever for such anHypothesis to account for the dispersion of mankindand their breaking into nations. Two chaptersin the book of Genesis 1 set the whole matterin a clear light, both as to the first cause of theirseparation, and the various tribes into which theyseparated, in which we can trace the names ofmany nations still in existence. From Babeleach in due time took the course, in that direction,however led by circumstances, that Providencehad decreed. Europe became at last thehead quarters of the descendants of Japhet,Asia of those of Shem, and Africa of those of1 Chap. x. xi.76 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALHam ; the Smites in the lapse of ages, passingover to America, were the progenitors of thered or copper race of that continent. Nor werethere any insurmountable obstacles in the wayto prevent the peopling of the globe from onecommon stock. Supposing Babel or Babylonto have been, so to speak, the centre of irradiationhow easy was the transit for Ham's descendantsinto Africa by the Isthmus of Suez ;into Europe, the path was still more open for thoseof Japhet ; and as the stream of populationspread to the East, the passage to America wasnot difficult to those who had arrived at BehringsStraits. But in all these countries mixtures withthe aborigines have probably taken place, eitherfrom the irruption and colonization of greatconquerors, the spread of commerce and similarcauses, which naturally tend to produce variationsin races from the primitive type. Hencewriters on this subject now reckon six races distinguishedby their colour, viz. a white race ; atawny race ; a red race ; a deep brown race ; abrown-black race ; and a black race.This leads me to the other theory alluded toabove, that there are different species of men aswell as of other animals. The principal foundationupon which those naturalists have builttheir theory, that have adopted the opinion,that there are several distinct species of menoriginally created, is not only their colour, butDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 77likewise certain parts of their structure, whichare found to vary in different races, such asthe shape of the head ; the prominence, moreor less, of the jaws, producing different facialangles ; the comparative length of some ofthe bones, and shape of the feet ; the degradationof intellect ; the peculiar acuteness of thesenses ; the tenacity of the memory ; and, toname no more, the appropriation of a peculiarspecies of parasitic animal to a peculiar race. 1Various are the circumstances, which, in theprogress of generations, tend to produce differencesbetween the different races which are nowfound inhabiting our globe, without havingrecourse to a theory that boldly contradicts ornullifies the word of God ; since the Scriptureexpressly declares, that God " hath made of oneblood all nations of men, for to dwell on all theface of the earth, and hath determined the timesbefore appointed, and the bounds of their habitation."Climate, the elevation of country, itssoil, waters, woods, and other peculiarities ; thefood, clothing, customs, habits, way of life, andstate of civilization, often, of its inhabitants, produceeffects upon the latter that are importantand durable, and contribute to impress a peculiarcharacter upon the different races of men1 See N. Diet. D'Hist. Nat. xv. 150, Article Homme. White'sRegular Gradation in Man, &c. S. 2.78 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALas well as animals, that inhabit our globe, andwill account for many distinctions, which indicatethat such an individual belongs to such apeople. But these circumstances will not explainand satisfactorily account for all the peculiarcharacters that distinguish nations from eachother, without having recourse to the will ofa governing and all-directing POWER, influencingcircumstances that happen in the commoncourse, and, according to the establishedlaws of nature, to answer the purposes of hisProvidence. When he confounded the speechand language of the descendants of Noah, congregatedat Babel, he first made a division ofmankind into nations ; "And from thence didJehovah scatter them abroad upon the face of allthe earth." The same Divine Power that effectedthis distinction, which may be called the originof nationality, also decreed that nations shouldbe further separated by differences of form andcolour, as well as speech, which differences originatednot in any change operated miraculously,but produced by second causes, under the directionof the FIRST. When we are told expresslythat " The hairs of our head are all numbered"and that in God's " Book all our members arewritten" we learn, what in common parlance weacknowledge, that it is according to God's willthat we are made so and so. That persons, who,in some one or other of their parts and organs,DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 79exhibit an approximation to races different fromthat to which they belong, as thick lips, a prominentfacial angle, a difference in the relativeproportion of certain bones to each other, thecurling of the hair, and the like, occur in allplaces, must be obvious to every one who useshis eyes and intellect. It is evident that allthese variations are produced by circumstancesthat we cannot fully appreciate. Even in animals,there is as much difference in generalcharacters between the Arabian steed of highblood, fine form, indomitable spirit, and wingedspeed, and the brewer's dray-horse, of a strikinglyopposite character, as there is between the Europeanhigh-bred gentleman and the African negro.The long-legged swine of France, though exhibitingsuch a marked difference in the relativelength of some of their bones, are still the samespecies with the short-legged swine of England.The same argument is strengthened by the infinitevarieties of the dog, the erect ears of the tame,and recumbent ones of the wild horse. 1 It isevident, therefore, from fact and from what ordinarilyhappens, that there are powers at work atand after conception, and while the fetus is in thewomb, that can produce variations in the samepeople, approaching to those that distinguish theNegro, the red man, or the brown man ; which,1 See above, p. 60.80 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALindeed, can produce forms much more singularand extraordinary ; for instance, the monsters thatsometimes make their appearance in the world,as the Siamese youths, children with two heads,&c. The mysterious influence that the excitedimagination, or passions, or appetites of the mother,have over the fetus in her womb, is wellknown, and produces very extraordinary consequences,and malformations, and monstrosities.When we consider that all these facilities, if Imay so speak these tendencies to producevariations in the foetus, are at the disposal ofHim, who upholds all things by the word of hispower, and turns them to the fulfilment of hisown purposes, we may imagine that thus newtypes may be produced, which may be continuedin the ordinary way of generation ; according tothat observation of Humboldt, that " The exclusionof all foreign mixtures contributes to perpetuatevarieties, or aberrations from the commonstandard." 1 That what at first were familycharacters, accompany the race when grown intoa nation, is evident from the case of the Jews,who, wherever dispersed, exhibit certain commoncharacters by which they are every whereknown ; and, with respect to complexion, theyare said to vary according to the climates inwhich they reside. A singular exception to this1 Personal Travels, v. ii. 565.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 8iis furnished by the black Jews of Malabar, mentionedby Dr. Buchanan. At Cochin, he says,there are two classes of Jews, the white and theblack Jews. The latter are supposed to havearrived in India soon after the Babylonian captivity; at least, they have that tradition amongstthem, which seems confirmed by the fact thatthey have copies only of those books of the OldTestament which were written previously to thecaptivity. The white Jews emigrated fromEurope to India in later ages. Now here is asingular fact, that in the lapse of so many agesa white or tawny race has become black. Mr.White endeavours to account for such an aberrationfrom his principle, that colour does notresult from climate, by an observation not altogetherfounded in fact namely, that the Jewshave gained proselytes in every country in whichthey have resided, and, being at liberty to marrythose proselytes, this would produce mixedbreeds. But though the Jews, in our Saviour'stime, would compass sea and land to gain oneproselyte, this has not been their character sincethe destruction of Jerusalem, and we never hearnow of their making proselytes. Indeed, theseblack Jews of Cochin seem to have been settledthere long before any white ones came to thatplace.With regard to the degradation of the intellect,and the peculiar acuteness of the senses orVOL. i. o82 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALmemory of certain races ; these furnish no proofwhatever of specific distinctions, or that theycould not be descended from the common ancestorof our species.Humboldt has an important observation whichwill explain how this might happen withouthaving recourse to such a supposition. Speakingof the barbarism of certain tribes of Americansand Asiatics, he observes : " The barbarismthat prevails throughout these differentregions is, perhaps, less owing to a primitiveabsence of all kind of civilization, than to theeffects of a long degradation. The greater partof the hordes, which we designate under thename of savages, descend, probably, from nationsmore advanced in cultivation." 1 And in anotherplace : " If it be true that savages are for themost part degraded races, remnants escapedfrom a common shipwreck, as their languages,their cosmogony fables, a crowd of other indicationsseem to prove."Now, what is it that degrades man, and causeshim to make an approach towards the brute?Setting up sense above reason and intellect;sight above faith; this world above the next.Experience teaches us, that those faculties ofour nature that are most cultivated, become mostacute : if intellectual pursuits are neglected, the1 Personal Travels. E. T. iii. 208.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 83intellect itself becomes weakened ; in proportionas the senses are exercised, they are strengthened; in proportion as the pleasures they affordus stand high or low in our estimation, wegraduate towards the brute, which knows nopleasures but those of sense, or towards theangel who knows no pleasures but what arespiritual. There is a governing principle inman,1 originally enthroned in him by his Creator,and to whose sway the senses were originally incompletesubjection. But when man fell, astruggle was generated, the lower or sensual partof his nature striving to gain the rule over him,and to dethrone the higher or intellectual. Thisis the " law in our members warring against thelaw of our mind" mentioned by the Apostle.Now, we know that the same individual, atdifferent periods of life, may be directed in hisactions first by one and then by the other afthese laws ; he may begin in sense, and end inspirit,or vice versa. If the former takes placein him, his nature and character are elevated,and he is become more intellectual ; if the latter,they are degraded, and he is become moresensual and nearer to a brute, and yet in bothcases he remains the same man as before ; hisspecies is not altered. Apply this to nations,will it follow, because one is now generally gifted1 To84 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALwith a greater degree of intellect, and anotherremarkable for more acute sensation, that, therefore,they cannot be derived from a commonorigin ? Nations are often led by custom as wellas individuals ; they, therefore, usually walk inthe path that their ancestors have trod beforethem, and, from circumstances connected withthis, it happens that some apply their facultiesto higher pursuits than others. Those thatchiefly cultivate the intellect improve it by thatvery act ; while those who are principally engagedin pursuits that require the constant andskilful use of the organs of sensation acquire adegree of expertness in that use not to be metwith in the others ; but the intellect being employedonly upon low objects, becomes habituallydegraded, and loses all taste for things that arenot visible and tangible. Though in an individual,or in a long succession of individuals, thismight not produce a perceptible contraction andnon-development of the organ of the intellect, orinthe chamber that contains it ; yet, in the lapseof ages and generations, this effect would graduallybe produced, for if an organ is not used foralong course of years, it becomes contracted,and from long habit unapt to perform its naturalfunctions. Some American nations, by the applicationof boards properly shaped, depress theskull-bone of their infants, thinking a flat heada great beauty, whence the tribe is distinguishedDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 85by the name of Pallotepallors, or Flat-heads.Others, by the same means, give them a conicalform ; there is no difficulty, therefore, in conceivingthat with a gradual contraction of thebrain, that of the skull might take place in thefoetus, which would accommodate one to theother. With regard to the memory, it is notwonderful that a being who occupies his timeand intellect with few objects, should have amore distinct recollection of certain events, thanone whose attention is more divided. It maybeobserved of the lower orders in general, thattheir memory, for the same reason, of matterswithin their own sphere of comprehension, isoften more clear than that of persons bettereducated and informed.I remember the case of a negro who residednear Bury St. Edmund, who was an educatedman, and published a volume of poems by subscription,which did him no discredit. 1 Hence,it is evident that there is a difference of capacityin negroes as well as whites, which admits ofimprovement from instruction and study, whenthey come among civilized people. Little stresswill be laid on the parasite of the negroes, 2 beingspecifically distinct from that which infests thewhites, when we reflect that the horse and theox have different insect parasites and assailants1 He, was called Ignatius Sancho. 2 Pediculus Nigritarum.86 GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCALin different climates. There is a time fixed uponin the divine counsels when the curse shall cease ;and it will then be found that by reversing thecourse that has degraded so many nations, theapostacy, namely, from God to idolatries of themost debasing kind which has yielded them upa prey to sensuality, clouded their understandings,and, instead of universal good-will, has taughtthem to regard those that are not of their owntribe or caste as objects of just hatred and injurywhen this course has been reversed and theyare brought back to God, which will take placein his time and at his word ; and by the meansand instruments that he empowers and commissions,1 they will become more elevated intheir character, and assume a higher rank amongthe nations : and they will make good their claimto the same inheritance with the other membersof the Christian family. He who decreed theend, decrees also the means. When the Lordgave the word, great was the company of thosethat published it. This was the case at the firstpreaching of the Gospel, when the gross darknessof heathen idolatry covered the earth ; this alsowas the case at what may be called its republicationat the time of the Reformation, when thegross darkness of papal idolatry had almost putout the light of truth in the church ; and so shall1 See Appendix, note 16.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 87it be again, should another and perhaps lastcloud of error envelope the world with darkness, 1which seems even now beginning to gather, andmay we not hope that it will be followed by thathappy time, foretold by the prophet, when theknowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as thehaters cover the sea ? The old curse on Ham's offspringshall then cease, he shall no longer be aservant of servants to his brethren ; then shall thecurse also that has driven the children of Abrahamafter the flesh into every region of the globe,cease, and they shall look on him whom theypierced, and be restored to the favour of theirGod, and to their own land; 2 and next, in itsown day, the original curse, also pronounced uponAdam and his posterity shall be obliterated anddone away for ever.Taking all the circumstances I have noticedinto consideration, I trust I have made it clear,that the variations observable in the differentraces of men are not of such a nature as to renderit impossible, or improbable, that they should allhave been derived from a common stock ; and thatthe degradations observable in some of them, andapproximation to the highest of the brutes, wascaused not by the will and fiat of the Creator,but by their own wilful departure from him, andvoluntary self-debasement. Because they did notlike to retain God in their knowledge, he gave1 See Appendix, note 17. * See Appendix, note 18.88 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.them over to a reprobate mind to do those thingsthat are not convenient: further, that with respectto those characters, which distinguish onenation from another, they may be attributed tothe action of physical causes directed by theDeity : who, to use the language of a pious andexcellent poet,Lives through all life, extends through all extent,Spreads undivided, operates unspent.THERE is another interesting subject connectedwith the geography of animals, which may findits place here ; a subject than which none showsmore evidently or strikingly the hand of a beneficentand ever watchful Providence, holding thereins ; and upon certain occasions and at certainseasons, directing various animals to change theirquarters, and seek often in distant countries amore genial climate, in which they may give birthto their young, or find a better supply of food fortheir own support. I shall, therefore, now devotea few pages to the migrations of animals.The most general principle that causes emigrationis common to man and animals. Whena country is over-peopled, and can no longermaintain its inhabitants, unless some means canbe devised at home, by which the pressure maybelightened, and the suffering classes enabledto procure the necessaries of life, there must in-MIGRATIONS. 89suitably be some outbreak ; when the rivers canno longer be contained within their natural channelthey will overflow, and spread desolationaround, till they have passed away and found aplace in the great receptacle of waters. Thus, inancient times, the great northern hive sent forthits numberless swarms, and overturned and dividedamongst them a considerable portion ofthat mighty empire which extended its ironsway over the fairest portion of the globe. 1With regard to their migrations, animals maybedivided into two classes. The first will consistof those that migrate casually, under a certainpressure ; and the second of those that migrateperiodically, or at certain seasons.1. Of the first description, are those infinitearmies of Locusts, which, when they have laidbare one country, as an overshadowing and darkcloud pregnant with the wrath of heaven, pass ontoanother ; mighty conquerors of old, of whomthey were the symbols, from Sesostris to Sennacheriband Nebuchadnezzar, also mark their progressby devastation and ruin ; to use the graphiclanguage of the prophet " The land is as thegarden of Eden before them, and behind them adesolate wilderness . " 2This plague has generally been consideredas belonging to the old world, in which they1 See Appendix, note 19.See on the Locusts Introdd. to Ent. 1 Lett. rii.90 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.seldom exceed latitude 42. but in N. America,there is a species of Locust or Grass-hopper, asDr. Richardson informs me, according to thereport of the Indians, becoming prevalent aboutonce in twenty years, which committed greatdevastations at lord Selkirk's colony of Red river,as high as latitude 52. They made their firstappearance in vast flights coming from the plainsto the westward, and soon destroyed the crops ofgrain, and every thing green. They re-appearedfor three or four successive summers, each yearin smaller numbers, and now for several yearsthey have not been seen.These were evidently insects of the same orderand tribe with the locust, though perhaps of a differentgenus ; but, probably the tradition of theIndians might relate to another North Americandevastation, which is also called there the Locust,but belongs to a genus beloved by the Greeks forits song, and hated by the less imaginative Romansfor its stunning noise, which may be called theTree Locust ; a species of which is said to appear,about once in every seventeen years, 1 insuch prodigious numbers as to do incalculabledamage to the fruit and forest trees, in which itdeposits its eggs, and upon which it feeds internallyin the grub state, but the oral organs of theperfect insect are only calculated for suction.Amongst quadrupeds, the analogues, in some1 Cicada septendecim. L.MIGRATIONS. 91respects, of the locusts, are the Lemmings, a kindof mouse or rat. These little animals, whichusually inhabit the mountains of Norway andLapland, in certain seasons, emigrate in prodigiousnumbers to the south ; the most commonspecies 1 is said not to lay up any winter store,but to form burrows under ground in summer,and under the snow in winter in search of food ;but that found in Kamtschatka, 2 which is largerthan a rat, is stated to be occupied during thesummer in laying up provisions for the winterin holes under the turf divided into compartments,they consist of various kinds of roots,some even poisonous, but which agree with thisanimal, and of which it collects from twenty tothirty pounds. It is called in Kamtschatka .In fine weather its instinct teachesit to spread its harvest of roots in the sun to dryand fit them for keeping. When these differentspecies of Lemmings make their excursions, whichtake place only in certain years and seasons, andin different directions, the species last mentionedgoing towards the west, the others towards thesouth, like certain ants, they always marchstraight forward, neither turning to the righthand nor to the left, and if their course is interruptedby a river, they cross it by swimming.The common Lemmings, when they migrate, areregarded as a terrible scourge ; they devastate1 Lemnos vulgaris. 2 Lemnos economies.92 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.the fields and gardens, ruin the harvest, and onlywhat is kept in the houses escapes them, intothese happily they never enter. Their numberis so prodigious, that, when they die, the air isinfected, and much sickness is the consequence.All this tribe of mice appear to live on roots,bulbs, grain, nuts, &c. and have generally a veryshort tail.The Campagnol, 1 or short-tailed rat of Pennant,is equally destructive ; in some years their numbersare so prodigious, that they overflow, as itwere, a whole district, and by their ravages producefamine and desolation. This effect is statedto have been produced in certain parts of Francewhere an extent of forty square leagues was devastatedby them. In their progress these animalsare preyed upon by the predaceous quadrupedsand birds, by whose incessant attacks theirnumbers, in ordinary seasons, are kept within thebounds assigned them by the Creator, as are theLocusts by the Locust-eating Thrush, 2 and theAphides or Plant-lice which may be denominatedthe Locusts of Britain, and which are statedsometimes almost to darken the air, by the ladybirdsand aphidivorous flies.All these migrations are produced by a differentcause from those periodical ones which take place,after certain intervals, or at certain seasons, invarious other animals of every grade ; and though1 Agricola alkalis. a Turdus gryllivorus.MIGRATIONS. 93a scarcity of food, or straitened circumstances oraccommodations may be the impelling motives,yet these are produced by an unusual increase inthe numbers of the migrating species, so thatthey are driven to seek an outlet by which theirsupernumeraries may pass off and relieve themfrom the pressure, or the whole population, desertingan exhausted country, may establishthemselves in better quarters.In all the instances that I have here adduced,the object, at the first blush, as far as the Deitymay be supposed to be concerned in these outbreaks,appears rather punitive than beneficent,but when we dip below the surface, and look toultimate consequences, what appears to be altogetheran evil, instead of a dark side, turnsround and shews one bright with good. It istrue, in some cases, the object is punishment ofan offender, and in hopeless cases, the sentenceis pronounced, " Cut it down, why cumber eth itthe ground." But before this, Divine Mercy,which willet not that any should perish, employsthose correctives, which at the same time thatthey give pain, and wear the appearance of eviland punishment, tend to produce that change ofthe mind and conversion of the heart, that willreconcile the sinner to God, and ensure to himthe blessed inheritance of his children. Buttemporal good, as well as spiritual, is often theresult of these visitations, the devastations of.94 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.which they are the instruments, as was observedby Spartan of the locusts, are often followedby fertility, and the fearful scourge is replacedby Amalthea's horn.2. We are next to consider those migrationsthat take place periodically, and usually at certainseasons of every year ; the general intention ofwhich appears to be a supply of food, and oftena temperature best suited to reproduction. Providence,in this, taking care that their instinctsshall stimulate them to change their quarters,when these two objects can be answered at thesame time, and by a single removal.In North America, that ferocious and lion-likeanimal, the Bison? called there the Buffalo,forms regular migrations, in immense herds, fromnorth to south, and from the mountains to theplains, and after a certain period returns backagain. Salt-springs, usually called salt-licks orsalines, found in a clay, compact enough forpotter's clay, are much frequented by theseanimals, whence they are called Buffalo salt-licks.Dr. Richardson informs me that theperiodical movements of these animals are regulatedalmost solely by the pastures : when a firehas spread over the prairies, it is succeeded by afine growth of tender grass, which they are sureto visit. How the Bison discovers that this has1 Bos Americans.MIGRATIONS. 95taken place seems not easily accounted for;perhaps stragglers from the great herds, whenfood grows scarce, may be instrumental to this.The Musk Ox, a ruminating animal betweenthe ox and sheep, 1 has the same habit, extendingits migratory movements as far as Melville, andother islands of the Polar sea, where it arrivesabout the middle of May, and going southwardtowards the end of September, where it has beenseen as low as lat. 67 N., which, as Dr. Richardsonstates, approaches the northern limit of theBison : its food, like that of the Rein-deer, calledin North America the Caribou, is grass in thesummer and lichens in the winter. Its hair isvery long, and, as well as that of the Bison,which has been manufactured both in Englandand America into cloth, might be woven intouseful articles. This animal inhabits strictly thecountry of the Esquimaux, and may be regardedas the gift of a kind Providence to that people,who call it Oomingmak, and not only eat itsflesh but also the contents of its stomach, as wellas those of the Rein-deer, which they call jorrocks,which consisting of lichens and othervegetable substances, as Dr. Richardson remarks,are more easily digested by the human stomachwhen they are mixed with the salivary andgastric juices of a ruminating animal.The wild Rein-deer in North America, in the1 Ovibos moschatus.96 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.summer, as the excellent man and author latelymentioned states, seek the coast of the Arcticseas : it is singular that the females, driven fromthe woods by the mosquito, migrate thitherbefore the males, generally in the month of May(some say in April and March), while the latterdo not begin their march till towards the end ofJune. At this time the sun has dried up thelichens on the Barren Grounds, and the moistpastures in the valleys of the coast and islands ofthe above seas afford them sufficient food. Soonafter their arrival the females drop their young.They commence their return to the south inSeptember, and reach the vicinity of the woodstowards the end of October. After the ruttingseason, which takes place in September, themales and females live separately ; the formerretire deeper into the woods, while the pregnantherds of the latter remain in the skirts of theBarren Grounds, which abound in the rein-deer 1and other lichens. In the woods, they feed onlichens which hang from the trees, and on thelong grass of the swamps. The males do notusually go so far north as the females. Columns,consisting of eight or ten thousand ofthese Carious, so numerous are they in NorthAmerica, may be seen annually passing fromnorth to south in the spring, infested and attacked1 Cenomyce rangiferlna. Char.MIGRATIONS. 97in their progress by numbers of wolves, foxes,and other predaceous quadrupeds, which attackand devour the stragglers.The Pronged-horned Antelope? as well as theRein-deer, appears to go northward in the summer,and return to the south in the winter.Dr. Richardson remarks to me in a letter,The Musk-ox and Rein-deer feed chiefly onlichens, and therefore frequent the Barren Landsand primitive rocks, which are clothed with theseplants. They resort in winter, when the snow isdeep, to the skirts of the woods, and feed on thelichens which hang from the trees, but on everyfavourable change of weather they return to theBarren Grounds. In summer they migrate to themoist pastures on the sea-coast, and eat grass,because the lichens on the Barren Lands are thenparched by the drought, and too hard to beeaten. The young grass is, I suppose, betterfitted for the fawns, which are dropped about thetime the deer reach the coast." In all this wesee the hand of Providence directing them tothose places where the necessary sustenance maybehad.The same gentleman has remarked a singularcircumstance with regard to the American BlackBear. 2 In general, this species hybernates inthe northern parts of the fur countries ; but it1 Antilope furcata. 2 Urus Americans.VOL* I. H08 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.has been observed in certain years, and verysevere winters, that great numbers enter theUnited States from the northward. These wereall lean, and generally males. The nativesassert, that a bear that is not fat cannot liberate;therefore, those that have not acquiredsufficient fat when winter overtakes them, necessarilyemigrate to a milder climate, 1A migration of an animal of the equine genuswas observed by Mr. Campbell in South Africa.The Quagga, a kind of wild ass, travels in bandsof two or three hundred, in winter, from thetropics southward to a district, in the vicinity ofthe Malalaveen river, reported to be warmer thanwithin the tropic of Capricorn, when the sun hasretired to the northern hemisphere. They stayhere for two or three months, which is called theBushmen's harvest. The lions, who follow thequaggas, are the chief butchers. During thisseason, the first thing the bushman does, whenhe awakes, is to see whether he can spy anyvultures hovering in the heavens at a greatheight ; under them he is sure to find a quagga,which a lion has slaughtered in the night.But the animals which are most noted for theirmigrations, from a cold to a warm climate, andvice versa, are the birds, which, as having dominionin the air, are enabled to transport themFaun. Boreal-amerlc. i. 16.MIGRATIONS. 99selves with greater ease, and with the interpositionof fewer obstacles, than the quadrupeds,the theatre of whose motions is the earth, intersectedby rivers and mountain ridges, whichrenders their periodical transit less easy toaccomplish. The number of birds that migrate,if we take Dr. Richardson's scale, for those ofNorth America, as a rule, compared with thosethat reside the whole year in a country, is aboutfive-sixths, a very large proportion ; but as thesummer residents are replaced by winter ones,the difference is less striking, and the desertionless apparent and annoying. The celebratedDr. Jenner, in a very ingenious posthumouspaper, in the Philosophical Transactions for1824, has produced many arguments to provethat the periodical migrations of birds are theresult, not of the approach of the cold or hotseasons, but of the absence or presence of astimulus connected with the original law, " Increaseand multiply." That when they feel itthey seek their summer, and when it ceases itsaction, their winter quarters. In one case, theanimal winging its way to a climate and countrybest suited to the great purpose impressed uponit by its Creator, of producing and rearing aprogeny ; and in the other returning to a home,most congenial to its nature, and best supplyingits wants.The cause of emigration, in both cases, had100 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.previously been attributed to the changes ofthe temperature gradually produced by thechange of seasons, and the growing scarcity offood resulting from it. But Mr. Jenner has observedthat these cannot be the causes thatoccasion the migration of those birds that leaveus early in the year, as the cuckoo, 1 which disappearsin the beginning of July ; and the swift, 8which takes its departure early in the followingmonth. At these times they can feel no coldblast to benumb them, and the food that formstheir usual support is in the greatest abundance.There seems to be some analogy between thebirds that migrate annually to warmer climatesto spend their winter, and those animals, whichremaining in a country, seek a subterranean, orother close retreat, to shelter them from therigours of that season, and in which they continuein a torpid state, till spring revives themand they issue from their hiding-places to fulfilthe first law of their Creator. Several instancesalso are upon record, even with regard tobirds that usually migrate, of their havingbeen found torpid in the clefts and cavities oftrees ; and Spallanzani relates experiments whichprove that swallows can bear a certain degree ofcold when torpid. I do not recollect any observationswhich serve to prove that liberating1 Calculus canoes. e Cypselus spits.MIGRATIONS. 101animals are regulated by the temperature as tothe season at which they prepare to retire forthe winter, except as to insects, which, with fewexceptions, are of that description. My learnedcoadjutor, Mr. Spence, in our Introduction toEntomology, has some remarks on this subject,which seem, at first sight, to prove that the disappearanceof insects, at least those of the Cleopatraorder or beetles, is not preceded by any remarkablelowering of the temperature ; on the contrary,he observed a great number of variousgenera congregating with this view when thethermometer was fifty-eight degrees in the shade. 1This was about the middle of October. But thereis one circumstance to which he has not adverted,which may tend to reconcile this fact with thereceived opinion. The nights, at this time of theyear are often cold when the days are hot, thelatter also are much shortened and the formerlengthened, so that the sum-total of heat receivedfrom the sun is very much diminished, whichmay be the exciting cause of their liberatingat this time, when the diurnal temperature is soconsiderable.With regard to the swift, these birds seem toavoid heat, they lie by in the middle of the day,and only appear in the morning and evening.Their early migration from this country may1 Intro to Ent. il. 433.102 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.probably be caused by the heat ; and Buffon saysthat instead of warmer, they seek colder climates.The house-swallow, 1 which remains with us tillOctober, is stated to winter in Africa, so that itsobject is evidently a warmer climate. It is remarkablethat the birds of this tribe, when theyvisit us in the spring, return to their old haunts.Dr. Jenner ascertained this by cutting off twoclaws from the foot of a certain number, severalof which were found in the following year, andone was met with after the expiration of seven.The instinct that directs these little beings sounerringly across continents and oceans, andleads them to their native clime is wonderful,and inexplicable under any other principle thanthat of Divine superintendence. But upon thisI shall have occasion to enlarge hereafter.From what is here stated, it seems most probable,that it is not only the increasing heat ofthe southern regions which induces the swallowto seek a less ardent clime to transact her lovesand rear her young ; but also a stimulus, causedby the heat, acting upon her organization, whichaids to accomplish that important purpose, andis the leading star by which her Creator impelsher to the land of her own nativity, and whichis destined to be that of her offspring. Onlythe swift leaves a colder climate for one moregenial and better suited to the same purpose,1 Hirundo rustica.MIGRATIONS. 103and both return from whence they came, whenthe errand of their voyage is fully accomplished.One sent away by too great heat, and the otherby a gradual decrement of the amount of heat,and also of their customary food.Vieille says, that all the swallows do not quitthe warm countries to which they betake themselvesin winter that one part migrates, whileanother remains stationary, during the wholeyear, in Egypt, Ethiopia, and other tropicalcountries and islands.But, besides the insectivorous emigrators>manyof the higher and more powerful tribes are accustomedto change one country for another.When the carcasses of animals putrefy, and birdsmultiply under the influence of the northernsun, vultures, eagles, falcons, hawks, &c. leavethe south and go to partake of the feasts providedfor them in higher latitudes.But, besides the birds that visit us during themore genial part of the year, and add so greatlyto the beauty and music of our groves in springand summer, there are others, and those anumerous tribe, that wing hither their way whenthe reign of winter has commenced. The mostnumerous of these are the birds which theAuthor of nature has fitted to disport themselvesand seek their food in the water, or which frequenthumid and watery places. When theArctic seas, and lakes, and rivers, present an104 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.unbroken field of impenetrable ice, the variousweb-footed birds, the swans 1 and geese, 2 andducks 3 and divers, 4 and coots, 5 and an infinityof others, forming their angular and sometimestriangular phalanxes, each in turn taking thelead and first cutting the air, 6 fly off, often at agreat height, to seek in more southern climates,not a region devoid of the usual concomitants ofwinter, frost and snow, but where their rigoursare mitigated, so as to afford to these creaturesthe means of life. Now, also the waders, usuallydistinguished by their long legs and long beaks,as the woodcock, 7 the curlew, and the snipes, 8leave their native marshes and haunts to seekothers whose unfrozen or partially frozen morassesafford them a supply of the worms andvesicles or similar animals that form theirusual nutriment. Many a time, when a boy,have I pursued the field-fare, 9 which is one ofour winter guests, from tree to tree, without itsaffording me an opportunity of taking aim at it,as if it was aware of my purpose, and could smellthe contents of my musket ; no sooner did I getwithin a couple of hundred yards, than, with allits company, it flew a little further, and thuskept tantalizing me for hours, without my even1 Cydnus. 2 Anger. 3 Anas.4 Mergus and Columbus. 5 Fulica.6 N. Diet. D'Hist. Nat. xx. 544.7 Rustica vulgaris Vieille. Numerous torquatus. Lath.8 Scolopax Galling and Gallinula. 9 Turdus paris.MIGRATIONS. 105being able to secure one. These birds, if theweather becomes very severe here, are said to flyfurther south in search of food, and to returnagain.Thus, we see the change of seasons bringswith it a change in the winged inhabitants ofevery country ; and the winter immigration ofa vast variety of birds, fit for food and otheruseful purposes, makes up in some degree forthe summer or autumnal emigration of those,which being constantly before our eyes movingin every direction, and rendering vocal everygrove or tree and even the very heavens, entertainour senses of seeing and hearing in a mostdelightful manner. Thus, also, all countriespartake in some degree, by this shifting sceneof animal life, of the same blessings and pleasuresderived from the same instruments.Though the production and rearing of theiryoung forms a principal feature in most of themigrations before noticed, yet it is most prominentand conspicuous in the animals, whose annualmotions I shall next advert to. And heremankind is more conspicuously indebted to thefatherly care and bounty of a beneficent Providencefor a supply of their wants, than in any ofthe cases above detailed ; which most of themminister to our pleasures, rather than our sustenance.When the time of the singing, birds is106 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.come, and the voice of the nightingale is heardin our land; when the swallow and the swiftdelight us by their rapid and varied motions, nowskimming the surface of the waters, now darting,either aloft or with more humble flight over theearth ; when the carolling lark ascends towardsheaven, teaching us to look up and learn from herwhere to direct the best affections of our hearts ;these all excite in us delightful sensations, andmerit our grateful acknowledgment, but still theycontribute little or nothing to the means of life.The locusts indeed, who headed the list of emi-orators,at the same time that they lay waste acountry, supply its inhabitants with food, andthus make some recompense for their ravages ;and a considerable proportion of the winterbirds mentioned under the last head, as theswimmers 1 and the waders, 2 furnish our tableswith dainty meats ; but they come not in suchnumbers as to add materially to the generalstock of food, or to contribute to the maintenanceof the poor, as well as to the enjoymentsof the rich. The animals I allude tounder the present head, form the sole food ofsome nations, and contribute a vast and cheapsupply, that covers the table of the poor manwith plenty. The migrating fishes are one ofthe greatest and most invaluable gifts of theCreator to his creature man, by which thousands1 Natatores. 2 Grallatores.MIGRATIONS. 107and thousands support themselves, and theirfamilies ; and which, at certain periods, formthe food of millions. Of the proceedings of theprincipal of these fishes, I shall now give abrief account.I begin with one of the cartilaginous fishesthe Sturgeon. There are two noted species ofthis fish, which is related to the shark, the oneis called the sturgeon 1 by way of eminence, andthe other the huso. 2 The latter is found only inthe Caspian and Black seas, and the Don, theVolga, and other rivers that flow into them. Itis stated to be much larger than the sturgeon :Pallas describes one that weighed 2800 pounds,which it is conjectured must have been nearlyforty feet long. Its ordinary length is stated tobe twenty-five feet, which is the maximum of thesturgeon. The numbers of this species far exceedthose of the latter, the caviar is usuallymade of its spawn, which equals nearly a thirdof the weight of the whole fish, from whence wemay conjecture the infinite number of eggs thatit contains. Professor Pallas gives a very interestinghistory of the manner in which theseenormous fish are taken in the Volga, and theSaiek, which discharge their waters into theCaspian. And it seems really wonderful thatso wild and illiterate a people as the Tartars,1 Accidence Studio. 2 A. Hush.108 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.who have no acquaintance with the arts andsciences, should on this occasion, shew as muchgenius and invention as the most enlightenednations. The huso enters the rivers to spawnearlier than the sturgeon, generally about midwinter,when they are still covered with ice. Atthis time the natives' construct dikes across therivers in certain parts, formed with piles, leavingno interval that the huso can pass through ; inthe centre of the dike is an angle opening to thecurrent, which consequently is an entering angleto the fish ascending the stream ; at the summitof this angle is an opening, which leads into akind of chamber formed with cord, or osier hurdles,according to the season of the year. Abovethe opening is a kind of scaffold, and a littlecabin, where the fishermen can retire and warmthemselves or repose, when they are not wantedabroad. No sooner is the huso entered into thechamber, which is known by the motion of thewater, than the fishermen on the scaffold let falla door, which prevents its return to seaward, theythen by means of ropes and pullies lift the movablebottom of the chamber, and easily securethe fish.Gmelin has related, in a very lively way, thesolemn fishing which takes place at the beginningof winter, in the neighbourhood ofAstrachan, when these fish have retired intovast caves under the seashore, which form theirMIGRATIONS. 109winter quarters. A great number of fishermenassemble, over whom are placed a directorand inspectors, who possess considerable authorityand influence ; every kind of fishing isprohibited, in the places known to be the hauntof the huss ; a numerous flotilla of boats are inreadiness ; every thing is prepared as it werefor an important military operation ; all approachin concert and with regular manoeuvres theasylum in which the fish are concealed, theslightest noise is severely interdicted, so thatthe most profound silence every where prevails.In an instant, at a given signal, a universalshout rends the heavens, which echo multiplieson every side. The astonished huss, in thegreatest alarm, rush from their hiding places,and are taken in nets of every kind, preparedto intercept them.The huso fishery is of great importance, principallyon account of the caviar prepared fromthe roe of these fishes, and the isinglass that ismade from their air-vessel. The former is muchin demand amongst many nations, as the Russians,Turks, &c.; the Greeks particularly makeit almost their sole food during their long fasts,and the latter is almost universally an article ofcommerce. The common sturgeon furnishes thesame articles, as do other fishes also.The next kind of fishes that migrate for thepurpose of spawning, which I shall notice, is110 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.one, which though it falls far behind the sturgeonsin size, exceeds them infinitely in numbersand dispersion, and in the vast supply of foodwith which it furnishes the human race ; it willreadily be seen that I am speaking of the Codfish*This valuable animal belongs to the classof fishes with a bony skeleton, and the tribe ofJugular, or those whose ventral fins are nearerthe mouth than the pectoral. It frequents shallowsand sandbanks, between the fortieth andsixtieth degrees of North Latitude, both in theAtlantic and Pacific Oceans, where it is takenin infinite numbers. The fishery for it employsboth European and American seamen and vesselsin abundance. The most celebrated isthat on the great bank of Newfoundland, wherethousands of men are employed in catching,salting, and barrelling these fish, and whencethey are dispersed principally into the Catholiccountries, where they form a considerable portionof the food of the people, especially during lentand other fasts.The cod-fish makes for the coast at spawningtime, going northward, this takes place towardsthe end of winter, or the beginning of spring.Leeuwenhoek counted more than nine millionsof eggs in a cod-fish of the middle size ; allowingfor a large consumption by other fishes whichdevour them, still enough are left, that when1 Gadus Morhua.MIGRATIONS. 1 1 1hatched produce a superabundant supply. Theyare deposited in the inequalities of the bottomamongst the stones.The Haddock 1 is another species belonging tothis genus, which frequents our coast in greatnumbers in mid-winter ; they are stated sometimesto form a bank twenty-four miles long bythree broad. They pursue and devour the herrings,and are themselves in their turn devouredby Sharks, which follow their shoals.The next tribe of migratory fishes is onewhich supplies our tables with a very acceptablesuccessor, when the cod-fish is out of season,and which at last usually becomes so plentifuland cheap as to form a part of the poor man's billof fare, as well as of that of his rich neighbour.Every one will see that I here allude to theMacJcareL* This is one of the thoracic fishes, orthose whose ventral fins are situated below thepectoral. It is very widely dispersed, beingfound in the Arctic, Antarctic, and MediterraneanSeas, as well as in the Atlantic Ocean.It hybernates in the seas first mentioned, whereit is stated to select certain depths of the seacalled by the natives Barachouas, which are soland-locked, 'that the water is as calm at alltimes, as in the most sheltered pools ; the depthof these asylums diminishes in proportion to the1 Gadus (Egeljiitus. ~ Scomber Scombrus.112 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.proximity of the shore, and the bottom is generallymuddy and covered with marine plants.It is in these muddy bottoms that the mackarel,directed by their instinct, pass the winter. Theyplunge their head and the anterior part of theirbody in the mud, keeping their tails elevatedvertically above it. In the spring they emerge,in infinite shoals from their hiding-places, andproceed southward for the purposes of depositingtheir eggs in more genial seas ; more than halfa million of these have been discovered in asingle female. 1 These fish die as soon as theyare taken out of the water, and then they emita phosphoric light. The Scomber is one of thefishes, which, according to Pliny, was used formaking the celebrated Roman pickle namedGarum, and he calls it a fish good for nothingelse: if he means our mackarel, it is singular thatits value, as an article of food, should not havebeen discovered. The Gar us or Garum derivedits name from a crustaceous animal so called,from which it was sometimes made. Apicius issaid by Pliny to have employed the liver of themullet in concocting it.What the mackarel is to the north of Europe,the Tunny is to the south. It deposits its eggsin May and June, when it enters the Mediterranean,seeking the shores in shoals arranged in1 Scomber Thyrsus.MIGRATIONS.the form of a parallelogram, or as some say, atriangle, and making a great noise and stir.They appear to have been much in request withthe Greeks and Romans, and are now an importantarticle of food with the inhabitants of thecoasts and islands of the Mediterranean.But no fish is so important a gift of Heaven,as affording employment to a large number ofindividuals both in the catching and preparingit, and as adding very largely to the generalstock of food, especially in Catholic countries,as that of whose history I shall next give a briefsketch.Three thousand decked vessels, of differentsizes, besides smaller boats, are stated to beannually employed in the herring-fishery, witha proportionable number of seamen, besides avast number of hands that, at certain seasons,are occupied in curing them.The herring to which I now allude belongs tothe tribe called abdominal fishes, or those whoseventral fins are behind the pectoral, and maybesaid to inhabit the arctic seas of Europe,Asia, and America, from whence they annuallymigrate, at different times, in search of foodand to deposit their spawn. Their shoals consistof millions of myriads, and are manyleagues in width, many fathoms in thickness,and so dense that the fishes touch each other ;they are preceded, at the interval of some days,VOL. I. I1 14 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.by insulated males. The largest and strongestare said to lead the shoals, which seem to movein a certain order, and to divide into bandsas they proceed, visiting the shores of variousislands and countries, and enriching their inhabitants.Their presence and progress areusually indicated by various sea-birds, sharks,and other enemies. One of the cartilaginousfishes, the sea-ape, 1 is said to accompany themconstantly, and is thence called the king of theherrings. They throw off also a kind of oilyor slimy substance, which extends over theircolumns, and is easily seen in calm weather.This substance, in gloomy still nights, exhibits aphosphoric light, as if a cloth, a little luminous,was spread over the sea.Some conjecture maybe formed of the infinitenumbers of these invaluable fishes that are takenby European nations from what Lacepede relatesthat in Norway twenty millions have beentaken at a single fishing, that there are few yearsthat they do not capture four hundred millions,and that at Gothenburg and its vicinity sevenhundred millions are annually taken ; " but whatare these millions," he remarks, " to the incrediblenumbers that go to the share of the English,Dutch, and other European nations."Migrations of these fishes are stated to take1 Chimaera monstrous.MIGRATIONS. 115place at three different times. The first whenthe ice begins to melt, which continues to theend of June ; then succeeds that of the summer,followed by the autumnal one, which lasts tillthe middle of September. They seek placesfor spawning, where stones and marine plantsabound, against which they rub themselvesalternately on each side, all the while movingtheir fins with great rapidity. According toLacepede, William Deukelzoon, a fisherman ofBiervliet, in Dutch Flanders, was the first personwho salted herrings, this was before the end ofthe fourteenth century ; others attribute this inventionto William Benches or Feelings ofBerlin. To shew his sense of the importanceof this invention, the Emperor Charles V. isstated to have visited his tomb, and to haveeaten a herring upon his grave. The smoking ofthis valuable fish, we are told, was first practisedby the inhabitants of Dieppe in Normandy.Next to the herring, the pilchard 1 is valuableto our own country, especially to the inhabitantsof Cornwall and Devonshire, to whom this fishis as important as the herring to other parts ofthe kingdom ; they frequent the southern coastsfrom the middle of summer to the end of autumn,and many thousand barrels are annually cured.Lacepede says that, in one year, a milliard 2 ofthese fishes has been taken.1 Clupanodon Pilchards. 2 One thousand million.116 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.The sprat 1 and the anchovy, 2 are two otherfishes of the present tribe, the former, at certainseasons, furnishing a considerable supply of foodto the lower orders, and also a fertilizing kind ofmanure to the farmer and hop-grower, though,it must be confessed, very annoying to the travellerpassing through a country where it is soemployed, by its disagreeable stench, and tothose who inhabit it by its putrid effluvia, whichI have known to produce fevers ; the other ministeringto the enjoyment and luxury of the wealthyby its piquancy when pickled, or reduced to anessence ; but on these I shall not further enlarge.The next tribe of migratory fishes is one whoseseveral species are intermediate between marineand fresh water fishes, roving indifferently in thesea, and rivers, and lakes, and thus is fitted byProvidence to make up to the inhabitants ofinland countries their distance from the othermigratory, by a supply brought, as it were, totheir very doors. The fishes in question belongalso to the abdominal class, and form the salmongenus, including the salmon, 3 the salmon-trout, 4the trout, 5 the grayling, 6 the charr, 7 the smelt, 8the hucho, 9 and many other species. I shall,however, confine my observations principally to1 Clupea Sprats. z C. encrasicolus.3 Salmo Salary. * S. Trutta.5 S. Faro. 6 $. Thymallus.7 S. Albinus. 8 S. Eperlanus.9 S. Hucho.MIGRATIONS. 117the king, as it may be called, of the river migratory,the Salmon. In our own country thisnoble fish is too high-priced to form a generalarticle of food, and may be reckoned amongstthe luxuries of the rich man's table; but inothers, especially amongst some of the NorthwesternAmerican tribes, they are gifts of Providence,which form their principal food at allseasons. One, which Sir George Mckenziefell in with, in his journey from Canada to thePacific, were perfect Ichthyophagites, and wouldtouch no other animal food. These people construct,with great labour and ingenuity, acrosstheir streams, salmon weirs, which are formedwith timber and gravel, and elevated nearly fourfeet above the level of the water ; beneath machinesare placed, into which the salmon fallwhen they attempt to leap over the weir. Oneither side is a large frame of timber-work, sixfeet above the level of the upper water, in whichpassages are left for the salmon, leading into themachines. When they catch their salmon theystring them and suspend them, at first, in theriver. The women are employed in preparingand curing these fish ; for this purpose they appearto roast them first, and then suspend themon the poles that run along the beams of theirhouses, in which there are usually from three tofive hearths, the heat and smoke from whichcontribute, no doubt, to their proper curing.118 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.The salmon, indeed, frequents every sea, thearctic as well as the equatorial ; it is found evenin great lakes and inland seas, as the Caspian,into which it is even affirmed to make its wayby a subterranean channel from the PersianGulf it goes as far south as New Holland andthe Australian seas ; but, it is said never tohave been found in the Mediterranean, andappears to have been unknown to Aristotle.Pliny mentions it as a river fish, preferred to allmarine ones by the inhabitants of Gaul. Ittraverses the whole length of the largest rivers.It reaches Bohemia by the Elbe, Switzerlandby the Rhine, and the Cordilleras of Americaby the mighty Paragon, or River of Amazons,whose course is more than three thousand miles.In temperate climates the salmon quits the seaearly in the spring, when the waves are drivenby a strong wind against the river currents. Itenters the rivers of France in the beginning ofthe autumn, in September ; and in Kamtchatkaand North America still later. In some countriesthis is called the salmon-wind. They rush intorivers that are freest from ice, or where they arecarried by the highest tide, favored by the wind;they prefer those streams that are most shaded.They leave the sea in numerous bands, formedwith great regularity. The largest individual,which is usually a female, takes the lead, and isfollowed by others of the same sex, two and two,MIGRATIONS. 119each pair being at the distance of, from threeto six feet from the preceding one ; next comethe old, and after them the young males in thesame order.The noise they make in their transit, heardfrom a distance, sounds like a far off storm. Inthe heat of the sun and in tempests, they keepnear the bottom; at other times they swim alittle below the surface. In fair weather theymove slowly, sporting as they go at the surface,and wandering again and again from their directroute ; but when alarmed they dart forward withsuch rapidity that the eye can scarcely followthem. They employ only three months inascending to the sources of the Paragon, thecurrent of which is remarkably rapid, which isat the rate of nearly forty miles a day ; in asmooth stream or lake, their progress wouldincrease in a fourfold ratio. Their tail is a verypowerful organ, and its muscles have wonderfulenergy ; by placing it in their mouth they makeof it a very elastic spring, for letting it go withviolence they raise themselves in the air to theheight of, from twelve to fifteen feet, and soclear the cataract that impedes their course ; ifthey fail in their first attempt, they continuetheir efforts till they have accomplished it. Thefemale is stated to hollow out a long and deepexcavation in the gravelly bed of the river to120 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.receive her spawn, and when deposited to coverit up, but this admits of some doubt.Amongst the migrations of fishes, I must notneglect those that take place in consequence ofthe water in the ponds or pools that they inhabitbeing dried up : some of these are very extraordinary,and prove that when the Creator gavebeing to these animals, he foresaw the circumstancesin ! which they would be placed, andmercifully provided them with means of escapefrom dangers to which they were necessarilyexposed.In very dry summers, the fishes that inhabitthe above situations, are reduced often to thelast extremities, and endeavour to relieve themselvesby plunging, first their heads, and afterwardstheir whole bodies, in the mud to a considerabledepth ; and so, though many in suchseasons perish, some are preserved till a rainyone again supplies them with the element soindispensable to their life. Carp, it is known,may be kept and fed a very long time in nets inadamp cellar, a faculty which fits them for retainingtheir vitality when they bury themselvesat such a depth as to shelter them from theheat.But others, when reduced to this extremity,desert their native pool, and travel in search ofanother that is better supplied with water. Thishas long been known of eels, which wind, byMIGRATIONS. 121night, through the grass in search of water, whenso circumstanced. Dr. Hancock, in the ZoologicalJournal, gives an account of a species offish,called, by the Indians, the Flat-head Hassan,and belonging to a genus 1 of the family of theSilurian, which is instructed by its Creator,when the pools, in which they commonly reside,in very dry seasons, lose their water, to take theresolution of marching by land in search ofothers in which the water is not evaporated.These fish grow to about the length of a foot,and travel in large droves with this view ; theymove by night, and their motion is said to belikethat of the two-footed lizard. 2 A strongserrated arm constitutes the first ray of its pectoralfin. 3 Using this as a kind of foot, it shouldseem, they push themselves forwards, by meansof their elastic tail, moving nearly as fast as aman will leisurely walk. The strong plateswhich envelope their body, probably, facilitatetheir progress, in the same manner as thoseunder the body of serpents, which in some degreeperform the office of feet. It is affirmedby the Indians, that they are furnished with aninternal supply of water sufficient for their1 Dora. 2 Pipes.3 PLATE XII. FIG. 1. is a species of Callicthys, a fish of thesame habits with the Dora. FIG. 2. is the pectoral ray of anotherSilurian, which was dug up in a village near Bashan, butwhich is not a fossil bone.122 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.journey, which seems confirmed by the circumstancethat their bodies when taken outof the water, even if wiped dry with a cloth,become instantly moist again. Mr. Campbell,a friend of Dr. Hancock's, resident in Essequibo,once fell in with a drove of these animals,which were so numerous, that the Indians filledseveral baskets with them.Another migrating fish was found by thousandsin the ponds and all the fresh waters ofCarolina, by Boscc ; and as these pools are subjectto be dry in summer, the Creator has furnishedthis fish, as well as one of the flyingones, 1 by means of a membrane which closesits mouth, with the faculty of living out of water,and of travelling by leaps, to discover other pools.Boscc often amused himself with their motionswhen he had placed them on the ground, and hefound that they always direct themselves towardsthe nearest water, which they could not possiblysee, and which they must have discovered bysome internal index ; during their migrationsthey furnish food to numerous birds and reptiles.They belong to a genus of abdominal fishes, 2and are called swam pines. It is evident fromthis statement that these fishes are both fittedby their Creator, not only to exist, but also movealong out of the water, and are directed by the instinctimplanted by him, to seek the nearest pool1 Exoccetus. " Hydrargyra.MIGRATIONS. 12.3that contains that element; thus furnishing astrong proof of what are called compensating contrivances; neither of these fishes have legs, yetthe one can walk and the other leap withoutthem, by other means with which the SupremeIntelligence has endowed it. I may here observethat the serrated bone, or first ray of thepectoral fin, by the assistance of which the flatheadappears to move, is found in other Silurian,which leads to a conjecture that thesemay sometimes also move upon land.Another fish, 1 found by Daldorff, in Tranquilnot only creeps upon the shore, but evenclimbs the Fan palm 2 in pursuit of certain Crustaceanswhich form its food. The structure ofthis fish peculiarly fits it for the exercise of thisremarkable instinct. Its body is lubricated withslime which facilitates its progress over the bark,and amongst its chinks ; its gill-covers are armedwith numerous spines, by which, used as hands,it appears to suspend itself; turning its tail tothe left, and standing, as it were, on the littlespines of its anal fin, it endeavours to push itselfupwards by the expansion of its body, closingat the same time its gill-covers, that they maynot prevent its progress ; then expanding themagain it reaches a higher point ; thus, and bybending the spiny rays of its dorsal fins to rightand left, and fixing them in the bark, it contPercy sanders. 2 Morasses flabelliformis .124 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.tenues its journey upwards. The dorsal andanal fins can be folded up and received into acavity of the body.How exactly does this structure fit it for thisextraordinary instinct. These fins assist it incertainparts of its route, and, when not employed,can be packed up so as not to hinder itsprogress. The lobes of its gill-covers are sodivided and armed as to be employed together,or separately, as hands, for the suspension ofthe animal, till, by fixing its dorsal and analfins, it prepares itself to take another step ; allshowing the Supreme Intelligence and Almightyhand that planned and fabricated its structure,causing so many organs, each in its own way, toassist in promoting a common purpose. The fanpalm, in which this animal was taken by Daldorff,grew near the pool inhabited by these fishes. Hemakes no mention, however, of their object inthese terrestrial excursions ; but Dr. Vires observesthat it is for the sake of small Crustaceans,on which they feed.I shall name only one more animal thatmigrates for the great purpose of reproduction,and this is not the least interesting of them ; and,though it does not furnish so large a supply offood to the countries it passes through, as themigratory fishes, still it is useful in that respect :the animal I allude to is the land-crab.Several, indeed, of the crabs forsake the watersMIGRATIONS 125for a time, and return to them to cast theirspawn ; but the most celebrated of all is thatknown by the above appellation, and alluded tobyDr. Paley, under the name of the violet crab,and which is called by French the tourlourou. 1These crabs are natives of the West Indies andSouth America. In May and June, when therainy season takes place, their instinct impelsthem to seek the sea, that they may fulfil thegreat law of their Creator, and cast their spawn.They descend the mountains, which are theirusual abode, in such numbers, that the roadsand woods are covered with them. They feelan impulse so to steer their course, that theymay travel by the easiest descent, and arrivemost readily at the sea, the great object at whichthey aim. They resemble a vast army marchingin battle array, without breaking their ranks,following always a right line; they scale thehouses, and surmount every other obstacle thatlies in their way. They sometimes even getinto the houses, making a noise like that of rats,and when they enter the gardens they commitgreat devastations, destroying all their producewith their claws. They are said to halt twiceevery day, and to travel chiefly in the night.Arrived at the sea-shore, they are there reportedto bathe three or four different times ; when1 Gecarcinus carnifex.126 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.retiring to the neighbouring plains, or woods,they repose for some time, and then the femalesreturn to the water, and commit their eggs to thewaves. This business dispatched, they endeavourto regain, in the same order, the countrythey had left, and by the same route, but onlythe most vigorous can reach the mountains. Thegreater part are so weak and lean, that they areforced to stop to recruit their strength in the firstcountry they reach. When arrived again at theirhabitations, they have a new labour to undergo,for now is the time of their moult. They hidethemselves in their subterranean retreats for thispurpose, so that not a single one can be seen :they even stop up the mouth of their burrows.Some writers, however, affirm that they changetheir shells immediately after their opposition.The respiration of these land crabs, for a longtime,had puzzled comparative anatomists.They could not explain how animals, breathingby gills, could subsist so long out of the waterwithout these organs becoming useless. M. M.Bedouin, however, and Milne Edwards, clearedup the mystery by the discovery of a kind oftrough, formed by the folds which line and constitutethe parietes of the branchial cavity, anddestined to contain and preserve a certain quantityof water proper to moisten the gills. Onespecies 1 has more than one pocket, or vesicle,1 Gecarcinus Uca.MIGRATIONS. 127filled with that fluid. This trough exists in thehorsemen land-crabs, 1 but it is smaller, and aspongy mass furnishes the requisite moisture.The gills of the land-crabs, in other respects, donot differ from those of the tribe in general.God, when he formed these animals, would notseparate them from their kind by a differentmode of respiration, but by this compensatingcontrivance he fitted them for the circumstancesin which he decreed to place them, and for along sojourn out of the water.What is the great object of this law of theCreator, that impels them to seek, in many cases,a mountain retreat, at a distance from the ocean,which forms the liquid atmosphere fitted to thegreat body of the Crustaceans, has not hitherto,for want of sufficient and accurate details of theirhistory, been made fully obvious. When insectsleave the waters to become denizens of the earthand air, the object appears evidently an increaseof food, not only for terrestrial animals, whethermoving on the one or in the other, but to multiplyeven that of the inhabitants of the waters.When the day-flies 2 burst in such myriads fromthe banks of rivers which they inhabited in theirfirst state, the fishes are all in motion, and oftenjump from the water to catch the living flakesthat are every moment descending. When in the1 Ocypode. 2 Ephemera.128 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.water, or under it, these animals and the may-fliesare defended, or concealed from the fishes,and therefore are not so easy to come at; butnow is their harvest, and when they drop theireggs, they fall towards the stream, and it isdeemed a shower of manna.The same object brings the several kinds ofland-crabs at stated times to sea, to deposittheir eggs where their young may reach a certainmaturity, if not undergo a metamorphosis ;probably at this period there is an assemblage ofaquatic devourer of Crustaceans, to share in theexpected harvest. And during the route of themyriads that thus migrate to the sea, beasts andbirds, and man himself, all partake of the feastthus provided for them.If we give this subject of the migration ofanimals due consideration, and reflect whatwould be the consequence if no animals everchanged their quarters, we shall find abundantreason for thankfulness to the Almighty Fatherof the universe, for the care he has taken of hiswhole family, and of his creature man in particular,consulting not only his sustentation andthe gratification of his palate by multiplyingand varying his food, but also that of his othersenses, by the beauty, motions, and music of theanimals that are his summer or winter visitors :did the nightingale forsake our groves, theswallow our houses and gardens, the cod-fish,MIGRATIONS. 129mackarel, salmon, and herring oar seas, and allthe other animals that occasionally visit us theirseveral haunts, how vast would be the abstractionfrom the pleasure and comfort of our lives.By means of .these migrations, the profits andenjoyments derivable from the animal creationare also more equally divided, at one seasonvisiting the south, and enlivening their winter,and at another adding to the vernal and summerdelights of the inhabitant of the less genialregions of the north, and making up to him forthe privations of winter. Had the Creator sowilled, all these animals might have been organizedso as not to require a warmer or a colderclimate for the breeding or rearing of theiryoung : but his will was, that some of his bestgifts should thus oscillate, as it were, betweentwo points, that the benefit they conferred mightbe more widely distributed, and not become thesole property of the inhabitants of one climate :thus the swallow gladdens the sight both of theBriton and the African ; and the herring visitsthe coasts, and the salmon the rivers of everyregion of the globe. What can more stronglymark design, and the intention of an all-powerful,all-wise, and beneficent Being, than that sucha variety of animals should be so organizedand circumstanced as to be directed annually,by some pressing want, to seek distant climates,and, after a certain period, to return again to theirVOL. I. K130 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.former quarters ; and that this instinct should beproductive of so much good to mankind, and, atthe same time, be necessary, under its presentcircumstances, for the preservation or propagationof the species of these several animals.There is another view that may be taken ofthis subject, equally shewing the attention of theAlmighty Father to the wants of every descriptionof his creatures. The migrating tribes ofalmost every kind are attended by numerousbands of predaceous animals, which, as well asman, partake in the general harvest ; the bears,wolves, foxes, dogs, and, in tropical countries,other beasts of prey, hang on the flanks of thebands of emigrations, and capture and devour thestragglers. The vultures, and other carnivorousbirds, follow and share in the spoil : and the emigratingfishes are attended by whole tribes ofpredaceous birds and fishes, which thin theirnumbers before they are taken by the nets of thefisherman.I am next to say something on the local distributionof animals. By their local distribution, Imean their station in any given country. Underthis head they may be divided into terrestrial,amphibious, and aquatic.The local distribution of terrestrial animals isLOCAL* 131very diversified. Some inhabit the loftiest mountains,here the eagle builds its aerie, and thecondor 1 deposits its eggs on the bare rock ; andhere the chamois 2 often laughs at the efforts ofthe hunter, astonishing him by the ease withwhich it scours over the rocks, or with whichit ascends or descends the most inaccessibleprecipices.Some animals, that in high latitudes are foundin the plains, in a warmer atmosphere seek themountains. Of this description is the beautifulApollo butterfly, 3 which, in Sweden is very commonin the country and gardens about Psal,while in France it is found only on mountainsbetween three and four thousand feet above thelevel of the sea. I received very fine specimenscollected by a friend in the Pyrenees. Thecommon viper 4 also, which in northern Europeis found in the plains, in southern is found onlyon Alpine or Subalpine mountains.It has been observed by an ingenious andlearned writer, that the terrestrial globe seemsto be formed of two immense mountains, setbase to base at the equator, and that upon eachof these hemispheres the vegetables and animalsare generally placed in parallel zones, according1 Sarcorhamphus Gryllus. ~ Antilope Rupicapra.3 Parnassus Apollo. * Colder beaus.132 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.to the degree of heat or cold. The exceptions tothis rule, he farther observes, are easy to be appreciated,and confirm its truth, since the mountains,the various elevations and depressions ofthe country, which even under the same parallelmodify the ordinary temperature, produce vegetables,and often animals, analogous to theirseveral degrees of heat or cold. The lofty mountainsin tropical countries, exhibit from their baseto their snow-clad summits, the same gradationas these hemispheres present in going from theequator towards the poles.The majority, however, of animals do notascend such heights, but seek their subsistencein the plains, and less elevated regions ; yet herea considerable difference obtains according tothe nature of the soil and country. The vastsandy desarts of Africa and Asia, the Steppes ofTartary, the Llanos and Pampas of South Americahave their peculiar population ; in the formerthe camel, and his master the Arab, whosegreat wealth he constitutes, are indigenous ; inthe latter the horse and the Tartar who rides andeats him ; or the Hispano American, and theherds of horses and oxen, returned to their wildand primitive type, who snares them with hislasso, and reduces them again to the yoke of man.Numerous also are the peculiar animal productionsto which different soils afford subsistence.The sea-shore, sandy and barren wastes, woodsLOCAL. 133and forests, arable lands, pasture, meadow andmarsh, all are thus distinguished ; every plantalmost is inhabited by insects appropriated toit,every bird has its peculiar parasite or louse ; land not only are the living animals so infested,fout their carcasses are bequeathed to a numerousand varied army of dissenters, who soonreduce them to a naked skeleton ; nay, theirvery excrements become the habitation of thegrubs of sundry kinds of beetles and flies.But not only is the surface of the earth and itsvegetable clothing, thickly peopled with animals,but many, even quadrupeds and reptiles, as wellas insects and worms, are subterranean, and seekfor concealment in dens, caves arid caverns, ormake for themselves burrows and tortuous pathsat various depths under the soil, or seek forsafety and shelter, by lurking under stones orclods, and all the dark places of the earth.To other animals, in order to pass graduallyfrom such as are purely terrestrial, to those thatare aquatic, Providence has given the privilegeto frequent both the earth and the water ; someof which may be regarded as belonging to theformer, and frequenting the latter, as water fowlof various kinds, the amphibious rat, 2 the architectbeaver, 3 many reptiles, and some insects ;others again as belonging to the latter, and fretNinus. * Lcmmus amphibious. 3 Castor Fiber.134 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.hunting the former ; for instance, the sea-ottersand the different kinds of seal 2 and morse, 3 theturtle, 4 the penguin, 5 several insects, 6 and thewater-newts. 7 Other amphibious animals, ifthey may be so called, are aquatic at one periodof their life, and terrestrial at another ; this isparticularly exemplified in some insects, thus thegrubs of water-beetles, 8 those of dragon-flies, 9may-flies, 10 ephemeral-flies, 11 water-moths, 12 gnatsor mosquitos, 13 and several other two-winged flies,live in the water, while the perfect insect iseither amphibious as the beetle, or terrestrial asthe remainder.But no part of this terraqueous globe is morefully peopled, and with a greater variety anddiversity of beautiful, or strange, or monstrousforms, than the waters, from the infinite ocean tothe most insignificant pool or puddle. Every partand portion of the supposed element of water ;nay, almost every drop of that fluid teems withlife. Thousands of aquatic species are known,but myriads of myriads never have been seenand never will be seen by the eye of man.1 Hydra marina. 2 PhocisTrichechus. 4 Chelonia Midas.5 Aptenodytes. 6 Dyticus, Grins, Tanagra, &c.7 Salamander aquatic. 8 DyticidcE,lJydrophilid(Z, Gyrinidce.9 Libelling. I0 Trichoptera.11 Ephemeridce. 12 Hydrocampa.13 Culex.LOCAL. 135Amongst those that inhabit fluids, none aremore wonderful than those that are termed In-furies; 1 because they are usually found in infusionsof various substances, &c. ; when dry,these animals lose all signs of life, but upon immersion,even after the lapse of years, they immediatelyawake from their torpor and begin tomove briskly about. Even the air, according toSpallanzani, seems to contain the germes oreggs of these infinitesimals of creation, so thatwe swallow them when we breathe, as well aswhen we drink.With respect to animals more entirely aquatic,some inhabit, as the majority of sea-fishes andanimals, salt waters only, some salt at one timeand fresh at another, as the species of the salmongenus, the sturgeon, &c. ; and some frequentbrackish waters, as some flat-fish, and shell-fish.The bed of the mighty ocean is not onlyplanted with a variety of herbs, which afford pastureto many of its animal inhabitants, but it hasother productions which represent a forest oftrees and shrubs, and are, strictly speaking, thefirst members of the zoological world, connectingit with the vegetable ; these are denominatedZoophytes or animal plants, and Polypes (polypus.This last name has been adopted fromAristotle ; with him however and the ancients,1 Infusoria, Acrita, Austria, Morphia, Microscopic.136 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.it is evidently used to designate the Argonaut 1and Nautilus of the moderns, and also to includesome terrestrial shells. The Zoophytes howeverare not confined to the ocean, every rivulet, andstagnant ditch or pool affords to some kinds,more commonly denominated Polypes, and alsoto some sponges, their destined habitation. Aninfinite army of shell-fish, whether multi valve,bivalve, or univalve, also cover the bed of theocean, or move in its waters, and some dancegaily on its surface with expanded sails, or dashingoars when tempted by fair weather.From this brief view of the local distribution ofanimals and their various haunts, we see the careof Divine Providence, that no place, however,at first sight, apparently unfit, might be withoutits animal as well as vegetable population : ifthe hard rock is clothed with a lichen, thelichen has its inhabitant : and that inhabitant,besides affording an appropriate food to the birdthat alights upon the rock, or some parasite thatlias been hatched in or upon its own body,assists in forming a soil upon it. There isno place so horrible and fetid from unclean andputrid substances, that is not cleansed and purifiedby some animals that are either its constantor nomadic inhabitants. Thus life, a life Argonauts.LOCAL. 137tended in most cases, if not all, with some enjoyment,swarms every where in the air, in theearth, under the earth, in the waters there is noplace in which the will of an Almighty Creatoris not executed by some being that hath animallife. What Power is manifested in the organizationand structure of these infinite hosts of existences! what Wisdom in their adaptation to theirseveral functions ! and what Goodness and stupendousLove in that universal action upon allthese different and often discordant creaturescompelling them, while they are gratifying theirown appetites or passions, and following the leadof their several instincts, to promote the good ofthe whole system, combining into harmony almostuniversal discord, and out of seeming death anddestruction bringing forth life and health anduniversal joy ! He who, as an ancient writerspeaks, "Contains all things," 1 can alone thusact upon all things, and direct them in all theirways to acknowledge him by the accomplishmentof each wise and beneficent purpose of hiswill. Philo Judaeus, in his book upon agriculture,2 speaking of those words of the Psalmist,The Lord is my shepherd, therefore can I lacknothing" has the following sublime idea, illustrativeof this subject. " God, like a shepherd1 Hennas.2 Ilfpi ycwpymjr. 152. A. Ed. Col. Allow.138 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.and king, leads, according to right and law, theearth, and the water, and the air, and the fire,and whatever plants or animals are therein,things mortal and things divine ; the physicalstructure also of the heavens, and the circuit ofthe sun and moon ; the revolutions and harmoniouschoirs of the other stars ; placing overthem his right Word the first born Son, who hathinherited the care of this Holy Flock, as theViceroy of a mighty King."CHAPTER III.Functions and Instincts of Animals.HAVING, in the last chapter, stated how the dispersionand distribution of animals, under theDivine superintendence and direction, probablytook place after the Deluge ; and having likewiseconsidered those temporary changes ofplace, either casual or periodical, which are stillin operation, I shall next endeavour to give ageneral sketch of the animal kingdom, itsclasses and larger groups, and so much of theirhistory, habits, and instincts, as may be necessaryto indicate their several functions and officesin the general plan of creation, so as to illustratemore strikingly the GOODNESS that willed, theFUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS. 139WISDOM that planned, and the POWER that executedthe wondrous whole ; so that each in itsplace and station, by employing the facultiesand organs, with which he has gifted it, inaccomplishing his will, praises, though unconsciously,its Almighty and Beneficent Creator,thus loudly calling upon man, the rational headof the creation, to take up the strain and leadthe general choir.Before I descend to particulars, I must say afew words upon the general functions of theanimal kingdom. These, like Janus, have adouble aspect; on one side they affect thevegetable world, and on the other their ownbody.There is a singular contrast and contrarietybetween the majority of animals and vegetables.The head of the animal and the root or base ofthe vegetable perform the same office, that ofcollecting and absorbing the nutriment of each.The animal derives this nutriment from organicmatter, the vegetable from inorganic. The plantgives oxygen to the heaven, and falling leavesand other matters to the earth. The animalgives nitrogen to the former, and the rejectsof its food to the latter. The most beautifuland admired, and odorous and elevatedparts of the plant are its reproductive organsand their appendages, while in the animal theyare the very reverse of this.140 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.But, in all this, we see the wisdom and forethoughtof the Creator. We see how exactly,by this mutual inversion, each class of beings isfitted for its station and functions. The plantto take root in, invest and ornament the earth,and keep the atmosphere pure by a constantsupply of vital air ; the animal to browse and trimthe vegetable, and by checking its luxuriancepromote its welfare, to furnish it with a productcalculated for its health and necessary to itsexistence ; and by the manure, various in kindas the animals themselves, which it produces,supplying to the earth fresh pabulum for itsvegetable tribes, and making good what it lostby the exhaustion, occasioned by the infinitemyriads that, investing it on all sides like agarment, derive their nutriment from it, someplunging deep, and others, as it were, skimmingthe surface: if we contrast this with thereturns they make, we shall be convinced that,in this case, the expenditure would vastly exceedthe income, and that a class of beings wasessentially necessary as a counterpoise, which,by taking little or nothing immediately fromthe soil, at the same time that they added to it,some in a greater and some in a less degree,might afford a sufficient supply of those principleswhich are indispensably requisite for thedue nutriment and development of the variousmembers of the vegetable kingdom, and thusFUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS. 141maintain an equilibrium, and make good thedeficiency just stated.There is another function which is devolvedupon animals with respect to the vegetablekingdom ; to keep the members of it within duelimits, and to hinder them from encroaching toomuch upon each other. All organised beingshave a natural tendency to increase and multiply; and while there is space this tendency isbeneficial ; but when plants or animals exceedcertain limits, they stand in each other's way,and prevent all further growth or healthy progress.The herbivorous animals, in variousways, serve as a countercheck to this tendency,and keep the vegetable tribes from encroachingtoo much upon each other. As I have detailed theeffects of this when I spoke of the ravages of thelocusts, and shall have occasion again to noticeit, I shall not now enlarge further upon it.I am next to consider another general functionof animals, or the effects they produce upon theirown body : and here the reason just alluded to,their constant tendency to multiply so as to beinjurious to each other, and also to vegetableproductions, especially those that are importantto man or beast, which in the present state ofthings is so constantly recurring, renders itnecessary that some bounds should be set totheir increase, which Providence effects by lettingthem loose against each other. The great142 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.object of the Creator is the maintenance of thewhole system of creation in order and beauty,and this he is pleased to accomplish, not alwaysby the concord but by the seeming discord of theagents he employs.When we take a first view of nature we arestruck by a scene which seems to be one ofuniversal conflict, for the very heavens appearnot clear from the charge : the philosopher whostudies them tells us of antagonist powers, thatare perpetually striving with each other, the oneto absorb all things in a common centre, theother to dissever them, and scatter them in illimitablespace, and when we turn to the earth,what a scene of destruction is before us ! Theking of the terrestrial globe, man, constantlyengaged in a struggle with his fellow man, oftenlaying waste the earth, slaughtering its inhabitants,and deforming its productions his subjectsof the animal kingdom following the example oftheir master, and pitilessly destroying eachother the strong oppressing the weak, andmost seeming bent to annihilate the races towhich they are opposed ; so that, humanlyspeaking, in the lapse of ages, we might expectthat one species of animals would be annihilatedafter another, till the whole were obliteratedfrom the face of creation, and the sublime languageof the prophet literally verified ; " /beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without, formFUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS. 143and void ; and the heavens, and they had no light.I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, andall the hills moved lightly. 1 beheld, and, lo,there was no man, and all the birds of the airwere fled."But if, with our spirits depressed, by the prospectof so universal a scene of mutual struggles anddestruction, we listen again to the philosopher,he will tell us that the ceaseless struggle of theantagonist powers of the heavens prevents, insteadof causing disorder and confusion, that by thepowerful and mutual counteraction of thesemighty opponents, all the heavenly bodies of oursystem are prevented from rushing to the centre,or being driven, dispersed into their atoms,beyond the Jlammantia iceni mundi ; that thustheir annual and diurnal revolutions are maintained,that each observes its appointed course,keeps its assigned station, and ministers to thegood and well-being of the whole system. Ifthen we turn our view again to the earth, andtake a nearer survey of things if we considerthe present tendency to multiply, beyond measure,of all things that have life, we shall soonbe convinced that, unless this tendency wasmet by some check, the world of animated beingswould be perpetually encroaching upon eachother, and would finally perish for want of sufficientfood ; and that the partial evils inflictedby one individual or one class upon another, toborrow a term from the Political Economist,144 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.proportions the demand to the supply ; that thusboth vegetables arid animals are so accuratelydistributed, weighed so nicely against each other,as never to go a step beyond what God decrees,and what is most beneficial to the whole system ;and that the actual number of every kind bearsdue relation to the work it has to do ; and, uponcloser inquiry, we find, that though since thecreation, probably in consequence of the greatchange in the moral state of the world, superinducingphysical changes also, some species nolonger necessary may have perished, yet that, ingeneral, they have maintained their ground fromageto age, in spite of the attacks of the greatarmy of destroyers. To maintain things in thisstate, thus to " order all things in measure, number,and weight" as the wise man speaks, tocause all so to harmonize, and so out of deathand destruction to bring forth life, indicatesstill more strongly the constant and wise superintendence,and powerful arm of a watchfulProvidence, and demonstrates irrefragably thatthere is a Great Being constantly at work, eithermediately or immediately, to produce effectsthat, without his constant superintendence andintervention, could never take place. And thus,as sings the bard of Twickenham,All nature is but art unknown to thee,All chance direction which thou canst not see,All discord harmony not understood,All partial evil, universal good."CHAPTER IV.Functions and Instincts of the Industry Animals.SINCE at the original creation of the animal kingdom,it was the will of the Supreme Being tobegin at the foot of the scale and to terminatewith man, whom he placed at its summit, thusmaking a gradual progress towards the mostperfect being it was his will to create, and endingwith him : so I think it will best manifest hispower and perfections if I endeavour to trace outthe footsteps of the Deity in the same direction ;and instead of beginning, as is usually done bysystematical writers, with the highest grade ofanimals, if I ascend from the lowest.Our first inquiry must be what are theselowest animals? And are there any organizedbodies that partake of two natures, that are eitheranimal at one period of their existence and vegetableat another, or else are partly animal andpartly vegetable? These doubtful forms must besoughtfor amongst what have been denominatedfirst-plants l and first-animals ; 2 amongst theformer is a certain genus or tribe 3 of plants,1 Protophyta. a Protozoa. 3 Oscillatorice. Vouch.VOL. I. L146 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.which are distinguished not only by their simplestructure, but also by an oscillatory movementwhich seems to connect them, in some degree,with the animal kingdom. When collected inmasses they resemble a piece of green velvet.Some cover considerable spots in moist places ;others live in the water, either fixed to substancescontained in it, or floating on the surface.They are generally based on a mucilaginoussubstance, the remains of those that, having fulfilledtheir functions, are become a caput mortuum.The filaments of which the living plant iscomposed continually oscillate from right to left,or from left to right, but very irregularly, somegoing in one direction, others in another ; someremaining stationary while others continue inmotion.Professor Garth inclines to the opinion thatthese oscillating plants owe their existence todifferent species of animalcules, which at firstswim about as animals, and afterwards fix themselvesas plants. This opinion has been adoptedby others ; and lately Mr. Unger has stated thathe has seen animated particles separate from theparent plant, in a few hours converted into globulesof vegetable matter, which subsequentlybecame plants perfectly similar to the individualfrom which they were produced.But surely the motions of these seeds orgermes, may be merely mechanical, and may beINFUSORIES. 147necessary to enable them properly to fix themselves,somewhat analogous to those mechanicalcontrivances by which the seeds of numerousplants, as those of the dandelion and crossbill,are transported to a distance and enabled toenter the soil and fix themselves in it.That any creature should begin life as ananimal and end it as a plant seems to contradictthe general analogy of creation, and requiresmuch stronger proofs than appear to have beenadduced in the present case, before it can beadmitted. The motions of the oscillating plantsare not very different from those of the staminaof some, and of the leaves of others, as theHedysarum gyrans ; yet Adamson has provedthat the vibrations of the filaments are the sameboth in hot and cold weather, and that theaquatic species are equally sensible with theterrestrial, therefore the movement can scarcelybe caused by the temperature. But as analogousmotions were observed by Mr. Brown inspherical and other molecules obtained fromvegetables, it is evident that such motions donot necessarily indicate an animal, but only akind of attraction and repulsion produced by anuncertain cause. Another argument proves theirvegetable nature, these plants give out oxygen,whereas if they were animals they would absorboxygen and give out azote.Professor Garth illustrates his opinion just148 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.stated by the following fanciful allusion. Whenthus fixed he considers these beings as no longerhaving any animal life, but as preserving theappearance of it, " Like those men of Plato,"adds he, " agitated by eternal regret with whichthe remembrance of a happy life, the sweetsof which they formerly tasted, inspires them ;always oscillating, never tranquil, they seemaiming at the recovery of that happy life whichthey have lost." The locomotion, however, ofthe germes of these Hydrophytes, and theiroscillatory movements when fixed, indicate atleast a semblance of animality, and an approachto the confines of the animal kingdom.Leaving, therefore, these doubtful forms, ashaving no just claim to be considered as animals,I shall now proceed to those whose rightto that title is generally acknowledged. Andhere two very different tribes start up and prefertheir claim to be first considered ; the Industries,namely, and those which have been calledPolypes and Zoophytes. But since the first ofthese two classes, by means of one of its tribes, asits great oracle, Ehrenberg, remarks, approachesthe oscillating plants, I shall consider it as thebasis on which the Deity has built the animalkingdom. Indeed, though the Polypes at firstsight appear most to resemble the higher plants,in their general configuration, the Industries, aswell as coming nearer to the lowest by some ofINFUSORIES. 149their members, in others exhibit no slight analogyto seeds.Of all the groups of animals those of the leastconsequence, one would think, must be thosethat for the most part escape the inquiring eyeunless aided by a microscope. The industries,or as they have been also called animalcules,microscopic animals, acrita or indiscernibles,morphia or without form, are of this description.These wonderful little creatures, though theyare every where dispersed, remain like seeds,without apparent life or motion, perhaps afteranimation has been suspended for years, tillthey come in contact with some fluid, when theyare immediately reanimated, move about in variousdirections, absorb their proper nutrimentand exercise their reproductive powers accordingto the law of their several natures. Yet theselittle animals, though in some respects treyexhibit no slight analogy to vegetables, are notonly distinguished from them by their irritability,but likewise by their organization, and powers oflocomotion and voluntary action. Their modeof reproduction, however, is not far removedfrom that of some vegetables ; they arc spontaneouslydivisible, some longitudinally and otherstransversely, and these cuttings, if they may beso called, as in the Hydra or common Polype,become separate animals. They are also propagatedby germes, and some appear to be vivianFUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.rous. The species of Vibrio found in diseasedwheat by M. Bauer is oviparous, as is evidentfrom his observations and admirable figures.Lamarck indeed regards them as having novolition, as taking their food by absorption likeplants ; as being without any mouth, or internalorgan ; in a word, as transparent gelatinousmasses, whose motions are determined not bytheir will, but by the action of the medium inwhich they move. That they have neither head,eyes, muscles, vessels, nerves, nor indeed anyparticular determinable organ, whether for respiration,generation, or even digestion. On accountof these supposed negative characters, they werecalled by De Blainville, Austria, or stomacher,^s having no intestines ; but Ehrenberg, who hasstudied them in almost every climate, has discovered,by keeping them in coloured waters,they are not the simple animals that La-andothers supposed, and that almost allhave a mouth and digestive organs, and that numbersof them have many stomachs. Spallanzani,and other writers that preceded Lamarck, hadobserved that their motions evidently indicatedvolition ; this appeared from their avoiding eachother and obstacles in their way ; from theirchanging their direction and going faster orslower as occasion required ; from their passingsuddenly from a state of rest to motion withoutany external impulse ; from their darting eagerlyINFUSORIES. 151at particles of infused substances ; from theirincessantly revolving on themselves without achange of place ; from their course against thecurrent ; and from their crowding to shallowplaces of the fluid in which they are : each speciesseems also to exhibit a peculiar kind of instinct.Lamarck thinks all this delusion proceedingfrom errors in judgment, and the result of prejudicesinducing people readily to believe whataccords with their persuasions. But to apply thisremark to such observers as Spallanzani, &c., isdrawing rather largely on the credulity of hisreaders, who might very j justly change the tablesand apply it to himself, who is certainly as muchchained by system as any one can be. Admittingthat the observations of Spallanzani juststated record facts, it appears clearly to followfrom them that these animals have volition, andtherefore cannot properly be denominated apathetic,or insensible. The fact that they almostall have a mouth and a digestive system ; manyof them eyes, and some rudiments of a nervousone, implies a degree, more or less, of sensationin them all, and consequently that theyhave all, whether it be molecular and diffused intheir substance, or confined to particular organs,I say that they have all a nervous influence andexcitement sufficient for their several wants, correspondingwith their several natures.152 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.These minim animals may be said almost tobe universally dispersed ; they inhabit the sea,the rivers, and other waters ; are supposed to floatin the air ; they are found in the blood and urine ;in the tartar of the teeth ; in animal substances ;in vinegar ; in paste ; in vegetable substances ;in fruits, seeds, and grain ; in sand ; amongsttiles ; in wells ; on mountains, &c. Their numbersare infinite ; hundreds of thousands maybeseen in a single drop of water ; their minutenessis extreme, some being not more than sowpart of a line in length, and yet these atoms ofanimals have a mouth and several stomachs.Let a man, says Dalzell, the translator ofSpallanzani, conceive himself in a momentconveyed to a region where the properties, andthe figure and motions of every animal areunknown. The amazing varieties of thesewill first attract his attention. One is a longslender line ; another an eel or serpent ; someare circular, elliptical, or triangular ; one is athin flat plate ; another like a number of reticulatedseeds ; several have a long tail, almostinvisible; or their posterior part is terminatedby two robust horns ; one is like a funnel ;another like a bell, or cannot be referred toany object familiar to our senses. Certainanimalcules can change their figure at pleasure:1 sometimes they are extended to immo-1 PLATE I. FIG. 3.Industries. 153derate length, then almost contracted to nothing ;sometimes they are curved like a leech, orcoiled like a snake ; sometimes they are inflated,at others flaccid ; some are opaque whileothers are scarcely visible from their extremetransparence. No less singular is the variety oftheir motions ; several swim with the velocityof an arrow, so that the eye can scarcely followthem ; others appear to drag their body alongwith difficulty, and move like the leech ; andothers seem to exist in perpetual rest ; one willrevolve on its centre, or the anterior part of itshead ; others move by undulations, leaps, oscillations,or successive gyrations ; in short, thereis no kind of animal motion, or other mode ofprogression, that is not practised by animalcules.Their organs are equally various. Some appearto take their food by absorption, having nomouth, to this tribe belong what have beencalled vinegar eels ; others have a mouth andseveral stomachs, but no orifice for the transmissionof their excrements; others, again,have both a mouth and anal passage, and whatis wonderful, in such minute creatures, sometimesas many as forty or fifty stomachs ; 1 thoughmany are without eyes, others are furnishedwith these useful organs, some having one,others two, others three, and others four ; some1 Leucophrys, Enchelis, &c.154 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.have processes resembling legs. In the secondClass of these animals, the Rotatories, to whichthe wheel-animalcules belong, the internal organizationapproaches to that of the higherclasses, for they exhibit the rudiments of anervous system ; their alimentary canal is simple ;they have a branching dorsal vessel, but withouta systole and diastole ; their pharynx is usuallyfurnished with mandibles, which are sometimesarmed with teeth. The mouth of the majority,especially amongst the oratories, is fringed withray-like bristles, which Cuvier thinks are connectedw r with their respiration. This circumstanceof a circle of rays surrounding the oralorifice, is found in the polypes and several otheranimals of a higher grade. Their use in thepresent instance, I speak more particularly ofthe wheel-animalcules, is by their rotation toproduce a current in the water to the mouth ofthe animal, bringing with it the still more minutebeings which constitute its food.These invisible inhabitants of the visibleworld created an early interest in inquisitiveminds; Dr. Henry Power, and after him thecelebrated Hooke, about the middle of the seventeenthcentury, or earlier, noticed, what werecalled vinegar eels. 1 Sir E. King, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, described some expertVibrio Anguilla.INFUSORIES. 155ments on the animalcules found in pepper water ;and, subsequently, Mr. Harris made observationsupon a variety of these minute creatures.The subject was afterwards taken upby various writers, both here and on the continent.Amongst these none was more eminentthan Spallanzani. O. F. Miller, who seems tohave been the first who treated the subject systematically,embodied these animals in a Classby the name of Industries. 1 He was followedby Bruguiere and Lamarck, who divided it intoOrders and Sections. But the system of thesezoologists has for the most part been set asideby Ehrenberg, a Prussian naturalist, before-mentioned,who devoted ten years of his life to theinvestigation of these animals, for which he wasparticularly qualified by his previous studies andemployment, the anatomy of the Molluscans ofthe Red Sea, by which he had been accustomedto the use of microscopes and micrometers. Hisresearches on the Industries, during Baron deHumboldt's last journey, extend to more thanfifty degrees of longitude, and fourteen degreesof latitude ; he went as far as Dongola in Africa,and the Altar mountains in Asia, and examinedthese animals in a great variety of situations. Hefound them on Mount Sinai ; swarms of variousspecies in the wells of the Oasis of Jupiter1 Infusoria.150 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Ammon ; and at a considerable depth in someSiberian mines, in places entirely deprived oflight.He considers them, it should seem, as forminga Sub-kingdom, which he denominates Plant-animals.1 This sub-kingdom he divides into twoClasses. The first, from the number of stomachs, 8with which the genera belonging to it are furnished,he names, Polygastrica, or many-stomacher,probably, to contrast with De Blainville'sname before-mentioned. The second class hecalls Rotatories, 3 consisting of the ciliated Polypesof Lamarck ; 4 each of these classes he subdividesinto two parallel orders, the first containing thosethat are naked, and the second those that arelocated, 5 or covered with some kind of shell.In the first of these classes, the Polygastrics,the animals recede further from the organizationof the higher tribes, and approach nearer tothat of vegetables ; but in the second, as I beforeobserved, rudiments of the organization of thosetribes make their appearance. Many of theformer are known to derive their nutriment fromvegetable substances, but what the majoritysubsist upon is not certainly known ; but thelatter class, the Rotatories, are ascertained to bepredaceous, as above stated. Their mode of1 Photo-zoa. 2 PLATE I. FIG. 1.3 Rotatory, 4 PLATE I. FIG. 2.5 See Appendix, note 20.INFUSORIES. 157drawing their corpuscular food within the vortexof their mouth is thus amusingly illustrated bySpallanzani. As a certain species of whale,says he, (sic ignis cow porter e para solent) afterhaving driven shoals of herrings into a bay orstrait, by a blow of its tail produces a whirlpoolof vast extent and great rapidity, which drawsthe herrings into its vortex ; the monster thenpresenting its open mouth, the herrings are precipitatedinto its throat, and it is soon satiated :so the carnivorous Industries produce a vortex bytheir tentacles, and satisfy their appetite.I have been more diffuse upon the history ofthe animals whose functions in nature I am nextto consider, because to them in a more particularmanner, applies Pliny's observation with regardto insects. In his tarn parvis, atque tarn nullus,qiice ratio, quanta vis, quam inextricabilisperfectio!In nothing is the power and wisdom of theirAlmighty Author more signally conspicuous. Organizationso complex, and life, and spontaneousmotion, and appetite, and means to satisfyit, and digestion, and nutrition, and powers ofreproduction in animals of such infinite minuteness! Who can believe it ? Yet so it is, and thateach of these should be varied in the differenttribes and genera that these less than the leastof all the creatures that present themselves tothe observation of mankind, and which till withina century or two were not suspected to exist, should158 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.out-number beyond all statement of numbers, allthe other animals together that people the wholeglobe, that they should probably enter into usand circulate in our blood, nestle between ourteeth, be busy every where, and perceived nowhere,till the invention of the microscope drewaside the veil between us and these entities, andwe saw how God had filled all things with life,and had based the animal kingdom upon livingatoms, as well as formed the earth and the worldof inert ones. But to us the wondrous spectacleis seen and known, only in part ; for those thatstill escape all our methods of assisting sight, andremain members of the invisible world, mayprobably far exceed those that we know.We may conclude that this vast, or rather infinite,host of animalcules was not created merelyto be born and die ; was not sown, as it were,over every part of the earth's surface, lurking inseeds, and other vegetable and animal substances,till coming into contact with fluid matter of whateverdescription it starts into life, and swarmingin the ocean, and its tributary streams ; it wasnot thus dispersed every where, either alive, orina state to revive and live, but for some greatpurpose, for which its organization, structure andstation amongst animals, particularly adapt it.With respect to its immediate action upon thevegetable and animal kingdoms, it has been ascertained,as to many species, that they ascendINFUSORIES. 159with the sap in vegetables, 1 and are found in theblood and excretions of animals, 2 who knows butthey may act an important part in the animalframe ; somewhat similar to what devolves uponthe larves of certain insects, with regard to stagnantwaters, they may be curators where theyare thus employed, and contribute to preserve ahealthy action. It is true, as far as vegetablesare concerned, especially grain, they appear todestroy, where they take up their residence, butwhen we discover the same or similar species, insour paste or vinegar, they seem destined to consumesubstances that cease to be wholesome ; andin fact, in all fluids, in which they usually soabound, they may be destined to fulfil a similaroffice, and it is a remarkable circumstance intheir history confirmatory of this idea : thatthese animals, though animation in them isoften suspended for a long time ; when theyswarm in infusions, having fulfilled their office,perish in a few days.It is probable that in the waters of our globean infinity of animal and vegetable moleculesare suspended, that are too minute to form thefood of even the lowest and most minute animalsi Mr. Bauer found Vibrio Tritiri, in the stalk as well as in theear and grain of plants of wheat, which were raised from seedsinoculated with it. Phil. Trans. 1823. 3.- See above, p. 152.1GO FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.of the visible creation, and therefore an infinitehost of invisibles was necessary to remove themas nuisances.But the principal point, and that in whichtheir utility most evidently appears, is their furnishinga principal portion of the food of innumerableanimals of a higher order than themselves.Those infinite armies and forests of locomotiveand fixed Polypes, that give to the oceanone of the features that distinguish earth, havetheir mouths surrounded with tentacles, whenexpanded assuming the appearance of so manyblossoms, with these they collect their food,which, amongst the more minute ones, consistsoften of our Industries. A single stem ofthese compound animals, having often innumerableoscula or mouths, requires a vast supply offood ; others equally compound, as the Ascidiansor Lyons, by alternately absorbing and expellingthe sea water, draw in with it a supply of animalfood, consisting, in part, of the creatures in question,which abound in the oceanic waters ; someof these have a common organ for this purpose,and in others each individual of the system isfitted with one ; the Molluscans and an infinityof the smaller inhabitants of the ocean, doubtlessalso derive a considerable portion of theirnutriment from them, the minute Crustaceansprobably do the same, and many insects,whose larvae inhabit the waters, some by pro-industries.161during a vortex like the oratories, 1 thus find anabundant supply to carry them to their intermediatestate. But not only do these creaturesfurnish the more minute animals that inhabitthe waters, with a considerable portion of theirfood, but, it should seem, even some of thosethat are of a higher grade, and larger stature.Whoever has been in the habit of keeping goldand silver fish, 2 in glass or other vessels, is awarethat they require no other food than a freshsupply of water every second or third day.Their nutriment therefore must be derivedfrom what they find in the water. In this mayoften be seen minute Branchiopods swimminghere and there, sometimes with a bundle of eggsappended to each side : but these are notsufficiently numerous to form the whole of theirfood, the water must therefore contain othernutritive substances which may contribute totheir subsistence, and as it is known that variousindustry animalcules inhabit it, we may concludethat they are inserted in their bill of fare. Ithas been observed by an eminent writer,speaking of the gold fish, "The water, whencare is taken to renew it frequently, appears sufficientfor the nutriment of these fishes duringmany months ; but it should be considered thatthough this water appears to us very pure,1 Culex, Stratyomis, &c. 2 Cyprus aratus.VOL. I. M162 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.it always contains a multitude of animalculesand very minute plants, which the fishes arecontinually swallowing."When Creative Wisdom covered the earthwith plants, and peopled it with animals, he laidthe foundations of the vegetable and animalkingdoms with such as were most easily convertibleinto nutriment for the tribes immediatelyabove them. The first plants and thefirst animals are scarcely more than animatedmolecules, 1 and appear analogues of each other ;and those above them in each kingdom representjointed fibrils. 2 It is singular and worthyof notice, that the Creator after the creationof inanimate matter, probably first imparted theliving principle to bodies of the same formwith the molecules and fibrils into which thatmatter is resolvable, thus uniting, by commoncharacters, things essentially distinct, and preservingunbroken that wonderful chain whichlinks together all created things.Every body, who has eyes, is aware, thatvegetation takes place upon almost everysubstance, upon the bark of trees, upon nakedrocks, upon brick walls and tiled roofs, and evenupon glass when not constantly cleaned. Thefirst plants, that take on these their station,1 For instance, Globulina and Monas.2 Qscillatoria and Vibrio. See Appendix, noteInfusoria. 163usually look like green or yellow powder, whenthey decay forming a little soil, in which othersmore conspicuous find sufficient nutriment, and soonesucceeds another till a sufficient portion of soilcovers the rock, &c. to afford the means of lifeand growth to more perfect plants, and often toarborescent ones. An analogous process takesplace in the water. The matiere verte of Frenchauthors makes its appearance, and other Hydro-plates,in conjunction with the Industries, formas it were a first soil for the support and maintenanceof animal life, both for those whichderive their nutriment from vegetables, andthose that feed on beings of their own class.Thus a maintenance is provided for higher forms,and, at last, for the highest ; and a table isspread, both on the earth and in the waters, forevery living thing, from that which the eye cannotdiscover, to man, the head and king of all.How wonderful and adorable is that AlmightyBeing, who thus made all things dependant uponeach other, and based the visible world, in thethree great departments into which we see itdivided, upon an invisible basis, and in whichcohesion and life are maintained by those powerswhich God has placed as rulers in the physicalworld, and by which he still acts upon the universeof existences.CHAPTER V.Functions and Instincts. Polypes.THE tribe of animals to which we are next todirect our attention, though not invisible likethe last, are almost equally concealed from ourview by the medium that they inhabit ; so that,with the exception of those that abound in freshwater,and are easily kept alive for examination,the great body of them inhabiting the ocean,can seldom be studied in a living state. All thepolypes are aggregate animals, in which theydiffer from the majority of the preceding class.The most imperfect of them, as the sponges andsome of the alcyons, seem to consist merely ofa gelatinous mass, without any organs of prehension,which by its alternate contraction anddilatation, imbibes or sends out the water fromwhich the animal derives its nutriment ; but thegreat majority have a mouth furnished witharms or tentacles varying in number. Theseare described as tubes, filled with fluid, expandingat the base into a small cavity, which whencontracted necessarily propels the fluid into thetentacles, and thus extends them ; but whenPOLYPES. 16-5the tube contracts, the fluid flows back intothe cavity, and the points of the tentacles convergeover the mouth.These parts are not only organs of sense, butalso serve many other purposes, particularlythose of prehension and motion ; and they veryprobably assist in respiration, which appearsevidently connected with the alternate contractionand expansion of these animals. They arealso so constructed as to lay hold of every substancethat floats within their reach, whether bymeans of any gummy excretion like bird-lime,as some suppose, or whether they are furnishedwith very minute suckers by which they canadhere to any substance, has not been ascertained.Trembleyy observed, that when thecommon polype of fresh water touched any littleanimal with one of its long tentacular arms, itwas immediately arrested, and in spite of themost violent efforts to liberate itself, which hecompares to those of a fish that had beenhooked, was held fast, and carried to the mouthof the polype and swallowed.The body of polypes is formed of a kind of inspissatedmucus, with confusedly agglomerated,and probably nervous, molecules equally distributed; it is covered by no skin, is extremely contractile,and forms an alimentary sac open atoneend, serving both for mouth and anal passage.The equal distribution of nervous FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.rules through the whole substance of theseanimals, will account for their extreme tenacityof life. In fact, this uniform gelatinous mass,which is without any organized structure, mayberegarded as a kind of primary substance,which possesses characters, in some respects,common to both animal and vegetable matter.This substance without any nervous centrethough nervous influence, one would thinkmust be in most force round the orifice wherethe tentacles are in action, yet full of cerebralmatter, sensible to the light without anyorgan of sight ; extremely irritable ; alternatelycontracting and expanding, and thus movingwithout any apparatus of muscles ; with no traceof organization but the tubular rays that surroundits mouth, which appear to perform theoffice of eyes, hands, feet, and lungs ; thissingular substance lends a clue to form theclass into Orders according to the circumstancesin which it is placed.1. In the common Polypes 1 of our ditches andstagnant waters, it is a naked branching elementarysac or canal, without any internal support,and endued with powers of locomotion.2. In the Madrepores and others, 2 its Maker formighty purposes has enabled the animal to formfor itself a fixed calcareous house or polygamy1 Hydra viridis, fusca, &c. 2 Lamellifera, Lam.POLYPES. 167as it is called, consisting often of innumerablecells, each containing a separate individual withits mouth and tentacles, united to the generalbody at its other extremity, and each with anexternal aperture, by which they are protruded,and expand like a flower.3. In the Coral and affinities, 1 it forms aninternal calcareous axis, which it envelopes asthe bark does the tree : it is fixed by its baselike the preceding tribe ; and from this crust,or bark, the tentaculiferous mouths of thepolypes emerge. In some the axis appearsarticulated.Neb. In these two last the base by which thecompound animal is fixed to rocks, or othersubstances, expands like the base or root of atree ; and by their ramifications these polypes,whether the polypary is external or internal,resemble its branching stem.4. The Sponges* and Lyons 3 have beengenerally arranged with the last Order, but, fromM. Savigny's observations, it appears that certainof these animals have neither stomach,mouth, nor tentacles, the animal life of which hethinks might be disputed ; but Mr. Bell hasdiscovered that they alternately imbibe andexpel that fluid, which seems to prove theiranimal nature. Perhaps they ought to be contCorticifera, Lair. 2 Sponge. 3 Alcyonium.168 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.ordered as nearer to vegetable matter than theother polypes.5. Other Lyons 1 seem to have a more complexorganization than any of the precedingpolypes ; they are stated to have eight parallelstomachs. Only four genera belonging to thisOrder have been described, and its proper stationseems doubtful.6. In the Sea-Pen, and others, 2 the animalenvelopes an axis, as in the third Order, andhas a tentacular mouth, but it is not fixed by itsbase. The greater part of these animals float inthe waters, but others remain at the bottom,either upon the surface or partly plunged in thesand.Polypes are invariably aquatic animals, someinhabiting fresh water, but the great body aremarine, and most numerous in tropical seas. Invery high latitudes, only sectarians, 3 sectarians, 4alcyons, and some sponges occur, and in thevicinity of volcanic islands in the Polar seas,corallines and gorgonia. These multiply alittle from 6 to 9 N. L. : then, as they approachthe tropics, the coral reddens, and themadrepores whiten, and at 33 they attain theirfull powers of growth and multiplication. Somefrequent the mouths of rivers, where there is aconflux of fresh and salt water. Some love1 Polypi tubiferi, Lam. 2 Polypi nantes, Lam.3 Cellar. 4 Sertularia.POLYPES. 169atmospheric influence, while others avoid it. Themarine ones frequently plant themselves on rocks,in different aspects, often regulated by the climate.They rarely expose themselves to violentcurrents, or the direct shock of the waves. Theyare often found in the hollows of rocks or submarinegrottoes, and in gulfs where the water isless agitated.It was observed above that the Industries presentsome analogy to the seeds of vegetables ;the polypes go further, and represent, often mostexactly, the developed plant from the tree, byalmost all the intermediate stages, to the fungus, 1at least the fixed polypes: these appear, as itwere, to take root, to send forth branches whichproduce seeming blossoms, composed of whatappear to be petals arising from a calyx,arranged sometimes in a single and at othersin a double circle, and in some including thesemblance of stamina ; they are also verysensible to the light, and turn to its source, andlike plants are readily propagated by cuttingsand buds ; so that all the older naturalists regardedthem as real plants, without apparentlysuspecting their animal nature. Ancient naturalistswere very apt to mistake analogicalresemblances for proofs of affinity, but in theprogress of science, when natural objects were1 PLATE II.VOL. I. M 5170 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.submitted to a stricter examination, more correctideas were substituted for these mistaken ones,and the zoophytes, or polypes, were generallyadmitted to be real animals, though some, afterLinne, still regard them as something betweenanimal and vegetable. Trembleyy was one ofthe first who ascertained their animal nature ;he saw the fresh-water polypes, by means oftheir long tentacles, seize and swallow certaingrubs, and also many minute Entomostracans*common in stagnant water. These polypes sousedtheir tentacles as evidently to indicate adegree of volition, sometimes using one and sometimesmany, as circumstances required. Whenthey had secured their prey, they contracted andgave a curve to these organs, so as to bring it nearthe orifice, or mouth, at their anterior extremity,which then began to open, and the animal theyhad caught was gradually absorbed. He-hasseen them attack small fishes, also worms, larvaeand pupae of gnats, parts of slugs, entrails, andeven pieces of meat.The marine polypes are equally ravenous withthe river ones, feeding upon whatever they canlay hold of, sometimes, like the wheel-animals,or oratories, producing a vortex in the water,and thus causing a flow to their mouth of theindustry, and other animalcules contained in that1 Monoculi. Linn.POLYPES. 171element. It is to be observed that these inhabita common house, from which they cannot separatethemselves ; their sole character is that ofbeing attached to an animated mass, so that eachindividual partakes of the life common to thewhole, and also of a separate life, independentof that of the others. Yet the nutriment thatone of these individuals takes, extends its influenceto parts the most distant from the place itoccupies.Having made these general remarks, I shallnext give a history of some of the best knownand most interesting species.1. The common polypes of stagnant waters,belonging to the first Order, have met with anadmirable historian in M. Trembleyy, and whatI have to communicate with respect to them willbe chiefly derived from him. With regard totheir reproduction, it is by germs and cuttings.The former issue gradually from the body of theparent polype, as the trunk of a tree sends fortha branch. The bud that forms the commencementof a young one, is a continuation of herskin, and its stomach of her stomach. Whenshe takes her food, the bodies of her young areseen also to inflate themselves as if they hadtaken it with their own mouths, and the food maybeseen passing from one to the other. Afterthey have grown thus as branches for some time,and even have pushed forth germes themselves,1 72 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.they detach themselves from the parent stem,and become separate animals.It is stated that, by this mode of generation,in the space of a month a single polype may betheparent of a million of descendants. Trembleyyobserved some long branches of trees that hadfallen into the water, which he describes asbeing as full of polypes as a peruke of hairs ;and that though their innumerable arms were atwork, there was no confusion amongst them.But these animals, as is well known, do notmultiply solely by germes, but also by cuttings,as they may be called ; their substance is soinstinct with life, that nothing appears able todestroy it a circumstance, perhaps, arising fromthe nervous molecules of which it seems almostto consist. If divided transversely, each segmentwill become a distinct animal, send forth tentaclesround its upper aperture, and close thelower one ; if it is divided longitudinally, eachhalf will form a separate tube in an hour, andbegin to ply its tentacles in a day ; even ifdivided into longitudinal strips, instead of thesides turning in, as in the former case, each stripbecomes inflated, and a tube is formed within it :and what is still more wonderful, and seems nextto a miracle, these animals may be turned insideout, like the finger of a glove, without destroyingeither their vitality, their power of producinggermes, and of catching, swallowing, or digestingPOLYPES. 173their food : so that they have, properly speaking,neither a within nor without, both surfaces of theiralimentary canal being equally fitted for digestion.This, however, is not so entirely anomalous as itmay at first sight appear ; for cuttings of somevegetables, if planted inversely, will take root, thetop bearing the root, and the bottom the branchesand inflorescence.The fresh water polype usually remains fixedby its closed extremity to one spot, from whichit seldom moves, exhibiting no other trace of ananimated being than the motions of its arms ;but when the want of light or heat causes it toshift its quarters, it moves slowly by fixingalternately, like a leech, its head and tail to whatit is moving upon.The majority of the marine polypes are attached,in some way, to a calcareous supportformed by themselves, which is called by Amoureux,Lamarck, and other continental writers,their Polygamy , i1 and they are none of themlocomotive except the last order.4. The polypes of the second Order, thesheathed polypes of Lamarck, 2 as the most importantand interesting of this class of the animalkingdom, I wish to leave last upon the reader'smemory. I shall, therefore, next make a fewbrief observations upon those sponges and alcyons1 Fr. Polype. * Polypi vagina.174 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.that have no tentacles, and form the fourth Order.These are included by Lamarck amongst thosejust mentioned, but they appear not properly tobelong to them, and to have a still more simpleorganization. In this tribe, as was before observed,nutrition seems carried on by a kind of systoleand diastole, the sea water being alternatelyabsorbed and rejected by the tubes composingthe substance of the sponge, they having noorgans to collect their food in any other way.Many of these productions are remarkable forbeing hollowed internally, and in their externalshape resembling cups, bowls, and vases : severalgigantic specimens of this kind were collected inIndia by the late lamented Sir Stamford Raffles,to whose indefatigable exertions, judicious arrangements,and uncommon ardour in her cause,science is so deeply indebted, and presented byhim, with the rest of his valuable collections, tothe Museum of the Zoological Society, wherethey are now to be seen. Their general structurealso, as well as form, fits them for receiving alarge quantity of water, as well as for partingwith it, in proportion to the pressure, whenreceived : in the living animal, this pressure isproduced by its expansion.What particular function, or office, has beendevolved by the All-wise Creator upon thesezoophytes, which are produced so rapidly, and insuch numbers, on the bed of the ocean and itsPOLYPES. 175rocks, has not been ascertained. As in the caseof a vast variety of other marine animals, theyprobably derive their nutriment from the contentsof the water absorbed by their tubes ; they maycontribute their part to the depuration of theoceanic waters, and to the maintenance of theequilibrium amongst their inhabitants, howeverminute, which is necessary to the general welfare.Doubtless, in their creation, He, who inhabitedEternity, to whose view all time as well as allspace is present, had in view the benefit of hiscreature man, to whom they form a very usefulpresent, and which he has long applied to his purposes.Sponges were in use as early as Aristotle'stime, when the people that employed themselvesin collecting them observed, that when theyattempted to pluck them up they appeared toresist, whence they concluded they had somesensation. 1 They now form a very considerablearticle of commerce. The fishery for them ischiefly carried on in the Mediterranean, particularlyin the Grecian Archipelago. The collectionof them is attended with danger, as they arefixed to the rocks at the depth of severalfathoms, so that the sponge-fishers must be excellentdivers. Tournefort says, that no youth inthese islands is allowed to marry, till he hasgiven proofs of his capacity in this respect.1 Aristot. Hist. Anim. B. i. c. 1, comp. B. v. c. 16.176 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Amongst plants, as Mr. W. S. Mac Leay has, Ithink, remarked, sponges present some analogyto the puff-balls. 15. A. fifth Order of polypes, worthy of attention,is that to which the red coral belongs, inthese the animal instead of being covered, or inany way sheltered by its polypary, invests itcompletely, so as to form a kind of bark overevery part of it ; on this account the name hasbeen changed by writers on these animals, and itis denominated their axis, since upon it they areasit were, suspended, and run their prescribedrace. This axis consists of a much more rigid,solid and lapide substance, than the polyparyof the really sheathed polypes, presenting whenpolished the smooth substance and lustre ofmarble, without any appearance of pores or otherorifices when broken it exhibits the same kindof fracture as a stick of red sealing-wax ; thisdescription refers particularly to the red coral, 2for in some other genera belonging to the Orderthe axis is jointed, 3 and in others, very flexible. 4The sheathed corallines appear in some sort, tobe analogues of those animals whose bodies arecovered and defended by an external crust orshell, like the Testaceous Molluscans, the Crustaceansand the Insects ; while the tribe in question,Lycoperdon. * Coralline.Isis, &c. 4 Antipathies, Gorgonia.POLYPES. 177especially those having a jointed axis, presentsome analogy to the vertebrated animals, inwhich the muscles cover the bones. It shouldseem, from the solid and compact substancegenerated by them, that these Polypes absorbfrom the seawater a greater quantity of thematter which is converted into carbonate of limethan the rest of the class, so as to enable themto condense' it into the smallest compass, andtherefore Providence has gifted them with thefaculty of making up in virtue, so to speak, whatthey may want in volume. A single-stemmedspecies, however, belonging to the flexible genusAntipathies, found by Professor Eschscholtz,on the north-west coast of America, was ten feetlong. The foot, or base by which the commoncoral is attached to the rocks, as indeed is thecase with the whole section to which it belongs,is remarkably expanded ; it rises at first with asingle stem of varying magnitude, which soondivides into a. small number of branches, in theirturn dividing and subdividing irregularly into agreat number of others, so as to resemble a leaflessshrub, rising to the height of about eighteeninches. After pearls, this is the most preciousproduction of the ocean, and has always been avaluable article of commerce. As well as thecommon sponge, it is principally the produce ofthe Mediterranean, and is formed with such rapidity,that a place which has been quite exhaustedVOL. I. N178 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.by the coral fishermen, in the course of a veryfew years, is again replenished with it. It isprobably enabled, by its broad well fixed baseand rigid axis, to withstand the violent action ofthe strong currents of the sea just mentioned.6. The Floating Polypes, which form Lamarck'slast order, chiefly differ from the coral in beinglocomotive, and sometimes swimming freely aboutin the sea, though some usually remain stationary,but never fixed. Their uniform germes, like thoseof many other marine polypes, are ejected by themouth. The most noted species, from its singularresemblance to a quill with its plumes, iscalled the sea-pen. 1 It is a phosphoric animal,and emits a light so brilliant that by it thefishermen can see the fishes swimming near it,so as to be able to cast their nets.The vast number of marine animals that areendued with the remarkable faculty of emittinglight, indicate that it answers some importantpurpose in their economy. A fact observed bythe celebrated Navigator Peron, renders it probablethat its object is defence; he remarked thatwhen the Atlantic Pyrosome 2 was irritated, aswell as when it was contracted, its phosphorescencewas augmented. A variety of hypotheseswith respect to the phosphorescence of the oceanhave been started ; at first it was attributed to1 Pennatula an/entea. ~ Pyrosorna atlantic.POLYPES. 179the revolutions of the earth, to electricity, &c.;then to putrescent marine animals, which certainlydo emit light ; but it is now generallyknown to be the property of a variety of themore frail inhabitants of the deep, and the aboveremark renders it extremely probable that it wasgiven them by their Creator, to defend them fromthe attack of their enemies, whom a suddenaugmentation of the intensity of their light mayfrighten from their purpose.2. But the most celebrated polypes, and thosewhich produce the most wonderful effects insome parts of the globe that we inhabit, belongto the section in which the polypary is umbelliferous,or having the star-shaped oscula, ormouth, from which the polype exerts its tentacles,lamellated or divided into various channels,separated from each other by elevated processes,resembling the gills of a mushroom : these, withseveral others related to them, Linne regardedas belonging to one genus which he denominatedMadrepora, but which Lamarck has divided intoeighteen ! It is amongst the species of thisgenus, even as circumscribed by the author justmentioned, that we are to look for the polype,which is instructed by its Creator, not only toerect rocky reefs of vast extent and wonderfulsolidity which often arrest and perplex thecourse of the navigator, and greatly increase theperils of navigation and submarine mountains180 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.that keep gradually diminishing the mass ofwaters, but also islands, which emerging fromthe ocean, in process of time are covered withvegetation, and fitted to receive and maintain ananimal population with man at their head. Thespecies principally engaged in this great work isthe coral, called by Linne the medicated Madrepore,1 and generally known by the name of whitecoral; but Lamarck seems not to have been satisfiedas to this species, since it is excluded fromhis list of madrepores, though he refers to four,if not five, varieties of it as distinct species. Itspolype, though so celebrated for its wonderfulworks, seems to be unknown. Rumphius howeverhas described that of the fungus Madrepore,and recently an Italian, Vincent Rosa, whosedescription I shall copy, another species.From every cell," says he, " issues a cylindricalanimal, resembling an intestine, transverselywrinkled, about half an inch long and two linesin diameter, and of which the upper extremity ormouth is surrounded by about twenty-two veryshort tentacles. These animals, which are pendent,because this madrepore is always fixedunder the projections of the rocks, and vibratesat the will of the waves, are always of a livelyorange colour, they contract as soon as they aretouched, and they die upon being taken out of1 Madrepora muriate. PLATE. II. FIG. I.POLYPES. 181the water." Whoever examines a fragment ofthe polypary of any of the varieties of whitecoral, will find it to consist of innumerable radiatingtubes, variously intercepted, all of whichappear to issue from a common base ; these arethe receptacles of the general body of the polype,while the connected individuals with their blossomsinhabit an infinity of cells opening externally,from which the tentacles issue to collecttheir food.The seemingly insignificant creatures heredescribed, and which seem as little animalizedas any animal can be to retain a right to thename, all whose means of action are confinedto their tentacles, and whose sole employmentappears to be the collection and absorption ofthe beings that form their food, are employedby their Creator, to construct and rear mightyfabrics in the bosom of the deep. He has so organizedthem, that from their food and the watersof the ocean, which by a constant expansionand contraction they absorb and expel, they areenabled to separate, or elaborate, calcareous particleswith which they build up, and are continuallyenlarging, their structures ; forming theminto innumerable cells, each inhabited by an individualanimal, which however is not insulatedand separated from the parent body, but forms apart of a many headed and many mouthed monster,which, at every oral orifice, is collecting the182 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.means of still increasing its coral palace, andthus it goes on till it has formed a habitation,not for itself, but, as I said, for man, in themidst of the world of waters.One of their most celebrated historians, Amoureux,thus expresses himself upon this part of theirhistory. " Some, by their union or aggregation,form a long narrow ridge or reef, which extendsuninterruptedly several degrees, opposing an immovablerampart to the great currents of the sea,which it often traverses, the solidity and magnitudeof which increases daily. Sometimes this lineof madrepore rocks assumes a circular form ; thepolypes that inhabit it gradually elevate theirrocky dwelling to the surface of the sea, workingthen in a sheltered basin, they by little and littlefill up its voids, taking the precaution, however,to leave in the upper part of this impenetrablewall openings by which the water can enter andretire, so as to renew itself, and furnish themwith a constant supply of their aliment, and ofthe material with which they erect their habitation."They do not always elevate their polypariesfrom the depths of the waters to their surface,some extend themselves horizontally upon thebottom of the sea, following its curvatures, declivities,and anfractuosities, and cover the soil ofold ocean with an enamelled carpet of various andbrilliant colours, sometimes of a single colour asPOLYPES. 183dazzling as the purple of the ancients. Many ofthese beings are like a tree which winter hasstripped of its leaves, but which the springadorns with new flowers, and they strike thebeholder by the eclat of petal-like animals, withwhich their branches are covered from the baseto the extremity.Captain Beechey has given a most interestingaccount of the proceeding and progress of theseanimals in erecting these mighty works, and ofthe manner in which the sea forms ridges, whenthe animals have carried their work as high asthey can : upon these at length a soil is formedbeyond the reach of its waves; a vegetation nextcommences, in time plants and trees spring up,animals arrive, and man himself finds it a convenientresidence. His account is too long tocopy, I must therefore refer the reader to it, butI must give here his statement of some proceedingsof these animals, which have a bearing uponthe principal design of the present work, andseem to indicate an instinctive sagacity in thepolypes far above their rank in the animal kingdom,and quite inconsistent with their organization.Speaking of Duties Island, a formation of thecoral animals, he describes it as taking the shapeof a truncated cone with the face downwards, theform best calculated to resist the action of theocean, and then proceeds to say, " The north'sFUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.eastern and south-western extremities are furnishedwith points which project under water withless inclination than the sides of the island, andbreak the sea before it can reach the barrier tothe little lagoon formed within it. It is singularthat these buttresses are opposed to the only twoquarters whence their structure has to apprehenddanger, that on the north-east, from the constantaction of the trade wind, and that on the otherextremity, from the long rolling swell from thesouth-west so prevalent in these latitudes ; andit is worthy of observation, that this barrier,which has the most powerful enemy to oppose,is carried out much farther and with less abruptnessthan the other." We should feel seme surpriseif a bee, in the construction of its comb,should strengthen the points most exposed to injury; but that an animal apparently gifted withthe lowest degree of sensation, and no intellect,should know where to erect buttresses so as bestto provide for the security of its structure indicatesin a striking degree the superintendence ofProvidence directing its blind efforts and unconsciousoperations.After considering all the wonderful facts herestated with regard to the proceeding and progressof these seemingly insignificant animals, a speculativeimagination may not only picture to itself,with respect to any group of coral islands, itsPOLYPES. 185conversion into one vast plain, yielding forestsof bread-fruit and other trees, and ultimatelysustenance to a numerous population, and avariety of animals subservient to their use, buttaking a wider range and still further enlargingits view, might behold the tropical portion of thevast pacific, not only studded with these islands,but exhibiting them in such frequent clustersand so large as almost to form a kind of bridgeof communication between Asia and America.Indeed, at present, we know not how far thesefounders of islands may have been concernedin rearing a considerable portion of those continentsthat form the old world. Calcareous strataand ridges occur every where, and though othercauses may have contributed to their formation, 1yet it is not improbable, that at the time whenour northern climates were inhabited by tropicalanimals, our seas also might abound in madrepores,&c. which might bear their part in theerection .of some of our islands.Professor Buckland, in the appendix to CaptainBeechey's Voyage, states that even withinthe arctic circle there are spots that can be shewnto have been once the site of extensive coralreefs. The old coral reefs that existed previouslyto the deluge, by that great catastrophe, in manycases might be formed into chalk ridges. Thisindeed seems proved by the remains of marine1 See Ly ell's Geog 1. 130. 210.VOL. I. N 5186 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.animals, especially sea-urchins, which from thiscircumstance the common people know by thename of chalk-eggs, and which, we learn fromCaptain Beechey, abound on the submergedledges of some coral islands ; and at the sameperiod, it is surely no improbable supposition,under the directing hand of Him who willedto destroy the earth by the waters of a flood,and at the same time determined, accordingto the good pleasure of his will, the precisemode of its renovation, that in the course of therise, prevalence, or subsidence of the mightywaters, which, for the principal part of a year,acted with irresistible force upon the earth,considerable additions might be made from thedebris of the earth's disrupted crust to the reefsof coral that were left subverted, and so manyislands be formed or enlarged.When the Creator formed the coral animals,what foresight, as well as power and wisdom didhe manifest ! That a minute pouch of animatedmatter, with no other organs than a few tentaclessurrounding its mouth, should be fitted to secretecalcareous particles from food collected by it, totranspire or regurgitate them so as to constructfor itself a limestone house, and should be empoweredperpetually to send forth germes thatcould also act the same part, is in itself sufficientlywonderful ; but that, in process of time,these animals, by their combined efforts, shouldPOLYPES. 187build up in the fluctuating ocean, not merely insignificantislets, but whole groups of islandsand extensive ridges, I had almost said continents,is still more worthy of admiration but farbeyond and above this, that Creative Wisdomshould so order all other circumstances connectedwith this procedure ; as, for instance, the actionof the waves and winds upon this nascent littleworld, and that when the animal has built up tothat point which its nature, for it cannot existout of the water, enables it to attain, should takeup the wonderful work, and by other meanscomplete his design, give the structure its dueelevation, furnish it with fountains and streams,cover it with a soil capable of affording nutrimentto plants and trees, yielding a supply of food tosome portion of the animal kingdom, and finallyto man himself how strikingly does this wholeconcatenation of dependent circumstances demonstratethe adaptation of means to an end, byan infinite mind ! What a number of calculationsmust be made, what a number of circumstancestaken into consideration, what a numberof contingences provided against, what a numberof conflicting elements made to harmonize andsubserve to the promotion of a common purpose,which could only have taken place by the interventionand constant guidance of an unseenBeing, causing all things so to concur, as tobring about and establish what he designs !N 6188 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.And, when we further consider the multiplicityof aspects in which the subject must be viewed,in order to get a clear and correct idea of theco-operation of so many causes seeming often atvariance with each other; we may further affirmwithout fear of contradiction, that the wholemust be the plan and the work, as the primaryand only intelligent cause, of a Being infinite inpower, wisdom, and goodness.There are two circumstances in the aboveaccount of the proceedings of these animals, thatmore particularly demonstrate Divine interposition.One is the precaution to which they haverecourse when they build a circular reef in thesea, that they leave an opening in this part forthe entrance of the tide and its reflux, so that aconstant renovation of the waters takes place,without which they could not proceed in theiroperations, for want of their necessary aliment.The other is, not only that they erect theirbuildings in the form best calculated to resistthe action of the ocean, but also erect breakwatersto strengthen the weakest points, andthose from which the greatest danger is to be apprehended.It is clear that beings so little organized, withscarcely any sense or feeling, are not sufficientof themselves to take these precautions, theymust be directed and impelled by some poweracting upon them ; which, foreseeing the want,POLYPES. 189provides for it ; this can be no physical power,for that is equally without intelligence, and actsnecessarily, but it must be the result of the willand original action of Supreme Intelligence, whoeither so organized the animal as to direct it tocertain acts, when placed in certain circumstances,by the agency of physical powers ; orby his own immediate employment of thesepowers, influenced its action, as the occasionrequired.I cannot conclude this history of the Polypeswithout adverting to another circumstance whichproves in a very striking manner the interventionof the Deity : and that they could not haveassumed the various forms under which webehold them, from peculiar circumstances, tothe influence of which, in the lapse of ages theywere exposed. When we see animals, buried inthe bosom of the ocean, symbolize the wholevegetable world from the tree to the moss andlichens that vegetate on its trunk, and the agaricor other funguses that spring up beneath it, wearenaturally led to inquire into the reason ofthis system of representation, exhibited by beingsthat have no affinity, nor are even contrastedwith each other by juxta-position.One of the general objects of the vegetablekingdom was to ornament the dry land withwhat was fair to look upon, as well as with whatwas good for food. But the depths of ocean,N 7190 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.though planted with various vegetables, seemunapt to exhibit in beauty the frail blossoms ofthe plant, which though they can bear the fluctuationsof their own atmosphere, must often bedestroyed by the greater weight and more irresistibleagitations of a denser element. Toornament the bosom of the deep, therefore, moresolid forms, sending forth blossoms capable ofsustaining the action of such an element, wererequisite : and therefore God, who gifted hiscreature man with an inquiring spirit, and withan appetite for knowledge of the works ofcreation, to furnish him with objects for inquiry,and to gratify that appetite to the utmost, notonly placed before his eyes upon the earth aninnumerable host of creatures, of which he couldgain a notion by only opening his eyes and byobserving their beauties, and experiencing theirutility, might praise his Maker for them; butalso filled the deep with inhabitants, and ornamentedit with animals which appearing to vegetateand blossom like plants, his curiosity beingexcited, he might also study the inhabitants ofthe water, and glorify his Maker for the creationof them also.But we may derive another use from the considerationof these plant-like animals, if thesceptic endeavours to persuade us, from thegradual progress, observable in natural objectsfrom low to high, and from the narrow intervalPOLYPES. 191that often separates those in the same series fromeach other, that by the action of certain physicalcauses, consequent upon certain established lawsand a fixed order of things, and by the stimulusof certain appetencies in themselves, animalsgradually changed their forms and organization,and thus, by slow degrees, kept improving in allrespects, till at last the monkey became theman, if the sceptic thus attempts to pervert us,we may turn round upon him, and ask him, howit was that the zoophyte, buried in the depths ofthe ocean, should imitate the plant? can a studiedimitation every where denoting purpose and design,a mighty structure including innumerableforms and parts connected with each other andformed evidently according to a preconceivedplan, be the result of the operation of blind,unguided physical agents, acting by the appetenciesof these organized beings ? How indeedcould they have any appetency to put on theappearance of a set of objects they never saw?The thing is morally impossible. In fact, whenwe survey the whole series of natural objects,and find throughout a system of representation,as well as a chain of affinities, it is as clear asthe light of day, that an infinite Intelligencemust first have planned, an Almighty hand thenexecuted, and that infinite Love still sustains thewhole.CHAPTER VI.Functions and Instincts. Radiaries.IT happens not seldom to the student of theworks of creation, when he is endeavouring tothread the labyrinth of forms in any of the threekingdoms of nature, and has arrived at any givenpoint, to feel doubtful which course to pursue.The road divides, perhaps, into two branches,which both promise to lead him right. At thevery outset of the animal kingdom, as we haveseen, there was some uncertainty, whether weshould begin by the Industries or Polypes, andnow the Tunicaries, or Ascidians as some callthem, at the first blush seem more closely connectedwith the Polypes, than the Radiaries,which Lamarck has placed next to them ; butwhen we consider that the organization is muchmore advanced in the former than in the latter,not only in the organs of digestion, but in thoseof sensation, respiration, and circulation, we feelsatisfied that the latter, where the object is toascend, should first be considered. I shall, therefore,now give some account of the Radiaries.The animals forming this class receive thisappellation, because they exhibit a dispositionto form rays, both in their internal and externalR Ani ARIES. 193parts, a disposition which begins to show itself,as we have seen, both in the polypes and theindustries 1 with respect to their oral appendages,and is found also in the tuileries and cephalopods,or cuttle-fish. And this tendency in theworks of the Creator to produce or imitateradiation, does not begin in the animal kingdom ;the Geologist detects it in the mineral, andthe Botanist in the vegetable, for Actinolites,Pyrites, and other substances exhibit it in theformer, and a great variety of the blossoms ofplants in the latter. We may ascend higher, andsay that irradiation is the beginning of all life,from the seed in the earth and the punctumsalient in the egg, to the foetus in the womb ; andstill higher in the physical world, sound radiates,light radiates, heat radiates. If we further surveythe whole universe, what do we behold butradiating bodies dispersed in every direction.Suns of innumerable systems, shedding theirrays upon their attendant planets ; and the GreatSpiritual Sun of the universe, even God himself,is described in Holy Scripture as that awfulBeing, " Whose goings forth have been from ofold, from everlasting."Cuvier, and after him several other modernZoologists, have considered Lamarck's Class ofRadiaries as forming a group or class of the1 See above, p. 154, 166, &c.VOL. I. O194 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.zoophytes ; but when we recollect that theycannot, like the industries and polypes, be propagatedby cuttings and offsets, this seems toindicate an animal substance in which the nervousmolecules are less dispersed, and that some tendencyto nervous centres has been established.In the upper classes of vertebrates animals,indeed, many will reproduce an organ whenmutilated, and some even a head, but none butthe polypes and industries multiply themselvesin the way above stated. It seems, therefore,most advisable to adhere to Lamarck's system,by considering the animals in question, as forminga group by themselves, and to adopt hisname of Radiaries.These are distinguished from the class immediatelypreceding, the polypes, by being limitedas to their growth to a certain standard, as totheir form by the general appearance of radiationthey usually present, being either divided intorays, as in the star-fish ; or having rays exhibitedby their crust as in the sea-urchins ; or embeddedin their substance, forming appendages to theirviscera, as in the sea-nettle or jelly-fish. Theyhave not, like the polypes, a terminal mouth ororifice surrounded by food-collecting tentacles ;but one placed, most commonly, underneaththeir body. Their digestive organs are distinctand more complex. They are never fixed, andare to be met with only in the sea and its esterAni ARIES. 195aries. Lamarck has divided this class into twoorders, the Gelatiness* and the Ecliinoderms^1. The Gelatine which some consider as adistinct class under the name of Acalephes? aredistinguished by a gelatinous body, and a softand transparent skin ; they have no retractiletubes issuing from the body ; no anal passage ;no hard parts in the mouth ; and they have nointerior cavity, their viscera being imbedded intheir gelatinous substance.Some genera 4 in this Order, like the fishes,are remarkable for an air-vessel which theycan fill or empty, and so rise to the surface, orsink to the bottom at their pleasure, but it differsfrom that of the fishes in being external ; othersare distinguished by a dorsal crest, which theyerect and use as a sail. 52. The Echinoderms have an opaque, leathery,or crustaceous skin, mostly covered with tubercles,or even moveable spines, and generallypierced with holes, disposed in rows ; retractiletubes which respire the water, and are used alsofor locomotion and prehension, emerge fromthese holes ; a mouth generally situated below,and armed with hard parts ; and a cavity simpleor divided.To begin with the Gelatiness in walking upon1 Radiates molasses. z R. Echinodermes. 3 Acalepka.Physsophora. &c. 5 Velle.190 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.the sea-shore, I have occasionally remarked ananimal of this tribe left by the waves, not muchlarger than a nutmeg, of a spherical form, withseveral longitudinal ridges, and nearly as transparentas the purest crystal. If at all injured bythe touch, it immediately dissolved. Such delicatecreatures has the Creator exposed to theaction of the oceanic waves, and they sail gailyon, by means of their ciliated tails, receivingno injury, frail as they are, except in being sometimescast upon the shore. These lucid gems ofthe waters, 1 which abound equally within thepolar circle and near the equator, are eminentlyphosphoric. Boscc says, he has seen millions,which he could scarcely distinguish during theday from the water in which they lived, butwhich in warm and calm nights afforded themost brilliant spectacle. From their rotatorymotion, they seemed then globes of fire whichrolled upon the surface of the water. The morerapid their motion, the more intense the light,and their tails always emitted more than theirbody. They doubtless absorb animalcules withthe water that they inspire, and they swim by amotion combining rotation with contraction anddilatation. They are found from a line to sixinches in diameter. Providence has destinedthem to be the food of a vast number of fishes,even the whale does not disdain them ; and wemay conjecture the havoc that one of these giants1 Eeroe,RADIARIKS. 197of the ocean would make in their ranks. Themanner in which they are propagated has notbeen ascertained, but from their infinite numbersin every sea, their progeny must be inconceivable.Another phosphoric animal of the presenttribe is distinguished by a dorsal crest, resemblinga vesicle full of air, and which it is said touse as a sail, like many of the Molluscans, toconduct it over the surface of the waves. It isconnected with the body only by its middle, itsextremities being at liberty, which enables theanimal to steer its course in any direction.I shall mention one more of these gelatine,which falls under the observation of every onewho is fond of sailing, or rowing, in a boat onthe ocean or in its estuaries. If he cast his eyeupon the water in fair weather, he will see numbersof animals, in shape resembling an expandedumbrella, with some flesh-coloured organs roundthe summit or centre, carried with the rising orfalling tide, and dancing along with a seeminglyundulating motion : these belong to what arevulgarly called the jelly-fish, or sea-nettles. 1Though the body of the animals of this tribe isgelatinous and easily melts, yet its weight isconsiderable, and it is said that they can renderthemselves heavy or light at pleasure, whichsome effect by means of a natatory vesicle, butthe means in all has not been ascertained ; unless1 PLATE III. FIG. 1.198 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.they were thus gifted, as their specific gravityexceeds that of the water, they could not raisethemselves to the surface, where they are seenswimming very gracefully ; as it were, by analternate systole and diastole, admitting and rejectingthe sea-water. Several of them, 1 for it isnot common to them all, when touched, cause asensation similar to that produced by the sting ofa nettle : 2 it is supposed by some that this is doneby their tentacles, which are conjectured to havelittle suckers, as indeed is very probable, whichadhere to the skin. This faculty, which is supposedto be the lowest degree of the electric powerpeculiar to several fishes, is found in other generaof this tribe ; for instance, the Jamaica sea-nettle, 3is said to affect the hands, when touched, stillmore severely. Probably this faculty was givento them by Providence, either for the defence oftheir frail forms against their assailants, or toenable them to secure their prey, this being thegeneral use of their numerous tentacles andother organs. Lamarck observes, that some ofthese animals are so large as to be more than afoot in diameter, and that some weigh as muchas sixty pounds. Their multitudes are prodigious,and, as well as the berne, they are said toform part of the food of the whale : they areeven devoured by some of their own class. The1 Rhizostoma* Cuv. Cephece Rhizostomce, Lam.2 See Appendix, note 22.3 Physalis pelagian.Radiates. 199mode by which these creatures are producedin such infinite profusion is at present unknown.They do not reproduce mutilated parts ; thereforeit cannot be, as in the polypes, by the divisionof their bodies.When we consider the extreme fragility anddeliquescent nature of the animals constitutingthis order of the Radiaries, that a touch almostdisorganized their structure, and moreover thatthey form part of the food of the most giganticanimals in creation, we should be led to think itimpossible that they could withstand all thesecombined actions upon them, and that howevernumerous and prolific, they must at length beutterly annihilated. Nothing less, indeed, thanAlmighty Power, and Infinite Wisdom and prescience,and a Goodness that is interested in thewelfare of the meanest as well as the mightiestof the animals he has brought into being, couldhave preserved them from such a fate. He whomade all things decreed their mutual relations,limited their numbers by certain laws, and appointedthe means by which those laws shouldbe executed. We may say, that in some sensethe whales were created for the gelatinous radiatesand numberless other animals with whichthe seas frequented by these monsters abound,and that these gelatinous radiates were createdfor the whales. The enormous mouth of the last-namedanimals is not armed with tusks orgrinders, but fitted instead with vast numbers of200 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.oblique laminae of a softer substance, usuallydenominated whalebone, which is adapted onlyfor the crushing and masticating of soft bodies ;therefore instead of a prey more proportioned totheir bulk, they contentedly make their meal offthese small but innumerable gelatine, which, bytheir number, make up for their want of magnitude,and are exactly suited to the masticatingorgans of their devourer ; and though the wasteof animal life seems almost infinite, yet was itnot for this check, so great appear to be thepowers of multiplication of the smaller creaturesthat swarm under the ice of the Arctic seas, therewould be more than could be maintained consistentlywith the general welfare.The object of Providence throughout ourglobe, as has been before observed, is so tobalance the respective numbers of the differentkinds of animals, from the invisible monad tothe gigantic whale, that a certain proportion maybepreserved, with regard to their numbers,between them, so that each may be in sufficientforce to accomplish the end for which it wascreated. We may observe that though the whaledevours myriads of millions, yet the quantum ofsuffering is less than if he were enabled to makehis meal off larger animals, and his jaws, likethe shark's, were fitted with january teeth. Infact the gelatine are incapable of suffering pain,having no digested nervous system, and whenRadiates. 201cast upon the shore they dissolve into a fluidexactly resembling sea water.The Echinoderms 1 form the second order ofthe Radiaries. This name was first given byBruguieres to a class formed solely of Linne'sgenera Echinus and Asturias, but Lamarck hasadded others to it. He has divided it into threesections, the Stelleridans, Echinidans, and ; in all these the outward envelope is ofa much harder substance than in the gelatine,in the first and last of these sections resemblingleather, and in the other, consisting of the searching,2 it is a crust in some degree like that ofcrabs and lobsters. The animals of this Order,though their nervous system is obscure, have ahigh degree of muscular motion and are fittedwith motive organs.To look at a star-fish one would wonder, atfirst, how it could move progressively, its raysseeming not at all calculated for that purpose,this however is wisely provided for. Those ofone family send forth a number of tentacles,from a furrow in the underside of the rays intowhich their body is divided, each terminatingin a cup-shaped sucker, which they can lengthenor shorten, and fix to hard bodies. These tentacles,or legs, as Cuvier calls them, are similar1 Echinodermata. z Echinus.20*2 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.in structure in all the Echinoderms. They areseparately retractile, their form is nearly thatof a long argillaceous tube, filled with a subtlefluid ; the elongated tubular part is that whichappears without the shell ; the spherical portionremaining within the body : by means of theabove fluid, as in the Polypes, 1 the tube isdarted forth, or retracted. Belon counted 5000of these suckers in one species. In the sea-urchinstar-fish 2 there are twenty rays, and thesuckers are so thick as to touch each other.They may probably be of use to them also asorgans of prehension to seize their prey. Thoseof the family to which the Medusa star-fishbelongs, move in a different way. The divergingrays are firm and hard, have few spines, and nochannel with suckers ; they are used by theanimal as legs, and as they are regularly placedit can move in any direction that suits it. Togo towards any particular spot, it uses the tworays that are nearest to it, and another that ismost distant from it ; the two first curve at theirextremity so as to form two hooks, which beingapplied to the sand drag the body forwards,while the posterior is curved vertically, and performsthe part of a repelling lever. The suckers,which in this genus issue from the sides of therays, at the junction of the upper and lower3 See above, p. 164. 2 Asturias echinites.Radiates. 203surfaces, appear short, but being retractile, theycan be lengthened, and doubtless are used toseize the animals that come in their way. Whatcan more strikingly indicate the contrivance anddesign of an Intelligent Being than the structureof these stellated animals by which they areenabled to move in different directions, and tosecure their prey?The exterior envelope of the sea-urchins isformed by two membranes, the one externaland thicker, and the other a very thin pellicle.Between the membranes is a thick, solid, calcareousshell composed of a great number ofpolygonal pieces of a fibrous tissue, evidentlyimmoveable, but not soldered during the growthof the animal. The shell of the common species 1if closely examined, when denuded of its spinesand other organs, will be found to be dividedinto twenty longitudinal portions, ten of whichare covered with breast-shaped protuberances, 2varying in size, which bear the spines, and tennarrow ones perforated with a number of smallorifices, from which the tentacular suckersemerge, which last Linne named alleys; 3 Ishall therefore call the spine-bearing ones groves.These last are alternately wide and narrow, andof a lanceolate form ; the wide ones havingsix rows of the larger tubercles, and the narrow1 Echinus oculis. L. 2 PLATE III. FIG. 2. a.3 Simulacra. Ibid. b.204 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.ones only two ; between each of these grovesis an alley containing nearly thirty obliquedouble rows of orifices, eight or ten in each row.These alleys terminate in a point at the upperaperture of the shell and are truncated at thelower. Each of the larger groves, if examinedinternally, will be found to consist of abouttwenty parallelograms arranged transversely andunited by an harmonic suture, in which the edgesare merely applied to each other without anyinequalities. These larger groves have a centrallongitudinal ridge, at which it readily divides anddiscovers a beautifully dentated suture, resemblingthe dog's tooth of a gothic arch; 1 on theside next the alleys the dentition of the sutureare much less prominent and conspicuous. Thesmaller groves have the same ridge and divide inthe same way, and seem to form one piece withthe alleys on each side of it : so that one of thenarrow groves with its two alleys forms thesupport of one of the frames of the jaws. 2 Thesenarrow groves consist of about sixty transversepieces, and when divided of double that number :thus wonderfully is the house in which theseanimals reside, formed by its Divine Builder.The sutures of the human skull, as anatomistsobserve, admit of its more easy formation into aspherical box : the shell of the sea-urchin is1 PLATE III. FIG. 3, a. 2 Ibid. FIG. 3, d.Radiates. 205adapted with equal skill and wisdom, the longitudinalsutures favoring the proper flexure oneway, and the transverse ones allowing a curvaturein a contrary direction: and besides, by thisstructure, as Mr. Gray has observed and DeBlainville intimates, the gradual increment ofthe shell, by the deposition of fresh matter in allthese parts, is rendered easy.But the spines and suckers of these animalsare equally worthy of our notice and investigation.; the former as instruments of defence andlocomotion, and the latter as instruments oflocomotion, prehension, and respiration. Imentioned the protuberances, large and small,the latter usually planted round the former,shaped like a breast with a central elevationresembling the nipple, these afford a basis withwhich the spines articulate, being united to it bya membranous ligature or sac, so as to form akind of ball-and-socket articulation, workingupon these protuberances by means of the membrane,the spines can assume every inclinationbetween vertical and horizontal, and may beused both as motive and defensive organs. Thegreat zoological and physiological luminary ofGreece, Aristotle, observed of these animals thatthey use their spines as legs for change of place, 1and Reaumur, who paid particular attention to1 Hist. Anim. B. iv, c. 5, ad fin.206 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.their motions, found, that whether they moved inahorizontal position, as they usually do, or in areversed one, or upon their sides, they principallyused their spines. As they can move in anydirection, some are used as legs for progressivemovement, others as points of support to preventa retrogressive one. It is by means of theirspines, also, some performing one office and someanother, that they bury themselves in the moistsand on the sea shore. 2It is not easy to conceive by what mechanismthe spines are moved ; the protuberances onwhich they move are fixed, and there appears tobe no communication between the interior of theshell and the membranous sac by which theyare attached to them. " It is very difficult,"says Cuvier, " to see the fibres that move thesespines at the will of the animal, for nothing isobservable in their articulation but a very solidligamentous substance, which it is very difficultto cut. I have examined, with a lens of considerablepower, the shell both within andwithout, and have been able to discover nopores on either side, round the base of theprotuberances or elsewhere ; so that it seemsimpossible for any muscular threads, howeverfine, to pass from the body of the animal tothe connecting ligament by which it could moveit and so give the spine its different inclinations.1 Osier in Philos. Tr. 1826.Radiates. 207Yet as the spines are employed by the sea-urchinto effect its motions, there must be someintermediate agent, hitherto undiscovered, whichit has at its command, by which it can act uponthem. Dr. Cams' remarks on the zoophytes ingeneral are very applicable in the present instance" When we find," says he, " that therecan be respiration without lungs ; that nutrition,growth, and secretion may exist without a circulationof fluids ; and that generation may takeplace without distinct sexes, &c. why shouldwe doubt that sensitive life may exist withoutnerves, or motion without muscular fibres ?" It isimportant to be observed here, that these spines,however strongly attached they may appear inthe living animal, in the dead one fall off uponthe slightest touch, which proves that the causeof their adhesion is connected with its life.But though it is difficult to detect the muscularfibres that move the spines of the commonsea-urchin, I had an opportunity when correctingthe proof containing the preceding paragraph,through the kindness of my friend Mr. Owen,of the Hungarian Museum, well known for hisadmirable anatomical description of the animalof the pearly Nautilus, 1 of examining a preparationof the large spines, with their sacs, ofthe mammillary Sea-urchin, 2 in which the mustNautilus Pompilius.2 Cedars camillus, PLATE III. FIG. 4.VOL. i. 08208 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.ocular fibres were distinctly visible, envelopingthe base of the spine, when the sac was removed ;so that, reasoning from analogy, it may be concludedthat the spines of the common specieshave a similar muscular apparatus.The spines vary much in their form andsculpture. In the species last named theyseem to be of a horny substance, varying inmagnitude arid length, the larger ones taperingfrom the base and being blunt at the tip, theyare beautifully fluted like the shaft of a corinthianpillar. 1 The part enveloped by themembrane before mentioned, is thicker than therest of the shaft, perfectly smooth, but terminatesin a bead : they are tinted with violet, but thebase and tip, or the pedestal and capital of thepillar are white. The base is concave so as toplay upon the levigated centre of the aboveprotuberance. Besides these larger spines, thereare some bristle-shaped ones terminating in asubovate knob, which when unfolded appearsto resemble a tripetalous flower with acuminatedpetals, and which are supposed to be polypes. 2Those parts void of spines, called the alleys,distinguished by rows of orifices disposed inpairs, are furnished with a quite different kindof organ, I mean the suckers 3 before alluded toand described, by which the animal can also move1 Echinus oculis, PLATE III. FIG. 14.2 Pedicellaria>, Ibid. FIG. 12, 13. * Ibid.Fio. 5.Radiates. 209or fix itself to any substance ; it is thought also,as they are perforated, that it uses them to absorbthe water for respiration. The length of thesesuckers or tentacles, for so they may be alsocalled, when they are fully extended, is alwaysgreater than that of the spines, so that they mayserve as so many anchors to fix the animal andenable it to resist the mass of waters that pressupon it. They are stated to be more numerousnear the mouth than in other parts, by whicharrangement Divine Wisdom has fitted them tomaintain a horizontal position, which is theirnatural one. These suckers fix the animal sofirmly to the rocks, that it is with the greatestdifficulty, and seldom without crushing the shell,that they can be separated.The most powerful and complex organs withwhich the Creator has gifted the Echinidansare their jaws and teeth. Their mouth hasadapted to it a remarkable frame work, consistingof five pieces, corresponding with fivesegments, into which the shell may be divided ;each of these pieces forms an arch, 1 and thewhole a pyramidal frame, which was comparedby Aristotle to a lanthorn without a skin. Tothese are attached the moveable part of theapparatus, consisting of five jaws, each containinga long tooth, 2 the teeth converging in1 PLATE III. Fio.S.rf. 2 7iirf,FiG. 10, 11.VOL. I. P210 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.the centre close the mouth. 1 Altogether thiscomplex machine consists of twenty-five piecesmoved by thirty-five muscles. The dispositionof these pieces, Lamarck observes, and of theirmoving muscles, indicate that the parts of thismachine can have only a common movement,and no one of them an individual or separateone ; but it appears from Cuvier's elaborate descriptionof this wonderful and complex machinery,if I understand him right, that the action ofcertain muscles will give to any one of the teeththat form the pyramids an independent motion.This powerful apparatus, which the animal canincline in different directions, indicates a kind offood, less easy to bruise and masticate than whatwe have seen satisfies the whale, and these organsafford a singular contrast to those by whichthat enormous monster estimates its food.The Echinidans, whose station appears tobe often near the shore upon submerged ledgesof rock, feed upon whatever animal they canseize. We have seen that they sometimesturn upon their back and sides, as well asmove horizontally, this enables them morereadily to secure their food, with the aid ofthe numerous suckers in the vicinity of theirmouth, which when once they are fixed, neverlet go their hold till the animal is broughtwithin the action of their powerful jaws. LatPLATE III. FIG. 9.Radiates. 211march thinks they do not masticate but onlylacerate their food ; but as two faces of each oftheir pyramidal organs answer those of the twoadjoining ones, and these faces are finely andtransversely furrowed, 1 this looks like masticatingsurfaces. Boscc, who appears to have seen themtake their food, says it consists principally ofyoung shell-fish, and small crustaceous animals ;as the latter are very alert in their motions, it isdifficult for the sea-urchins to lay hold of them :but when once one of these animals suffers itselfto be touched by one or two of the tentacles ofits enemy, it is soon seized by a great numberof others, and immediately carried towards themouth, the apparatus of which developing itself,soon reduces it to a pulp.Who can say that the All-wise Creator did notforesee all the situations into which this animalwould be thrown, so as to provide it with everythingthat its station and functions require ?Considering its internal organization and thenature of the animal itself, and that it holds amiddle station between the polype and the Molluscansns,in the former of which the developmentof muscle is very obscure, and in the lattervery conspicuous, and that it cannot, like theformer, fix itself by its base, and so support apolypary, or if endued with locomotive powerscarry with it a heavy shell ; these things contPLATE 111. FIG. 11.212 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.ordered, and the nature of its food, and the forcenecessary to prepare it for digestion, it wasevidently requisite that it should be defended bya crust sufficient to afford a support, and giveeffect to its powerful oral apparatus, and yetlight enough to yield to the efforts of its motivepowers; but as this crust, from its compositionand nature, was liable to be crushed by a veryslight pressure, it required further means ofdefence, and with these its Almighty andBeneficent Creator has amply provided it, bycovering it, like a hedge-hog, with innumerablespines, varying in length, and capable of variousmovements. The long ones, when erected,defend it on all sides, both from the attack ofenemies and from the effects of accidental pressure,and we may conjecture that when thelonger ones are couched to answer any particularpurpose, the short ones may come into play, andassist in keeping any pressure from the crust.Perhaps, as in the hedge-hog, the ordinaryposture of the longer spines is couchant, andthey are only erected when the animal is inmotion or under alarm.The wonderful apparatus which closes themouth of the common or typical sea-urchin, 1is another and striking proof that CreativeWisdom employs diversified means to attain acommon end, the nutrition of the animal.1 Echinus oculis.Radiates. 213The mouth of this animal is under its body,a situation far from favourable, according toappearance, for the mastication or bruising ofits food : if its jaws moved vertically, like oursor the mandibles of a bird ; or if they movedhorizontally like those of insects, it would havebeen attended with no small trouble to an animalwhose mouth was underneath, but its five pyramidaljaws with the points of the teeth in thecentre, admit an action more accordant with thesituation of the mouth. By means of its numerousmuscles it can impart a variety of actionto the mass and individual pieces that formits oral apparatus, so as to accommodate it tocircumstances, a power not possessed by thehigher animals. In those Echinidans, whosemouth is in the margin of the anterior part ofthe shell, 1 no such powerful apparatus is observable,its situation being in front of the animal,it is not as it were under restraint, it has lessoccasion for the aid either of tentacles in itsvicinity, or of a powerful apparatus of masticatingorgans.By furnishing these animals with a set ofpeculiar organs to act the part of hands as wellas feet, we have another instance of the care ofDivine Providence to adapt every creature to thesituation and circumstances in which it isplaced. The legs and arms of the higher ani-franchises,Spatanyus, fyc.2J4 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.male would be rather an incumbrance to anEchinidan, as well as a deformity; it is thereforefurnished with a set of organs better adapted toits peculiar station, wants, and functions, in anumerous set of retractile tubes 1 capable of thenecessary extension, fitted at their extremity witha cup acting as a cupping-glass or sucker, andenabling the animal to adhere, with irresistibleforce, to any substance to which it applies them,and discharging at the same time the functionsof hands to lay hold of their prey and convey itto their mouth, of legs and feet to stay themselvesupon, and of lungs to assist in their respiration.The workmanship also in these animal structuresis as beautiful and striking as the contrivancemanifested in them is wonderful. Theirprotuberances, especially in the mammillarysea-urchin, their variously sculptured spines,their tentacular suckers, all by their perfectfinish and admirable forms declare The handthat made us is divine since they exceed in allthese respects the most elaborate human works.The third and last section of the Echinoderms,or spiny-skinned Radiaries, are the Fistulidam*Amongst these we may notice the Sea-anemones*marine animals, fixing themselves to the rocks,but having the power of locomotion, which froma common base send forth what appear to be a1 PLATE III. FIG. 5. 2 Fistulides, Lam.3 Actinia.Radiates. 215number of stalks terminating each in whatseems a many-pealed flower of various hues,so that those who have an opportunity of observingthem from a diving bell, may see the submergedrocks covered with beautiful blossoms ofvarious colours, and vying with the parterresof the gayest gardens. Ellis, who was the firstEnglishman who opened his eyes to the beautiesand singularities that adorn the garden whichGod has planted in the bosom of the ocean, hasnamed many of these from flowers they seemto represent, as the daisy, the cereus, the pink,the aster, the sunflower, &c.These animals, at first, appear to come verynear the polypes, especially the fresh-water ones, 1bearing a number of individuals, springing, asit were, from the same root, each sending forthfrom its mouth a number of tentacles, which arestated to terminate in a sucker, and by whichalso, like the other Echinoderms, they respireand reject the water ; they also reproduce theirtentacles when cut off. Portions of the basewhen divided are reproductive, but they do notseparate from the parent till their tentacles arecompletely formed. Their internal organization,however, is much more advanced than that ofthe polypes. They have a separate alimentarysac or tube, surrounded by longitudinal muscles,1 Hydra.216 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.and even nervous nodules or ganglions, and alsoseveral ovaries.In mild calm weather, when the sun shines,they may be seen in places, where the water isnot very deep, expanding their many-colouredflowers at the surface of the waters but uponthe slightest indication of danger, the flowerssuddenly disappear, the animal contracts itselfand wears the aspect of a mass of flesh. Theyas it were, vomit up their young, or the germesformed in the ovaries : but they sometimes forcetheir way out from other parts. When inclinedto change their station they glide upon theirbase, or completely detaching themselves, committhemselves to the guidance of the waves.Reaumur observed them use their tentacles likethe Cephalopoda, for locomotion. They fixthemselves with so much force, that they cannotbe detached without crushing them.It is not wonderful that so many of the loweraquatic animals should have been mistaken forplants, when they so exactly represent theirforms, their roots, their branches and twigs,their leaves and their flowers but besides theirritability of the animal substance, whichhowever is partially exhibited by some plants ;there is another character which seems, as astrong line of demarcation, to be drawn betweenthem, and to which I have before adverted; 11 See above, p. 139.Radiates. 217animals take their food by a mouth at oneextremity of the body, plants by roots divergingfrom the other. The reproductive organsin the latter occupy the place and natureof the nutritive ones in the former. The gayand varied colours of the blossoms, the infinitediversity of their forms, the delicious scentso many of them exhale, all are calculated todraw the attention and excite the admiration ofthe beholder, while the organs of nutrition areusually hid in the earth. Not so in the animalkingdom ; the nutritive organs, or rather thosethat prepare the nutriment, are placed in themost eminent and conspicuous part of the body,in the vicinity of all the noblest avenues of thesenses, while those of reproduction are placed inthe most ignoble station, and are usually foundclosely united with those passages by which theexcretions of the body pass off. In the Tunicariesindeed the mouth and the anal passage 1 areusually very near to each other, and in thepolypes the same mouth that receives the foodrejects the feces, and it even sometimes appearsto happen than an animal has been swallowed,and after performing the ordinary revolutionin the stomach, has been ejected again in aliving state.1 PL ATE IV. FJG. 1.CHAPTER VII.Functions and Instincts. Tunicaries.THE animals we have hitherto been consideringvere all regarded by Cuvier as belonging to hisfirst class, the Zoophytes, and are continuedtherein by Carus ; the latter, however, allowsthat the Echinoderms are somewhat removed fromthe class by the commencement of a nervoussystem. Lamarck's next Class, the Tunicaries^which we are now to enter upon, form part of theheadless Molluscans 2 of Cuvier, and belong tothat section of them that have no shells. Mylearned friend, Savigny, in his elaborate andadmirable work on The Invertebrate Animals,who also considers them as a separate class,denominates them Ascidians, 3 dividing them intotwo Orders, Tethydans and Thalidans* Manyalcyons of Linne and others, are now referredto the Class we are treating of.The characters of the class may be thus stated :ANIMAL, either gelatinous or leathery, covered bya double tunic 9 or envelope. The external one,analogous to the shell of Molluscans, distinctly1 Tunica. 2 Mollusca Acephala.3 Arcadia. * Tethys, Chalices.TUN1CARJES.organized, provided with two apertures, the oneoral, for respiration and nutrition, the other anal;the interior envelope, analogous to their mantle,provided also with two apertures adhering tothose of the outer one. Body oblong, irregular,divided interiorly into many cavities, withouta head ; gills occupying, entirely or in part, thesurface of a cavity within the mantle ; mouthplaced towards the bottom of the respiratorycavity between the gills ; alimentary tube, openat both ends ; a ganglion, sending nerves to themouth and anus.These animals are either simple or aggregate ;fixed or floating : the simple ones are sometimessessile, 1 and sometimes sit upon a footstalk. 2 Theaggregate ones possess many characters in commonwith the polypes, inhabiting, as it were, acommon body, somewhat analogous to the poly-part,except that it is more intimately connectedwith the animal that inhabits it : the mouth of allissurrounded with rays or tentacles, as is also,in many, the anal orifice; but in their organizationthey differ very widely, exhibiting tracesof a nervous system, and even, in some, of oneof circulation. The fixed ones are commonlyattached to rocks or other reorganized substances,but sometimes they are parasitic ; thus a speciesof botrylle 3 envelopes, like a cloak, certain Cynthia, ~ Clavering. 3 Botryllus polycyclus.220 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.cleans, and another of the Tunicaries 1 envelopesthe madrepores, more or less, with a milk-whitecrust.The Creator, when he filled the waters of thegreat deep with that infinite variety of animalsof which every day brings genera and species,before unknown, to light, willed that many ofthem should, as it were, form a body politic, consistingof many individuals, separate and distinctas inhabiting different cells, but still possessinga body in common, and many of them receivingbenefit from the systole and diastole of acommon organ : thus, by a material union, issymbolized, what in terrestrial animal communitiesresults from numerous wills uniting toeffect a common object. The land, as far as Ican recollect, exhibits no instance of an aggregateanimal ; nor the ocean of one, which, like thebeaver, lemming, bee, wasp, ant, white ant, andmany others, forms associations to build and inhabita common house, and rear a common family.Probably the nature of the different mediumsthese several animals inhabit is the cause of thisdiversity ; and Providence, when it willed thepeopling of the waters, as well as of the earthand air, into which the effluxes of light and heatfrom the central orb could not so penetrate andbe diffused as to act with the same power arid1 Didemnum candid, Sav.TUNICARIES. 221energy as upon the earth's surface, and in itsatmosphere, so formed them as to suit the circumstancesin which they were to be placed,Instead of sending the social aquatic animalsforth by myriads to collect food and materialsfor their several buildings, he took the vegetablecreation for the type of their general structure,in many cases fixed them to the rock or stone,united them all into one body, which, under acommon envelope, contained often innumerablecells from which were sent forth by the occupantof each a circle of organs to collect food, fromwhich, by some chemical operation, they couldelaborate materials for the enlargement of theircommon house ; and often cause that influx andreflux, to compare small things with great,resembling the oceanic tides, and by which thesea-water is alternately absorbed and rejected bythese animals : but this function, in the case ofsome of the Tunicaries, the animals with whichwe are now concerned, seems to be affected bya central organ or pump common to the wholefraternity.But although none of the marine associatedanimals are employed, like the terrestrial ones, inlabours that require locomotion and the collection,from different and often distant parts, ofmaterials for the erection of their several fabrics,and of food to store up for the maintenance ofthe various members of their community, yet222 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.there are some that are instructed to form associations,which yet are not united by any materialtie or common body, so as to be physically inseparable.Of this description are the Salpes, 1or biphores, as the French call them. Theseare phosphoric animals, so transparent that alltheir internal organs and all their movements,and even all the contents of their intestines, maybedistinctly seen. They are gelatinous likethe medusas and heroes, and like them dissolveinto water. Their organization, however, provesthem to be Tunicaries. Certain species of theseanimals, in this respect unlike every other genusof the animal kingdom, have the property ofuniting themselves together, not fortuitously andirregularly, but from their birth and in a certainundeviating order. Boscc observed the reunionof the confederate Sale* which he thus describes :Every individual is attached by its sides totwo others, the mouth of which is turned to thesame side ; and by the back also to two others,when it is turned to the opposite side." In thiscircumstance it presents an analogy to thecombs of the hive bee, in which each combconsists of a double set of cells placed base tobase, with the mouths of each set looking oppositeways, and the cells so placed that a third ofthe base of three cells occupies the whole of one1 Salpa. ~ Salpa confederate.TUNICARIES. 223base in the opposite set. 1 This reunion, in thesales, is effected by means of eight pedicles, ofa nature exactly similar to that of the body. Itis perfectly regular, that is to say all the individualsare at the same distance and height, allthe heads in one row are turned to the sameside, and those of another to the opposite. Theserows usually consist of from forty to fifty individuals,and are carried by the waves sometimesin a straight, sometimes in a curved, and sometimesin a spiral line. In the sea, during the day,they appear like white ribands, and during thenight like ribands of fire, which alternatelyroll up and unroll, wholly or partially, eitherfrom the motion of the water, or from the will ofthe animals that compose them. They are foundin the ocean only at a great distance from land.Professor Eschscholz mentions one, 2 intermediatebetween the Salpes and Pyrosomes and asimilar one is now in the Hungarian Museum 3which by means of a pedicle appeared to be attachedto some common body, all of them arrangedin rows with the head turned to the sameside ; Savigny, whose eye nothing escaped, andthe acumen of whose intellect equalled that ofhis sight, alas now dark, further informs us, thatthe Salpes adhere to each other only by certaingelatinous protuberances, or as Lamarck susPLATE XI. FIG. 3. Anchinia.3 PLATE IV. FIG, 2.224 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.pets, certain lateral suckers, disposed so asnot to impede the motions of the muscles ; buttheir union is only temporary. At a certain age,M. Peron observes, these animals separate, allthe large individuals being solitary. The sametraveller is of opinion that the concatenation ofthe Salpes is coeval with their birth.The object of Divine Providence in endowingthese animals with an instinct so singular canonly be conjectured. They are of so very frail anature, that perhaps when first produced, thefluctuations of the mass of waters, to the surfaceof which they appear to rise, might be sufficientto destroy them, or to carry them to the shore,where they would inevitably perish ; but by being-unitedin bands, they may be better able to resisttheir force, and perhaps the more vivid lightthey thus produce, may be designed for defence, 1or to answer some other important purpose. Whenthey have attained maturity of size and strengththey may be better able to direct their courseand avoid these injuries. The young of terrestrialanimals generally are associated, under theguidance and protection indeed of the mother,till they are of age to take care of themselves.The object of Providence in both cases is thesame, though the modes of its accomplishmentvary according to the situation and circumstances1 See above, p 178.TUNICAR1ES. 225of individuals. When we see such paternalcare manifested for the welfare and maintenancein existence, of beings so frail, thata mere touch would dissipate them, we cannotbut assent to the observation of the Psalmist,that " His tender mercies are over all his works"the least and most insignificant as well asthose that appear to occupy the most elevatedplace in the animal kingdom : and we may feela comfortable assurance, built on this ground,that the eye which regards even these seeminglyinsignificant creatures, will, if we cast not off ourconfidence, never overlook us, or be indifferentto our welfare.The last and highest tribe, belonging to thepresent class, are those which are never unitedto each other, but are solitary in all stages oftheir existence. These, as well as the precedingones, make a near approach to the real Mollusca,at least their external and internal envelopebears considerable analogy with that of bivalveshells, as Lamarck acknowledges, though theydiffer in having a distinct organization, the shellsof bivalves having neither apparent vessels norfluids, while, in these Tunicaries, the covering,both external and internal, in some species,exhibits vascular ramifications very conspicuously.Though several of the animals belonging toVOL. I. Q2*20 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.the class of Tunicaries are interesting on accountof their singularity and beauty, I shall only selecttwo, one from the aggregated, and one from thosethat are simple, for description and further remarks,and then proceed to the great class ofMolluscans. Who would think, asks Lamarck,that the Pyrosome, first observed by Peron andLe Sueur, was an assemblage of little aggregateanimals ; any one that looked at this animal, orat Savigny's figure of it, 1 would mistake it forasimple polype, with a number of leaf-like appendagesgrowing from its skin : but a closerexamination would give him a very differentidea, and he would discover, with wonder, that itwas a mass filled with animals, united by theirbase, exceeding the number of the above appendages.The common body that contains thesecreatures resembles a hollow cylinder closed atits upper extremity and open at the lower ; thisbody or mass is gelatinous and transparent, anumber of tubercles of a firmer substance thanthe tube, but at the same time transparent, polished,and shining, differing in size, cover the surface; some being very short, and others longer,and the longer ones terminated by a lance-shapedleaflet. At the summit of each tubercle is a circularaperture, without tentacles, opposite to whichis another circular orifice which is toothed.The pyrosomes are the largest of the phosphoric1 Anim. sans. Vertebra. PL. IV. FIG. 7.TUNICARIES. 227animals, the Atlantic species 1 being about fiveinches long, and the Mediterranean* sometimesattaining to the length of fourteen. Their powerof emitting light is so great that in the nightthey cause the sea to appear on fire. Nothingcan exceed the dazzling light and brilliantcolours that these floating bodies exhibit coloursvarying in a way truly admirable, passingrapidly every instant, from a dazzling red tosaffron, to orange, to green, and azure, and thusreflecting every ray into which the prism dividesthe light, or which is exhibited by the heavenlybow. In the water their position is generallyhorizontal, and their locomotion very simple :they float, as they are carried by the waves orthe currents ; like the sales, they can howevercontract and restore themselves individually, andhave also a very slight general movement whichcauses the water to enter their common cavity,visit their gills for respiration, and convey tothem the substances which constitute their food.M. Le Sueur observed that when the central cavityof the common tube was filled with water, itwas immediately spirted forth in little jets from allthe extremities of the tubercles with which thesurface was covered, from whence it appears thatthe external aperture of the individual animalis really the anal aperture, and the oppositeor internal one the mouth, which thus received1 P. atlantic. 2 P. giganteum. PL. IV. FIG. 3.228 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.the water and the food it conveyed from thecommon tube, and rejected it by the orifice ofthe tubercles.The internal organization of the little tenantsof the common tube is given with considerabledetail by Savlgny, 1 the general opening at thesummit, or truncated end of the tube, has anannular diaphragm, from which it appears thatthey are arranged in circles round it, so thatin this respect they form rays ; in shape theysomewhat resemble a florence-flask, and havealternately a long and short neck. The cavitybelow the neck is filled by the gills and variousintestines, which it would be difficult to describeintelligibly, in a popular manner. There seemssome analogy in these floating hives of luminousanimals, both as to size and motion, with thesea-pens. 2No species of the genus appears to have beenmet with in our seas, we may therefore conjecturethat a warmer climate is essential to them.Their general functions beyond that of illuminatingthe great theatre in which their Creatorhas placed them, and probably affording food tosome of the inhabitants of the seas in whichthey are found, have not yet been ascertained.Neither of the orifices of these little animals isfurnished with tentacles, but their branchialorifice is toothed, in this they appear to differ1 Ubi. supr. pi. xxii. xxiii. 2 See above, p. 178.TUNICARIES. 229from the great majority of aggregate animals.We may conjecture that when the water passesinto the tube the diaphragm is either droppedor elevated to admit it, and then resuming ahorizontal position closes the orifice so that thewater is forced into the interior aperture of theindividual animals and passes out, as abovedescribed, by the exterior one. Food-collectingtentacles, therefore, would in this case be unnecessary,as their food would enter their mouthswith the water. Providence thus takes care tocompensate by this contrivance for the want ofthe ordinary instruments.Some of the Tunicaries are stated to haverecourse to a singular mode of defence. Whenseized by the hand, contracting themselvesforcibly, they ejaculate the water contained intheir cavities, so as often suddenly to inundatethe face of the fisherman, who in the astonishmentof the moment suffers the animal to escape.If this be a correct statement it proves that theseanimals are not altogether without some degreeof intelligence, they know when they are assailedand how to repel the assailant.Having given some account of the most interestingof the aggregate Tunicaries, I am nextto notice the simple ones. In these the twoorifices by which the sea water is received andexpelled are not at opposite extremities, butusually approximated, one being higher thanVOL. I. Q 3230 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.the other and furnished with tentacular filaments.The animals are fixed to rocks, shells, and sometimesto sea-weeds, and are either sessile, orelevated on a footstalk : the sessile ones presenta considerable analogy with the puff-balls, andthe others with different funguses, as Bavaria?&c. They seem, especially Bothnia, which iscovered with short stiff bristles, to approach theEchinidans. Nothing more is known of theseanimals, than that, like the others, they alternatelyabsorb and expel the sea water. TheCynthia Momus* is remarkable for its changesof colour, being sometimes white, sometimesorange, and sometimes of a flesh-colour. As allthis tribe are fixed, their history furnishes noother interesting traits.Nothing is more striking than the infinitelydiversified forms into which Creative Power hasmoulded the little frail animals, in this as wellas the preceding classes, that are destined toinhabit, and numbers of them to illuminate, thewide expanse of waters occupying so large aportion of the globe we inhabit. When wesurvey, with curious and delighted eyes, thevaried tribes that cover the soils of every aspectand elevation of that part of it which emerges fromthe fluctuating surface of the great deep, andwhich, instead of deriving their nutriment andmeans of life and breath from the waters,' salinei PLATE IV. FIG. 5. * Ibid. FIG. 1.TUNICARIES. 231or fresh, live, and breathe, and are fed, byprinciples and elements communicated, eithermediately or immediately, from the atmosphericocean, an expanse that envelopes uninterruptedlythe whole of our globe, and which itself is fedand renovated by the constant effluxes of thegreat centre of irradiation ; which also in itsturn, as well as all the other orbs that burn andare radiant, and those that revolve around themand reflect their light, receive their all fromHim, that GREAT AND INEFFABLE BEING, whogives to all and receives from none. But I losemyself, in infinite amazement; I shrink intovery nothingness, when I reflect that such amiserable worm as I am, so fallen and corrupted,should presume to lift its thought so high, andlose itself in the depths of the unfathomableocean of Deity. He has, however, commandedus to seek him, and assured us we shall findhim if we seek him humbly and sincerelyhe hath set before us his works and his word,in both of which he has revealed himself tous: and if our great object be to glorify himrather than ourselves, we shall collect theTRUTH from each, and shall find that theydeliver, though each in a different languageand style, the same mysteries ; for they are thework and the word of the same Almighty Author,and must, therefore, if rightly interpreted, deliverthe same truths, since they can no more con-functionsAND INSTINCTS.tract each other than he can contradict himself.But let me endeavour to emerge from thisocean in which I seem to have lost myself, and,recovering my station upon terra firma, directthe attention of the reader to the lovely tribesthat adorn every part and portion of this ourdestined but brief abode, I mean to the vegetablekingdom ; we see how they cover earth, that notaspot can be found, of which in time they donot possess themselves, and that the more weextend our inquiries the more numerous are theindividual species with which we become acquainted.This being the case upon earth,reasoning from analogy, we may conclude thatsomething similar takes place in the ocean ; thatcould our discoveries be extended under the seaas easily as they are upon land; could we traversethe bed and waters of the great deep with thesame facility that we do the surface of the earth,we should find the numbers of vegetables thatrespire, in some sense, the air, fall short perhapsof those plant-like animals that respire the water.And could we examine the individual species ofwhich this infinite host consists, and comparetheir organizations, we should find as great adifference in the instruments and organs bywhich their life is supported and their kind continued,as in the animals themselves ; and yetin all this diversity should trace a harmony andBIVALVE MOLLUSC AN S. 233concatenation that would evidently prove theWisdom that contrived, the Power that formed,and the Goodness that gave a living principleand breath of life to all these creatures, wereeach of them the attributes of an INFINITE BEING.CHAPTER VIII.Functions and Instincts. Bivalve Molluscans.HITHERTO in our progress from the lowest animalsupwards, the mind has been perpetuallysubmerged; not only every group, but everyindividual that we have had occasion to consider,has been an inhabitant of the waters, and to thegreat body of which a fluid medium is as necessaryto life and action as an aerial one is to aland animal, but now we shall be permitted toemerge occasionally, for although the largestproportion of the animals forming the great classwe are now to advert to, the Molluscans, are alsoaquatic, yet still a very considerable number ofthem are terrestrial, as a stroll abroad will soonconvince us, when after a shower we find we canscarcely set a step without crushing a snail or aslug.234 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.The term Molluscan 1 was employed by Linneto designate his second class of worms, 2 whichexcluded all the shell-fish, and amongst realMolluscans included both Radiaries, Tunicaries,and Worms ; it literally signifies a nut or walnut,and therefore seems more properly applied toshell-fish, than to animals which are defined assimple and naked. As now understood, it stillcomprehends a very wide range of animal forms,and it seems difficult to describe them by anycharacter common to them all. Their AlmightyAuthor, in the progress of his work of creation,linked form to form in various ways ; he not onlymade an animal of a lower grade a steppingstonetowards one of a higher, and which formeda part of the ascent to man, the highest of all ; butas the mighty work proceeded, he threw out oneach side collateral forms that ascend by adifferent route, or begin one to a different orderof beings. And this circumstance it is that hasopened the door for so many systems and thatdiversity of sentiment with respect to thegrouping of animals, which we meet with in thewritings of the most eminent naturalists. Someproceed by one path and some by another,though the object of all is the same, unless somebias from a favourite hypothesis interferes anddiverts them from a right judgment.The organization of the animals of the Class1 Mollusca. 2 Vermes.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 235we have just left, as we have seen, appears of ahigher character than that of any of the precedingones ; traces of a heart appear ; a nervous ganglionis detected between the mouth and anus, sendingnerves to each ; a regular respiratory system bymeans of gills becomes evident ; but still theanimal is furnished with no head, no eyes, and innumerouscases has no separate existence, butforms a branch of the general body thus resemblinga plant from which it cannot dissociateitself and become an independent individual.Indeed when we enter the Class of Molluscans,we find that the nearest affinities of the Tuilerieshave likewise no head, and this circumstanceappears to have induced Lamarck notonly to separate them from the class as arrangedby Cuvier, but also his whole family of headlessMolluscans, 1 of which he forms his two Classes ofCirripedes* and Conchifers. 3 The absence of ahead from the animals of the bivalve andmultivalve shells, is certainly a circumstancewhich, at the first blush, appears to justifytheir separation classically from the other Molluscansns,but when we compare other characters,we shall find many that are common to both,particularly their nervous system, which isthe same both in the Conchifers and Molluscaof Lamarck ; for neither of these exhibit1 Mollusca acephala. 2 Cirripeda.3 Cone his era.236 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.a medullary ganglionic chord, but only dispersedganglions which send forth the requisitenerves ; both have a double or bilobed mantle,gills on each side, and a heart and circulation.The Cirripedes indeed seem to be of a highergrade, at least their nervous system is moreperfect since they have a longitudinal spinalmarrow with ganglions, a mouth furnished withtoothed jaws disposed by pairs, and jointedtendril-like organs about the mouth and approachesnear to that of the Annulose animals, 1the Condylopes of Latreille. These, therefore,may be considered as properly entitled to thedenomination of a Class ; but should not beplaced at a distance from the Crustaceans, towhich Lamarck, with reason, thinks they makea near approach, as they are by Cuvier andCams. In fact, they seem to have little to dowith the bivalve Molluscans, except in beingdefended by more than one shell, and havingno head.I shall now mention the most prominent charactersof those shell-fish, that I regard as strictlyentitled to the denomination of Molluscans.ANIMAL soft, without articulations. Mantlebilobed, enveloping more or less the animal.Gills varying. A heart and circulation. No medullarychord with ganglions, but a few scatteredganglions from which issue nerves to various1 Annulosu.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 237parts. Body commonly defended by a calcareousshell, to which it adheres only by one or twopoints, but in some instances it is externallynaked, and has an internal bone.The Molluscans may be .divided into severalfamilies, and those of Cuvier are mostly natural,but as my plan has been to ascend from thelowest grade of animals towards the highest, Ishall reverse this order, and begin my observationswith the last of his families, or more properlyspeaking Orders, excluding for the presentthe Cirripedes of Lamarck, or most of the multi-valvesof Linne, as leading off laterally towardsthe Crustaceans.His first order he calls Acephales, or headlessMolluscans, it includes all the bivalve shells ofLinne, with the addition of the Holds orstone-borers. 1 Lamarck has divided it into twosections, which, regarding it as a Class, are withhim Orders ; the first is Muscular? having twoattaching muscles, and two muscular impressions; and the second is Unimuscular, 3 havingonly one such muscle with one impression. Withregard to their habits and economy, the bivalveMolluscans may also be divided into two sections,the first of which may consist of thosethat inclose themselves either in a cell or burrow,or live in the mud, &c. ; and the second of those1 Pholas. 2 Conchifires dimyaires.3 C. monomyaires.2.')8 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.that fix themselves to the rocks, stones, and othersubstances, by means of a Byssus, which theyhave the faculty of spinning from their foot orother part, or by a tendinous ligament which theyprotrude through an orifice in their shell.The general habit of ihejirst family, includinga vast variety of forms, seems to be that of boringand burrowing, many piercing wood, and evenrock, and others burrowing in the sand, sometimesto a great depth. Thus they are instructedby their instinct to form a convenient cell orother habitation, either constantly submerged,or only when the tide visits them, in whichthey are enabled to procure their destined food,of what nature does not appear to have beenclearly ascertained, although probably animalcules,introduced when they inspire the water forrespiration, may form a principal portion ofit, as the majority having no teeth for mastication,require a kind of nutriment for whichit is not necessary : comparing this tribe ofaquatic animals with those of the antecedentclasses, we see the same object effected bydifferent means. The sheathed polype 1 buildsa house of matter elaborated in its own stomach,while the ship-borer 2 pierces wood, and thestone-borer the rocks, and the razor-shell 3burrows deep in the sand with the same view ;1 See above, p. 166. n. 2. 2 Teredo. 3 Solen.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 239and thus each is instructed by its OmniscientCreator, and fitted by its structure and organization,to accomplish the intended purpose, butby different means and instruments.While each of these creatures has a particularand individual end in view, in its several proceedings,its own accommodation and appropriatenutriment and defence; the Creator, who hasgifted them accordingly, makes use of them asinstruments, which by their combined agency,though each, as it were, by a different process,accomplish, usually by slow degrees, Hisgeneral purposes. This object, in the presentinstance, as well as in numerous others, seemsto be to remove obstacles that stand in the way,and prevent certain changes willed by Providence,in the sea-line of any country, fromtaking place. Rocks may be regarded as somany munitions of a coast, which prevent theencroachment of the ocean, but nothing canmore effectually prepare the way for the removalof this safeguard, than its being, as it were,honey-combed by numberless stone-borers, thatmake it their habitation, thus it must be graduallyrendered weaker ; till it is no longer ableto resist the impetus of the waves ; the processis very slow, but it is sure ; and it is worthyof remark, by what a seemingly weak organmost of these animals are enabled to effectthis purpose, a fleshy foot, strengthened by no240 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.internal bone or gristle, but upon which theycan turn as upon a pivot, and so in due timeeffect their destined purpose.I shall now proceed to furnish some examplesof the manner in which this is effected : and givean account of some of each of these tribes,beginning with those, and they are numerous,that make the burrows in the sand to a considerabledepth, so that it presents a less solid massto the action of the waves.I shall first call the reader's attention to theproceeding of one usually denominated the razor-shell,from the supposed resemblance of some ofthe species to that instrument ; in substance andcolour they are often like the human nail, and asthey, as well as the stone-borers, are stated toemit a phosphoric light, and also are eaten, itseems to me most probable that they are theanimals and not the pholad as is usually supposed,which the Roman naturalist describesunder the name Dactyle* These animals burrowin the sand, sometimes to the depth of two orthree feet, and never quit the burrow unless byforce. Poli says the collectors of them areaccustomed to pour oil upon the water, whichrenders it quite transparent so that they can discernthe razor-fish in its burrow by its tubeswhich are exerted. So powerful are its struggles,that, though they wind linen about their1 See Appendix, note 23.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 241feet, they are often severely wounded by thesharp edges of their shells. The animal descendsto the bottom of its burrow when the tide retires,and there remains till its return when it risesagain. In order to take it, the fishermen areaccustomed to cast into its retreat which alwaysremains open for respiration, and which is indicatedby a little jet of water a very little salt,this probably deceives the razor-fish and causesit to ascend, thinking the tide returned. Theybury themselves with wonderful celerity by therapid action of their foot, and mount again bythe combined action of that part and their smoothvalves. The former is cylindrical and ends in aspherical summit of larger diameter than therest of the foot. 1The common cockle 2 is also a borer. Mr.Osier, in a very interesting paper in the PhilosophicalTransactions for 1826, has describedthe way in which they bury themselves. Thefoot of the cockle, he observes, is very strongand .stiff, and is the instrument by which theyprincipally perform this operation ; but to lookat it when unemployed, we cannot readily conceivehow it can make a burrow capaciousenough for so large a shell. Its point, indeed,is solid, and a viscid secretion from its surfaceenables it to fix itself more firmly in the sand,but this alone is not sufficient to accomplish this1 PLATE V. FIG. 1. 2 Artium edule.VOL. i. R242 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.purpose, it is therefore further gifted with thepower of distending it to a size, nearly equallingthat of its shell but 'how is this effected?It has a tube, opening just within the mouth,which conveys to the foot the water by whichthe animal is enabled to distend it thus the sizeof the boring auger becomes so nearly equal tothat of the shells, that the solid point or bit firstentering the sand, in time, by rotatory motionsoften repeated, works a burrow that receivesthe shell, and the animal is buried with onlythe extremity of its siphon emerging. How admirableis this contrivance of Divine Wisdomto enable it to bury its shell, which it couldscarcely otherwise accomplish.We easily comprehend the use of terrestrialburrowing animals, by this habit they not onlyconstruct a habitation for themselves, but by themould they throw out they help to fertilize andrenew the soil ; but with regard to the aquaticborrowers on the barren sands, which the tidessubmerge, we only see one end answered, thewelfare of the individual who forms them : butthey likewise doubtless answer some moregeneral purpose connected with a plan of Providencewhich daily advances towards its completion,though we do not clearly comprehend whatthat end is. I was once conversing with afisherman of a village on the N. E. coast ofNorfolk on the subject of his trade, whenBIVALVE MOLLUSC AN S. 243amongst other matters he observed, that fromsome alteration in the sands of that coast thenumber of small shell fish had considerablydiminished of late years, which being the principalfood of soles and other flat fish had occasioneda great diminution of them also. Anover abundance of burrowing bivalves mayundermine the beach to that degree, that thesea in high tides and stormy weather may makesuch a breach upon it as may carry away, orbury too deep, a large proportion of these shellfish,which would cause the fishes to leave thecoast for one better provided with food for them.No animal has been more celebrated for themischief it has occasioned as a timber-borer thanthat of which I shall next give some account.I am speaking of the ship-worm. 1 Though theanimal of some of the land-shells, as the snails, 2 dohim some injury in his garden, man seldom suffersvery materially from their ravages, but the ship-worm,where it gets head, does him incalculableinjury : destroying piles as far as they are underthe water and every thing constructed of timberthat is placed within their reach, to which theyare as injurious as the boring wood-louse ; 3they even attack the stoutest vessels, and renderthem unfit for service. Their object however isnot to devour the timber, but with the same viewthat the pholads bore into the rock, to make1 Teredo navalis. 2 Helix. 3 Linaria terebrans.244 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.for themselves a cell in which they may be safefrom their enemies ; their food is probably conveyedto them in the sea water. These animalscannot exist in fresh water, they pierce the woodby means of what Cams calls boring shellsmoved by a double-bellied muscle. The valves ofthe shells of this animal are emarginateorbilobed,both lobes are beautifully scored at the margin,but in different directions, the furrows in onebeing much the finest and receiving those of theother. The mode in which these animals borehas not been ascertained, probably it is by therotation of their valves. Sir E. Home describesthem as protruding a kind of proboscis whichhas a vermicular motion, and which he supposesto act as a centre-bit while the creature is boring.The shells, by means of their ridges, probablyact, like those of the pholads, as rasps. Theybore in the direction of the grain of the timber,deviating only to avoid the track of others.Various are the animals whose function it isto attack substances from which the vitalprinciple is departed, nor are those, we see inthe foregoing instance, which are submerged,always exempted from this law. Fortunatelythe aquatic animals, that prey upon timber, fallvery far short of the terrestrial ones in theirnumber and in the amount of the damage theyoccasion, and their aversion to fresh water is thesafeguard of our bridges and other buildingsBIVALVE MOLLILSCANS. 215that are erected upon piles did an animal, withthe boring powers of the ship-worm, enter ourrivers and abound there, we should see the magnificentbridges that so much adorn our metropolisand are so indispensable to its inhabitants,gradually go to ruin the vast stones with whichthey are built might become the habitation ofpholads, and other rock-borers, and the communicationbetween the two sides of the rivergreatly interrupted. But a merciful Providencehas so limited the instincts of the differentanimals it has created, that they cannot overstepa certain boundary, nor extend their ravagesbeyond the territory assigned to them. The lawlaid down to the ship-worm is to hasten thedecay of timber, that is out of its place, andmay be denominated an unsightly encroachmentupon the ocean this is the law they must obey,and they make no distinction, whether it is disownedby all, or an important and valuable partof man's property. Their individual object, ashas been stated above, is their own benefit, andthey neither know that they obey a law of God,or injure man, but the Almighty by an irresistibleagency impels them to it, and they fulfil thepurposes of his Providence, at the same time thatthey provide for their own welfare.The history of none of the boring bivalves ismore interesting than that of the Holds, orstone-borers. These animals are defended by two246 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.very fragile shells strengthened indeed by supplementarypieces, and rough like a file, inhabitedby a very soft animal which appears to be furnishedwith no organs adapted to boring so harda substance as a rock. When the young aredisclosed from the egg, being cast upon the rockin which their mother resides, they bore a holein it which they enlarge daily, and which theynever leave, unless compelled by force. Thishole always communicates with the water, and isthe orifice through which the animal exerts itsdouble siphons ; one of these siphons is its mouthand the other its anal orifice. Reaumur madesome observations upon their mode of boring, hesays, that it is by the rotation of the two valvesof their shell which form a rasp, and continuallywear away the rock which surrounds them.The surface of the valves of the shell is ridgedlongitudinally and transversely, and rough withasperities at the intersections of the ridges whichseems to fit it for such an office, but still it isusually so tender and friable, that one would notexpect it could act upon a rock, nor could it beby this agency that they first make an entrywhen young, or bore through shells, madrepores,and wood as they are said to do. They arestated principally to select calcareous rocks andsometimes hardened clay, which seem betteradapted to the nature of their shells. Poli saysthey use their foot as an auger in excavatingBIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 247their crypts, the shell revolving upon it as uponan axis.Mr. Osier, in the memoir before alluded to,states that the pholads can be observed toburrow only in the young state : and that theyare found completely buried when so minute asto be almost invisible. The guiding hand ofProvidence excites them from their very birthto fix themselves by their pointed foot, to erecttheir shells, and giving them a partial rotatorymotion which employs the valves alternately,thus to enlarge their habitation, and this almostconstantly, since the rapidity of their growth, forthe first few weeks, compels them to act perseveringlyin effecting that object, for the raspingsof its crypt would clog the animal if they wereleft in it. When the siphon is distended withwater, the animal, closing the orifices of its tubes,suddenly retracts them : thus a jet of water isproduced which is prolonged by the gradualshutting of the valves, and clears the shell andthe crypt.There is another family of bivalves whichbores the rocks, the species of which are instructedby their Maker, to accomplish theirobject by a very different process. I allude toLamarck's family of Stone-eaters. 1 This familycontains only two genera, removed from Venus,1 Les Lithophages.248 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.which he denominates Saxicave* and Petri-cole?the habits of which appear to be the same.M. Fleurian-de-Bellevue has described the proceedingsof a species found in great numbers insubmarine calcareous rocks near Rochelle. Itlives like the pholads in crypts within the rock,but as the crypt is not circular, it is clearit cannot be produced by a revolution of theanimal upon its foot ; M. de Bellevue, therefore,concluded that it dissolved the stone by meansof a phosphoric acid transuding from its body.Some have thought, that did the animal secretesuch an acid, it must have destroyed its shell,but since the rock round the crypt is found tobe differently coloured from the rest, for a littlethickness, and the animal does not frequent theargillaceous, basaltic, and other rocks in thevicinity, but only the calcareous ones, M. Bellevue'sopinion is rendered not improbable. Itis surely very possible that the acid may be somixed and tempered as to act upon the rockand not upon the shell. Mr. Osier, in thememoir lately quoted, brings forward some verypowerful additional arguments which confirmthis opinion. The species which he observedwas the rugose saxicave. 3 This animal fixesitself by a byssus from the foot, and thereforecannot perform a rotatory motion, and it appears1 Saxicava. 2 Petricola 3 Saxicava rugosa.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 249to have no mechanical means of excavating itscrypt it can act solely upon the calcareous partof the rocks it perforates for these and otherreasons, Mr. Osier is of the same opinion withM. de Bellevue.Poli has described, a stone-boring bivalve,belonging to the muscle genus, which perforatesmarble, each inhabiting a separate crypt, generallyas large as the shell, and which he thinksthey enlarge by friction and rotatory motion.The pillars of the temple of Serapis at Puteoliwere perforated by these animals at the heightof forty-six feet above the sea, whence it is probablethey were so perforated before they werecarried there. 1When we compare the proceedings of thesefour kinds of boring or burrowing Molluscans,above described, with their forms, we shall findin them a particular adaptation of means to anend. In the ship worm, whose province is topenetrate into submerged timber and there totake its abode, we find the anterior part of thebody armed with two shelly valves, moved bystrong muscles, which cut and rasp the substanceupon which they act, so that it probablybegins its labour as soon as it is born, introducingits narrow body, defended at the otherextremity also by shell, into the timber softened1 Poli, ii. 215.250 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.by the water, and slowly increasing its cryptas its dimensions increase in this case the mostpowerful action seems to be at the anterior end,though assisted, it may be, by some motion atthe posterior. This kind of action appears bestsuited to its slender body.Let us next examine the pholads, all thegenuine ones are rough like a rasp, strengthenednear the base with accessory valves and a thickinterior margin, indicating that here is the greataction, and here it is that the foot revolves, thusmaintaining a rotatory motion, causing the valvesto act as files upon the walls of its crypt and thusto enlarge it when necessary ; perhaps thisaction may also be connected with its respirationand nutriment ; it is probably very slow andgradual, so as not to injure the frail apex ofits shells.In another rock-borer, of a form not suited toeffect an excavation by a rotatory motion, thedeficiency, we see, is compensated for, and iteffects its purpose by employing chemical agencywhen its crypt becomes too small for it.The sand-boring razor-shell above described,would be impeded by a rough shell, in excavatingits deep burrow, its valves therefore are smoothand polished, and its body very narrow, andconsequently meets with less resistance in itsmotion either upwards or downwards while thecockles which do not bore to a great depth areBIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 261differently constructed and proceed in a differentmanner.We next come to those bivalves which fixthemselves to the rocks, or in other securestations, by means of a Byssus, which is usuallyformed of brown silken threads, intertwined likewool, spun from the foot of the animal, formedfrom a slimy fluid furnished by a gland situatedunder its base. Poli says, with respect to thebyssus of muscles, which have all of them thisfaculty, that it is of the same structure with hair,and that, at the extremities, it is furnished withlittle cups or suckers, by which it adheres sofirmly, that the muscles can only be drawn fromthe water in great bunches. Some species areentirely enveloped with this substance. Theseprovisions evidently indicate design and CreativeWisdom.The giant Clamp-shells 1 belonging to the bi-muscularsection, sometimes four feet in lengthand weighing more than five hundred pounds,suspend their vast bulk by means of a strongbyssus : below the hinge is a large opening,through which the animal passes a bundle oftendinous fibres, by which it is suspended to therocks however large and weighty its shells, andthus it is enabled to fix itself securely, whereverits instinct directs it.1 Tridacne Gig as.252 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.These animals are said to be taken by meansof a long pole, which is introduced between thevalves of their shells when open ; they immediatelyclose them, and will not quit their hold,till they are landed. They are a principal articleof food in the Moluccas, especially the youngones, which may be kept alive a long time.The wing-shell * belonging to the unimuscularsection, has long been celebrated, on more thanone account, from a very early period. Theyare called wing-shells, or fin-shells, because theyare shaped somewhat like a wing or fin, theirLatin name (Pinna) is supposed to have beengiven them because of their resemblance to theplumes which the Roman soldiers wore in theirhelmets. They are sometimes very large, someare said to measure three feet in length : theirsubstance differs from that of most shells, beingof a fibrous structure, and they appear to beformed of transverse imbricated laminae, theyare also semi-transparent and very thin. Theirbyssus has been long celebrated, for it is mentionedby Aristotle. 2 Its Creator has providedthis animal, as we learn from Poli, with a pairof bifid muscles with which it spins this substance,which emerges from the shell oppositethe hinge ; like the thread of the muscle itterminates in a sucker, and with it the animal1 Pinna. 2 See Appendix, note 24.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 253adheres to the rocks and other bodies which itmeets with at the bottom of the sea, and thusthey brave the agitation of the waters. Theyseldom change their station, but they can unfixtheir byssns, if any circumstance renders suchchange imperative. In Sicily and Calabria thisbyssus, which is very silky, is manufactured intostuffs, stockings, and gloves, which are very fineand warm, but it will take no dye : articles composedof it are very dear, and the manufactureis fast declining. Aristotle observed a littlecrustaceous animal within the valves of the wing-shell,which he thought was necessary to itsexistence. Pliny says it is always accompaniedby a companion, the Pinnotheres or Pinnophylax,that when the Pinna opens its shell, a numberof small fish boldly enter, and when it is full,the crab gives the blind animal notice by aslight bite, who immediately closes his shell, andassigns a portion of the prey to his little usefulcompanion. Small Crustaceans indeed, bothcrabs and shrimps, certainly do find their waynot only into the shells of the Pinna, but intothose of muscles and whiles, 1 but their objectis to defend themselves, especially when theircrust is soft, and not to tell the Pinna when toclose its doors upon its prey ; for its food is thesea water or the animalcules it contains.1 Bucclnum.254 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Many other bivalves, which I need not particularize,spin a byssus with their foot. Singular it isthat the same office should be assigned to organsso differently situated in different animals. Thespinnerets of the silk-worm, and other spinningmoths are in the mouth, those of the spider in itstail, and those of various shell-fish in their fool;in the first case, if we consider the various purposesto which caterpillars apply the faculty ofspinning, we see the importance of its beingunder the direction of the eye of the animal :and even in the case of the spider, the eyedirects the animal in its course to form its concentriccircles, and the thread follows it ; and thesame is the case when it spins the rays thattraverse its web ; and when it descends from aheight the same takes place. But the foot isthe only organ that is so situated in bivalveshells, as to throw forth a thread that will goout of the shell, where it is wanted for use.Of all this tribe of shells none are more beautiful,both as to their form, painting, and sculpture,than what are called Escallop shells, or Combshells 1 from their resemblance, as to the scoringof the upper valve, to that instrument. Thesemay be regarded as, in some degree, analoguesof the butterflies amongst insects, and their flyingas it were, on the surface of the water, as1 Pecten.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 255we shall soon see, increases the resemblance.There is, however, a difference between the Con-slopesor annulose animals and the Molluscans,which must strike every examiner, the lattercannot be called symmetrical animals, while inthe former the most perfect symmetry, both as tonumber of parts, and their structure, generalform, sculpture and painting, prevails ; in thelatter this general symmetry seems not to obtain ;in the muscular bivalves, indeed, the two shellsare generally symmetrical both in form, size, andsculpture, but this does not invariably take place.In many of the unimusculars the upper shelldiffers from the under, either in size or otherparticulars; in the escallop shells it is muchflatter and more ornamented as to colouring ;and in the animal itself it is not a generalprinciple that each part shall have its counterpart,or, if single, that the two sides shallexactly correspond. This furnishes some additionto the other proofs of the superiority ofthe Insect over the Molluscan tribes ; symmetry,especially of the external organs and parts,distinguishes all the higher classes from mandownwards ; but is continued in the invertebratesub-kingdom no further than the Condy-lopes, when it is interrupted or altogetherceases. It must be observed, however, thatin the animal of the univalves, a beginning ofsymmetrical organs appears in the tentacles,256 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.which are in pairs mutually corresponding, acircumstance not discoverable in the bivalves.The escallop shells were considered by Linneas belonging to the same genus with the oyster,which he regarded as a kind of rustic tribebelonging to it ; but they not only differ widelyin their shells, but also in the animal they contain.The mantle of the former is stated to becomposed of two large membranes surroundedwith long white hairs, and with reticulatedeyes: whence Poli denominated the animal ofthis shell " Argus ;" but these assuredly are notreal eyes, but probably eye-like organs or tentacles,useful to the animal, perhaps, as organs ofinvestigation and prehension, but not of vision.Lamarck, who does not, in loco, mention thisformation of the animal of the escallop shells,observes that the Spondees 1 have the margin of themantle furnished with two rows of tentacularthreads, a structure that seems to indicate someinvestigating office or prebendary function residentin that part, perhaps like the tentacles ofthe polypes they may seize animalcules. Theanimal of the oyster has nothing akin to this, asufficient proof, added to their very differentshells, that they belong to different genera.The French call these shells pelerines orpilgrims, they are also in catholic countries,especially in Spain and Portugal, called shells of1 Spondylus.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. '257St. James, because the pilgrims to the shrine ofSt. James of Composedly, in Alicia, wereaccustomed to ornament their cloak and hatwith them.I shall next make some observations upon thebivalve just mentioned, the oyster, which of allshell-fish, though it is one of the rudest and leastsightly, has from every age been most in request,as a favourite article of food. This gift of Providenceis widely dispersed, being found on thecoasts of Europe, Asia, and Africa ; those thatfrequent our own are reckoned the best of all.They are not a roving animal, but when theyleave the matrix, they fix themselves torocks or any substance that falls in their way,which they seldom quit. Like other Molluscans,they are hermaphrodites, and are stated byPoli, the great luminary of conchology, to contain1,200,000 eggs, so that a single oyster mightgive birth to 12,000 barrels!! Providence hasthus taken care that the demands made uponthem to gratify the appetite of his creature man,shall not annihilate the race. These also arethe only shell-fish that man has thought it worthhis while to cultivate, by keeping them in certainpits formed for the purpose, called amongstus beds, and to which the salt water is admittedonly at high tides : and in these the green oystersare said to be produced ; marine plants of thatcolour, the growth of which is favoured by theVOL. i. s258 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.tranquillity of the water in these tanks, generatea vast number of seminiform germes, whichentering the shells of the oysters when theyopen them to take their food so it is statedstain them with their own hue.They have other enemies besides man : whoeverhas observed their shells will often see themquite covered with a small kind of sea-acorns. 1Tt is related also that certain crabs get into theirshells, first introducing a piece of stone to hinderthem from shutting, but this is probably fabulous; they may, however, when the oystersopen their shells to receive the sea water, enterthem as they do those of the muscles and thewing-shell, either for protection or for the sakeof food. It is observed that the oyster defendsitself against intrusive enemies by squirtingupon them with force water kept in reserve intheir shells ; they keep out those that attempt topierce their shells to get at them, by thickeningthem in the part attacked.I shall next give some account of a bivalvethat has interested mankind from a very earlyperiod of history, on account of the valuable gemthat it produces, and which is frequently mentionedin Holy Scripture. The Supreme Being,in his goodness and attention to the wants andtastes of his principal creature, has not neglectedto furnish him with various articles for ornament1 Bo/ami*, &e.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 259as well as for use : and the most valuable of allpossessions, the kingdom of grace in the heart,is symbolized by a pearl of great price ; andthough the apostle charges females not to adornthemselves with gold or pearls, but with goodworks, the meaning of the passage is, that thelatter should have their first attention, not toforbid absolutely the use of the former theyare to adorn themselves not so much with goldor pearls as with good works which ought tobe the object of their most sedulous care.The animal that produces pearls in the greatestabundance, of the purest nature, and of thehighest value, was by Linn classed with themuscles, 1 but Lamarck has formed it into adistinct genus which he names Meleagrina.In this country it is usually called the pearl-oyster.It inhabits the Persian Gulf, thecoasts of Ceylon, the sea of New Holland, theGulf of Mexico, and the coasts of Japan. Itattains perfection no where but in the equatorialseas, but the pearl fishery in the island ofCeylon is the most celebrated and productive ;it is on the west coast, off the bay of Condatchy,where the country is very sandy and nearlywithout inhabitants, but on these occasionsa populous town, with many streets a mile long,appears to have suddenly started up. Theoyster beds or banks extend over a space thirty1 Mytilus margaritiferus.260 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.miles long by twenty-four broad. The twentiethof February is generally the day of rendezvousfor the fishermen. The fishery is commonlyrented by a single individual, who is allowed toemploy 150 boats for thirty days, there areabout 6000 boatmen and attendants. Theoysters vary in their qualities according to thenature of the ground to which they are attached ;and also in their number, by the action ofthe tides and other circumstances : those atthe greatest depth produce the largest pearls,which are situated in the fleshy part near thehinge. Pearls consist of concentric coats of thesame substance as that which forms the mother-of-pearlof the shell ; they are produced by theextravasation of a lapidifying fluid, secreted inthe organs of the animal and filtered by itsglands. For one pearl that is found perfectlyround and detached between the membranes ofthe mantle, hundreds of irregular ones occurattached to the mother-of-pearl like so manywarts : they are sometimes so numerous that theanimal cannot shut its shell, and so perishes.The pearl is a formation forced upon the animalby some annoying substance in its shell, whichit covers with mother-of-pearl, as the bees dointrusive wasps with wax, to fix it or hinder itfrom affecting them by putridity, &c. Sir E.Home is of opinion that the abortive eggs of theanimal are the nucleus upon which the pearl isBIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 261formed, and he has made it very probable thatthis is often or generally the case, but still theprocess just mentioned may take place whenaccidental substances are introduced, and producethe warty excrescences, arid sometimesloose misshapen pearls.The diving tackle consists of a large stonesuspended by a rope with a strong loop abovethe stone to receive one foot of the diver, andhaving also a slip-knot, and a basket formed ofa hoop and network which receives the otherfoot. When he has fixed himself in this tackleand is duly prepared, he holds his nostrils withone hand, and pulling the running-knot withthe other, instantly descends when he reachesthe bottom he disengages his foot from thestone, which is immediately drawn up to beready for the next diver. He at the bottomthrows himself on his face and collects everythinghe can lay hold of into the basket whenready to ascend he jerks the rope and is speedilyhauled up, and working himself up the rope hearrives at the surface sooner than the ladenbasket. A minute and half or two minutes arethe utmost any diver remains under water. Theshark charmers form a necessary part of thecompany, by their incantations they are supposedto possess the power of preventing these voraciousfishes from attacking the divers, and they willnot descend without their attendance ; where the262 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.bed is rich the diver often collects 150 oystersat one dip, but sometimes not more than five. 1It is said that a single diver will, in one day,often bring up from 1000 to 4000 oysters.From the simple circumstance that Providencehas instructed this animal, which cannoteject from its shell those substances, whetherformed within itself, or that have accidentallyentered, to encase them in the precious substancewhich it is empowered to secrete, whata vast fund of ornament to deck the most lovelypart of the creation, and having no parallel inany gem that the earth produces, is provided.The pearls obtained from other shell-fish varyin colour those from the wing-shell are brown,and those from the fresh-water muscles greenish,but sometimes they are yellow, pink, bluish, andsome are even black ; these last are very rareand dear.Other bivalves fix themselves by a tendinousligament to the rocks. In one genus,* in theupper valve near the hinge, is an aperture,closed by a kind of operculum formed at thedilated extremity of an internal muscle, it is bythis operculum that the animal fixes itself. Inanother, related to the last, 3 the beak of the lowervalve turns up, overhanging in some degreethe upper valve ; in this beak is a notch or aperMalte-Brun, Geog. iii. 225. 2 Anomia, PL. V. FIG. 2, 3.3 Terebratula, PL. V. FIG. 4.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS.ture through which the fixing tendon passes ;affording an admirable instance of variationin the means of attaining the same end, whencircumstances require it. It was necessarythat the valves should not be reversed, a tendonthrough the lower valve secures this in thefirst of these animals ; but in the second, wherethe overhanging beak would interfere withthis purpose, the tendon issues from the beakitself, so as to enable the animal still to fixitself with the proper valve downwards. In theAnomia the valve takes the form of the substanceit is fixed to.Who would think that these headless animals,unprovided with organs that indicate any ofthe higher senses, as sight, smell, and hearing,and apparently fitted with no other means ofmotion than those of opening and shutting thevalves of their shells, or travelling very slowlyfor a few inches, should yet be able not only toleap and use other motions, but occasionally tosail gaily on the surface of the ocean ; but,however improbable this may seem, it has beenproved to be the case by the evidence of eyewitnessesof the fact.The common cockle, 1 Poli says, can not only,by means of its foot turn round, or to eitherside, but even take a good leap. The Tritons, 21 Cardinal edule. ~ Triyonia.264 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.nearly related to the cockle, are mostly fossilsbut there is one recent species, found on thecoast of New Holland, called originally, fromthe pearly lustre of the inside of its shells, thepearl triton, 1 a name changed, without reason,by Lamarck. This, which was originally takenby Lesser and since by Capt. King, was morerecently brought from thence by Mr. Setchbury,who told me, that they would leap over thegunwale of a boat in which he was, to theheight of above four inches. The foot of thisanimal is bent at an acute angle, so, as uponpressure, to form a very elastic organ, 2 and thatof the cockle is nearly the same.Those elegant shells the Pectens, or comb-shells,have long been celebrated for theirmotions. Pliny says, probably meaning theseshells, that they leap and flutter out of thewater, and dive. D'Argenville relates, thatwhen they are on shore, they regain the waterby opening the valves of their shells as wideas they can and then shutting them briskly,by which they acquire sufficient elasticity torise three or four inches, and thus proceed tillthey accomplish their object. Most probablythe foot assists in producing these leaps. Theirprogression in the water is described as verydifferent ; when they rise to the surface but the1 T. maryaritacea. 2 PLATE V. FIG. 5.BIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 265means by which they do this has not beenclearly explained they support themselves halfunder water. They next open their shells, towhich they communicate such a vibration, thatthey acquire a very brisk movement from rightto left, which enables them, as it were, to runupon the water.The tulip-shell, 1 when it walks, if I may sospeak, opens and shuts its valves, and at thesame time lengthens and shortens its foot,which seems to indicate a connection, or action,between the former and the latter organs,similar to what has been observed to take placein insects, and perhaps points out some analogybetween the valves of the shell and the upperwings, or elytra of insects, and the mantle andtheir under wings.Boscc states, that the animals of the genusVenus, in calm weather, may be seen sailingon the surface of the waters, using one of theirvalves as a boat and the other as a sail. Asthese are usually rather heavy shells, theymust be furnished with some means of renderingthemselves lighter than the water. Pliny, ofold, mentions shells dedicated to Venus, whichsail and oppose their concave part to the wind.Thus we see the Creator has given even tothese apparently stupid and inactive creaturesmeans of enjoyment, that every one is not aware1 Telling.266 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.of; and powers of locomotion, of which, at firstsight, they seem incapable.I might enlarge here on the admirable contrivanceand variety observable in the hinge, asit is called, by means of which the animals areenabled to open and shut the valves of theirshells; upon the sculpture and colours thatdistinguish many of them, particularly amongstthe unimusculars, but this chapter is alreadytoo long, and enough has been said to provethat they have in no respect been neglectedor overlooked by the Almighty Being who willedtheir existence, and who is ever watchful overthe creatures of his hand, to provide them withallthings necessary for their being, consistentlywith the ends he created them to serve.CHAPTER IX.Functions and Instincts. Univalve Molluscans.THE Univalve shells of the Swedish naturalist,a term adopted from Aristotle's Monothyra, arenext to be considered ; these, with the multivalveBritons, form the Gastropods, or shell-fish usingtheir belly for a leg, of Cuvier ; and with theUNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 207cuttle-fish and nautilus tribe constitute Lamarck'sClass of Molluscans. The latter author divideshis Class into five orders, four of which belongto the tribe I am considering.1 . Pteropods (wing-footed) ; furnished withorgans only for swimming and sailing. 12. Gastropods (belly-footed); body straight,never spirally convolved ; a muscular foot forcreeping under the belly.3. Trachelipods (neck-footed) ; greatest part ofthe body spirally convolved, always inhabitinga spirivalve shell ; foot free, attached to theneck, formed for creeping.4. Heteropods (diverse-footed) ; no coronet ofarms; no sub ventral, or sub jugular foot; fins,one or more, not disposed in pairs. 2As the Cephalopods, forming Lamarck's fourthOrder, may be regarded rather as constituting alarger division or Sub-class of the Molluscans,than an Order, I shall consider them in a separatechapter.1 . Proceeding from one of the above Orders toanother, I shall select such individuals, belongingto it, as appear to exemplify the great attributesof their Creator, either in their structure,forms, habits, or instincts. The animals of thefirst Order, like the long celebrated Argonautand Nautilus, enliven the surface of the oceani PLATE V. FIG. 6, 7. 2 FIG. 8.268 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.in fine weather, where they steer their littlebarks through, between, and over its fluctuatingwaves, and spread their membranous sails to thesoft breathing of the zephyrs.One of the most noted animals of the tribe isknown by the appellation of the Boreal Clio,which, like the jelly-fish, has a gelatinous body,is defended by no shell, and affords food to thewhales and other fishes, as well as to the seabirds.This animal is abundant in places thatsuit it, and appears only during the warmesthours of the day on the surface.Other genera of this Order are covered bya shell or shells. Of this kind is the genusHyalcea, so named from its semi-transparentshell, which wears the appearance of a bivalvewith soldered valves, the upper one being thelargest ; this difference of size of the seemingvalves causes an aperture through which theanimal sends forth two large yellow and violetwings, or sails, rounded and divided at theirsummit into three lobes. The head in this genusis almost evanescent, so that both shell and headexhibit an easy transition from the acephalous orbivalve Molluscans to those which have a head.When its wings or sails are unfolded it moveswith great velocity on the surface of the sea.The animals of this Order, both from the beautifulcolouring of their filmy sails or wings, andfrom their number and symmetry, are betterUNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 269entitled to the appellation of the butterflies of theocean, than the escallop shells which have sometimesbeen so called. The mantle of the bivalvesbecomes an organ of very different use in thePteropods; for they, having no means of fixingthemselves like most of the bivalves, float continuallyin the ocean; to compensate for thiswant, as in innumerable other instances, theirCreator has given them the power of expandingthis organ as a sail, both for motion and to givesome direction to their course; it is attachedto the mouth or neck, and is connected insome species with their respiration. Nothingcertain is known with respect to their food :probably they absorb the animalcules swarmingin the sea-water.2. The series of Gastropods begins with animalsthat have no shell, amongst which the mostremarkable seem to be the Scylla and the Tethys,both known to Linne, and by him described.The former is an oblong gelatinous animal, laterallycompressed, elevated above in the middle,where it has two pair of membranous wings orfins. Its inferior surface is hollowed out longitudinally,by means of which, and its tentacles,it can embrace the stems of the foci or sea-wrack,the flowers of which it eats. It is describedas moving very slowly in the water bybending its extremities. It swims on the surfacewhen the weather is calm, but adheres to the270 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.floating fuel when the sea is agitated, so that thekindness and foresight of its Maker by givingit wings, for independent motion, and means toadhere to the foci, when support is necessary toit,or it takes its food has thus provided amplyfor its enjoyment and sustenance. The greatpeculiarity of the latter, the Tethys, is a mantlewhich extends above and beyond the head, likethat of some marine goddess, concealing it entirely,and forming an ample veil, fringed orundulated at its margin. By the help of thisveil they elevate themselves to the surface, andprobably sail on the waters. This animal isnearly related to the Laptysia, a kind of sea-slug,like which it lives in muddy places, and ejectsa black fluid ; it is very fetid, and its flesh ispoisonous. It only rises to the surface in thehot season.I shall next notice a tribe of Gastropods,which at first sight, considering the number ofpieces of which their shelly covering is composed,seems to belong to the cultivates, amongstwhich Linne has placed it. It will be readilyperceived that I am speaking of the Chiton, orcoat-of-mail shell, but when the animal that itcovers is examined, it will be found that, notwithstandingits multivalve shell, it really belongsto the Gastropods.These animals are generally found under stones,sometimes they adhere to the surface of rocks, andUNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 271sometimes conceal themselves in their fissures :they often traverse vast tracts of ocean fixed to thekeels of ships, like some of the limpets they fixthemselves a good way out of the water, so asonly to be wetted when the tide is up, and sometimesabove high water mark. Poli says thatwhen they resist any attempt to force them fromtheir station, they expel the air and water on allsides and produce a vacuum, so that it is verydifficult to overcome the pressure of the atmosphere; and Mr. Freely, who had an opportunityof studying their habits on the coast ofChili, states that when not apprehensive of dangertheir attachment is very slight, and by pushingthem gently they will easily slide from the surfaceto which they are attached, but if a directattempt is made to unfix them by force, theywill part with a portion of their shells soonerthan let go their hold.When we consider that these animals are notonly often exposed to the violent action of thewaves, but also to the attack of countlessenemies, we see abundant reason for the coatof mail with which their Creator has coveredthem. Even the fleshy or cartilaginous margin,or zone, as my lamented friend the Rev. Lans-downGuilding, in his admirable memoir on thistribe, denominated it, is defended sometimes byscales, spines, and bristles, at others rough withnumerous little bony tubercles ; it is also FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.scribed as in general fringed, so that when theanimal attaches itself to a rock or stone, it isaltogether calculated, by the application of theprone part of its body, to produce a vacuum.The wing-shell and other bivalves that suspendthemselves by a byssus, are sufficiently protectedby their shells from the attack of theirenemies, without so complete an adhesion of thebody as is necessary for the coat-of-mail shell.Mr. Guilding, who had excellent opportunities ofobservation, informs us that these animals arenight-feeders, remaining stationary as above,during the day ; reasoning from analogy hesuspects they feed on marine plants, the sea-wrack,&c. These creatures slide along veryslowly, if accidentally reversed, they recover aprone position by the violent motions of the ligamentor zone that surrounds them, and if alarmedthey sometimes roll themselves up like woodlice.Lamarck proceeds immediately from the to the Patellidans or Limpets, 1 whichalso fix themselves so firmly to the rock, that itrequires considerable force to separate them, andsometimes in such numbers that their surfaceseems quite covered by them. The transitionfrom the former tribe to this, with no intermediatelinks, seems at first sight violent, and their rightto be associated in the same family rather pro1Patella.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 273emblematical : probably intermediate species willcome to light which will render this pointmore evident than the shell of these animalsappears to indicate.With regard to their functions and the partassigned to them in the great plan of creation,little is known ; probably, from their numbers insome parts, they may help to soften the rocks,so that they may, at some destined hour, yieldmore readily to the force of the winds and waves;thus they may be enumerated amongst the instrumentswhich the Creator employs to effecthis purposes, and such changes in the coast ofany country, as he wills shall take place.They afford a beautiful instance of the gradualprogress of Creative Wisdom from form to form.If the student of the tribe looks with inquiringeye at a collection of the Patellidans, or limpets,in the flattest and most depressed of them 1 he willfind no small resemblance to one of the valves ofa bivalve shell, he will soon, however, discover aprominence in it, the first tendency towards thespiral convolution, a little removed from its centre,which will prove to him that it belongs to avery different tribe ; looking again at others thatare more elevated and conical, 2 he will see thesame prominence or beak forming a more strikingfeature, and ascertaining these shells to beunivalves, he will find, upon a comparison of1 Umbrella indica. 2 Patella vulgata.VOL. I. T274 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.them with the merit, 1 the snail, 2 or the periwinkle,3 that this umbo or knob is analogous tothe spiral part of those shells, as he will see uponexamining one of the bonnet-limpets, 4 in whichhe will detect an incipient recurved spire ; passingfrom this by one of the chambered-limpets, 5it will lead him to the meridians, or top-shells,from which the road is direct to the sea-ear ; aand by another 7 he arrives almost immediatelyat the periwinkles and snails. If he chance toexamine further between the limpets and thewhelks, 8 he will find another open shell, 9 whichforms the path to the latter genus. If oncemore his eye happens to observe a shell almostopen 10 but with the sides a little turned in, hewill see still another road leading by the dippers 11to the elegant tribe of cowries. 12 It is by thisroad that Lamarck travels to them. Again, hemay perhaps be shewn, preserved in spirits,an animal whose respiratory orifice is coveredby a round shield this is the sea-slug, 13 ananimal famous for Pliny's legend of its noxiousqualities, whose head resembles a hare, whichleads from the Patellidans towards the commonslug of our gardens. 14 To the bivalves there1 Nerita, Meriting, &c. 2 Helix.3 Turbo. 4 Pileopsis ungarica, &c.5 Crepidula. 6 Haliotis. 7 Calyptrcea.8 Buccinum. $ Concholepas peruviana.10 Bulla. 11 Bulla. Cyprcea.13 Laplysia depilans. 14 Lima.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 275seems to be also a road from this central group,by a Norwegian shell described by Muller as ananomalous species of limpet, but which byLamarck is considered to be a bivalve. 1 Thelower valve in this genus is so thin that Mulleroverlooked it; by it the animal adheres to marinebodies the upper valve, like the Patella, issub-conical with a prominent vertex, and thetwo valves are not connected by a hinge.A due consideration of all these circumstances,of this radiation, as it were, from a typical formas a centre, by various roads towards differenttribes, seems to prove, and the observation is confirmedby facts in other departments of nature,that the world of animals, as well as that ofheavenly bodies, consists of numerous systemseach, so to speak, with its central orb, and allconcatenated, and revolving as it were wheelwithin wheel, and all tending towards or branchingfrom a common centre. It seems, in thepresent instance, taking the group expressed byPatella of Linne as the common centre, thatfrom thence, though by different and divergingroutes, we may arrive at almost every molluscangroup or tribe.The Molluscans that we have hitherto beenconsidering, with the exception of the herbivorousbritons, derive their nutriment from the1 Orbicular Norweyica.276 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.sea water itself, either from animalcules or othermarine substances requiring only absorption, butthe Gastropods that we are next to notice liveupon more solid food, and such as cannot bedigested without a more powerful action upon it.Of this description are the dippers 1 which arefurnished with a singular organ or gizzard thatproves their predaceous or carnivorous habits ;the remaining genera are herbivorous, but asthey exhibit no very interesting traits I shallproceed to the next Order.The Trachelipods, constituting Lamarck's thirdOrder of Molluscans, may be divided into thosethat are herbivorous, and those that are carnivorous,the first having no respiratory siphon,with which the others are furnished.The herbivorous Trachelipods may be subdividedinto terrestrial and aquatic, and thelatter into those that inhabit fresh water or salt.It is not known that any of the predaceous onesare terrestrial. The terrestrial ones not onlydevour the leaves and stems of plants, but somealso attack their roots, one species, defended byan operculum or mouth-cover, devours those ofthe violet. 2 Others of this tribe are found ontrees, under moss, or feeding on the lichens ;the shells of some of these are what are calledturreted 3 or long and slender, with spiral whirls,1 Bull a. 2 Cyclostoma elegant. 3 Clausilia.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 277resembling, in miniature, a lofty tower with aspiral staircase winding round it. By this attenuatedstructure their motions, in their closeretreats, are less impeded. As it is in this tribeof univalves that the organ just mentioned, theoperculum, or mouth-piece, first makes its appearance,it will not be improper here to givesome account of it.If we survey the various tribes of shell-bearinganimals we find them defended from the injuriesor attacks, to which their situation exposes themby various expedients, all of them indicatingPower and Wisdom in their contrivance andformation, and Goodness in their end. Theseanimals themselves all have a soft body furnishedwith organs of different kinds, suited totheir station and purposes. Those that arebelow them in the scale, especially the nakedPolypes, and gelatinous Radiaries, are still morefrail and evanescent, but their organization is soinferior, that it is probably less subject to derangementfrom external accidents, or injuriesare sooner remedied, than in that of the shell-fishwhich, unless they were clad in some kind ofmail, would probably soon perish. Accordinglywe find some protected by a multivalve tubularshell, 1 the inhabitant protruding its organs at thesummit, which is defended by an operculum consistingof more than a single piece in others,Balsams. TMcinella.278 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.also, the shell is multivalve, but the animal protrudesitself at the sides, and has no operculum,as in the common barnacle. 1 Others, again, areprotected by a shell consisting of two valves,open at one or two ends, and these seek furtherprotection either by burying themselves in thesand or perforating the rocks, or by suspendingthemselves by a byssus ; others, again, whichonly open their shells at certain times, as theoyster, fix themselves to any convenient substance.To these succeed others, whose shell istransversely divided into many pieces, 2 but yet,taken together, it forms a single valve protectingthe back of a gastro pod, or slug-like animal,which for further protection, when it is not moving,and to supply the place of a lower valve,fastens itself to a rock or other substance.With the Patellidans begin the undivided univalveshells, which like the preceding animalsprotect their lower side by fixing themselvesto the rocks ; the sea-ears, 3 which are still moreopen, have recourse to a similar mode of protectingthemselves, they preserve a communicationwith the atmosphere or water withoutelevating their shells, by means of a line ofapertures, under the thickest margin near theapex; these apertures begin when the animalis young near the spire, and as it grows it stops1 Pentelasmis. 2 Chiton. 5 Haliotis.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 279up one and opens another, as its occasions require.I have a very large specimen, in whichthere are traces of eighteen apertures, and allbut six are stopped up. If we turn our eyesfrom these to the Buccinidan or Whelk tribe,we are struck by an open Peruvian shell, whichat first sight seems like a limpet, 1 but upon inquirywe find that it is defended by an operculum,the plan of protection being here changed,and, instead of an under valve, or a rocky munition,it is closed by a broad plate, which somepeculiarity in its structure and organizationdoubtless required ; from this by Purpura andMonoceros to the true Buccinum, the mouthnarrows and the operculum with it.If we examine the common periwinkle, wefind the mouth of its shell closed by a hornyorgan called the patch, which is attached to thefoot or rather neck, by its convex or lower surface,sitting on a sub-triangular flat space spirallyconvoluted ; this is the operculum, and ifexamined on either side will be found to be alsospirally convoluted, proving that it is formed bythe part on which it sits. When the animal expandsits foot for creeping, the operculum isretracted within the shell, so as to be quite outof the way. If we examine the opercula of othershells, we shall find that the majority of themConcholcpas.280 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.have the same spiral configuration traced both onthe upper and lower surface. In most that I haveseen the intervals of the whirls increase in width,as the spires of the shells do from the base tothe mouth. In the top-shell 1 the whirls areperfectly regular and nearly equidistant. Theyvary much in thickness ; I have one three-fourthsof an inch thick, while those of the top-shelland periwinkle are very thin. In some of thethick ones, on the under side the convolutionsare very convex, and sometimes elevated intoconcentric ridges. Some underneath have aforest of obtuse elevations, and many are roughwith minute tubercles. As to substance some arehorny, while others resemble the shell ; othersare horny externally and shelly internally. Ifthese formations on the under side, as in thecommon periwinkle, represent the shape of thepart of the neck to which they are attached,as they most probably do, it must act the partof a mould, upon which the operculum is formedfrom its mucus, and increased as the apertureenlarges.Lamarck is of opinion that the shell of univalvesis formed in a similar way upon the neckof the animal, which in the Maurice or rock-shells,and other tribes distinguished by spinesor tubercles, has certain fleshy processes which1 TrochusUNIVALVE MOLLUSC ANS. 281produce those spines, 8cc. and is withdrawnwhen they have acquired consistence enoughnot to bend when thus left to themselves. Otherconchologists, particularly one of the most eminentof our times, Poli, think that the shells ofunivalves are organized bodies, and producetheir spines as vegetables do their prickles, hesays also that their shells contain cellular membranesalmost like a Rete mucous.In the progress of a shell's growth, as new spinesare formed old ones drop off, how this is effectedseems not to be accounted for by either hypothesisit is analogous, however, in a great degree,to what was mentioned above with regardto the holes in the shell of the sea-ear, only thatwith them an old hole is stopped up, when anew one is formed. All that can be said on thesubject is that the animal, instructed by Providence,as new processes are formed and a newwhirl of its shell completed, is enabled to throwoff by a solvent, or some other means unascertained,those that are no longer wanted.It is observable that the terrestrial univalves, 1of this Order, are never armed with spines, tubercles,or other elevations, but exhibit generally alevigated shell. As they move about usuallyamongst bushes, under moss, or in grass, theobject of the Creator in this structure was pro1Helix, &c.282 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.bably that their motions might not be impededby any roughness of their shell.Mr. E. W. Bradley, in a very ingenious memoir,in the Zoological Journal, has contended,with considerable strength of argument, that themoveable black points, in the upper tentacles ofsnails, though he allows they may be their analogues,are not real eyes ; but the Rev. L. Guilding,in a subsequent part of the same Journalstates, that the large strokes of the Caribbeansea have eyes furnished with iris and pupil,similar to those of birds and reptiles that theyhave also a vitreous and aqueous humour, anda black pigment, which certainly prove themto be real eyes their organ of hearing, hethought, was likewise distinct. The cowries alsoare said to have eyes exhibiting both iris andpupil, as have some volutes. 1Giving these facts their due weight, I thinkwe may conclude that the, so called, eyes ofsnails, are real though imperfect visual organs.It appears to be the plan of the Creator,to ascendFrom small beginnings to a glorious end.An organ is, as it were, sketched out, in the lowestanimal, as for instance, a nervous system, whichkeeps developing and improving till it is broughtto its acme in the highest : first we find in the1 Valuta ethiopia, PLATE VI. FIG. 1. a.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 283polypes no nervous centre, but molecules everywheredispersed ; then the next form is a nervouscollar round the oesophagus ; next dispersed ganglions; then a ganglionic chord ; and so on tillwe arrive at a regular brain and spinal marrowincased in a vertebral column. We may with reasontherefore conclude, that the organ of vision,when first planted, would be a mere rudiment,though sufficient for the animal's purposes, andpossessing few of the characters it exhibits whenarrived at its most perfect form ; these it keepsacquiring, as it becomes more developed, or toavoid misconception from nibbling critics, theCreator keeps giving it more and more perfectsight till he brings it forth, in all its glory, inthe highest animals.The most common in this country of these herbivorousTrachelipods, is the garden-snail, 1 butthe species whose history has been most copiouslyrelated, is that called in France the Iscariot?which, though stated to have been originallyimported into this country, now abounds in someparts of Sorry and other southern counties. Ishall begin by giving some account of theireconomical and then of their physical history.On the continent, especially in France, thislarge snail, which is more than double the size ofour garden one, is used as an article of food, andthough said not to be easy of digestion, is very1 Helix hortensia. H. Portia.284 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.palatable. They are thought to be in best seasonin the winter, when they are liberating, andcovered with their temporary calcareous operculum,which falls off in the spring. The Romansappear to have fattened these snails, inplaces appropriated for that purpose. Plinymentions several sorts that were kept separate,and amongst others white ones that were found inthe neighbourhood of Rieti. The Illyrian snailshe describes as the largest ; the African asmost prolific ; others from Solanum, in theNeapolitan territory, as the noblest and best :he speaks of some as attaining to so enormousa size, that their shells would contain eightypieces of money of the common currency. 1Bruguieres, to whom conchology is under verygreat obligations, is of opinion that, by cultivation,the several species of snails might bebrought to a much greater size, and furnish anabundant, wholesome, and even delicate aliment.There is no reason why the species of this genus,which feed on vegetable substances, should notbe as palatable as the oyster or periwinkle.Snails, in general, are hermaphrodites, orunite both sexes in the same individual : this isthe case with the great majority of Molluscans ;the object of Providence, in this kind of organization,is evidently the greater multiplicationof the species, but though hermaphrodites, in1 Quadrant.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 285each individual possessing the organs of bothsexes, they are not so as to sexual union ; reproductioncan only take place when different individualsimpregnate each other ; this union takesplace at the beginning of the spring, sooner orlater, according to the heat of the season. Theircourtship is singular, and realises the Paganfable of Cupid's arrows, for, previous to theirunion, each snail throws a winged dart or arrowat its partner. About twenty days after couplingthe snails lay, at different times, a great numberof white eggs, varying at each laying fromtwenty-five to eighty, as large as little peas,enveloped in a membranous shell, which crackswiden dried. They lay these eggs in shady andmoist places, in hollows which they excavatewith their foot, and afterwards cover with thesame organ. These eggs hatch, sooner or later,according to the temperature, producing littlesnails exactly resembling their parent, but sodelicate that a sun-stroke destroys them, andanimals feed upon them ; so that few, comparativelyspeaking, reach the end of the first year,when they are sufficiently defended by the hardnessof their shell. The animal, at its first exclusion,lives solely on the pellicle of the eggfrom which it was produced. Providence, whichin oviparous and other animals, has provided forthe first nutriment of the young in differentways, appropriating the milk of the mother to280 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.the young of quadrupeds ; the yolk of the egg tothose of birds, tortoises, and lizards; and thewhite of the egg to frogs and toads, has madethis pellicle or coat the best nutriment of theyoung snail. In fact, this pellicle, consisting ofcarbonate of lime, united to animal substance, isnecessary to produce the calcareous secretion ofthe mantle, and to consolidate the shell, as yet toosoft for exposure. When this envelope is eaten,the little snail finds its nutriment, more or less,in the vegetable soil around it, and from whichit continues to derive materials for the growthand consolidation of the shell. It remains thusconcealed for more than a month, when it firstissues forth into the world, and without respectof persons, attacks the vegetable productionsaround, returning often to an earthly aliment,probably still necessary, for the due growth andhardening of its portable house. These snailscease feeding when the first chills of autumn arefelt, and associating, in considerable numbers, onhillocks, the banks of ditches, or in thickets andhedges, set about their preparations for theirwinter retreat. They first expel the contents oftheir intestines, and then concealing themselvesunder moss, grass, or dead leaves, each forms,by means of its foot, and the viscid mucus whichit secretes, a cavity large enough to contain itsshell. The mode in which it effects this is remarkable; collecting a considerable quantity ofUNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 287the mucus on the sole of its foot, a portion ofearth and dead leaves adheres to it, which itshakes off on one side ; a second portion is againthus selected and deposited, and so on till it hasreared around itself a kind of wall of sufficientheight to form a cavity that will contain its shell ;by turning itself round it presses against the sidesand renders them smooth and firm. The dome,or covering, is formed in the same way : earthis collected on the foot, which then is turnedupwards, and throws it off by exuding freshmucus; and this is repeated till a perfect roofis formed. Having now completed its winter-house,it draws in its foot, covering it with themantle, and opens its spiracle to draw in the air.On closing this, it forms with its slime a finemembrane, interposed between the mantle andextraneous substances. Soon afterwards themantle secretes a large portion of very whitefluid over its whole surface, which instantly setsuniformly, and forms a kind of solid operculumlike plaster of Paris, about half a line in thickness,which accurately closes the mouth. Whenthis is become hard the animal separates themantle from it. After a time, expelling a portionof the air it had inspired, and thus beingreduced in bulk, it retreats a little further intothe shell, and forms another leaf of mucus, andcontinues repeating this operation till there aresometimes five or six of these leaves forming288 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.cells filled with air between it and the operculum.The membranous partitions are more numerousat the end than at the beginning of winter,and, in snails inhabiting the mountains, than inthose on the plains. These animals liberateat the proper period, at very different temperatures,varying from 37 to 77 Fahrenh. Respirationceases during the period of liberation.The mode in which these animals escapefrom their winter confinement is singular : theair they had expired on retiring into their shellfurther and further, remains between the differentpartitions of mucous membrane abovementioned,which forms so many cells hermeticallysealed ; this they again inspire, and thusacquiring fresh vigour, each separate partition,as they proceed, is broken by the pressure ofthe foot, projected in part through the mantle;when arrived at the operculum they burst it bya strong effort, and finally detaching it, thenemerge, begin to walk and to break their longfast. 1In all these proceedings the superintendingcare and wise provisions of a Father Being areevident. This creature can neither foresee thedegree of cold to which it may be exposed in itsstate of liberation, nor know by what means itmay secure itself from the fatal effects it would1 Gaspard and Bell, Zool. Jour. i. 93. ii. 174.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 289produce upon it, if not provided against. Butat a destined period, often when the range of thethermometer is high, not stimulated by a coldatmosphere, except, perhaps, by the increasinglength of the night, at the bidding of some secretpower, it sets about erecting its winter dwelling,and employing its foot both as a shovel to makeits mortar, as a hod to transport it, and a trowelto spread it duly and evenly, at length finishesand covers in its snug and warm retreat ; andthen still further, to secure itself from the actionof the atmosphere, with the slimy secretion withwhich its Maker has gifted it, fixes partitionafter partition, and fills each cell formed by it,with air, till it has retreated as far as it can fromevery closed orifice of its shell and thus barricadesitself against a frozen death. Again, in thespring, when the word is spoken awake, thouthat steepest it begins immediately to act withenergy, it inspires, as above related, the airstored in its cells, bursts all its cerements,returns to its summer haunts, and again layswaste our gardens.We may observe here, with respect to this andall liberating animals, a beautiful relation andcorrespondence between their habits and theirfunctions. Their official duty is to remove superfluitiesand nuisances, to prevent vegetablesubstances from encroaching too much uponeach other, to remove entirely those that areVOL. i. u290 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.dead and putrescent. At the season of theyear, therefore, when the former are in fullvigour, forth issue from their various retreats theinnumerable tribes that make them their food,but when they cease to grow and flourish theseservices are not wanted, and the animals whoperform them disappear from the face of nature.Again, when dead animals, or the excrements ofliving ones, or the sweets issuing from innumerableflowers, would clog the air that we breathewith effluvia unfriendly to health and life;countless armies are every where upon the wing,or on the alert, to prey upon such substances,and prevent their miasmata from breeding apestilence amongst us but when the cold seasonreturns, the flowers lose their leaves and blossoms,and exhale no longer their sweets, and thescents arising from putrescent and other fetidsubstances become no longer annoying thenthe whole army employed in this departmentdisappears, and the face of nature seems tolose the most busy part of its population, goneto a long repose.It is worthy of remark, with respect to theterrestrial animals of the tribe we are considering,that they all delight in shady and moistplaces, and that during hot and dry weatherthey seldom make their appearance, but nosooner comes a shower, than they are all in motion.It is probable that their power of motionUNIVALVE MOLLUSC ANS. 291is impeded by a dry soil, and that the grains ofearth and small stones, when quite dry, adhereto their slimy foot.As many of the marine shells appear in somedegree amphibious, for instance, the Britons andthe Limpets, so, perhaps, some of the terrestrialones may occasionally enter fresh waters ; indeedthe amber shells, 1 at least one species, 2 is statedto swim occasionally on the surface of the water.From these circumstances it seems not improbablethat the shell-fish, as well as the birds,so vast a proportion of them being marine animals,were all amongst the objects created on thefifth day, and produced by the waters.There are very large and beautiful shellsfound in South America, belonging to the terrestrialherbivorous section and to different genera 3divided from Helix of Linne, but we knownothing of their history or habits, I shall thereforenow say something upon the marine herbivorousTrachelipods.The violet snail, 4 which, according to the accountof its manners given by Boscc, who paidparticular attention to them in a voyage fromFrance to America, exhibits several very remarkablepeculiarities. When the sea is calm,these animals may be seen collected often in1 Succinct. 2 s. elongata.3 For instance, Achatina Julius, fyc.4 latina, PLATE VI. FIG. 2.292 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.large bands, swimming over the surface bymeans of a floating apparatus consisting of aerialvesicles, produced by their foot ; and attachedto its posterior part, a little below the point towhich the operculum is fixed in other genera, andto which Cuvier thinks it bears some analogy, 1who also observes that it has a natatory membraneor fin on each side of its body. Duringthis action their head is very prominent, and thefoot is so extended that the float or line ofvesicles forms an angle with the middle of theshell. When the sea is rough, the animal absorbsthe air from its vesicles, changes the directionof its foot, contracts its body, and lets itselfsink. It does the same when in danger fromany enemy, and further, like the cuttle-fish andsome others, colours the water by the emissionof a blue fluid, which serves to conceal it.They are vividly phosphoric in the night. Birdscarry them off with great dexterity.If their floating apparatus is mutilated thefoot can reproduce it. The latter is flat towardsthe head, this part of it is furnished with atransparent membrane, which extends far beyondits extremity, and is composed of a largenumber of vesicles of unequal size, those in themiddle being the largest ; these vesicles theanimals fill with air at their pleasure. The1 PLATE VI. FIG. 2. a.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 293violet-coloured shell of this little animal is remarkablythin, which facilitates its excursionson the surface. It is singular that under thisfragile vesicular float a little line of pearly fibresmay be perceived, to which are attached itseggs ; in some species they are contained inlittle membranous bags or sacs. It is thoughtthat the young animals, when liberated fromthese bags or chambers, ascend their mother'sfloat, and so are transported to the surface.Fishes are enabled to rise to the surface of thewater by means of their air-bladders, and someradiates by a vesicle which surmounts them, 1but neither of them are more singular than theseoutriggers by which the vessel of the violet-snailis kept both buoyant and steady.The foot of the Molluscans, when we firstobserve it, seems to us merely an organ of locomotion,nothing remarkable in its structure, andincapable of any multifarious action, but whenwe study the history of this and the precedingsnail, we see that it is a most important organ,and which performs a greater variety of operationsthan almost any organ of any other animal.We have seen that it spins a fine silk andthread ; that it secretes a fluid serviceable forseveral purposes ; that it can form a float, asin the present instance ; that it can be used as a1 See above, p. 195.294 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.hand in excavating and building, and variousother manipulations, so that in giving them thisinstrument and endowing it with such variety offunctions in the various tribes, their Creator gavethem every thing they wanted.Perhaps the followers of Lamarck may saythat, in the present instance, the animal constructsits own float itself, at the impulse of its ownwants. But uninstructed by its Creator, how couldit learn that vesicles full of air would serve to floatits little boat, and if not already organized to answerthe impulse of an exciting cause, in vainwould the will of the animal, if so instructed, endeavourto produce and inflate the vesicles, or,when it willed to sink, to empty them of air.The shell-fish of the aquatic tribe best knownin this country is the periwinkle, vulgarly calledthe pin-patch, 1 which, next to the oyster and thecockle, seems most in request as a relishingarticle of food. These animals, as I observed,not very long since at Cramer, in Norfolk, appearto make the bladder-kelp, 2 which, at lowwater, may be seen there in large patches, akind of submarine pasture, for I found them inabundance upon it at low water. As theCreator willed that the waters, whether salt orfresh, should have their peculiar inhabitants, itwas requisite that each should have its Turbo litres. " Fucus vesiculosus.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS.private food. Did all feed upon the same substancethere would be a universal struggle,unless indeed, the entire variety of the submarinebotanical world was done away, andone homogeneous article provided, in suchquantity as to be a sufficient supply for all.But further, doubtless, different organizationsand forms could not be maintained upon thesame pabulum, and therefore different creaturesrequired different articles of food, or differentparts of the same article. Here was a mutualoffice the numberless vegetable productionsrequire to be kept within due limits, and thereforethe functions of the aquatic animals is tomaintain them in due relative proportions. Wasthe ocean and all its streams planted as now,and there were no animals of any description tokeep in check its vegetable productions, theywould all in time grow up and choke the riversand gradually raise the bed of the ocean tillthere would be no more sea.Having considered the plant-devouring TramI shall say something next upon thecarnivorous or predaceous ones, which form thegreat body of large marine shells, and thosewhich most ornament our cabinets, for to thistribe belong the Cowries, 1 Cones, 2 Mitres, 3Cyprcea. ~ Conus. 3 Mitre.200 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Whelks, 1 Runs, 2 Volutes, 3 Helmets, 4 Rock-shells,5 Strokes, 6 and other conchs which exceedthe general run of shells in beauty, form,and magnitude. But with regard to their habitsand instincts we know little or nothing of anyinterest.They are distinguished from the herbivorousones by breathing the sea-water, for they areall submarine, by means of a siphon or tube,instead of by an aperture in the neck ; in theplace of maxilla?, their mouth is furnishedwith a retractile proboscis, with which theypierce and suck other shell-fish. The apertureof the shell is also very different, the siphonbeing accompanied sometimes by a channel,and sometimes by a notch at the base of theaperture.The tribe most celebrated from ancient times,on account of the vaunted purple die whichone species produced, is that constituted by theRock-shells, or Linne's great genus, Murex,and Lamarck's canaliferous Zoophagans, calledso from the long straight canal which terminatesthe mouth of their shells. The principal featureof this tribe, besides their long channelledbeak, is the vast variety of spines, and otherprocesses and ridges, with which their Creatorhas armed a great number of them ; the1 Buccinum. 2 Dolium. ' Valuta.4 Cassis. 5 Murex. * Strombus.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 297beak and mouth of several give them no smallresemblance to the heads of certain birds, thusone is called the thorny woodcock, 1 another thesnipe, 2 &c.At the first blush an inquirer into the use ofthese spines and other arms of shellfish, wouldimagine that their object is defence, yet whenhe is told that those which are most remarkablefor them, are themselves predaceousanimals; and that the herbivorous shell-fishare usually not distinguished by any thing ofthe kind, he seems to hesitate as to what conclusionhe shall draw. It may be observed,however, that the tribe most distinguished forthese arms, the rock-shells, are not so remarkablefor their size as many others which live byprey, as the strains, the helmet-shells, and thetritons, so that their armour may sometimesprevent one of these from boring their shells,and inserting its proboscis into them.The tribe we are now considering, the rock-shells,were in high esteem from the earliest ageson account of the die that some of them afforded,and cloths died with it bore a higherprice than almost any other : more than one species,however, yielded anciently a die ; one, accordingto Chart, a glaucous or azure colour,as he interprets it, and the other purple. ButM. Tributes. 2 M. Haustellum.298 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Tyrian purple is no longer in request. I couldsay much, observes the author just named, uponthe finding, fishing, and method of dying of thepurpura, about the price formerly enormous,nearly equalling that of pearls, a single shell,according to Aristotle, selling for a mina or about31. concerning the time at which it began graduallyto grow out of fashion, and at length to bewholly neglected : so that now it is never used,and no one knows the method of preparing it.In fact, the cochineal seems to have supplantedit, but it would surely be an object of greatinterest to re-discover the Tyrian rock-shell, aswell as that which yielded the azure colour, andascertain how far they deserved, especially theformer, the high encomiums bestowed upon them,and to deck imperial shoulders. The shells areprobably still in existence on the coast of Palestine.It was the custom to crush the shell assoon as taken, for if kept the animal was wontto vomit its flower, as the purple die was calledby Aristotle. This great philosopher thoughtthe purpura lived six years, as the adult animalhad six whirls in its shell, and he supposed oneto be formed annually. He gives a detailedhistory of these animals, of their congregatingin the spring, and of their forming a kind ofcomb, like bees ; he also mentions several kindsof them, that the small shells were bruised,and the animal extracted from the large ones ;UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 299that the die lies between the neck and whathe denominates the poppy. It is found, byCuvier, to be placed above the neck by theside of the stomach. Plunder relates that ashell-fish of this genus squirts out its fluid inastream, whenever molested, which rendersit probable that its object is defence.Aristotle mentions the operculum of the purple,and also the proboscis, or tongue as he callsit, which he describes as longer than the finger,and protruded from under the operculum, withthis it feeds, and with it can pierce shells, andwill attack even those of its own kind; thisagrees with modern observations, adding thatthe tongue is terminated by a sucker armedwith short tentacles. Aristotle also observes, anobservation confirmed likewise by modern investigators,that these animals bury themselves inthe sand like the pectens. This learned naturalistalso states that shell-fish at certainseasons hide themselves, snails in the winter*and the purples and whelks for a month duringthe dog days.The die of the purple is mentioned in scriptureas well as that of the coccus, and was usedas such in the time of Moses. It is said alsoto be used at this time in India and Americato dye small pieces of stuff, but in no place isit an important object.Having given so long an account of the FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.shells or purples, I shall not have occasion todilate upon any of the remaining genera, butshall merely notice a few peculiarities that someof them exhibit.The Cowries are a tribe long known andadmired for their beauty and polish, and onespecies 1 forms the current coin in many parts ofAfrica, and many Asiatic Islands. Some remarkablefacts distinguish their history; from theform of their shell and of its aperture, its incrementcould not take place in the usual way,these animals, therefore, are furnished by theirCreator with a 'remarkably ample mantle, thewings of which cover half the shell, and thus itis gradually thickened, and changes and variationsin the colour take place that havepuzzled conchologists to distinguish a speciesfrom a variety. At certain times the animalis also stated to quit its shell, and form itselfa new one more appropriate to its size, a circumstancerelated by Aristotle of the Buccinum. 2Volutes are another polished tribe of shells,which are probably formed by the mantle as inthe Cowries they are particularly distinguishedby having no operculum. The jet volute isviviparous, and its young when excluded aresaid to have shells an inch long. These probablyare more exposed to enemies than theCt/j>r(ca Moneta. - Kiyptf, A list.UNIVALVE MOLLUSCANS. 301young of other shell-fish. They form an importantarticle of food to some African nations.Before I close this account of these predaceousMolluscans, I must observe, that theyhave two distinct sexes, and consequently maleand female shells. The genuine hermaphroditesare confined to the bivalves, for in the univalvehermaphrodites two individuals are necessaryfor re-production, and therefore those form adistinct link between the true hermaphroditesthat impregnate themselves, and those that havedistinct sexes. So gradual are the steps bywhich the Creator passes from low to high.First, animals are re-produced without sexualintercourse, as in the polypes ; then the twosexes are united in one body, and suffice fortheir own impregnation next follow two sexesin the same body, which cannot impregnatethemselves, bringing us at last to distinct sexes,or unisexual individuals.4. Lamarck's fifth family, the Heteropods, Iintroduce here because, being univalves, theyappear to connect that tribe with the Cephalopodsforming his fourth order, but which fromthe discovery of the animal of Nautilus Pom-filius,so admirably described by Mr. Owen,being further removed from the other Mollusca,and the animal of the Heteropods havinga proboscis and only two tentacles, seems interestFUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.mediate between the Zoophagan Trachelipodsand the Cephalopods. They have four swimmingorgans. There seems a considerableaffinity between this tribe and the Pteropodsin these organs, which indicates a circular arrangementin the univalve Molluscans. TheCarinthia vitrea is one of the rarest shells thatis known, arising probably from its extremelyfragile conch, which is nearly as transparent asglass. A model of it in wax may be seen inthe British Museum. The animal is a sailorlike the Argonaut, to which it comes near. It isfound in the South Seas. There are two otherspecies known, one of which frequents theMediterranean. Some genera without shellsare placed in this order by Lamarck. Theyswim horizontally like fishes, which circumstance,in conjunction with their fins or swimmingorgans, induced him to place them at theend of the Molluscans as near the fishes ; severalauthors consider them as belonging to thePteropods, to which they are certainly related.CHAPTER X.Functions and Instincts. Cephalopods.WE have now taken leave of what may be calledthe proper Molluscans, including the Bivalves,and Univalves J of Aristotle and Linne, or theConchifers and Molluscans of Lamarck, and arearrived at a Class remarkable, not only for theirorganization, form and habits, but also for theirposition in the animal kingdom ; for in theircomposition they seem to include elements fromboth the great divisions of that kingdom : fromthe Vertebrates the beak, the eye, the tongue,an organ for hearing, the crop, the gizzard, andan analogue of the spine, with several otherparts enumerated by Cuvier ; and from their ownsub-kingdom, many of their remaining organs.We may descend to the very basis of the animalkingdom for the first draught of their nervoussystem, for it is discoverable in the wheel-animalsin which Ehrenberg detected pharyngeal ganglionsand a nuchal nervous collar ; 2 the .2 Ganglia nerve pharyngeal. Andes nerves michaelis.Ehren.VOL. i. u 8304 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.bearing arms seem to have their first outline inthe fresh water polypes; 1 indeed if the mouthof the cuttle-fish with its suckers, be separatedfrom the head, leaving behind the long arms,we see immediately an analogue of a radiant,particularly of a star-fish, with its rays bearingsuckers below, and its central mouth. Thelamellated tentacles observed by Mr. Owen inhis work, before quoted, on the animal of thePearly Nautilus, 2 above and below the eyes,seem to lead to the antennae of Crustaceans andInsects, and numerous Molluscan characters areobvious to every one. From these circumstancesit seems evident that the Creator has placed thistribe in a station which leads to very differentand distant points in the animal kingdom, andthat there is scarcely any but what may recognizein it one or more of its own peculiarfeatures yet at the same time it exhibits manycharacters, both in its most extraordinary outwardform and in its internal organization, thatare quite peculiar and sui generis, of which noanimal at present known exhibits the slightesttraces. To mention only its muscular apparatusadapted to its unparalleled form ; its systemof circulation, carried on in the first Order bythree distinct organs instead of one heart ; andthe wonderful complication of its tentacles, of1 Hydra. 2 Nautilus Pompilius.CEPHALOPODS. 30/>the nerves that move them, and the vascularsystem that animates them.This singular Class, which Cuvier denominatedCephalopods, or having their feet attached totheir head, appears to follow very naturally theTrachelipods and Heteropods, lately described,which have not only eyes furnished with irisand pupil, but also distinct sexes, and are of predaceoushabits, all characters which they possessin common with the Cephalopoda or Cuttle-fish.There is, however, an animal amongst the nakedGastropods called by the ancients, from its tentaclesrepresenting the ears of a hare, the share,1 a name it still bears in Italy, whichLinne named JLaplysia, in which he was followedby Lamarck, but modern writers after Gmelinhave called it Aplysia, a name used by Aristotlefor a very different animal, a kind of sponge, 2and, therefore, improperly applied this animalhas many characters that are found in some ofthe Cephalopods, particularly in its circulatingand nervous systems ; in having internal solidparts, and in discolouring the water with an inkyfluid, so that there seems also a connectionbetween this genus and the Cephalopods amountingto something more than a mere analogicalresemblance.Mr. Owen has divided this Class into two1 Lepus marinus, Plan. " Hist. An. 1. v. c. 16.VOL. I. X306 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Orders, from the composition of their respiratoryorgans, namely, those that have two branchiae, 1or gills, and those that have four. 2 The first includesthose that have no shell, and the secondthose that have one. The last is further divisibleinto those whose shell has many chambers, asthe Nautilus, and those where it has only one,as the Argonaut, or paper nautilus.To the first of these Orders belongs the cuttlefish*one of the most wonderful works of theCreator. Its mouth is surrounded by eight longfleshy arms, or rather legs, somewhat conicalin shape, and acute at the end, moved by innumerablenerves, furnished from numerous ganglions: these legs can bend in every directionwith the utmost vigour and activity, their surfaceis furnished with many suckers, by whichthey can fix themselves strongly to any thingthey wish to lay hold of, arid by means ofwhich, like the star-fish, 4 they can move fromplace to place. When this animal walks, inthis resembling also the star-fish and sea-urchin, 5it moves with its head and mouth downwardsand its body elevated. It swims also and seizesits prey by means of these organs : besides thesearms or legs, for they perform the functionsof both, there is a pair of long organs, one on1 Dibranchiata. 2 Tetrabranchiata.3 Sepia. * See above, p. 201.Ibid, p. 212.CEPHALOPODS. 307each side, having their origin between the firstand second pair of legs, which are incrassatedat the end, where, also, they are furnished withmany suckers. Cuvier supposes they use theseas anchors to maintain them in their stationduring tempests, and as prehensile instruments,by which they can seize their prey at a distance.In the centre of the legs is the mouth,surrounded by a tubular membranous lip, includinga beak, consisting of two mandibles,like that of a paroquet ; these mandibles orjaws are crooked, and the upper one fits intothe lower as a sliding lid into a box. Withthese redoubtable jaws the cuttle-fish devoursfishes, crustaceans and even shell-fish, whichreceive a further trite ration in its muscularcrop and its gizzard. By .means of the suckerson their legs and arms, they lay such fast holdof their prey as to deprive them of all powerof motion ; thus they master individuals muchlarger than themselves. The hard and oftenspinose crust of crabs or lobsters cannot withstandthe action of their trenchant jaws, andthey do not fear the gripe of their claws. Theirlarge eyes, which resemble those of vertebratedanimals, by their look of ferocity, are enoughto create an alarm in the animals they pursue,and are said to see in the night as well asthe day. So that although they are not likePontoppidans Kraken the notion of which308 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.is thought to have been taken from a largecuttle-fish half a league in circumference, soas to be mistaken for floating islands, yet theyare really as tremendous animals, their sizeconsidered, as any that Providence has commissionedto keep within due limits the populaceof the waters.One of their most remarkable and uniquefeatures, is the manner in which circulationtakes place in them. They have three hearts ;the principal one, seated in the middle, sendsthe blood through the arteries : the blood returnsby a vena cava, which dividing into twobranches, carries it to the two lateral hearts,each of which sends it to the gills for oxygenation,whence it returns again by the intermediateheart.The Octopus, called by the French writersthe Poulpe, probably a contraction of polype,differs from the common cuttle-fish, havingneither the arms nor long tentacles of thatanimal, and instead of the large heavy bonehas only two small cartilages. This differentstructure is rendered necessary by the differencein their habits. The body of the octopus issmall, and it has legs sometimes a foot anda half in length, with about two hundred andforty suckers on each leg, arranged, except nearthe mouth, in a double series ; so that it walks\\ with ease. They are often out of the water,EPHALOPOD8. 309and frequent rough places, are excellent swimmers,and move rapidly in the water with theirhead behind. The cuttle-fish, whose legs areshort and body heavy, prefer the bottom, anddo not attempt to swim, for which they are notwell fitted. Providence has, therefore, giventhem their long arms to compensate for theshortness of their legs.A remarkable peculiarity distinguishes theseanimals. They are furnished with an organwhich secretes a black fluid, with which theycan produce an obscurity in the water thatsurrounds them, on any appearance of danger,or to conceal themselves from their prey. TheChinese are said to use it in making the inkthat bears the name of their country ; somethingsimilar, but not so black, is prepared from it inItaly ; and Cuvier used it to colour the plates forhis memoir on these animals.The second order of cephalopods, or at leastthe pearly nautilus, differs in several respectsfrom those which constitute the first, and whichI have just described, approaching much nearerto the Molluscans. The most striking approximation,and which first catches the eye of theexaminer is its shell, which, though its spiralconvolutions are not externally visible, exhibitsa general resemblance to a univalve shell.To a person who had the opportunity of witnessingthe motions of the animal that inhabits310 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.it, the first thing that would strike him, wouldbe the means by which it progressed upon thebed of the sea, he would see no motion producedby the action of tentacular legs furnished withsuckers, like those of the cuttle-fish, but insteadof it, by a single expansive organ, exhibitingconsiderable resemblance to the foot of a snail.This organ, Mr. Owen, led by the nervoussystem, regards as surmounting the head andas its principal instrument for locomotion. Theoral organs of this animal are much more numerousand complicated than those of the cuttlefish,and are furnished with no suckers. Itstentacles are retractile within four processes,each pierced by twelve canals protruding anequal number of these organs, so that in allthere are forty-eight. In fact, the whole oralapparatus, for the full description of which Imust refer the reader to Mr. Owen's excellenttract, except the mandibles and the lip, isformed upon a plan different from that of thecuttle-fish, as likewise from that of the carnivoroustrachelipod Molluscans, arid indicates verydifferent modes of entrapping and catchingtheir prey.The eye, also, Mr. Owen states to be reducedto the simplest condition that the organ of visioncan assume, without departing altogether fromthe type of the higher classes, so that it seemsnot far removed from that of the proper .311tuscan. In this animal there is only a singleheart, the branchial ones being wanting.There is one circumstance which proves thiscephalopod to belong to this shell, and not to beaparasitic animal as that of the argonaut has beensupposed to be it is this, though the whole bodyappears to reside in the last and largest concatenationof the shell, yet there is a small tubulartail-like process which enters the siphon, butwhich, in the specimen examined by Mr. Owen,unfortunately was mutilated, only a small piecebeing left, but enough to shew that the animalhad power over the whole shell by means of thisorgan, hence it follows that a Cephalopod is theanimal that forms the shell of the nautilus, andits natural inhabitant, which goes a great waytowards settling the controversy concerning thereal animal of the argonaut, and amounts almostto a demonstration that the celebrated sailor whouses it as a boat, and scuds gaily in it over theocean, is no pirate who has murdered its naturalowner, but sails in a skiff of his own building.The only circumstance that now leaves anydoubt in the mind of the inquirer, is the verydifferent nature of the cephalopod of the argonautand the nautilus, the former appearingto be nearly related to the octopus or poulpe,and belonging to the genus Scythe of Romanesque.In this genus the tentacular legs orarms are similar to those of the poles, plantedVOL. I. X 4312 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.on the inner side with a double series of sessilesuckers, the second pair having a membranousdilatation at their apex, 1 which the animal issupposed to use as a sail when it moves on thesurface of the sea. Some naturalists deny thatthis animal ever uses these organs for sailing orrowing, but Boscc expressly asserts, and I amnot aware that there is any reason to doubt hisveracity, that he has seen hundreds of theargonauts rowing over the surface of the sea, incalm days, at so small a distance from the vesselin which he was sailing, that though he couldnot catch one, he could observe all their manoeuvres; he further says, that they employ theirdilated tentacle sometimes as a sail and sometimesas an oar.When we consider how many instances areupon record of Molluscans being fitted withorgans that enable them to catch the wind andsail on the surface of the sea, 2 there is nothingcontradictory either to analogy or probabilitythat the argonaut should do the same, especiallywhen we consider how universally thisidea has prevailed, from the time, at least,of Pliny and Appian, both of whom describeits sails with sufficient accuracy. Aristotle alsospeaks of his polype, which is evidently acephalopod, as a sailor by nature he says,1 See Zool. Mourn. n. xiii, t. iii. 2 See above, p. 263.CEPHALOPODS. 313that when it rises from the deep it is in asubverted shell, rendering that action more easyand keeping the shell empty, but that whenarrived at the surface it reverses it; that itspreads its sail to the wind, and when thatblows, letting down its two cirri, one on eachside, uses them to steer with.Upon comparing the animal of the nautiluswith that of the argonaut, it appears evident,though the gills of the latter seem not to havebeen examined, that they belong to differentOrders, at least, every probability rests on thatside ; yet every thing speaks the relationship ofthe latter to the octopus, and therefore theywould properly form a section of the dibran-charta of Mr. Owen. In fact, the oral organs ofthe former are so widely different from those ofthe Order just mentioned, that one wouldalmost expect another to connect them. Thisprobably lies dormant amongst the fossil ammonites,the shells of many of which, thoughconsisting of many chambers, are evidently intermediatebetween the nautilus and argonaut.We must next inquire what was the objectof Him, who does nothing but with a view tosome useful, though not always evident, end,in producing these miniature monsters of thedeep, so wonderfully organized and so unlikeevery other tribe of animals, in his creation, andyet containing in them, as we have seen, as it314 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.were, the elements, whether we ascend or descend,of all the rest. It appears from theunited testimony of almost every writer thathas noticed them, that they have it in chargeto keep within due limits, a tribe of animals,almost equally destructive with themselves, andwhich are armed also with weapons of offence,apparently equally terrific to their prey. Itwill be readily perceived that I am speaking ofthe Crustaceans, and of the formidable pincerswith which they seize their prey. It mustbe a curious spectacle to see one of the largerpoles attack a lobster ; at first sight, weshould think the latter most likely to masterhis assailant, covered as he is with a hard crust,and using adroitly his powerful forceps, weshould feel sure that the cuttle-fish, with hissoft body and oral organs equally soft, stood nochance against such an antagonist. But Hewho gave him his commission, has fitted him forthe execution of it, his soft tentacular organswill bend in every direction, and the numeroussuckers wherewith they are planted, by pumpingout the medium that forms the atmosphere ofmarine animals, produce such a pressure whereeverthey are fixed, that, struggle as it may,it cannot disengage itself from the grasp of itsassailant ; and, by their flexibility, these organscan imitate the fishermen, and tie together thetwo pieces of the forceps, so that it cannot bite ;CEPHALOPOD.S.thus, at last, it is brought within the action ofthe powerful beak of the cuttle-fish, which soonmakes its way through its crust, and devours itshell and all. Even when at a distance, bymeans of its long arms, the cuttle-fish can layhold of it and drag it towards it ; and thepoulpe, which has not these arms, makes up forit by having longer legs.The argonaut probably uses similar means tomaster its prey, and finds some defence in itsshell, but the nautilus has a still stronger castle,which it may be supposed defies the bite of theCrustacean ; its oral organs are calculated forcloser combat, but the tentacles appear lessadapted for holding fast their prey, not beingvisibly furnished with suckers, but what theywant in power is made up in numbers, since inlieu of eight or ten tentacular organs, they havenearly a hundred. So diversified are the waysand instruments by which infinite WISDOM,POWER, and GOODNESS enables its creatures tofulfil the ends for which he created them : andso an equilibrium is maintained in every part ofcreation.The fossil species are mostly called by onename, Ammonites, as if they were the horns ofthe Egyptian Jupiter, and which, if any of themare now in existence, probably frequent thedepths of ocean, and do not, like the argonautor nautilus, visit its surface, to tell an admiring316 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.world, that God has created such wonderfulbeings. Specimens have been found of theenormous diameter of six feet. Though thesculpture of many of these great cephalopodsgives reason to think that they may be intermediatebetween the argonaut and nautilus,yet the convolutions and external form of theirconchs gives them no small resemblance to agenus of snails, 1 the species of which are oftenfound in fresh waters, except that in this theshell is more concave on one side than the other.The genus Spicula, the animal of which appearsalso to be a Cephalopod, 2 seems to exhibit thefirst tendency to this form.Amidst all this variety of Molluscous animals,exhibiting such diversity in their structure andorganization, in their habits, food, modes of life,and stations, one great object seems attainedby their creation especially, the production ofcalcareous matter. Even the shells of terrestrialtestaceous, if we consider the vast numbersthat every year perish, must add in no triflingdegree to the quantity of that matter on theearth, and probably make up for the continualwaste or employment of it, so as to maintainthe necessary equilibrium ; but in the ocean, thequantity added to that produced by corallines,1 Planorbis. * 2 PLATE VII. FIG. 2.CEPHALOPODS. 317must be exceedingly great, even in lakes bedsare formed of the deposits of the shell-fishinhabiting them, how much more gigantic mustthey be in the ocean, this will be evident fromthe superior number and size of the oceanicshells compared with the minute species, theLinea, Planorbis, &c. that inhabit our lakesand pools. Thus, as reefs and islands are formedby the coral animals, the bed of the ocean maybeelevated by the shells of dead testaceousones. That eye which is never closed, thatthought which is never intermitted, that powerwhich never rests, but, engaged in incessantaction, and employing infinite hosts of under-agentsto effect his purposes, sees and providesfor the wants of the whole creation : the plantabsorbs from the soil, the animal after devouringthe plant, or the plant-fed creature, returns tothe earth what the plant had absorbed, and somaintains the proper equilibrium ; He who numbersthe hairs of our head, numbers the workmenthat he employs, employing them only insuch proportions so distributed, as may best accomplishHis purposes.CHAPTER XI.Functions and Instincts. Worms.WE are now at length, after long wanderings,arrived, if I may so speak, at the limits of theMolluscan territory, and, having visited thecapital, seem now to be upon the confines of thehigher hemisphere of the animal kingdom, theinhabitants of which are distinguished by havingtheir whole frame built upon a vertebral column,inclosing a medullary chord, and terminating, atits upper extremity, in a skull containing a developedbrain.But though we seem arrived at the confines ofthis higher order of animals, there are still many,and some superior to the most perfect of theMolluscans, in the entirety of their nervoussystem, and the habits and instincts which theymanifest, to which we have not yet paid theattention that they merit. These animals areparticularly distinguished from the precedingClasses, by the appearance, or actual existence ofsegments or joints in their bodies, especially intheir legs, of what may be called an annularstructure. They are divided into two greattribes, which, from this circumstance, have beenWORMS. 310called Annelidans, and Annulosans, and the last,with more propriety, Condylopes.There is one tribe, however, amongst the Ra-diaries,as we have seen, that shews some slighttraces of inspection, I allude to the star-fish andsea-urchins, forming the main body of Lamarck'sOrder of Echinoderms. If we examine the former,we find them marked out into areas, and inthe latter, as I have before stated at large, thewhole shell consists of numerous pieces unitedby different kinds of sutures.Before I call the reader's attention to the twotribes lately mentioned, exhibiting the appearanceor reality of inspection, I must notice ananomalous tribe of animals, whose real stationhas not been satisfactorily made out. I amspeaking of the Entozoa or Intestinal Worms.This Class, as Mr. W. S. Mac Leay has remarked,consists of animals differing widely intheir organization, some having a regular nervoussystem formed by a medullary collar sendingforth two threads, while others have nodistinct organs of sense.Lamarck places this Class between the Tuileriesand Insects, and Cuvier, amongst hisZoophytes, between the Gelatiness and Echinoderms.Mr. Mac Leay has divided it into twoclasses, placing one, consisting of the Parenchymatousintestinal worms of Cuvier, between theInventories and Polypes, and the Cavities of that320 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.author, amongst the Annulosans or Condylopcs.Dr. Von Beer is of opinion that these Entozoa,or worms, reducible to no common type of organization,inhabiting various animals in variousparts of their body, together with the Industriesand others might be added should bebanished from a natural arrangement of animals.He seems also to think, in which I feel disposedto agree with him, that the leading types of animalorganization are to be found in its lowest grades. 1As I formerly observed with respect to the In-furies 2 these appear to be the basis on whichGod has built the animal kingdom. As some ofthe species appear connected with the AngelicI have introduced the Class here, but notas having formed any settled opinion as to itsproper division and legitimate station.The majority of this Class are, what theirname imparts, intestinal worms, or parasites,that have their station within the body ofother animals. Some of them, however, donot answer this description, as they are foundonly amongst aquatic vegetables ; of this kindis a little tribe, which Linne arranged withthe leeches, 3 to which they approach by theflukes. 4 The Linaria, in some respects, partakesmore of the nature of a polype than of any1 See Zool. Mourn. July October, 1828, 260.2 See above, p. 148. 3 Hirudo.4 Fasciola. Distoma.WORMS. .3*21other animal. Draparnaud, who paid particularattention to them, says that when youngthey have only two eyes, and acquire twomore when adult. The head has no mouth ;beyond the middle of the body, and on its underside,is a single orifice which serves for mouth,anus, and nostrils. This orifice answers to along sac, which is the intestinal tube ; from itsometimes issues a white tubular organ, which heregards as respiratory ; this organ is doubtlessthe same with the retractile trumpet-shaped proboscis,issuing from a circular aperture in themiddle of the abdomen, mentioned by Dr. Johnsonin his interesting paper on these animals in thePhilosophical Transactions, which he supposesto be a kind of mouth, when extended, equallingin length the animal itself. 1 This remarkableorgan was also noticed by Miller and Mr.Daly ell. The circumstance of its receiving andextruding its aliment and respiring at the sameorifice, is a clear approximation to the polype.A further confirmation of this is the power thisanimal possesses of spontaneously dividing itselffor the purpose of reproduction. M. Drapersafter remarking that the species he described,which he calls P. tentaculata, and whichis probably synonymous with that particularlynoticed by Dr. Johnson under the name of1 Philos. Trans. 1825. i. 254. t. xvl./. 10.VOL. I. Y322 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.jP. cornua, is oviparous in the spring and gem-oviparousin the autumn observes, that, in thelatter season, it divides itself spontaneously andtransversely into two parts above the abdominalorifice, and at the end of ten days each of theseparts has acquired the head or the tail thatit wanted. He has divided individuals intomany transverse pieces and two longitudinalones, and every piece, in due time, completeditself. It formed eyes, an intestinal tube, andother necessary organs.Mr. Dalzell and Dr. Johnson subsequentlymade similar observations, and by dividing thehead had succeeded in producing an animalwith two heads; the latter, from the result ofseveral observations, found that each individual,upon an average, might, by spontaneous self-division,produce ten, and this when underconstraint ; if at liberty, and in their naturalsituation, we may conjecture that their reproductivepowers might be carried much higher. Dr.Johnson divided one into three equal portions,when the head speedily acquired a new bodyand tail ; the tail, a new body and head ; andthe middle piece a new head and tail.From this whole statement it is evident thatthese pseudo-leeches, to say the least, their substanceconsidered, tend towards the polypes, andpossess the same reviviscent powers. In severalcharacters, which I shall notice hereafter, theyWORMS. 323also agree with the Annelidans. Draparnaud,from the approximation of the points on thehead of P. cornua, to the tentacles of Lymtiea,thinks that they form a link between the Molluscansnsand the Worms. Reproductive powershave certainly been observed in the former, butonly in the reproduction of mutilated organs,for a snail or slug cut in pieces, would not formso many individual animals. Bonnet has givenan account of reproductive powers in oneof the Hispid Worms 1 of Lamarck, supposedby Gmelin to be the Nais barbara of Muller,and in a species of fresh water worm belongingto the Annelidans, which, if I may sospeak, grows from cuttings, and like the Planarice,can produce two heads. These last are probablynot far removed from the flukes, 2 though theirstation is so different. Whether they live onanimal or vegetable matter is not certainlyascertained ; to look at their proboscis it seemsrather calculated to fix them as a sucker, tosome animal, and so to derive their nutrimentfrom it, like their analogue, the leech, especiallyas the marine species are supposed to be carnivorous.Their wonderful reproductive powers appearto be given them by a kind Providence to preventtheir total annihilation ; at least, it is stated,that at certain periods of the year, their numbers1 Vers hispides. 2 Fusciola.324 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.are so reduced, that where thousands were seenin summer, in spring scarcely one has survived.Their substance is so soft and gelatinous, thatthey are easily destroyed ; to compensate this,they are gifted with the extraordinary powersof reproduction above described. God hath sotempered his sentient works, that seemingdefects, in one respect, are compensated byredundance in another.Having made these observations upon animalsof this class, that do not infest man or beastinternally, I next turn to those whose office is,in spite of all his care, to make the Lord of theCreation, as well as the whole animal kingdom,not only their constant abode, but also theirfood. More than twenty of these pestiferouscreatures, that attack man, have been enumerated; some penetrate into the very seat ofthought; 1 others disturb his bile; 2 others circulatewith the blood in his veins ; 3 others, again,are seated in his kidneys ; 4 others in his muscles ; 5the guinea worm 6 in his cellular tissue: theovaries of females are infested by another ; T thetape-worms extend themselves, joint by joint,to an enormous length in his intestines ; 8 some1 Echinococcus Hominis. 2 Fasciola hepatica.3 Linguatula Verum. 4 Strongly gigs.5 Hydatigera cellulose. 6 Filaria medinensis.7 Linguatula pinguicula.8 Tcenia-solium, and Botryocephalus Hominis.WORMS. .325select the large intestine ; l and others the smallones ; 2 some even attack infants, and themonly. 3 Such are the ills that flesh is heir tofrom these our internal assailants and devourer.The recital is really enough to cause our hairto stand on end. No one can believe that allthese instruments of punishment were at workin the first pair when they came from the handsof their Maker, and nothing, except death, canprove with a greater strength of evidence, thathe is fallen from his original state of integrityand favour with God, than such an army ofscourges set in array against him. I shallenlarge a little upon a few of them, and thenbid adieu to the disgusting subject.There are few people, that have not heard ofthe Fluke, or animal resembling a flat fish, andwhich really has been mistaken for one, oftenfound in the liver of diseased sheep, and sometimesalso in the human gall-bladder and bile-vessels.The eyes of these animals are veryprominent, and set in a cartilaginous ring, seemingto exhibit both iris and pupil ; they are bothplanted in the upper side of the head, like thoseof the fish 4 they resemble. Like the leech, thefluke has two orifices the first in a tubular prolongationof the head, and the other underneath1 Trichocephalus Hominis. 2 Ascaris lumbricoides.3 Oxijurus ParticulariseLeeuwen: Arian. Nat. E. Tr. t. f. H K, i. K.326 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.in the abdomen, but distant from the tail. Bythese they fix themselves, living by suction ;they sometimes produce fatal effects upon sheep.When only in small numbers, they, doubtless,as well as the rest of the Class, answer somegood end ; it is solely when they becometoo numerous that they occasion fatal diseases.Leeuwenhoek found 870 in one liver,and in others only ten or twelve. He saysthey occur in many kinds of quadrupeds, asstags, wild boars, and calves. He seems quiteat a loss to account for their introduction intothe livers of these animals, but concludes that,like the leech, their native element is water,and their eggs, swallowed by cattle when theydrink, so find their way into the liver. Thisof course is all conjecture. Providence, whoassigned to them their office, has also directedthem to their station, but from whence or bywhat route we do not know certainly at present.A friend of mine who has kept a flock for manyyears, has observed that whenever they wereturned into moist meadows in wet seasons, theysuffered greatly from these animals ; but that inthe same situation, in a dry one, they were notaffected.The most celebrated of all the intestinal animals,are the Tape-worms, of which five specieshave been ascertained to inhabit man, besideswhom quadrupeds, birds, reptiles and fishes areequally their victims. These are now dividedWORMS. 327into two genera, the common 1 and the grape-headedtapeworms. 2 The former is the mostcommon in England, 3 but the latter 4 seems themost gigantic of any. Sir A. Carlisle, who hasamost excellent paper upon the former, in thesecond volume of the Linnaean Transactions,says that he has met with them from lessthan six feet long and consisting only of fiftyjoints, to thirty feet long with four hundredjoints. But these are nothing compared withothers of the latter observed by continentalwriters. Bonnet mentions them as sometimesextending to the length of thirty ells, probablymeaning French ells, or one hundred andtwenty-five feet, and Boerhaave, one that greatlyexceeded that length.These animals differ little from each other, butinthe common tape worm, the head which hasacircular orifice or mouth at its extremity surroundedby a number of rays of a fibrous texture,and probably serving to fix the mouth, hason each side two small suckers which doubtlessattach the head more strongly. The mouth,before spoken of, is continued by a short ductinto two canals, which pass round every jointof the animal's body conveying its aliment, andsending a transverse canal along its bottomwhich connects the two lateral ones. Sir Anthonyinjected upwards of three feet of these1 Tanna. 2 Botryocephalus. PLATE I. B. Fro. 3.3 Tcenia solum. 4 Botryocephalus latus.328 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.canals by a single push with a small syringe,but he could not make it pass upwards beyondtwo joints which seemed to indicate the existenceof valves opening only in one direction.He says there is no anal orifice, but other authorsexpressly mention one, and it is not easyto conceive, if the last has no orifice, how thejoints can increase in number and remain concatenated.The body is composed of a vastnumber of joints, each having an organ wherebyit attaches itself: those nearest the head arealways small and they enlarge gradually as theyrecede from it. The extremity of the body terminatesin a small semi-circular piece.Sir Anthony suspects that the several joints ofthe tape-worm are separate animals. This is anold opinion and has been adopted by several zoologists,but Bonnet seems to have proved, thathowever extended, the tape-worm is only a singleanimal. Whilst a living head remains attachedto some joints, this creature maintains its stationand keeps augmenting their number, but whenany are broken off, they appear not to form newheads, as Sir Anthony supposes, but die and areexpelled from the body. Their nutriment isprobably derived from the gastric, pancreatic,and other juices which perpetually flow intothe stomach and intestines of the animals theyinfest ; and they employ the tentacular rays asamean of irritation to determine a greater secretionof these fluids.WORMS. 329It would be an endless labour to expatiatein this vast field where the rest of the animalkingdom is concerned, amidst therefore thevarious and strange forms that are destined tothis office, I shall select only a few, beginningwith one that affects one of the most valuableof our animal possessions, I mean the Hydatids, 1which particularly and often fatally affect ourflocks of sheep, not indeed that they are confinedto them, for they are found also in swine,deer, and oxen, and even in man himself.These animals resemble the tape-worm intheir oral organs, but their body, especiallyposteriorly, is vesicular. The lymphatic vesiclesare what medical men call hydatids ; they arefound usually in the brain and in the liverof these animals. Their size varies accordingto the species, some are as big as the fist,and one was shewn to the School of Medicinein Paris as big as a man's head. Their shapevaries, but generally is somewhat spheroidal,their substance is composed of membranes oneon another more or less thick, and formed ofcircular fibres visible only under a lens ; theyare half filled with transparent lymph. Theyexhibit a peristaltic motion which is often verylively.Three species more particularly annoy oursheep. The cerebral hydatid, 2 which finds its1 Hydatis. ~ H. cerebral.330 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.way into the brain of these poor animals andoccasions the vertigo ; and the vervecine l andovine hydatids, 2 which penetrate into their lungsand liver and occasion the rot. It is usuallydiscovered when a sheep is infested by theformer of these pests by its turning often andbriskly its head on one side ; when it runs veryquick, and suddenly stops without any apparentcause ; in a word, when it appears almost deranged.Though the progress of the disease theyproduce is slow, it is generally fatal. Five hundredhave been counted in the head of a singlesheep. The ravages, however, produced by thishydatid are nothing to those occasioned by theother two, which attack the lungs and liver andcause the rot, by which, in some years, thousandsperish.Some worms are remarkable for their verysingular forms or station. One that attachesitself to the gills of the bream, looks like a doubleanimal, 3 and a kind of fluke, 4 in great numbersinfests the ball of the eyes of the perch. 5Though at first view the animals of which Ihave in the present chapter given some accountseem to be altogether punitive, and intended asscourges of sinful man both in his own person and1 H. vervecina. 2 H. villa.3 Diplozoon paradoxes. PLATE I. B. FIG. 4.4 Diplostomum volvens. Ibid, FIG. 5.5 Ibid, FIG, 6.WORMS. 331in his property, and their great object is hasteningthe execution of the sub laps arian sentenceof death, yet this evil is not unmixed with good.Though fearful and hurtful to individuals, yetit promotes the general welfare by helping toreduce within due limits the numbers of manand beast. Besides, with regard to the Lordof the Creation, these things are trials thatexercise his patience and other virtues, or tendto produce his reformation, and finally to secureto him an entrance into an immutable and eternalstate of felicity, when that of probation isat an end, so that the gates of Death may be tohim the gates of PEACE and REST.CHAPTER XII.Functions and Instincts. Annelidans.THE animals we have just been consideringform an almost insulated group, so that it seemsnot easy to say to what tribe they are mostnearly related, but the soft Pseudo-leeches, aswas observed above, especially those that haverudimental tentacles, seem to tend somewhattowards the molluscan tribes ; they exhibit considerableresemblance to the blood-suckers ortrue leeches, and like them have an instrument332 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTSof suction, though employed, perhaps, in extractingthe sap or the blood of plants, and at thesame time, in many respects, as we have latelyseen, they approach the polypes.The Flukes, likewise, appear to have somecharacters in common with the leech, 1 so thata passage is open from the intestinal wormstowards the Annelidans, some of which, as theearth-worm, occasionally become intestinal, andseveral are possessed of reproductive powersalmost as great as those of the pseudo-leech,or the polype. I shall therefore next, in takingmy departure from the worms, bend my steps tothe animals just mentioned, which formerly borethe same general denomination.They are called Annelidans, I suppose,because they appear to be divided into littlerings, or else to have annular folds, and aresoft vermiform animals, some naked, others inhabitingtubes, in some simply membranous,in others covered with agglutinated particles ofsand, and in others formed, like those of theMolluscans, of shelly matter. Some have neitherhead, eyes, nor antenna?, while othersare gifted with all these organs ; instead ofjointed legs, their locomotion are accomplishedby means of fleshy bristle-bearing retractileprotuberances or spurious legs disposed in1 See above, p. 325.ANNELIDANS. 333lateral rows. Their mouth is terminal butnot formed on one type ; in some it is simple,orbicular or habited ; in others it consists of aproboscis often having maxillae. They havea knotty spinal marrow, in this being superiorto the Molluscans and approaching the Con-slopes.They have red blood, and theircirculation is by arteries and veins, but theyhave no special organ for the maintenanceof the systole and diastole, their Creator nothaving given them a heart, but where the veinsand the arteries meet, there is an enlargement,and the systole and diastole is more visible,as Cuvier remarks, than in the rest of thesystem, these enlargements therefore seem torepresent a heart.Savigny, in the third part of his System desAnimaux sans Vertbbres divides them into fiveOrders, of which he gives only the characters ofthe four first, intending to publish, in a supplement,his account of the fifth ; these Orders hearranges in two Divisions the first includingthose that have bristles for locomotion, and thesecond those that have them not.1 . His first Order he denominates Nereideans, 1and characterizes them as having legs providedwith retractile subulate bristles, without claws ;a distinct head with eyes and antennae ; a pro1Nereidece.334 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.bosch that can be protruded, generally armedwith maxillae.2. The second he names Herculean, these addto the legs of the former retractile bristles, withclaws ; they have no head furnished with eyesand antennae, and no proboscis. 13. The third he names Lumbricinans ; thesehave no projecting legs ; but are furnished withbristles seldom retractile ; they have no headwith eyes and antennae, and no maxillae.4. His fourth Order he names Hirudineans.They have a prehensile cavity, or sucker, ateach extremity, and eyes. 25. In his fifth Order he intends to comprehendthose Annelidans that have neither bristlesnor prehensile cavities, but his account of thishas not been published.He begins with the most perfect of the Anne-titans,but viewing them in connection with theworms I must reverse the order, and insteadof descending ascend, which will bring meultimately into connection with the more distinctlyjointed animals the Condylopes.1 . The Order of Hirudineans includes animalsthat are of the first importance, as well as somethat are fearfully annoying, to mankind. Thecommon leech 3 has long been so much in request1 SerpulecK. 2 Lumbricince and Hirndinece.3 Hirudo medicinal, L. (Sanyuisuga, Sav.)ANNELIDANS. 335with medical men, on account of the facilitywith which it can be applied to any part of thebody where bleeding is required, that they arenow become scarce in our own waters, andconsequently dear, so that large numbers areimported from the Continent.Providence has gifted these animals with asucker on the underside at each extremity oftheir body, by which their locomotion are performed,and by means of the anterior one theyfix themselves to any animal that comes intheir way. We see therefore in them, thoughon a larger scale, some approximation to thelocomotive and prehensile organs of some of theCephalopods, and prior to them, of the Steeleand Echinidans, 1 which likewise moveand fix themselves by suckers. The mouth issituated in the cavity of the oral sucker, itis triangular and armed with three sharp teethdisposed longitudinally in a triangle, two being-lateraland one intermediate, and higher up.These teeth are sharp enough to pierce notonly the human skin, but even the hide of anox, and have their edge armed with two rows ofvery minute teeth ; at the bottom of the mouthis the organ of suction which imbibes the bloodflowing from the wound made by the teeth.These animals inhabit fresh waters, in which1 See above, p. 306, 201, 205.336 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.they swim like eels with a vermicular motion.In moving on a solid body, they first fix themselvesby their anal sucker, which is larger thanthe oral, and then by means of their annularstructure, extend themselves forwards, when theyfix their mouth, detach their anal sucker,and thus fixing themselves alternately by eachproceed with considerable rapidity. They arehermaphrodites, and bring forth their youngalive. When in their native waters they suckany animal that comes in their way, even thosewith white blood, as the larvae of insects, worms,and the like.Herodotus relates that the crocodile, in consequenceof its frequenting the water so much,has the inside of its mouth infested by leeches,which a little bird, named the trochilus, entersand devours, without receiving any injury fromthe monster. Geoffrey St. Hilaire asserts thatno leeches are found in the Nile, and thereforesupposes the Delle of the father of historywere not leeches but mosquitoes. But Savignyhas described a leech under the name of Bdellanilotica 1 which he regards as synonymous withthe leech of Herodotus. Boscc mentions onewhich was found in the stagnant watersin Egypt, when not inflated as small as ahorse hair, which very much annoyed the1 PLATE VIII. FIG. 3.ANNELIDANS. 337French soldiers, attacking them in nearly thesame way ; when they drank, fastening itself totheir throat, and occasioning hemorrhages andother serious accidents.Mr. Maddox, in his Excursions in the HolyLand, Egypt, &c., states that he had frequentlyseen, on the banks of the Nile, a bird about thesize of a dove, or rather larger, of handsomeplumage, and making a twittering noise whenon the wing. It had a peculiar motion of thehead, as if nodding to some one near it, at thesame time turning itself to the right and left,and making its cone twice or thrice beforeits departure. This bird, he was told, was calledSucksaque, and that tradition had assigned toitthe habit of entering the mouth of the crocodile,when basking in the sun, on a sand bank,for the purpose of picking what might be adheringto its teeth: which being done, upona hint from the bird, the reptile opens his mouthand permits it to fly away. 1This seems evidently the Trochilus of Herodotus,above alluded to, as clearing the mouthof the crocodile from the leeches. Aristotle, inmore than one place of his History of Animals,mentions such a bird, and a similar traditionconcerning it, with that of Mr. Maddox. " TheTrochilus flying into the yawning mouth of the1 Excursions) &c. i. 408.VOL. I. Z338 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.crocodile cleanses his teeth, and thus is providedwith food. The latter, sensible of the benefit,suffers it to depart uninjured." 1 In anotherplace, 2 he seems to speak of it as an aquaticbird, yet afterwards he describes it as frequentingshrubberies and subterranean places. 3 Whetherthis animal really attends thus upon thecrocodile has not been ascertained, but it wouldbe singular that such a tradition should havemaintained its ground so long without any foundation.As a further proof that the Bdella of thefather of history is a true leech, and not a mosquito,as M. Geoffrey St. Hilaire, from themeaning of its primitive, 4 would interpret theword, it may be observed that Aristotle comparesthe Bdella to an earth-worm, 5 and describesits peculiar motion ; and in Hesychius it issaid to be a kind of Scolex or worm ; Theocritusalso alludes to its blood sucking propensities. 6That leeches infest the aquatic Saurians isfurther evident from a letter received by Mr. R.Taylor, and very kindly communicated by himto me, from a friend at Calcutta, Mr. W. C.Hurry, who having observed that the fauces ofthe gigantic crane 7 were generally very full ofi Hist. An. 1. ix. c. 6. j^id. 1. viii. c. 3.3 Ibid. 1. ix. c. 1 1. 4 Them. BSeXXw, to suck.5 De incense animal, c. 9.6 Idyll, ii. line 55, he calls it A//ij'<me7 Laconia Argala ?ANNELIDANS. 33.0leeches, determined to examine the crocodile ;and upon a large alligator he found a small redspecies, of which he sent specimens. A friendof mine, Mr. Martin, of Islington, observed alsothat the alligators of Pull Pen an g were infested,as he thought, by an animal of this kind, calledby the natives its louse.The Trochilus of Aristotle, Mr. Stanley statesto Mr. Taylor, is the Egyptian Plover ;* whofurther observes that the Green Tody 2 is alsorelated to cleanse the mouths of the alligatorsin the West Indies, from the gnats and fliesthat stick, in great abundance, in the glutinousmatter they contain.But there is a terrestrial kind of leech foundin the island of Ceylon, which appears to be agreater pest than any other species of the genus,and one of the greatest scourges of that fineisland. They infest, in immense numbers, themountains, woods, and swampy grounds, particularlyin the rainy season. They are oftenerseen on leaves and stones than in the waters.The largest are about half an inch long when atrest. Their colour varies from brown to lightbrown, with three longitudinal yellow lines.They are semi-transparent, and when fully extendedare like a fine chord, sharp at the extremity,and easily thread any aperture, so that1 Charades JEgyptius. ~ Totus viridis.340 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.they can penetrate through the light clothingworn in that climate, rendering it impossible,at that season, to pass through the woods withoutbeing covered with blood, Dr. Davy countedfifty on the same person ; no sooner does anyindividual stop, than, as if they saw or scentedhim, they crowd towards him from all quarters.From their immense numbers, activity, andthirst of blood, they are the great pest of travellersin the interior. Percival says that theDutch, in their march into the interior, at differenttimes, lost several of their men from theirattack. Other animals besides man suffer dreadfullyfrom them, and horses in particular arerendered so restive, when they fasten upon them,as to be quite unmanageable and unsafe to ride.The only way to prevent their attack, is to coverthe skin completely.The office devolved upon the present tribe,is one which, within certain limits, is beneficialto the animals who are the objects of it thoughthose last mentioned would be inserted in alist of the destroyers of the animal kingdomwhich contribute to maintain a just balancebetween the different members of it. The flythat bites the horse prevents it from overfeeding,and so the leeches may be of use tothe larger aquatic animals, at the same timethat the smaller ones, such as the grubs ofinsects, must generally perish from the insert341tion of their sharp jaws, and the suction of theirproboscis.Yet, as we see, this is one of the animalsthat man has taken into alliance with him,and this no doubt Providence intended heshould, and probably directed him to it, I meanby causing certain circumstances to take placethat attracted his attention and indicated itsprobable use. So that what at first put him topain, and caused him alarm, he found, upontrial, might be rendered a very valuable additionto his means of cure when attacked by disease,or when he was suffering from a local injury.The leech tribe, besides its utility in theexercise of its own function, may be useful asaffording nutriment to some other animals, asfishes and birds.2. The earth-worms 1 form a principal featureof the next Order, and afford a delicious morselto birds of every wing. The fisherman alsobaits his hook with them, and the ground -beetles 2 often make a meal of them, so thathad they no other use, still they would be avery important part of the creation. But theirgreat function appears to be that of boringthe earth in all directions, whereby they areuseful to the farmer and grazier, giving a kind1 Lumbricus (Entering Sav.) terrestris. L. &c.2 Carabus. L.VOL. i. z 3342 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.of under-tillage to pasture and other lands, andby the casts which they every where throw up, 1they help to manure the soil, and do the samefor pastures, that the spade does for the gardenand the plough for arable land, place the soilthat laid below above. Their food being vegetabledetritus, what passes from them must bevery good manure.The anatomy of these well-known animalsis very singular and well worthy the attentionof the physiologist and zoologist, the onlycircumstance relating to it that I shall heremention is that their long body is not onlydivided externally into rings, but internally intoan equal number of cells separated from eachother, if I may so speak, by a kind of dissepimentor diaphragm there are more thanahundred of these cells in the common species,as appears by Mr. Bauer's admirable figures, 2to which I must refer the reader for further informationon this subject, first observing that thereseems some analogy between the cells of theearth-worm and the joint of the tape-worm.The motion of these animals, and of manyother Annelidans, is accomplished by means ofthe rings of their body and their lateral bristles ;the latter the Creator has given to them, in theplace of legs : pushing with the anterior portionof these against the plane of position, by con-seeAppendix, Note, 26. foi Trans. 1823.ANNELIDANS. 343trading the rings, they bring up the posteriorportion of their body, and then fixing that part,extend the anterior rings, and so proceed successivelywith a kind of undulating motion.3. We are next to notice a tribe of Annelidans,many of which, in one respect, make some approachto the Testaceous Molluscans. Thoughtruly annulated and furnished with a kind of falselegs, they are defended by a shell resemblingin its substance, that of the class just alludedto, but often by its irregular convolutions provingthat it belongs to an Angelica and not toa Molluscan ; some indeed approach to the spiralconvolutions of a Trachelipod shell ; others formamembranous sac, and cover it with agglutinatedparticles of sand, as the common Isabella ; othersagain, likewise inhabit a tube, but they fix it inthe rocks. The testaceous animals of this class,particularly the worm-shells, 1 inhabit a tortuoustube which they form, probably with more easeand celerity than the Molluscans form theirshells for they appear almost to do this as theymove, since the shape of the shell imitates thesinuous windings of a worm, and that of theSerpula adheres to the substances on which itis formed. We see it often upon the shells ofbivalves, to which it adheres by the lower sureSurplice.344 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.face, looking like a little worm creeping uponthem ; 1 and forming convolutions ; I have aspecimen on a valve of the cook's-crest oyster, 2which is bound down by a process issuing apparentlyfrom the disk of the oyster-shell itself,how produced and thrown over the Serpula itseems not easy to conjecture. Different speciesof these worm-shells are often found, embracingeach other with their convolutions, on the sameshell ; wherever the sea is or has been, theyabound either in a recent or fossil state ; theyare found on rocks, and sea weed as well as onmarine shells, and those of lobsters. The Serousin general, imitate the spiral structureof the Trachelipod and other Molluscans, as isparticularly evident in Siliquaria and Vermes, ifindeed the last genus is not itself a Molluscan,as Lamarck makes it.Other species of this Order are taught to establishthemselves in fissures of rocks, which servethem instead of a shell to protect the membranoustubes into which they retract their petaliformtentacles, which together represent a beautifulradiated blossom, or the sectarian of a passionsS. Triguetra.2 Ostrea Crista-galli. Since the above was written, in thecollection of the late Peter Collins, I have seen two specimensof this oyster, which had produced from the back of their shella double series of processes, with which, as with so many fingers,they had taken firm hold of a piece of stick.ANNELIDANS. 345flower. Of this kind is the Magnificent Ampliusfigured in the Linnaean Transactions It isfound in the rocks of various parts of the coastof Jamaica. When alarmed, it retracts its tentacleswithin its tube, and the tube itself intothe rock. How it excavates its rocky burrowhas not been ascertained.The Isabelle, which pass under various namesin different authors, inhabit the sandy parts ofthe shore, and like certain case-worms form acovering for their tube of selected grains of sand,mixing sometimes other substances that suittheir purpose, which, by some secretion at theirdisposal, they glue pretty firmly together so asto form a neat case tapering towards the tail.The animal buries itself and case in the sand,with its head towards the surface, so, probably,as to enable it to protrude and expand itstentacles to collect its food when covered bvifthe water. The bristles of the legs in somespecies resemble burnished gold.The functions of a large proportion of the animalsof this order seem to correspond with those ofthe bivalve shell-fish ; they undermine the sandsand the rocks, bore into sponges and corallines,and other submarine substances, and some probably,into submerged wood : like them, also,they seem to feed on animalcules brought withintheir reach by the tide. The Serpulidans, whose1 Tubular magnified. Shaw.VOL. i. z 5346 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.food is similar, are directed by the will of theirCreator to affix themselves externally to any submergedbodies that come in their way, whethermineral or animal. All they require seems to besomething to attach themselves to, on whichthey can protrude their tentacular gills, andseize their prey. They must contribute largely,as well as the mining Annelidans of this order,to the production of calcareous matter. Mr.Sower suspects that their proboscis may beinstrumental in forming the shell, but it seemsnot properly a proboscis, but merely an operculumon a long footstalk, which was requisite thatit might be protruded so far as not to interferewith the action of the gills.4. The animals included in Mr. Savigny's firstOrder, the Nereideans bring us very near to theCondylopes. They have a distinct head, jointedorgans like antennae, eyes, a proboscis armedwith maxillae, and spurious legs*. They havealso certain dorsal scales, which M. Savignycalls elytra, and deems analogous to the organsof flight in insects. These animals seem toafford the first example of the conversion oforgans of locomotion into others, employed foradifferent purpose. I do not mean by this,that, in the progress of the animal's growth, oneorgan is really converted into another, but thatanalogous organs, in different tribes or genera, areemployed for different purposes. Thus, what inANNELIDANS. 347most Annelidans are locomotive organs, in Locrisy Phyllodoce, and some other Nereideans 1become a kind of tentacle. The marine Scolopendraof Aristotle most probably belonged tothis Order, and many species make a near approachto the terrestrial ones. 2 Like them theyare long and often flat, consisting of a great numberof segments, some having between two andthree hundred, furnished according to the species,with one, two, or three pairs of legs in each ;like them also they twist about in all directionswhen handled, they conceal themselves in closeplaces where they lie in wait for their prey. Inone respect some of them add the instinct ofthe spider to that of the centipede, for they lineand sometimes cover the cavities of the rockswhich they inhabit with a slight silken web, andthus concealed they watch the approach of someanimal, and, suddenly thrusting out the anteriorpart of their body, seize and devour it.My late indefatigable and talented friend,the Rev. L. Guilding once found a land species,in an ancient wood in the Island of St. Vincent's,which from its soft body he regarded as a Molluscan,but from its figure, and annulose structure,its jointed antennae, and seemingly jointedlegs crowned with bristles, it 3 certainly belongs,as Mr. Gray has remarked, to the present class.1 Savigny, Syst. des Anne. 9, 12, 13.2 PLATE VIII. FIG. 4.3 PLATE VIII. FIG. 1. Mr. G. calls it Peripatusjulifvi mis.348 FUNCTIONS AND INSTINCTS.Though it has scarcely a distinct head, its resemblanceto the cylindrical myriads 1 isvery striking. Other species of this Order resemblethe Isopod Crustaceans, and some evenroll themselves up like one tribe of them. 2These animals have their haunts sometimes indeep burrows and passages under the sea-weedor in the sea-sand. They are so fierce in theirhabits that some have been styled the tigers ofthe worms. Some fishes in their turn makethem their prey. Many of them, as the sea-mouse,3 are remarkable for the brilliancy of theirmetallic hues. Perhaps these dazzling splendours,as in the case of some insects, 4 may beof use to them in preventing the escape of theirprey. Their forms and instruments of locomotionseem particularly adapted to the situationand circumstances in which they are placed ;their legs, which approach the jointed legs ofcrustaceans and insects, fit them for movingon the surface of the bed of the sea, their oarsfor swimming in the water, and the long form ofmany for threading the sinuous paths andburrows in which they have their habitation andplace of refuge. So exactly are they fitted bythe skilful hand of the almighty and benevolentArchitect of all animal forms to live and move inthe place he has assigned to them.1 Julius. L. * Nereis Armadillo.3 Aphrodite aculeata. * Introdd. to Ent. ii. 221.APPENDIX.SINCE the preceding part of this treatise hadmostly passed through the press, I have had anopportunity of consulting some recently publishedworks, which contain accounts, illustratedby figures, of many very interesting animalsbelonging to several of the Classes of which Ihave there treated ; and all of which more orless demonstrate a presiding Intelligence immediatelyconnected with the globe that weinhabit, and who, viewed under every aspect,evidently caret for us, and all the creatures hehas made. I shall select a few of these for theconsideration of the reader.I formerly observed 1 that types representingsome of the higher forms of the animal kingdomwere often to be detected amongst those belongingto its lowest grade : a remarkable instance of thismay be seen in one of Ehrenberg's late works, 2in which is described and figured a singularPolygastric Industry, which seems to exhibitthe first outline of an Arachnoid 3 form ; it has1 See above p. 320. 2 Symbols Physical.3 Discocephalus Rotator.,'350 APPENDIX.eight locomotive organs or bristles, representingthe eight legs of those animals. 1 By means ofthese organs, this animal, which was found byDr. Ehrenberg in the Red Sea, performs a doublerotatory movement, one by the rotation of theanterior pair, and the other by the three posteriorpairs. The motion of these filamentous legs isso rapid that they appear as if, instead of eight,a hundred were revolving, and so form a kindof natural Phantasmascope. Another industrygenus, Cancellaria, seems to prefigure the Salpes*the species at first being concatenated in chainsor ribands, and afterwards separating. 3 Theanimalcules forming this genus have sometimesbeen mistaken for plants, and the quadrangularform of the associated individuals gives them theappearance of the jointed stem of a plant, ratherthan of an animal chain. On a former occasion,I alluded to other imitations of the vegetableworld exhibited by the polypes, particularly tosome of them producing seeming blossoms, consisting,as it were, of many petals. 4 I shall nownotice some that represent monopetalous flowers.A genus long known to naturalists, which seemsintermediate between the Industries and thePolypes, named originally by Linne Vorticella,exactly simulates a bell flower with a spiralfootstalk. They are often found in fresh water,1 PLATE I. A. FIG. 6. 2 See above, p. 222.3 PLATE I. A. FIG. 4, />. * See above, p. 169.APPENDIX. 351and present no unapt representation of a bunchof the flowers of the Lily of the valley, whenceone species has been named Vorticella Cancellaria.Some of these have branching, and otherssimple stems, 1 but they are all spiral, and capableof being lengthened or shortened at the will ofthe animal, which is thus enabled to elevate ordepress its little blossoms, the mouths of whichare furnished with a double circlet of elementarytentacles, by the rotation of which, like the restof its tribe, it can produce a food-conveyingcurrent to its mouth. Still nearer to the Polypes,with which indeed it is arranged, is anothergenus representing monopetalous flowers, namedby Ehrenberg, who found it in the Red sea,Zoobotryon, or Animal-grape. This singularanimal production will scarcely arrange underany of the Orders mentioned on a former occasion,but it may be regarded as intermediate betweenthe Rotatories and the Polypes. Like the latterit is a compound animal, consisting of a nakedbranching stem ; its lower extremity, as may beseen in the figure, 2 appears as if sending forthnumerous little radicles, and the branches terminatein ovate germs, from which issue a multitudeof animalcules resembling monopetalousbell-shaped flowers, with the mouth surroundedby a filamentous coronet, each sitting upon a1 See above, p. 166. ~ PLATS I. B. FIG. 2. a.352 APPENDIX.spiral elastic footstalk, by means of which theanimalcule can either draw itself close to thestem, or, shooting out, dart on either side afterits prey. When the mouth of every individualis open, each germ looks like what botanists callaraceme of bell-shaped flowers ; and, when theyare closed, they resemble a bunch of grapes. 1To the class of Worms, especially those thathave been denominated JEntozoa, or internalworms, I have a few interesting additions tomake, taken from a work of Dr. Nordmann's, 2some of which are so extraordinary and wonderful,both as to their functions and structure, thatthe great object of the present treatise, GloriaDei ex opere natures, will receive considerableillustration from some account of them.Dr. Nordmann's first treatise is upon a tribe ofthese creatures that are interesting from theirvery singular situation, in the Eyes, namely, ofthe higher animals.Amongst the personal pests of our own species,enumerated in the chapter above alluded to, 3 Imentioned none that attacked the organs justnamed ; but this learned investigator of parasiticworms has noticed two which have been detectedin them ; one related to the Guinea-worm? whichwas extracted from the eye of a person affected1 PLATE I. B. FIG. 2. b. 2 Micrographische Beverage, &c.3 See above, p. 324. 4 Filaria medinensis.APPENDIX. 353by a cataract ;* and another, a Hydatid? from theeye of a young woman.Besides those that infest our own visual organs,quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, and fishes, have eachtheir eye-worms. Amongst those to which thewill of Providence has assigned their station inthe eyes of the latter class of animals, is a remarkableone, 3 which Dr. Nordmann discoveredin those of several different species of perch,*sometimes, in such numbers, as must have interferedwith that distinct sight of passing objects,which appears necessary to enable predaceousanimals to discover their prey in time to dartupon it and secure it ; in a single eye the Doctordetected, in different parts, 360 ! of these animalcules: when much increased they often producecataracts in the eye of the fishes theyinfest. This little animal appears somethingrelated to the Linaria, or pseudo-leach, and, tojudge from Dr. Nordmann's figures, seems able,like it, to change its form. 5 Underneath the body,at the anterior extremity, is the mouth ; and inthe middle are what he denominates two ; 6 these are prominent, and viewedlaterally form a truncated cone ; the anteriorone is the smallest and least prominent, and1 F. Oculi humani. 2 Cysticercus cellulose.3 Diplostomum volvens, PLATE I. B. FIG. 5.4 Ibid. FIG. 6.5 See Nordmann's Monograph, i. t. ii./, 1 9.6 Saugnapfe.VOL. I. A A354 APPENDIX.more properly a sucker ; the other probably hasother functions, since he could never ascertainthat it was used for prehension.A kind of metamorphosis seems to take placein these animals, for our author observed thatthey appeared under three different forms.These little pests, small as they are, have aparasite of their own to avenge the cause of theperch, for Dr. Nordmann observed some veryminute brown dots or capsules attached to theintestinal canal, which when extracted, by meansof a scalpel formed of the thorns of the creepingcereus, 1 and laid upon a piece of talc, the membranethat inclosed them burst, and forth issuedliving animalcules, belonging to the genus Monas,and smaller than M. Atoms, which immediatelyturned round upon their own axis with greatvelocity, and then jumped a certain distance inastraight line, when they again revolved, andagain took a second leap.Looking over our author's list of eye-wormsthat infest fishes, we find that five out of sevenare attached to different species of perch, andone cannot help feeling some commiseration forthese poor animals ; but when we recollect thatthey form the most numerous body of predaceousfishes in our rivers, we may conjecture thatthus their organs of vision are rendered lessacute, and that thus thousands of roach, dace,1 Cactus flagelliformis,APPENDIX. 355carp, and tench may escape destruction. Theever watchful eye of a Father Providence is overallhis works, and he has provided means, inevery department of the animal kingdom, so tolimit the inroads of the predaceous species, thata due proportion and harmonious mixture mayevery where be maintained, and that with respectto every individual species. The means are various,but the end is one ; and the partial evilterminates in the general good and welfare of thewhole.Next to the eyes, the gills of fishes are subjectto annoyance from internal worms ; and amongstthese there is none more remarkable or wonderfulthan one first discovered by Dr. Nordmann,upon those of the bream, 1 and to which, on accountof its remarkable structure and conformation,he has given the name of Diplozoon, orDouble animal. In the Classes of Polypes andTunicaries we have been introduced to manyanimals that appear to be compound ; which,from a common stem or body send forth numerousoscula or mouths, in this emulating themembers of the vegetable kingdom : but amongstall these plant-animals, 2 there is none cancompete with this of Dr. Nordmann, which, likethe Siamese youths, appears to be formed of twodistinct bodies, united in the middle so as to presCyprus Brama. ~ Phytozoa.3->6 APPENDIX.sent the appearance of a St. Andrew's cross,each half of the animal containing precisely thesame organs; namely, an alimentary canal, asystem for circulation and generation, and also anervous system. Muller calls the innumerableand varying cohorts of the animal creationpreachers of the infinite wisdom and power of theSovereign of the world ;* and this is one of themost wonderful of them all, which singularlyexemplifies those attributes.At first it might be imagined, that, like theyouths just alluded to, this was a monstrous productionof nature ; but Dr. Nordmann relatesthat he has found thirty specimens, preciselyagreeing with each other, all in a similar situation,attached namely, to the gills of the fishmentioned above, and he never found it single,or in any other situation : there can, therefore, remainno doubt on the subject. In order to findthese animals, it is necessary to examine all theleaves of the gills separately under water, or toseparate the lesser whitish ones with a pointedinstrument, when the animal may be detected byits movements : its station is between the leavesor folds of the inner gills.This singular creature consists of two lobes, orarms, above the point of union, and two below it.The upper pair are the longest and most divertEntomostraca. 27.APPENDIX. 357gent: they are somewhat lance-shaped, and atthe extremity of each, on the under side, is amouth, with a sucker, divided by a fleshy transverseseptum ; by means of these suckers, themouths of this two-bodied monster are keptsteady, so as to suck without intermission. Theorifice of the mouth is large, and, when fullyopen, triangular : there is also an organ withinthe gullet which seems analogous to a tongue,resembling the sucking organ of the pseudo-leech.The alimentary canal branches out onboth sides into numerous blind vessels. Thewhole of this canal, like the creature itself, iscruciform. The circulation of the blood is veryvisible : each half of the animal has on bothsides two principal blood vessels, which areevery where of almost equal diameter, withoutany enlargement ; in the two exterior ones theblood runs upwards, and in the two interior onesdownwards, and its motion is extremely rapid.The generative organs and ovaries are alsodouble. The feces, as in the polypes and otherlower animals, pass out at the mouth. The twolowest lobes are somewhat club-shaped, or thickestat the extremity, towards which, in each, aretwo oval plates, or disks, containing four oblongace tabula, or suckers : the bodies below theplates terminate in a triangular piece, or flapper.In some of their movements it seems as if thetwo upper lobes had different hills, since somersAPPENDIX.times one appears inclined to move to the right,and the other to the left, or one to move and theother to remain at rest ; but the lower lobesalways move simultaneously, either inwardly oroutwardly.The animals that are found attached to the gillsof other fishes are usually at their lower extremityfurnished with several suckers ; thus one genus 1infesting the gills of the sun* and sword fishes 3has three ; and another, 4 found in those of thetunny, 5 has six, whence Cuvier would rathercall it Hexastoma. But these are nothing tothose of our Diplozoon, which, on the four disksjust named, has no less than sixteen suckers, fouron each disk. 6 Under a strong magnifier, thesesuckers when opened, for they can open andshut, exhibit a complex machinery of hooks andother parts, by which their Creator has enabledthem to take firm hold of the gills, so as not tobe unfixed by their constant motion in respiration,especially when we consider their structureand substance. A further proof of this design isfurnished by the form of the animal itself, forthe body being divided upwards and downwardsinto two diverging lobes, it can fix itself at each1 Tristoma. 2 Mold. 3 Xiphias.4 Polystoma. 5 Scomber Thyrsus.6 Even this is nothing to those of a genus infesting someCephalopods, Hectocotyle,t\ie different species of which have fromsixty to more than one hundred suckers, whence their name.APPENDIX. 35.9extremity more firmly than if it was single, notonly by having more points of attachment, butalso by the divergent of its lobes, especiallythe lower ones. When a man wishes to standas firmly and steadily as possible, he separateshis legs so as to form a certain angle : and this iswhat its Creator has fitted our animal to do ; andso by all these means it maintains its station onthe lubricous, multifid, and constantly movingorgans, from which it is commissioned to suckthe blood. Probably these Diplozoons may beof the same use to the fishes they infest, as thehorse-flies are to the animal from which theytake their name.Dr. Nordmann found this creature could existsubmerged for three days, during which period itsmovements became gradually more feeble. Onespecimen, which he fed twice a day with freshfishes' blood, lived nine days in water, and appearedto die at last from being too muchhandled.What can more evidently illustrate both thepower, wisdom, and goodness of the Deity thanthis most extraordinary animal ? How nicely isit formed, in every respect, to fulfil the functionsgiven in charge to it! How admirably is itsecured against the mischances to which its singularsituation exposes it ! When we see somuch art and skill put in action to adapt suchseemingly insignificant creatures, and so low in360 APPENDIX.the scale of creation, to the circumstances inwhich they are placed ; so many contrivances,exhibiting the deepest intellect, taking the mostcomprehensive surveys of every possible contingency,and rearing a structure calculated to standagainst every pressure upon it, we must feelconvinced that the attention of the Creator isdirected to every individual in existence, whethergreat or small, high or low, spiritual or material.To every thing that he created he gave a law,the law of its nature; a law emanating fromHim, enforced by the physical powers actingupon certain structures, and producing certainnecessary effects under His constant superintendence,direction, and action, on and by thosepowers.The intestinal worms, as well as some otherparasitic animals, are many of them so remarkablefor the situation in which we discover them,that their transport to the spot where they are toexercise their function seems almost miraculous.How a mite should find its way into the humanbrain seems past our conjecture. We cannotclearly ascertain by what means the eye wormsare conducted to their assigned station, nor howthe various species of tape-worm invariablyselect each its proper pabulum : the same holdsgood with regard to the cyst-worms, 1 or hyda-1 Cysticercus.APPENDIX. 361tis. Do they, like the Infernal Fury, 1 as fabledby Linne, fall from heaven upon the earth andwaters, and instantly bury themselves in theirallotted animals ? But to speak soberly, all wecan safely affirm is, that He who decreed the enddecrees the means, and these probably are physicalones under his direction. He it is whoguides the punitive animals that he employs totheir several stations. Is there not an omnipresentDeity, whose action is incessant, and coextensivewith his presence ? He it is that, asthe Prophet speaks, cause it to rain upon onecity, and not to rain upon another city; thatemploys his instruments, both of benedictionand punishment, according to his will. It isHe, who by secret paths, and by means thatmock our researches, conducts to their assignedstation the animals in question. Every powerof nature, every physical agent, is at His disposal.His is the earthquake and the volcano ;the lightning of the thunder; the fire-damp ofthe mine ; the overwhelming violence of thewater flood ; the windy storm and tempest : Hisis the wide-wasting sword, that destroys myriads,and the pestilence that walketh in darkness,and carries off millions ; and He gives hiscommission to all his scourges against individualsas well as against nations, which they unsFuria infer talis. L.302 APPENDIX.consciously execute and cannot exceed, for Hesaith to them, as to the raging sea, Hitherto shallye come and no further, and here shall the workof destruction cease.We have a remarkable instance of this specialguidance and employment of natural objects inthe case of the prophet Jonah, when he disobeyedthe word of the Lord. In the first placeGod sent out a great wind into the sea ; in thenext he prepared a great fish to swallow himalive when he should be cast overboard, and atthe Lord's command the same animal cast himupon the ireland. Next God prepared a gourdfor a shadow against the heat ; after that heprepared a worm which destroyed the gourd ;and in the last place he prepared a silent eastwind, 1 or a heat, like the sirocco, without sound.In all these cases the object employed was aphysical object, under the immediate directionof the Deity. The wind, the fish, the gourd, theworm, the heat, were not new creations, butwell known objects, acted upon to take a particulardirection so as to produce particular events.By what is here said, I by no means assertthe doctrine of inevitable fate, for then therewould be no use in the employment of meansof prevention. Sir H. Davy's safety-lamp wouldnot preserve the life of the miner, nor Dr. nn.APPENDIX. 3631 in's conductor disarm the thunder cloud ; andall the other means that, non sine Neo, have beeninvented to render harmless the action of thephysical powers under certain circumstances ;but I would merely assert that constant superintendenceof the Deity over the world that hehas created, and Who upholder all things by theword of his power, which we call Providence, bywhich, in general as well as individually, his willhas full accomplishment; and every substanceor being, whether animate or inanimate, takesthe station which he has assigned to it. This isno miraculous interference out of the generalcourse of nature, but the adaptation of thatcourse to answer the wise purposes of Providence,which selects individuals, and distinguishesthem from other individuals by events,as to this world, seemingly prosperous or adverse,but which have their ultimate reference to thespiritual world, and to their final destiny. AsGod willet not that any should perish, so hewithholds not from any the means, that, ifduly used and improved, will be sufficient forhis salvation ; and in all his dealings with mankindhe hath this great and merciful object inview.VOL. I. B BAPPENDIX. NOTES.NOTE 1, p. 2. The life and motion. The word life mayperhaps here be used, in some sense, improperly ; but theoriginal motion caused by the agency of the Spirit, andfollowed by Light and Expansion, may be called the birth,or beginning, of the life of the world, which followed,under the Divine Guidance, as a consequence of it. Ispeak only of animal life, not of spiritual, which resultedfrom the immediate insufflation, if I may so use the term,of the Deity himself. 1I may here be permitted to observe that the Mosaicaccount of the beginning of creation, especially of theincubation of the Holy Spirit and its consequences, hasbeen transplanted, by many oriental and occidentalnations, into their cosmogonies. The circumstances andconsequences of it have, in most cases, been altered fromtheir original simplicity ; and, in some, it has been assumedas a foundation, on which an Atheistic Philosophy hasbeen erected amongst the Greeks. But when we considerattentively the terms in which these dogmata are delivered,and recollect that the Gods of the Greeks andRomans, especially him who was indicated as the fatherof gods and men, were really the great elementary powerswhich under God govern the universe whence Homer1 Genes, ii. 7, comp. John, xx. 22.306 APPENDIX. NOTES.describes him as ouQega vaiuv, and calls him Zei/fand Ennius appeals to him in these terms,Aspire hoc sublime cantons quern innocent omnesJove.And to live abroad is to live sub Jove, sub Dio. It isevident that these Gods were subsequent to Chaos, andsprung from that motion of the Spirit which first gavebirth to this world as we behold it; besides these, the sun,moon, planets, earth, ocean, &c. made part of the catalogueof false Gods whom the Heathens worshipped andserved instead of the Creator. These powers, which wereoriginally reverenced as symbols and representatives of theGodhead, and, as it were, his vicegerents in Nature, inprocess of time were thus regarded and adored as thesupreme and only God the sign instead of the thing signifiedthe instrument instead of the hand that guidedit the work instead of the workman. They deemed, asthe author of the Book of Wisdom observes, 1 Either fire,or wind, or the swift air, or the circle of the stars, or theviolent water, or the lights of heaven, to be the Gods whichgovern the world.Veneration and love to those from whose actions orstudies we derive great benefit, and respect for our ancestors,amiable motives when they do not lead us awayfrom God, often induce mankind to throw a kind ofDivinity, a ray of glory, around such persons ; first,perhaps, they are complimented with the title of suns oftheir people or race, and their wives as moons, and nextwe transform them into what we regarded as their symbol.So the Egyptians, in process of time, added the adjunctOn, or the Sun, to the name of their great ancestor,1 Wisdom, xiii. 2.APPENDIX. NOTES. 367Ham; whence he was afterwards designated as Ramon,or Ham the sun, and became the Jupiter Ammon of theGreeks. 1The idea of the incubation of the Spirit, of its being theprinciple of love that was in action, and that it producedthe first motion, prevails, more or less, in all the cosmogonies.Aristophanes, in his Aves, gives an account of theGrecian cosmogony, which proves that the heathen godsof the Greeks were all subsequent to the original creationof matter, in a passage, of which the following lines arenearly a literal translation :Once Chaos was and Night, dark ErebusAnd ample Tartarus; but Earth, and Air,And Heaven were not. First blackwing'd nightIn th' infinite gulfs of Erebus brought forthThe wind-nurs'd egg, from which in circling hours,Love the desir'd, his shoulders golden-wing'd,Sprung like a wind-swift vortex, he who mix'dWith Chaos wing'd and dark, and Tartarus wideNested our race, and them brought first to light.Ere love commingled all, immortal GodsWere none, but from that commixture roseHeaven, Sea, and Earth, and Gods incorruptible.Wind-nurs'd egg. Gr. UK-WE/MOV uov. Literally, the eggunder the wind, alluding to the incubation of the Spirit.Love. This is the motion infused by the Spirit into thechaos which was followed by light and expansion, andthe whole harmonious circle of creation, in which therewas no discord, but all was very good.His shoulders golden-wing' d. Gr. STJX&UV varov Trlzpuyowxpvcrcuv. Literally, his back shining with two golden1 Cudworth, I. ii. 338.368 APPENDIX. NOTES.wings ; these two golden wings were, perhaps, light andthe expansion, which carried love through his wholework.Sprung. Gr. EC'xarev, germinated.Wind-swift vortex. Gr. EWWJ avefM)xe<ri $ivai<;. Literally,like whirlwinds or whirlpools, swift as the wind.He who mixed with Chaos wing'd and dark. Gr. Ould$$E x, al TflepoEvrt faiths w%ia>. This describes love or motionentering into chaos and beginning to produce order.Nested our race. Gr. EvsoTlsurs yevog y/tsrEpov. The birdshere claim an early origin. The allusion probably is tothe mundane egg and the birth of winged love.But from that commixture rose heaven, sea, and earth, fyc.Gr. D t////*< yi/o//v<uv ' eTepuv Toi$, EyEVT xpavog, Qtctavog TE, KMyy, TTavTcav TE QECOV fAauapuv ysv~ aKpQnov. Literally, " onething being mingled with another, heaven, ocean, andearth, and the incorruptible race of all the immortal Godswere produced."It is evident from this passage that those whom theGreeks accounted their Gods were the elements, the heavenlybodies, and other works of creation. Thus theychanged the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped andserved the creature more than the Creator, who is blessedfor ever.NOTE 2, p. 5. Kindred Monsters. I allude here to thegigantic Reptiles, those especially which are now seen onlyin a fossil state, many of which instead of legs are furnishedwith paddles; as the Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri.These animals seem intermediate between the amphibiousSaurians and the Caledonians. Some of them also exhibitseveral characters in common with some of the Cetaceans,Amphibians, &c.APPENDIX. NOTES. 369NOTE 3, p. 8. Intermediate, as it were, between matterand spirit. I find a similar idea in the Nouveau DictionnaireHistoire Naturelle, 1 " Le mot de matiere porteavec soi 1'idee d'un corps lourd et grossier : cependant ilest des substances auxquelles on donne le nom de matiere,telle que la matiere etherege, et qui sont d'une si inconceivabletenuit, qu'on droit quelle tiennent le milieu entreEsprit et la matiere" Sir Humphrey Davy seems to haveadopted a similar opinion, which I have given in anotherpart of this work ; 2 and Dr. Wollaston also, in his Religionof Nature delineated, asks " Might it not be more reasonableto say, it (the soul) is a thinking substance intimatelyunited to some Line material vehicle which has its residencein the brain ?" 3 And again " If we should suppose thesoul to be a being by nature made to inform some body,and that it cannot exist and act in a state of totalseparation from all body ; it would not follow from thence,that what we call death, must therefore reduce it to astate of absolute insensibility, and inactivity, which to itwould be equal to non-existence. For that body, whichis so necessary to it, may be some fine vehicle that dwellswith it in the brain, and goes off with it at death. 4 Thisvehicle, which is so necessary to the soul, dwells with itin the brain, and goes off with it at death, he furthersupposes, is that by which it acts and is acted upon, bymeans of the nerves. 5 This vehicle seems not very differentfrom the vital powers of modern physiologists, whoregard the nervous power as their agent. 6The Doctrine of a vehicle for the soul which accostxix. 449. article Matures. Patron.a See VOL. II. p. 253. 3 p. 192.Ibid. 196. s Hid. 197.Dr. Wilson Philip, in Philos. Tr. 1829, 271, 278.370 APPENDIX. NOTES.panes her when separated from the body is not a modernhypothesis, but was held by the Platonist and many ofthe fathers. 1Our Lord says to his disciples The hairs of your headare all numbered: upon which we may observe that thehead of man is clothed with hair to answer a certain end,an end which has not yet been duly investigated, butwhich in Scripture has been intimated by making it thesymbol of strength or power by which latter term it isdesignated by St. Paul 2 as in the case of Samson,whose superhuman strength seems to have departed fromhim, when his seven locks were shorn off; symbolizingmight from the seven spirits of God, 3 or in other words,the sevenfold might of the Spirit. It is well known thatthe hair is affected by the electric fluid, and it mayconduct it to the brain or other organs. Whatever be itsfunction, however, its force will depend upon the quantity*and the quantity upon the number of conductors, and thisGod regulates in the case of individuals, according tocircumstances, so that, though some receive more andsome less, He that receives much has nothing over, and hethat receives little has no lack. 4NOTE 4, p. 9. For if the instinct of the predaceousones was not restrained, they would soon have annihilatedthe herbivorous ones, even if, as Lightfoot supposes, theywere at first created by sevens. If the fall of man, as isgenerally supposed, happened soon after his creation, thefirst sacrifice, which as the Lord God clothed the firstpair with skins before their expulsion from paradise,1 See Dr. H. More, On the Immortality of the Soul, B. iii.Axiome xxvii. and Cudworth's Intellectual Syst. 799.2 1 Cor. xi. 10. 3 Revel, i. 4, 5.4 2 Cor. viii. 15.APPENDIX. NOTES. 371must have been offered immediately after the former sadevent, would have caused the annihilation of a species;which, in conjunction with the circumstance of Noahbeing directed to admit clean animals into the ark bysevens the male and his female, afforded no slight groundfor Lightfoot's supposition alluded to in the text. Hethus expresses his opinion. " Bestir mundo create suntserena, tria paria ad problem, et reliques singular Adamoin sacrificing post lapsum : at immundcz tantummodobind, ad generis propagation." 1 Lightfoot here speaksof three pairs and a half, and some writers quoted byPoole, seem to think, that the same number were receivedinto the ark, and that the seventh, a male, was intendedfor sacrifice after the deluge; others think there wereseven pairs.NOTE 5, p. 11. In the fiercest enmity and oppositionto each other. There was a show-man, who in the year1831, exhibited on one of the London bridges, as I wasinformed by a friend upon whose accuracy I could rely,the animals here spoken of in a state of reconciliation.In one cage were cats, rats, and mice, and in anotherhawks and small birds living together in the utmostharmony, and without any attempt on the part of thepredaceous ones to injure their natural prey.NOTE 6, p. 16. Concerning the kind of which interpretersdiffer. The Septuagint renders the Hebrew wordCDJ3, which our translation renders lice, by <r*cvi<pes, whichis supposed to mean the mosquito or gnat, but I cannothelp thinking with Chart, 2 that it rather means the1 Lightfooti Opera, Ed. Lessen. i. 154. conf. 2.2 Hierozoic. 574.372 APPENDIX. NOTES.louse, not only on account of its derivation from a root,p, which signifies to fix firmly, which agrees better withthe animal just named than with the mosquito, but alsobecause it was produced from the dust of the earth likeother apterous animals, and not from the waters, like thewinged ones. 1 The African negroes, as was before observed,have a peculiar louse. 2NOTE 7, p. 17. Geologists have observed, from theremains of plants and animals embedded in the strata ofthis and other northern countries, that the climate mustformerly have been warmer than it now is. That theinclination of the earth's axis was once different from whatit now is was a very ancient opinion ; but whatever mightbe the cause, the fact seems to have been certain, fromthe existence in very high latitudes of the plants andanimals here alluded to, such as various species of palms,of elephants, hippopotami, turtles, and similar tropicalforms. Cuvier indeed has conjectured, that the carcaseof a mammoth found in Siberia belonged to a cold climatebecause it was clothed with wool as well as hair. Itshair was stated to consist of three kinds. One beingstiff black long bristles, another flexible hair of a reddishbrown colour, and the third a reddish brown wool whichgrew among the roots of the long hair. 3 Now with respectto sheep, there is evidently a difference with regard totheir coat in those that live in warm climates, and thosethat inhabit cold ones, the coat of the former usuallyconsisting chiefly of hairs, and the latter of wool ; 4 but1 Genes, i. 21.Far. Syst. Anglia. 340. 2.3 Cuvier, Theory of the Earth, by Jameson, 275.See above, Vol. I. p. 64.APPENDIX. NOTES. 373Dr. Buckland, 1 and Dr. Vires 2 have advanced some satisfactoryarguments which prove that the Mammoth couldnot have existed in the countries in which its fossilremains are so abundant, if it had been exposed to agreat degree of cold. It is remarked with respect to theremains of fossil elephants, which are so numerous withoutthe tropics, in regions too cold for their existence, thatnone have been hitherto found in those countries whichthey actually inhabit at the present time. 3 This throwsno small degree of doubt upon that hypothesis whichassigns them for their habitation the countries in whichtheir remains are now deposited : but with regard to theremains of coral reefs 4 found in the Arctic seas, nodoubt can be entertained that at the period of theirformation, those seas were warm enough to suit the temperatureof the animals that formed them ; but which nolonger exist and rear their structures in those latitudes.I met with the following extract in the Literary Gazettefor April 7, 1832 ; it is taken from a work entitled SixMonths in North America, by G. T. Vigne, Esq. : " Thefossil remains of about thirty animals, now supposed tobe extinct, have been found at the Big-bone lick; andMr. Bullock conjectures that there are more remaining.That these animals did not perish on the spot, but werecarried and deposited by the mighty torrent, which it isevident once spread over the country, is probable fromthe circumstance of marine shells, plants, and fossil substanceshaving been found not only mixed with thebones, but adhering to them, and tightly wedged in the1 Supplement to Captain Beechey's Voyage, ii. 355, 356.2 N. D. D'H. N. x. 162.s Ibid. 169.4 Dr. Buckland in the Appendix to Beechey's Voyage, ii. 355.374 APPENDIX. NOTES.cavities of the skull ' those holes where eyes did onceinhabit,' were often stopped up by shells or pieces of coralforcibly crammed into them." The bones of the Mastodonwere found by Humboldt at an elevation of more than 7,000feet above the sea, and in central Asia those of horsesand deer have been met with at an elevation of 1 6,000.!NOTE 8, p. 19. Butcher and Campbell appear to havemet with more than one new species of rhinoceros in theirjourney from the Cape of Good Hope into the interior.Butcher describes one under the name of Rhinocerossinus.* Campbell's had a straight horn projecting threefeet from the forehead, different from any he had seen,and its horn resembled that of the supposed unicorn. 3There is in the Norwich Museum a horn flattened at thesummit, nearly straight, and three feet long, which alsoseems to belong to another species.NOTE 9, p. 23. The word of God, in many places,speaks of an abyss of waters under the earth. Scientificmen in the present day seem to question this. The passagesin Holy Writ, besides those quoted in the text, thatappear evidently to affirm that an abyss exists in theearth, are chiefly the following.In the book of Genesis, in the blessings pronounced,both by Jacob and Moses, 4 previous to their death, uponthe tribes of Israel, in that relating to Joseph, amongstothers are mentioned The blessings of the deep that liethunder, or as the same words are more literally translatedQuarterly Review, No. LVII. p. 155.2 Travels, ii. 75. Bulletin des Sc. Juin 1817. 96.3 Travels, 295.Comp. Genes, xlix. 25 with Deut. xxxiii. 13.APPENDIX. NOTES. 375in Moses* blessing The deep that couched beneath. 1 Theexpression in these passages evidently alludes to an abyssunder the crust of the earth, from which blessings may bederived ; and which is emphatically described as couchingbeneath, as if the mighty waters it contained were lyingin repose like a beast at rest, and chewing the cud, in contrastwith the incessantly fluctuating and stormy ocean.When the children of Israel murmured for water inRephidim, Moses at the Divine command smote the rockin Horeb, and water flowed out of it in a copious stream,which there is reason to believe followed them in all theirwanderings through the wilderness. If we consider thenature of that dry and thirsty land where no water is, itis evident that this perennial stream could not be derivedfrom the clouds that hovered round the summits of MountSinai, the rocks of that district were washed by no riversderived from above, and seem not calculated for percolation.But what was the case the stroke of the wonder-workingrod of the Lawgiver of Israel produced a fissurein the rock, which opened a channel through which thewaters, before in repose in the great deep, rushed forth inamighty stream; and therefore the Psalmist says Heclave the rocks in the wilderness, and he gave them drink,as out of the great abysses. Alluding evidently to a sourceof sweet waters below.The prophet Jonah, in the prayer he uttered whenincarcerated in the fish's belly, has these words / wentdown to the bottoms of the mountains ; the earth with herbars was about me for ever. 3 A parallel expression is usedin Moses' song A sire shall burn to the lowest hellit shall set on fire the foundations of the mountains. 41 Heb. nnn vin 2 See 1 Cor. x. 4.3 Jonah, ii. 6. 4 Deut. xxxii. 22.370 APPENDIX. NOTES.This last passage shews that the Hades 1 of Scriptureusually translated Hell, but distinct from the Gehenna orHell of the New Testament is synonymous with theabyss. As is further proved by the following passage ofthe book of Job. Hast thou entered into the springs ofthe sea ? Or hast thou walked in the search of the abyss ?Have the gates of death been opened unto thee, or hast thouseen the gates of the shadow of death ? 2 In this passagethe springs of the sea, the abyss, the gates of death, andthe gates of the shadow of death, seem nearly synonymous,or to indicate, at least, different portions, of the womb ofour globe. The bottomless pit, or rather the pit of theabyss of the apocalypse, also belongs to the same place :the word rendered pit means also a well. Schleusner, inhis lexicon, translates the phrase by Puteus sen fonsabyss, so that it seems to indicate a mighty source ofwaters. But as the terms abyss and great abyss are appliedto the receptacle of waters exposed to the atmosphere, aswell as to those which are concealed in the womb of ourglobe, 3 it is evident that they form one great body ofwaters in connexion with each other.NOTE 10, p. 27. He who willed the deluge, and thedestruction of the primeval earth and heavens by it, fyc.When it is considered that all the knowledge which wehave, and can have, of the contents of the globe that weinhabit, is very superficial; that it is only, as it were, skindeep, and consequently very imperfect, it seems as if westood in great need of some other guide, besides our ownreasonings and guesses upon the little that we can exploreof the earth's crust, to enable us to form a correct judgeHeb. f?iNttf. 2 Job xxxviii. 16, 17.3 Job xli. 31, Ps. cvi. 9. Isai. li. 10, &c.APPENDIX. NOTES. 377merit, and to arrive at the truth as to what changes mayhave taken place in it, and by what means. When wefurther consider that we are informed by the highestauthority, that the original earth and its heavens, with alltheir animal inhabitants those only excepted, which, byhis command, took refuge in a vessel built according tohis direction were destroyed by a universal deluge, whichovertopped the highest mountains, and continued in forcefor nearly a year : when this great catastrophe is dulyconsidered, surely, from the account given of it in Scripture,much may be gleaned that will throw a light uponthe subject, that can never be struck out by the unassistedinvestigations of the Geologist who can penetrate so littlebelow the earth's surface.My own knowledge of Geology and its principles, asnow laid down, is too slight to qualify me to compare themwith what has been delivered in Scripture on the subjectshere alluded to ; but as it appears to me that the scripturalaccount of the great Cataclysm has not been dulyweighed, and its magnitude, duration, momentum, variedagency, and their consequences, sufficiently estimated bygeologists, I will endeavour, as briefly as I can, to calltheir attention, and that of Christian Philosophers ingeneral, to the most striking features exhibited by it, asstated in the seventh and eighth chapters of the book ofGenesis, still requesting them to bear in mind these wordsof the poet, as expressing my own feelings.Fungor vice cots exors ipse secundi.My only wish being to excite others better qualified, bytheir knowledge both of Scripture and Nature, the Wordand the Work of the same Almighty Being, to undertakethe task.It must be borne in mind that the scriptural account378 APPENDIX. NOTES.is not a. figurative one, in which the object is to representone thing by another, but a statement of epochs, andnaked facts ; of causes and effects ; in which all that isrequisite is to ascertain the meaning of the terms employedto describe them.The cause of the universal deluge, every one is aware,was, with the exception of one family, the universal corruptionof the human race. All flesh had corrupted hisway upon the earths In consequence of which God determinedto Bring a flood of waters upon the earth todestroy all flesh, wherein was the breath of life from underheaven ; and every living substance from off the face ofthe earth. 2 To accomplish this purpose, it was evidentlynecessary that the whole globe should be submerged, andthe tops of all the mountains covered to such a depth asto prevent any thing in which was the breath of life frommaking its escape.Having mentioned the cause and object of the deluge,we must next consider the means by which this universaldestruction is stated to have been effected. Three onlyare mentioned. All the fountains of the great deep werebroken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, andthe rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. 51. All the fountains of the great deep were broken up.The radical idea of the word here rendered broken up isthat of division or disruption, therefore the meaning isthat those fountains by which the waters of the greatabyss issued ordinarily upon the earth to water it bynumerous streams and rivers, were so cleft, disruptured,and broken up, as to form vast chasms vomiting up thefluid contents of the womb of the earth, and sending1 Genes, vi. 12. Ibid. 17, and vii. 4.3 Ibid. vii. 11.APPENDIX. NOTES. 379forth torrents of incalculable force and volume. Thevestiges of such clefts in the earth's crust are still to betraced in many places. Malte Brun, in his Geography,observes, with respect to valleys " Those which are foundbetween high mountains are commonly narrow and long,as if they had originally been only fissures 1 dividing theirrespective chains, or for the passage of extensive torrents.The angles of their direction sometimes exhibit a singularsymmetry; we see in the Pyrenees, says M. Raymond,some valleys whose salient and repentant angles so perfectlycorrespond, that if the force that separated themwere to act in a contrary direction, and bring their sidestogether again, they would unite so exactly, that even thefissure would not be perceived." 22. The windows of heaven were opened is stated byMoses to be the second cause by which the deluge waseffected. The word, 3 which in our translation of theBible, is here and in other places rendered windows, doesnot mean an opening for the transmission of light, forwhich another term is usually employed. 4 In the Septuagintand other ancient versions it is supposed to signifywater falling from the heavens in large masses, and cataractor a corresponding term is used.The radical idea is that of lying in wait, as a wild beastin its den. In other parts of Scripture it is used fordovecots, or the holes in rocks that doves frequent; 5 forthe sockets of the eyes; 6 for the heavens when sheddingcopiously blessings or plenty ; 7 and for the action of somethingfrom above producing earthquakes. 81 nypl is Hebrew for a valley, and yplJ is the verb used toexpress the disruption of the fountains of the great abyss.2 System of Geography, I. i. 168. E. Tr.3 mnR 4 pen 5 fsai. lx. 8. 6 Eccles. xii. 3.7 2 Kings, vii. 2. Malachi, iii. 10. 8 Isai. xxiv. 18.VOL. i. c c380 APPENDIX. NOTES.My venerated friend, the late Rev. Wm. Jones, of Nay-landwell known for his knowledge of the Hebrew, andthe variety and ability of his researches on every subjectconnected with the interpretation of Scripture in hisPhysiological Disquisitions thus expresses himself, concerningthe term in question. " We suppose then thatthe air was driven downwards, for this purpose, throughthose passages which are called windows of heaven. Thesemay seem very obscure terms to express such a sense by ;but heaven is the firma mente or expanded substance of theatmosphere; and windows, as they are here called, areholes, or channels of any kind. The same word is usedfor chimneys, 1 through which smoke passes, and for theholes, probably cliffs of a rock, in which the doves of theeastern countries have their habitation." 2It strikes me as not very improbable that the term I amspeaking of may allude to volcanos and their craters,which may be called the chimneys of this globe, by whichits subterranean fires communicate with the atmosphere,and by which the air rushing into the earth, when circumstancesare favourable, may possibly act the part of thefabled Cyclops, and blow them up previous to an eruption:thus they become literally channels or chimneys,through which the matter constituting the expanse orfirmament passes, either from heaven, or, in an eruption,towards heaven. The expression, in Isaiah, quoted above,The windows from on high 3 are opened, and the foundationsof the earth do shake seems to indicate that earthquakesare connected with the opening of the windows of1 Hosea, xiii. 3.2 Isai. Ix. 8. See Jones' Works, x. 264. See also Park-hurst,Heb. Lex. under ni II.Heb. DVIDDAPPENDIX. NOTES. 381heaven, thus pointing to volcanic action as the result.Still the expression is ambiguous, and requires furtherelucidation : it may, however, be intended to include bothinterpretations. The violent disruption of the fountains ofthe great deep, which appears to have been the first steptowards producing the deluge, since God generally employsmeans to effect his purposes, was probably occasioned bythe expansive power of heat, and the same agent would, asit does at this very time in some countries, send out thewaters, and it seems equally probable, that in proportionas the waters rushed out the air would rush in and taketheir place, and thus form a centre of repulsion, or viscentrifugal, to counteract the pressure of the superincumbentwaters. It seems not improbable, if this werethe case, that in its transit from the surface of the earth,to its centre, the air might bring with it vast cataractsof water attended by thunder and lightning and otherelectric phenomena.Heat, the most elastic of all fluids, at the first creation,under the name of the expansion or firmament, acting inthe bosom of the chaotic waters divided them, and thereforeit is consistent with 'the Divine proceedings that thesame mighty element should be put in action to bringthem again together. And we learn from Scripture, thatthe same irresistible agent will be employed for the destructionof the present earth and its atmosphere or heavens,which are reserved unto fire, when the heavens shall passaway with a great noise, and the elements shall melt withfervent heat ; the earth also and the works that are thereinshall be burned up. 1 As the opening of the windows of theheavens seems the consequence of the breaking up of thefountains of the great deep, it is therefore mentioned inthe second place.1 2 Pet. iii. 7, 10.382 APPENDIX. NOTES.3. The third instrument of Divine Power to producethe deluge was rain. And the rain was upon the earthforty days and forty nights. 1 It is a common form ofexpression, It rains as if heaven and earth would cometogether ; and this probably was the character of the rainthat now fell for forty Nycthemera, or entire days oftwenty-four hours. A circumstance that does not requirefurther explanation.By the united operation of these three mighty agents,guided by the Almighty hand of the Deity Whose wayis in the sea f and whose path is in the great waters, andwhose footsteps are not known* the waters kept graduallyrising and prevailing more and more, till they overtoppedall the high mountains 3 that were under the whole heavensfifteen cubits, 4 by which the Divine decree to destroy theearth with all its inhabitants, both rational and irrational,except those in the ark, was fully executed. With respectto the earth itself, when we consider the violent action ofthe ascending and descending waters, and of the firmamentrushing downwards; the disruptions, dislocations, intro-versions,combinations, decorations here and there of theoriginal strata of the crust of our globe, can scarcely be conceived,and are still more difficult to calculate and explainexactly. In the waters thus again, as at the creation,masters of the whole earth, God had an instrument bywhich his will with respect to its crust, and the changesto take place in it, might have full accomplishment, especiallywhen we consider the long time during which thewaters kept rising or prevailed, till they reached the height1 Genes, vii. 12. 2 Ps. Lxxvii. 19.3 Genes, vii. 19. In our translation, Damn in this verse isrendered hills, and in the 20th mountains.Ibid. 20.APPENDIX. NOTES. 383necessary to fulfil the Divine decree. It seems not clearwhether the forty days during which the rain fell are includedin the hundred and fifty days that the waters arestated to have prevailed. If they were included, theperiod would be five lunar months and ten days ; and ifthey were not, it would extend to six such months andtwenty-two days. What a time, even according to theshortest calculation, for the continued action of such abody of fluctuating waters, continually increasing, till theyleft no peak or pinnacle of the most elevated mountainsof the globe visible! Who can calculate the effects ofthat action ?During this period of the increase and prevalence ofthe waters, when the mountains were covered, all ingressof the atmosphere into the earth by the chimneys of thevolcanos, if that is the meaning of stopping the windows ofheaven, would cease ; and the abyss, at or before the endof it, no longer vomit forth its waters by its innumerablemouths.Having considered the secondary causes to which theWord of God attributes the rise and prevalence of thedeluge, I must next make a few observations upon themeans to which Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodnesshad recourse to effect this, and to cause the waters toreturn to their ancient receptacle. At the first creation,The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Theconsequence of which was that order arose out of confusion.The motion was then begun, by which the wind 1blowed where it listeth, the light shines forth, heatexpands, the clouds are formed, and the physical cheer7r\/>> atop TTO\UC pt&v OTIC\eytTctt. Aristot. De Mundo.384 APPENDIX. NOTES.rubim, under the guidance, and according to the will ofJehovah of Hosts, are in action, and fulfil his purpose,and the consequence is that The waters under the heavenare gathered together into one place and the dry landappears* Similar steps were taken at the deluge. ForGod remembered Noah and every living thing t and all thecattle that were with him in the ark : and God made a windto pass over the earthy and the waters assuaged.* It is nothere said, as on the occasion just alluded to, that theHoly Spirit brooded over the water, but literally that Godpassed (a) wind (or spirit) over the earth. The action,though not the same, was analogous, wind under thedirection of God was employed to do, in part, what theincubation of the Holy Spirit had before effected, to beginthat action by which the globe and its atmosphere wouldbe again placed in statu quo, the water again divided, sothat one part should return to the great abyss, its destinedabode; and the other be suspended in the atmosphere;and, by the same means, the dislocated crust of the earthbe re-formed ; the matter suspended in the water or floatingon it deposited, the detritus of the old one beingmixed, and often, as it were, intercalated with vegetableand animal substances and remains. This wind from Godhaving passed over the earth, the waters assuaged ; thatis, their rage and violence ceased ; the fountains of theabyss and the windows of heaven being stopped ; the oneno longer poured forth its waters upon the earth ; and theother no longer descended to occupy their place ; and therain had ceased to fall. When the above three causes ofthe deluge ceased their action, and had given place to thewind from God, the waters of course began to subside.1 Genes, i. 9. 2 Ibid. viii. 1.APPENDIX. NOTES. 385We are now arrived at the last epoch of this greatevent, the gradual decrease and final subsidence of thediluvial waters. The period of their increase, if withLightfoot we add the 40 days to the 150, would be 190days, or, as was before observed, six lunar months andabout three weeks. In the seventh month of the deluge,as the same author observes, 1 on the seventeenth day ofthe month, the ark rested on the mountains of Ararat, 2from which period the waters returned off the face of theearth, going and returning, as it is in the Hebrew, 3 renderedin our translation by the word continually, butalmost all the ancient versions adhere to the literal sense,which seems to be important, and to indicate a flux andreflux of the waters, which would affect the deposition ofthe matters floating upon or suspended in them. Whetherthis flux and reflux partook of the nature of a tide, andwas produced by the action of the moon, or whether it wasoccasioned by the wind, which, as Solomon observes,Goeth towards the south and turneth about to the north,*does not appear.After the resting of the ark, more than two months elapsedbefore the tops of the mountains were seen, and finally,in nearly two months more the waters had universallydisappeared; and after their long domination over theearth, lasting nearly eleven months, were confined againwithin the limits that God had originally assigned tothem. Reckoning to the day of Noah's going out of theark, on the twenty-seventh day of the second month, thewhole period of his confinement appears to have been one1 Ubi supra. z See above, VOL. I. p. 45.8 Heb. mm "pVn pNn Vp on nun*'Eccles.i. 6.386 APPENDIX. NOTES.year and ten days. It is evident, from the period thatintervened between the resting of the ark, and the subsequentemergence of the tops of the mountains more thantwo months afterwards, 1 that the subsidence of the watersat first was very gradual ; but, in proportion as their volumediminished, it probably became more and more rapid.The tumult and violence of the descending waters, andthe effects produced by them, in the new mixture, as itwere, of the substances now forming the crust of our globe,and the putting it into its present order always underthe direction and guidance of the Deity, who sitteth abovethe water-flood, employing as his hands those physicalagents which rule in nature, to fulfil his purpose musthave been the reverse of those of the ascending ones : theobject now was not disruption, and dislocation, and destruction,but to form anew the earth and its heavenswhich had been thus destroyed, and by the addition of avast body of fresh materials not entering into the compositionof the old crust of the former, to render it materiallydifferent from it ; and that when the attention of mankindwas directed to the study of God's works, and of thoseremains of the former world, a proof might be supplied ofthe existence of this sad catastrophe, confirmation of theaccount given in Holy Scripture, and adding to the forceof the warning that universal corruption will be a preludeto universal destruction.When we consider what an infinite host of animals ofevery description must have perished in the diluvial waters,as well as the incalculable magnitude of the mass of vegetablesubstances that must have been severed by the violenceof the conflicting waters from the earth's surface, oruprooted afterwards in consequence of its being so thosGenes, viii. 4, 5.APPENDIX. NOTES. 387roughly soaked by them, we see immediately that theirdeposition and sepulture, as well as the putting togetheragain of the dislocated remains of the primeval earth, musthave been an important part of the office of the subsidingwaters, upon which I shall now offer a few observations.It has been a matter of surprize that amidst so manyfossil animals which are daily brought to light, and thoseof some of the largest quadrupeds in great numbers, 1 noremains of the human race have yet been discovered, exceptin one or two solitary instances. As the deluge was causedby the wickedness of these old giants, as they have beencalled, but really apostates, 2 these men of renown, it wasevidently a miraculous interference of the Deity for theirpunishment ; it seems, therefore, by no means improbable,that the place of their burial was not left to chance, or theuninfluenced action of physical causes, but, like the burialplace of Moses, was decreed by God, and fixed so as to beplaced beyond discovery.It seems to have been the opinion of most moderngeologists, that fossil animals in general were natives ofthose districts or countries in which their remains havebeen discovered. But whoever takes into considerationthe account, above detailed, which the sacred writingsgive us of the universal deluge, and of the prevalence of thewaters above the summits of the highest mountains, willsee at once, with the exception of those that were overtakenand drowned by the waters in dens or caverns, theymust have floated when the waters had reached andflooded all the elevations upon which they had taken theirlast refuge, and they would have drifted off north or south,or in any other direction the fluctuating element wastaking, and if there was an alternate flux and reflux, they1 See Reliqida Diluv. 138 182. 2 Heb. D'^SJ388 APPENDIX. NOTES.would have been carried by it backwards and forwardstill they were deposited some here and some there ; someupon mountain summits, 1 and others at different heightsruled by the circumstances of the earth's surface and theaction of the subsiding waters. Few, indeed, would be imbeddedin their native country, except those that perished,as above mentioned, in caverns ; though probably, in manycases, those of the same species might congregate, and sofloating off together might be buried together. It hasbeen remarked that no fossil elephants have been foundin the countries that those animals now frequent. Itseems, therefore, by no means certain that the giganticSaurians now found in our southern coasts, or that theMammoths or other gigantic Pachyderms of NorthernRussia or Nova Semble, were really natives of thoseWhat Geologist, then, however practised, howeverdeeply conversant with his subject, can estimate andexactly calculate the action and operation of these mightywaters, both during their rise, prevalence, and subsidencefor so extended a period; especially when those of anAlmighty superintending and directing Cause, upon thewhole body of means that he employed to accomplish hispurposes, and execute his decrees with regard both to thedestruction and renovation of our globe, are duly considered?By what I have here argued I do not mean to contendthat there may not have been many partial convulsionswhich may have produced very important changes indifferentcountries of our globe : it is not moreover at allimprobable that while its population was concentrated,1 See above, p. 374.APPENDIX. NOTES. 389many regions when uninhabited, God so willing, by diluvial,volcanic, or other action of the elements, might bematerially altered, new mountain ridges might be elevated,mighty disruptions take place, and other changes to whichthere could be no witnesses, but which can only be conjecturedby the features such countries now exhibit.NOTE 11, p. 41. We learn from the Apostle St. Peter,that the primeval globe, and its heavens or atmosphere,perished at the deluge. I shall add a few words here onthe passage of St. Peter alluded to in the text. Speakingof the scoffers of the last days, and of the deluge, Whereby,he says, the world that then was being overflowed withwater perished ; he adds, But the heavens and earth, whichare now, by the same word are kept in store, &c. In thispassage it must be observed that the term world in thesixth verse is synonymous with the heavens and the earthtaken together of the fifth and seventh verses, and by itseems to be meaYit that the earth with its own heavens, orthe atmosphere that surrounds it, both perished or were destroyed,1 which is rendered further evident by the expression:But the heavens and earth which are now. Fromwhich it may be gathered that the heavens and earthwhich are now, are different from the heavens and earthwhich were destroyed at the deluge ; and as the latter hasevidently been reconstructed, and vegetable and animalremains have been mixed with the dislocated materialsand as it were detritus of the original world; 2 so the newatmosphere might be, and probably was differently mixed,so as to be less friendly to health and longevity, which1 Gr.2 See above, p. 384, and Herschel in Cab. Cyclops, xiv. 141.No. 135.390 APPENDIX. NOTES.would account physically for the gradual reduction of theformer extended period of human life to its present briefstandard. Animals as well as man might be affected bythis change, their bulk might be diminished, and othervariations be produced in them which have not been ascertained.When God fixed upon the rainbow as the tokenof his covenant with Noah, the changes, here alluded to,in the atmosphere might be the cause of the appearance,under certain circumstances, of that phenomenon.Scientific men have judged it not improbable, withoutreferring to this doctrine of Revelation, that changes inthe composition of the atmosphere, according to circumstances,may have taken place. 1NOTE 14, p. 52. Whoever examines the animals ofNorth America will find a vast number that correspondwith European species on the Rocky Mountains, and inthe country westward of that range Asiatic types are discoverable.The rein-deer, the fox, the weasel, the rat, themouse, the golden eagle, the peregrine falcon, and manyother birds are of the former description. In the latterparagraph I allude to a fine Carabus which is found inSiberia; and likewise to a new genus 3 related to Trochus,of which I possess a specimen, found in India, both takenalso in the Rocky Mountains. Mr. Sabine informed methat several new Pceonias, and a Laurus that reached theheight of sixty feet, were natives of the same country.In Chili, Molina found the green and temporary frogs,the heron, the turtle-dove, and several other old-worldanimals.1 Ann. Des Sc. Nat. xix. 432.2 C. Vietinghovii. Fish. 3 hopleurus. K. M. S.APPENDIX. NOTES. 391NOTE 15, p. 54. But which in their immediate or remoteconsequences, may be productive of effects that are importantto be attended to, and provided for. When we reflectupon the action of the Deity, we can scarcely avoid takingour ideas of it, in some degree from that of man. Man'sattention is usually directed to things that appear to himimportant, as affecting either his passions or his interests,but he passes by those that appear to him trivial, as havingno bearing upon his pain, or pleasure, or welfare. Buthere there is a great difference, for though someBy long experience do attainTo something like prophetic strain,the generality can trace the chain of causes and effects,but for a very few links; and therefore they disregardsome things as trivial, which, in the event, produce effectsof the greatest importance. But it is not so with God ;he sees the most distant consequences of every thing thathappens in his whole universe, and therefore knows exactlyin what proportions every thing appertaining to the natureof every creature should be measured out to it in orderto produce the effects he intends should take place, if Imay so speak, during its ministration ; so combiningagents and actions, as may infallibly fulfil his law, andgeneral purpose. He foresees the effect of what areregarded as the most trivial things, as the number of ourhairs and the death of a sparrow, as well as of those thatare most important: and his general object is to providefor the execution of the laws both physical and metaphysicalby which he governs the universe, and so upholdsall things, but not so as never to suspend the action ofthese laws. The following events recorded in Scripturewere remarkable instances of such suspension.3.92 APPENDIX. NOTES.1. The Universal Deluge, by the means of which theheavens and the earth of the primeval world weredestroyed.2. The Egyptian palpable darkness for three days andnights.3. The passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea,the waters standing as a wall on either hand.4. The sun apparently standing still in the heavens atthe command of Joshua, or the earth ceasing torevolve on its axis.5. The shadow going back on the dial of Aha threedegrees, or the earth retrograding.6. The supernatural darkness that took place at ourSaviour's crucifixion.NOTE 16, p. 86. Which will take place in his timeand at his word; and by the means and instruments thathe empowers and commissions. Ever since the fall of ourfirst parents a copious harvest of evil and sorrow, the fruitof sin, has been reaped by their descendants, amongstothers, that of slavery has been one of the bitterest. Inthe case of Ham it was predicted and decreed by the Deityhimself that his son Canaan should be a servant of servantsor slave to his brethren, a prediction which, to judge bythe event, affected all the descendants of the offendingpatriarch, for no races have been so much degraded, inall respects, as the African negroes who derived theirorigin from him.Much has of late been done with the view of amelioratingtheir condition, and most of the European nationshave concurred in the benevolent endeavour. In consequenceof the exertions of this country, the debasing trafficin slaves, and the miseries and waste of human life that itoccasioned, have been very much diminished. But thoughAPPENDIX. NOTES. 393Christian nations have agreed to relinquish the trade inslaves, and it is to be hoped that many of the wars thatwere expressly kindled amongst the Africans themselves,for the purpose of making slaves will cease : still there aremarkets for slaves that we have no power to close, andtherefore it is to be apprehended that the good expectedfrom the abolition, by European states, of the traffic inquestion, will not be altogether realized: so that it stillseems doubtful whether slavery is near its extinction, orwhether it ever will be extinguished during the presentstate of society, and while the nations amongst whom it ispractised continue to be apostates from the knowledge andworship of their Creator. While the souls of the sons ofAdam are thus enslaved and sold under sin, it seems improbablethat God's time 'for their general emancipationfrom bodily slavery should be at hand; but when theirheart shall turn to the Lord, this, and numberless otherevils, at his bidding, and by instruments that he appoints,will cease. The best way therefore of accomplishing thisobject is by providing means, wherever God has made anopening, for the education of the negroes, and for trainingthem to habits of industry and order : to give them freedombefore they are qualified to use it for the benefit of society,is giving them not a boon, but a curse.NOTE 17, p. 87. Should another and last cloud of errorenvelope the world with darkness. There are many passagesof Holy Writ, from which it appears that, before the finaltriumph of the gospel, there shall be a time of greatspiritual darkness upon earth ; and it seems also to beintimated that this reign of evil shall be brought on bymen that Despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, 11 Jude, 8.394 APPENDIX. NOTES.who shall promise liberty to their followers, while theythemselves are the servants of corruption; 1 who shallresemble Coral, and his companions in rebellion Nathanand Abram, 2 and rise up against their civil and ecclesiasticalrulers ; and who shall for a time prevail againstthem, as seems to be intimated by one of the most ancientprophecies in the Bible. Dan shall be a serpent by theway, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse-heels, sothat his rider shall fall backward. 3 So says the venerablepatriarch, in his valedictory and prophetic address to histwelve sons before his death. These words seem to foretellthat serpents, or apostates, symbolized by the tribe of Dan,would, in the last times, incite the lower orders to rebelagainst their governors and reject their authority; and whenJacob adds I have waited for thy salvation, O Jehovah, itseems to be further indicated that this event will be followedby the great day of salvation. It was an ancient opinionthat Antichrist would be an individual of the tribe of Dan,who, in the last times, to use the words of Irenaeus, wouldleap like a lion upon the human race; 4 an opinion probablyderived from this prophecy, or from that of Moses deliveredon a similar occasion, Dan is a lion's whelp : he shall leapfrom Bashan; 5 and from the exclusion of that tribe fromthe number of those that were sealed, as recorded in theApocalypse. 6 St. Paul, in his description of the man ofsin, describes him as exalting himself above all that iscalled God, or that is worshipped or venerated.? This hasbeen interpreted as meaning idols, but in Scripture princesand rulers are called Gods, as when it is said Thou shalt1 2 Pet. ii. 9, 19. 2 Numb. xvi. 13, 3135.3 Genes, xlix. 17. * Adv. Hares. 1. iii. c. 38.5 Deut. xxxiii. 22. 6 ft eve l. X vi. 58.7 Gr. fftaffjia. 2 These. ii. 4.APPENDIX. NOTES. 395not revile the Gods nor speak evil of the ruler of thypeople; 1 whence it seems as if St. Paul meant to indicatea power that was to exalt itself above all authority whethercivil or ecclesiastical. Irenaeus expected his personalAntichrist to reign three years and a half, interpreting theprophetic period of 1260 days literally; 2 but this period,if interpreted a year for a day, would only agree with asuccession of individuals. The ancient opinion of a personalAntichrist, may be reconciled with the modern one of asuccession of individuals entitled to that appellation, byconsidering St. John's prophecy of the two witnesses. Theyare to prophecy clothed in sackcloth 1260 days. 3 Thisperiod synchronizes with the reign of the Antichristianpower which corrupts the gospel, headed by a succession ofindividuals. Again, they are to be killed, and their bodiesexposed without sepulture in the street of the great cityfor three days and a half; 4 this second period synchronizeswith the reign of the personal Antichrist, who denies thegospel, who is to be a single individual ; and more particularlyentitled to the name of Antichrist by his infidelity,and atheistic principles. He is the Antichrist that deniedthe Father and the Son. 5 It may be asked When Goddoeth this, who shall be able to stand 1 will any Christianchurch escape ? We learn from the case of that of Philadelphia,6 that if any such church holds fast her profession,has kept the word of Christ, and not denied his name,though beset by a host of enemies, she shall be kept fromthe hour of temptation,NOTE 18, p. 87. And be restored to the favour of theirGod and their own land. Some Divines have thought1 Exod. xxii. 28. 2 Ubi supr. 1. v. c. 25.3 Revel, xi. 3. * Ibid. 7 11.5 1 John, ii. 22. 6 Rev. iii. 710.VOL. I/ D P396 APPENDIX. NOTES.that there will be no restoration of the Jews to their ownland ; but as it is evident, from what St. Paul says, thatthey will at a period fixed in the Divine councils beconverted to the faith of Christ, 1 so it appears equallyclear, from what is foretold in the concluding chapters ofEzekiel and by other prophets, 2 that they shall also againinhabit Judea and Jerusalem. Some interpreters are alsoof opinion, that the pouring out of the vial of the sixthangel upon the river Euphrates and the drying up of itswaters, 3 signify the dissolution of the empire of the Turks ;that, by the Kings of the East therein mentioned, aremeant the Jews ; and that their return to their own landisindicated, by their way being prepared. Bishop Horseysupposes, likewise, that the eighteenth of Isaiah foretellsthis event, and that the great commercial nation of the daywill be instrumental in bringing it about. 4St. Paul's conversion is thought to have been a type ofthe conversion of the Jewish nation in the latter days, andas his zeal and success seem to have exceeded that of theother apostles, and he was the great instrument of theconversion of the gentile world to the faith of Christ, so ithas been supposed that the Jews when converted, will bethemain instruments of the conversion of the then heathenworld.NOTE 19, p. 88. Unless some means can be devised athome, by which the pressure may be lightened, and thesuffering classes be enabled to procure the necessaries of life.There are two mighty nations on our globe in which asystem has long been acted upon, enabling them to support1 Rom. xi. 25, 26.2 Ezek. xxxvii. &c. Isai. Ix. Jerem. xxx. &c.3 Rev. xvi. 12. comp. ix. 14.4 See also Ix. 8, 9, and Zeph. iii. 10.APPENDIX. NOTES. 397a population, never diminished by foreign wars, greatlyexceeding that of any other country, whose numbers haveonly been diminished occasionally by famine, by devastatinginundations and unfavourable seasons, from whichnothing can altogether insure a people. The nations Iallude to are China and Japan. We are informed, in theAccount of Lord Macartney's Embassy, that in the formerof these countries, " Every square mile contains upon anaverage one third more inhabitants, being upwards of threehundred, than are found upon an equal quantity of land,also upon an average, in the most populous country inEurope." 1 The population of the latter is also stated to beprodigious. 2 The encouragement of Agriculture appearsto be the sole mean which enables these countries to maintainso vast a mass of population. In China, it is stated,that the whole surface of the country is dedicated to theproduction of food for man alone, that even the steepestmountains are brought into cultivation ; they are cut intoterraces, and the water that runs at their feet is raised bychain-pumps, worked each by two men, from terrace toterrace, to irrigate them ; and steep and barren places arenot suffered to run waste, but are planted with pines andlarches. 3 A similar account is given of the state of agriculturein Japan, where attention to it is enjoined by thelaws as one of the most essential duties ; and if any oneleaves his land uncultivated his more active neighbourmay take possession of it. In both these countries noarticle that can possibly be used as manure is wasted, sothat the soil and crops have every possible attention ofthis kind. 4 Malte-Brun has given a very interesting1 Macartney Embassy by Sir G. Staunton, iii. 388.2 Malte-Brun. Syst. ofGeogr. Asia II. ii. 533. E. T.3 Macartney Embassy. iii. 386. Malte-Brun. Asia, 560.Thumb. Japan, iv. 82. Malte-Brun. 561.398 APPENDIX. NOTES.account of the honours paid by the Emperor of China andhis court to agriculture : who annually in the beginningof March, after adoring the God of Heaven, and invokinghis Blessing on his labour and on that of his whole people,himself, laying aside his imperial robes, holding a ploughopens several furrows, and is succeeded by his chiefmandarins, who in succession, follow the example of theprince. 1 Some allowance probably must be made for toowarm colouring in these statements, as most of them musthave been derived from the report of the natives, yet thereseems no doubt with respect to their general accuracy.What an example is here set by nations which we areaccustomed to consider as far behind ourselves in everyart of life : how vast a portion of our own home empire issuffered to lie waste, while all the time hundreds ofthousands of our agricultural population are languishingfor want of employment, and compelled to live upon apittance, which, unless they add to it by theft or fraud, isscarcely sufficient to keep body and soul together; and inthe mean while the morals of our peasantry are graduallycorrupted; they grow daily less industrious; they willoften congregate at the beer-shops, and get inveteratehabits of intemperance; they lose all respect for theirsuperiors, and the bonds of union betwixt the upper andlower classes are gradually dissolving; and unless someremedy for this fearful evil is soon discovered, who cansay what the consequences maybe? When a man onceloses his self-esteem, and is degraded from his naturaldependence upon himself, under God, and the labour ofhis hands, for the support of himself and family, being nolonger of use to himself or others, he becomes careless ofhis actions; and being, as it were, rejected by society,1 Malte-Brun, 561.APPENDIX. NOTES. 399becomes the enemy of those above him, and the readyassociate of evil men, in evil works.NOTE 20, p. 156. Those that are located and coveredwith some kind of shell. The varied means by which aprovident and beneficent Creator has provided animalswith different means of defence ought not to be overlooked.When we see even these invisible atoms as itwere provided with armour, to defend them probablyfrom the attack of animals of their own class, we feelconfident that he will riot neglect us. This distinctionof animals into located and naked may be tracedthrough most of their Classes; thus the Cleopatra standin contrast with most of the other Orders of insects;the fishes and reptiles that are covered with scales withthose that are covered with skin. 1 In birds, however, thisdistinction does not appear to obtain at all : in quadrupedsthe giant Megatherium, the Armadillo, the Chfamyphorus,and the Man's, are distinguished from the other mammalianby the armour that protects them,NOTE 21, p. 162. The first plants and the first animalsare scarcely more than animated molecules, and appearanalogues of each other; and those above them in eachkingdom represent jointed fibrils. A discovery may herebe noticed of one of the most scientific Botanists of thepresent age, and whose keen eye and philosophic spirithave penetrated into depths and mysteries before unexplored,belonging to the science of which he is so great anornament. In the investigation of some of these, he discoveredthat not only vegetable, but even mineral molesIn some fishes the scales are invisible, so that they may bealmost reckoned naked. Vol. II. p. 306.400 APPENDIX. NOTES.rules, when placed in a fluid medium, would move aboutin various directions, but by what cause these motionswere generated he offers no conjecture. He very kindlyshewed me this singular phenomenon, if my memory doesnot deceive me, with respect to some mineral substances.Mr. Brown has observed that the motions in question, hewas satisfied, arose neither from currents in the fluid, norfrom its gradual evaporation, but belonged to the particleitself; 1 and of the spherical molecules mixed with the otheroblong particles obtained from Clarckia pulchella, thatthey were in rapid oscillatory motion: 2 in both mineral, 3vegetable, 4 and animal substances, 5 along with the molecules,he found other corpuscles, like short fibres somewhatmoniliform, or having transverse contractions, correspondingin number, as he conjectured, with that of themolecules composing them: and these fibrils, when notconsisting of a greater number than four or five molecules,exhibited motion resembling that of the mineral fibrils,while longer ones of the same apparent diameter were atrest. 6 It does not appear clearly from the words of thelearned author, whether the motion of the mineral moleculeswas similar to that of the vegetable ones, which hedescribes as oscillatory. The motions of the mineral fibrils,when not composed of more than two or three molecules,were at least as vivid as those of the simple molecule, andwhich from the fibril often changing its position in thefluid, and from its occasional bending, might be said tobe somewhat vermicular; 7 now vermicular movement isa kind of progressive oscillation, the anterior extremitygoing from side to side and being followed by the body.1 Brief Account of Microscopical Observations, fyc. 4.2 Ibid. 5, 6. 3 Ibid. 10. 4 Ibid. 11. 56 Ibid. comp. 10, 11. 7 Ibid. 10,APPENDIX. NOTES. 401In other mineral bodies, as in white arsenic, which didnot exhibit the fibrils, he found oval particles about thesize of two molecules, which he conjectures to be primarycombinations of them : their motion, which was more vividthan that of the simple molecule, consisted usually inturning on their longer axis, and then often appearing tobe flattened. 1 The revolution of a body upon its axis, itmay be observed, implies the action upon it of two equalconflicting forces, by the counteraction of which the revolutionis produced and maintained: the same action onthe longer fibrils 2 would keep them at rest.My motive for introducing a topic, which, at the firstblush, seems to have a very slight connexion with thesubject now before me, was a suspicion that sometimesMr. Brown's molecules may have been mistaken forIndustry Animals. Comparing the oscillatory motion heobserved in them, and Carus' observation that the motionsof Industries occasionally present the appearance of attractionand repulsion, 3 this suspicion seems to merit attention,and to call for more close examination; and it may beobserved that the action of these two powers seems sufficientlyto account for the oscillatory motions of the molecules,and takes away all idea of any spontaneity. Withregard to the Industries this has been most satisfactorilyestablished in a former part of this chapter, 4 and thisclearly proves their animal nature, as do their modes ofmotion, &c. 5 but when we recollect that they abound invegetable infusions, and that the more vegetables aremacerated, and as it were decomposed, the more numerousare the animalcule that they appear to give out when1 Ubi supra. " Ibid. 11.3 Introdd. to Comp. Ant. E. Tr. i. 45. 57.4 See above, p. 150. a /^. 1.53.402 APPENDIX. NOTES.infused, it would be nothing extraordinary either that theyshould be mistaken for moving molecules, or moving moleculesfor them. Farther we may observe a kind of analogybetween the spherical Industries and the Molecules, andbetween the filiform ones transversely annulated with avermicular motion, and the fibrils of Mr. Brown.Another law of nature seems to result from the experimentsof this acute naturalist that all bodies whetherorganized or reorganized, are formed, as fibrin is in theanimal kingdom, by spherical molecules made, as it were,into necklaces, and then adhering in bundles, and thatthese are the substratum of all substance. In fluids thespherules are not united, and so have free motion inter se.NOTE 22, p. 1 98.- Several of them, for it is not commonto them ally when touched cause a sensation similar to thatproduced by the sting of a nettle. Aristotle mentions amarine animal, under the name of Acalephe, 1 and another,if it be not the same, under that of Chide,* both of whichwords, according to the Greek lexicographers, are used todesignate the same plant, the stinging-nettle; 3 but itseems not quite certain that, in either case, he had thestinging Gelatiness or sea-nettles in his eye. Describinghis Acalephe, he says, " It adheres to the rocks, as dosome of the shell-fish, but sometimes it roves at large.It has no shell, but the whole body is fleshy. If the handis moved to it, it perceives, seizes, and adheres to it, likethe Polype, by means of its tentacles, 4 so that the fleshswells. It has its mouth in the middle, and the rock1 Gr. A/caXr/07;, Aulis Genius (Not. Matt. 1. iv. c. 11.) writesit AKaXvfyrj.2 Gr. KviSr). 3 Heschius explains AfcaX>;0at by4 Gr. 7r\Kravai.APPENDIX. NOTES. 403seems to serve it for a shell : if it meets with any of thesmall fishes, it detains them in the same way that it doesthe hand. Thus whatever edible thing it meets with, itdevours. One kind of them is at large, and devourswhatever sea-urchins, 1 or cockles, 2 it meets with : it appearsto have no excrement, in this respect resembling plants.There are two kinds of Acalephes ; one smaller, and bestadapted for the table ; the other large and hard, such asare produced about Chalcis. In the winter their flesh isfirm they are therefore caught and eaten at that seasonbut in summer they dissolve, for they become watery,and when touched they immediately are so damaged asnot to be removable. 3 When suffering from the heat theywithdraw within the rocks," 4 And again " It has amouth in the middle, which is chiefly conspicuous in thelarge ones; it has, like the bivalve shell-fish, a passageby which the excrements are voided, which is in theirupper surface : like them too it has the fleshy partwithin, but it uses the rock as a shell." 5With regard to his Guide, of which he treats at thesame time with the sponges, as inhabiting the cavernsof the rocks he says, "Of the Chides there are twokinds, one in the hollows, which adheres to the rocks ;others, that range at large, are met with in smooth places, 6and on the flat shore." 71 E^lVOl. 2 Gr. RTEVtQ.3 The word I have rendered watery (padapoc;) means properlywithout hairs ; but //aSaw is used by Theophrastus to expressmoisture, and is used here evidently in a similar sense.4 Aristot. Hist. Anim. 1. iv. c. 6. 5 Ibid. 1. viii. c. 2.6 In the text it is iv roi jj.eto(ri, but Theseus reads EV rotsXaoic, which better agrees with the context.7 Gr. TrAara/uwSco-u/ it may perhaps mean flat rocks. Aristot.Ibid. \. v. c. 16.404 APPENDIX. NOTES.It seems not accordant with the usual accuracy of thisgreat Philosopher and Naturalist, where he is treatingformally of the same kind of object, to distinguish it bytwo different names, nor is it likely that he would haveplaced them in separate chapters, as if they were distinctthings. He would surely not have devoted one wholechapter to the Tethys and Acalephe, and another to theChide and Sponge, unless he had meant they should beconsidered as distinct animals. Still there is one circumstancethat seems in one respect to indicate their identity,one species of each appears to be usually fixed, and theother free. But this, by itself, does not furnish a satisfactoryproof. With regard to these Acalephes or Chidesof Aristotle having any right to be considered as belongingto Linne's genus Medusa, it seems chiefly based upontheir name of Nettles, which probably was given them,from a faculty they possessed of stinging, in some measure,like a nettle, a faculty which some of the Medusas areknown to possess in a remarkable degree. 1 But Aristotledoes not appear to intimate that such an effect followsits touch, except that the fixing of its tentacles caused aswelling. If either of his species is entitled to be consideredas a Medusa it must be the smaller; the larger orfixed one appears in one respect to resemble the Amphitritemagnified:* they are stated to use the rock to whichthey are fixed as a shell, whence it should seem that they1 The stinging property of many such Tentacula, for instance,in the Medusa and Holothuria, likewise deserves notice. This,which, with some modifications, also exists in several plants,appears to be the lowest degree of the, so called, electric powerin several fishes, not recurring in the higher orders of animals,and perhaps comparable as regards man, to the magnetic influencealone. Cams. i. 47. 60.- Tubular maynijica, Linn. Tr. v. 228. t. ix.APPENDIX. NOTES. 405retire occasionally into it, like the above animal. Withregard to his second species, though some parts of hisdescription agree with the common jelly-fish, yet theirdevouring Echini and Cockles seems to indicate someanimal furnished with a more powerful apparatus formaking their way to the animal inhabiting these shells.Pliny does not in his description merely copy Aristotle ;for he speaks of his sea-nettle as producing the sameeffect as the vegetable nettle. Yet he mentions them andthe sponges as being something intermediate between theanimal and the plant, which can scarcely apply to ourJelly-fish. It seems, I think, probable, that the term inquestion was employed by the ancients, to designate morethan one group of animals, and more particularly theTunicaries of Lamarck, both those that are fixed and thosethat are free. Aristotle's fixed species, which he describesas retreating into the rocks, as into a shell, will probablyone day be found near the eastern coast of the Black Sea.It is worth while also to inquire whether any animalanswering the description of Aristotle's second species isstill eaten, in the winter, by the Greeks, customs of thatkind seldom changing.NOTE 23, p. 240. It seems to me most probable thatthey are the animals, and not the pholads, as is usuallysupposed, which the Roman naturalist describes under thename of Ductile. Pliny says of his Dactyli that they areso called, because of their resemblance to the human nail; 1in the Holds this resemblance is very slight, but in therazor-shells and some tulip-shells it is much more striking.He also observes that the Dactylus when replete withmoisture sparkles in the mouth of the eater, and that theiHist. Nat. 1. ix. c. 61.VOL. I. D D 6400 APPENDIX. NOTES.falling drops also emit light. 1 If Pliny, in his account ofthis creature, was really speaking of the pholad, it is singularhe should not mention its habit of boring rocks.NOTE 24, p. 252. Their byssus has long been celebrated,for it is mentioned by Aristotle. Aristotle's mode of expressionis singular. A/ E vriwcu fiat Quovrai etc ra fiucro-x evThis afAfAudsa-i nai @o@ogu$Ecnv. He says also when they aredeprived of the pinnophylax, they perish. 2 Pliny, whomostly copies Aristotle's account, does not notice thebyssus. 3NOTE 25, Introdd. p. xcviii. He might have added thefour physical cherubim, spirit or wind, light, expansion, andthe clouds. I have on a former occasion observed, that theheavens in action, which constitute the Physical Cherubim,are represented by the earthly rulers, whose faces distinguishthe sculptured images called by the same name; 4but it is not there specified, except in one case, 3 of whateach may be regarded as the appropriate symbol : I shalltherefore here add a few observations upon that subject. Imust, however, previously dilate a little upon the numberfour, which seems consecrated by the prophet in his descriptionof the cherubic forms. Not to mention the whirlwind,the great cloud, the brightness, and the fire fromthis came outybwr living creatures, each of which had/bwrfaces, four wings, and jfotir human hands under the wings.1 His natura in generis remote lumina, alio fuller claro ; etquanto magis humored habet, lucre in ore mandentium,lucre in manus, atque etiam in solo et veste decidentibusguttis. Ibid.2 Hist. Anim. 1. v. c. 16. 3 Hist. Nat. 1. ix. c. 42.4 Introdd. Xi, Ixxx. 5 Ibid. Lxxii.APPENDIX. NOTES. 40?They were also attended by four wheels ; and each wheelconsisted of four sides or parts. 1 It is a singular coincidencethat Brama, the first person in the Indian Triad, isrepresented with four heads and four arms : 2 it is not improbablethat the three-headed and four-headed images,occurring, as they do not unfrequently, amongst the idolsof heathen nations, had their origin from the cherubicimages, and afford an additional proof that the physicalcherubim were the Elohim, or gods, of the heathens. 3 Thehuman hands under the wings of the cherubim appear tosignify, that wherever their flight was directed by Himwho sitteth upon them, there they took hold so as to workHis will, and be His instruments. 4 All these Betrays confirmthe idea of four physical cherubim, as stated in thiswork.With regard to the four heads or faces, though in onerespect the cherubim were quadriform, in another theywere triform, for the prophet, in his statement of the situationof these faces with respect to each other, places Theface of a man and the face of a lion on the right side ; andthe face of an ox on the left side : 5 the face of the eaglemust therefore have been between the two sides, so as,perhaps, to form with the others a triangle. If we turn tothe forty-first chapter, where the prophet is speaking ofcertain parts of the temple shewn him in vision, we readAnd it was made with cherubim and palm-trees, so that apalm-tree was between a cherub and a cherub ; and everycherub had two faces, so that the face of a man was towardthe palm tree on one side, and the face of a young lion towardthe palm tree on the other side. 6 It appears evident1 Ezek. i. 4 17. 2 Maurice. Hindustan, i. t. vii.3 See above Note '. * Ibid. p. 7,5 Ezek. i. 10. 6 Ver. 18, 19.408 APPENDIX. NOTES.from this passage, first, that the faces looked in oppositedirections ; and secondly, that they were united so as toform one head. Archbishop Newcome supposes that thecherubim here described had the same number of faceswith those described in the first chapter, only that those ofthe ox and the eagle were non-apparent, being below theplane; 1 but however this may be, it is evident that theface of the man and the lion were joined together so as toconstitute one head, so that in this respect the cherubicimage was triform.That the several heads, or rather faces, of the lion, theox, and the eagle individually symbolize the first light,the second fire or heat, and the third wind or air, seems tobe the most probable opinion, and is adopted by thosewriters who have most thoroughly investigated the subject:I shall therefore refer the reader to their works, 2 and shallhere only inquire what the union of the lion's face withthat of the man seems intended to signify. But few argumentswill be necessary, I think, to convince any unprejudicedperson that, amongst the physical cherubim, thisunion symbolizes the clouds. A cloud may be stated toconsist of two parts, the one visible and ponderable, andthe other invisible and imponderable. The visible partevery one is aware is water, which as the lion's face is understoodto symbolize the light, must be represented bythe human face; and it is worthy of notice, that the Egyptiangod Canopus, who presided over the element of water,was represented with a human head affixed to a vase : butinconsidering what is the invisible and imponderable partof a cloud, it is not so easy to prove that it is light alone.1 Ezek. 167.2 See Maurice Indian Antiq. iv. 611 14. Parkhurst Heb.Lex. m3.APPENDIX. NOTES. 409I observed, on a former occasion, that the clouds are instinctwith all those principles by which God acts upon theearth They are not only pregnant with light, but alsowhen evaporation takes place, by which clouds are formed,water carries off with it in combination the matter of heat.In thunder storms, combustion may be said to take place aswell as the evolution of light the electric fluid indeedseems peculiarly connected with the clouds : it has beenobserved also, that a heavy cloud passing over with a hastyfall of snow or hail is often attended by a hasty and violentgust of wind, which subsides into a calm with the departureof the cloud ; till another coming in the same directionbrings with it a fresh blast. 2 Light, however, is most conspicuouslyconnected with water and the clouds ; we aretold that heat without it cannot produce air from water,but as soon as light acts upon it bubbles arise. 3 In thunderstorms,the lightning enlightens the world ; but theprincipal phenomenon in which light and water appear tobe united, takes place when the rainbow is exhibited, whichmay be called a personification of light, otherwise itself invisible,though it reveals to us the whole creation of God,of which without this blessed medium we should neitherknow the forms, nor the colours, nor the motions./ have set my bow in the cloudy saith God to Noah, andit shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth,that the bow shall be seen in the cloud, and I will remembermy covenant which is between you and me, and every livingcreature of all flesh ; and the waters shall no more become aflood to destroy all Flesh.* The cloud here mentioned isevidently a rain-cloud, 5 discharging its contents ; and the1 Introdd. xciii.2 Adams Let. on Nat. Philos. iv. 533.3 Ibid. i. 439. * Gen. ix. 1315.5 Nimbus. First.410 APPENDIX. NOTES.rainbow to the. observer appears in the cloud, though reallyproduced by the reflection and refraction of the sun's raysby the rain falling from it, which indeed may be consideredas a part of it, for viewed from a distance it often wearsthe appearance of wool or hair combed out, descending towardsthe earth. 1 This is the point in which the union ofthe light with the water is most conspicuous ; in its lowestsense it is a symbol of God's covenant not to destroy theearth again by a flood of water : and as the throne of theDeity is also represented as encircled by a rainbow, 2 in itshighest sense it is a symbol of the Gospel covenant, and ofthe incarnation of the Logos, 3 that light which lightedevery man that cometh into the world ; which by taking ahuman body was rendered visible to the human race, andreflected the glories of the Godhead. All this was indicatedand foreseen when God used the clouds as instrumentsof communicating with his people, and went beforethem in a cloudy pillar. 4NOTE 26, vol. i. p. 342. By the casts which they everywherethrow up. It has generally been supposed that worm-casts,as they are called, are cast out of their burrows by theworms, or are perhaps their ejected excrements; but thefollowing fact, communicated to me by my kind friend andrelative, I. R. Trimmer, Esq. of Brentford, which I havesince had an opportunity of observing myself, seems tothrow doubt upon the fact. He observed that, after a wet1 This appearance in the figure of Jupiter plutus (Montfauc.Antiq. i. t. ix. f. 13) is evidently a personification of a nimbus.2 Ezek. i. 28. Revel, iv. 3. Comp. x. 1.3 See Sitting in Apocalypse. 176, 423. Maurice Indian Antiq.iv. 403.4 See Introdd. Lxxxvii. Exod. xiii. 21.APPENDIX. NOTES. 4 1 1night, heaps of small stones were raised round the entranceof the worm-holes, in his gravel walks. These gravel stonesappeared as if they were collected and transported by theworms themselves, and placed to defend the mouth of theirretreats; but how this was effected he could not conjecture.Some of the stones were as big as a bean, and appeared tohave been embedded in the rolled gravel. Mr. T. thinksthat the object of these erections, as well as that of theearth-casts, is to keep out the wet.NOTE 27, vol. ii. p. 60. There may be herbivorousspecies amongst the Crustaceans, as well as in almost everyother class of animals. In a letter I lately received fromthe Rev. C. Hardy, dated Hailing Vicarage, Havant, Hands,he informs me that he has frequently observed small Crustaceansin vast numbers devouring the sea-weeds cast up bythe waves ; and apparently when their hunger was satisfiedburying beneath the sands fragments of what remained.NOTE 28, p. 224. To erect her three-floored houses. Thecompound rpiugotpog may be rendered either three-storied,three-roofed, or three-floored. But as the comb of thehive-bee consists of only two stories, one of the two latterterms should be employed.NOTE 29, p. 264. But to a peculiar mechanism of itsbones contained in a ligamentous sheath. In a letter recentlyreceived from him, Mr. Pelham thus further explains thismechanism. " Like the ant-eaters the wryneck can protrudeits tongue to a very great length, not because thatmember is in itself contractile or extensile, but because itsbone, dividing at the larynx, and passing first backwardsand encircling the occiput on either side, turns upward412 APPENDIX. NOTES.and then forward, and is inserted on the upper part of thebase of the bill, thus forming two loops which are containedin ligamentous sheaths, and which, when the tongue is protruded,are in immediate contact with the occiput ; butwhen drawn into the mouth, pass backward on either sidethe neck : these bones are enveloped in muscles throughtheir whole extent, and in their contractions use the occiputas a fulcrum."END OF VOL. I,C. VVHITTINGHAM, Took COURT, CHANCERY LANE.