PERICLES AND ASPASIA,VOL. II.NEW WORK BY MR. Buller.Preparing for PublicationATHENS:ITS RISE AND FALL.In 2 vols. 8vo.PERICLES AND ASPASIAWALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, Esq.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. 11.LONDONSAUNDERS AND Motley, CONDUIT STREET.1836./,OmitLONDON:IBOTSON AND PALMER, PRINTERS, SAVOY Street, STRAND.LOAN STACKGIFTTO GENERAL ANDREW JACKSON,PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.Happy may be the landWhere mortals with their eyes uplifted standWhile Eloquence her thunder rolls :Happier, where no deceptive lightBursts upon Passion's stormy night.Guiding to rocks and shoals.Happiest of all, where man shall layHis limbs at their full length, nor overcastThe sky above his head, but the pure rayShines brighter on the future than the past.CsVILook, look into the east afar.Refulgent western Star !And where the fane of Pallas stands,Rear'd to her glory by his hands.Thou, altho' nowhere else, shalt seeA statesman and a chief like thee.How rare the sight, how grand !Behold the golden scales of Justice standSelf-balanced in a mailed hand !Following the calm Deliverer of Mankind,In thee again we findThis spectacle renew'd.Glory altho' there beTo leave thy country free,Glory had reach not there her plenitude.Up, every son of Africa soil !Ye worn and weary, hoist the sail !For your own glees and garners toilWith easy plough and lightsome flail :vuA father's home ye never knew,A father's home your sons shall have from you.Enjoy your palmy groves, your cloudless day.Your world that demons tore away.Look up ! look up ! the flaming swordHath vanish ! and behold your Paradise restored !Never was word more boldThan through thy cities ran.Let gold be weigh'd for gold,Let man be weigh'd for man.Thou spake it ; and therefor praiseShall crown thy later as thy earlier days.And braid more lovely this last wreath shall bind.Where purest is the heart's atmosphere,Atlantic Ruler ! thereShall men discern at last the loftiest mind.Rise, and assert thy trust !Enforcing to be justVlllThe race to whom aloneOf Europe's sons was never known(In mart or glade)The image of the heavenly maidStrata ; she hath call'd thee ; goRight onward, and with tranchant prowThe hissing foam of Gallic faith cut thro'.July 3, 1835.Page 233, tine 12, /or shore read passage.PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO Cleon.The Parthenon is now completed, and waitsbut for the Goddess. A small temple, raisedby Cimon in honour of Theseus, is the model.This, until lately, was the only beautiful edificein the Athenian dominions. Pericles is resolvedthat Athens shall not only be the mistress, butthe admiration of the world, and that her" architecture*shall, if possible, keep pace with hermilitary and intellectual renown. Our country-vol.II. B2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.men, who have hitherto been better architectsthan the people of Attica, think it indecorousand degrading that loans, as the Atheniansare, should follow the fashion of the Dorian,so inferior a race of mortals. Many grand designswere offered by Ictinus to the approbationand choice of the publick. Those which hecalls Ionian, are the gracefully. Craters, ayoung architect, perhaps to ridicule the fineryand extravagance of the Corinthians, exposed toview a gorgeous design of slender columns andtop-heavy capitals, such as, if ever carried intoexecution, would be incapable of resisting thehumidity of the sea-breezes, or even the actionof the open air, uninfluenced by them. Thesehowever would not be misplaced as indoorornaments, particularly in bronze or ivory ; andindeed small pillars of such a character wouldbe suitable enough to highly ornamented apartments.I have conversed on the subject withPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 3Ictinus, who remarked to me that what wecall the Dorick column is in fact Egyptian, modifiedto the position and the worship ; and thatour noblest specimens are but reduced andpetty imitations of those ancient and indestructiblesupporters, to the temples of Thebes, ofMemphis and Entire. He smiled at the ridiculecast on the Corinthians, by the name designatingthose florid capitals ; but agreed withme that, on a smaller scale, in gold or silver,they would serve admirably for the receptaclesof wax-hghts on solemn festivals. He praisedthe designs of our Ionian architects, and acknowledgedthat their pillars alone deserved theappellation of Grecian, but added that, in placesliable to earthquakes, inundations, or accumulationsof sand, the solider column was in its propersituation, the architraves of the Parthenonare chiseled by the scholars of Phidias, whosometimes gave a portion of the design. It isB 24 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.reported that two of the figures bear the marksof the master's own hand : he leaves it to theconjecture of future ages which they are. Someof the young architects, Ionian and Athenian,who were standing with me, disputed not onlyon the relative merits of their architecture, butof their dialect. One of them, Psamiades ofEphesus, ill enduring the taunt of Branches theAthenian, that the Ionian, from its open vowels,resembled a pretty pulpy hand which could notclose itself, made an attack on the letter Tusurping the place of S, and against the augments.Is it not enough' said he, " that you lisp,but you must also stammer ?"Let us have patience if any speak against us,O Cleon ! when a censure is cast on the architectureof Ictinus and on the dialect of Athens,PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.When the weather is serene and bright, Ithink of the young Aspasia; of her liveliness,her playfulness, her invitations to sit down onthe grass ; and her challenges to run, to leap,to dance, and, if nobody was near, to gambol.The weather at this season is neither brightnor serene, and I think the more of my Aspasia,because I want her more. Fie upon me !And yet on the whole,Happy to me has been the day.The shortest of the year,Though some, alas ! are far awayWho made the longest yet more brief appear.I never was formed for poetry : I hate whateverI have written, five minutes afterwards. Aweakly kid likes the warm milk, and likes theO PERICLES AND ASPASIA.drawing of it from its sources; but place thesame before her, cold, in a pail, and she smellsat it and turns away.Among the Tales lately come out here,many contain occasional poetry. In the prefaceto one, the scene of which lies mostly in Athens,the author says,My reader will do well to draw his penacross the verses: they are not good for him.The olive, especially the Attic, is pleasing tofew the first time it is tasted."This hath raised an outcry against him; sothat of the whole fraternity he is the most unpopular."The Gods confound him with his Witticisms !"exclaim the sober-minded. " Is not the mancontented to be a true and hearty Marian?Have we not roses and violets, lilies and amaranths,crocuses and sow thistles ? Have we notpretty girls and loving ones; have we notPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 7desperate girls and cruel ones, as abundantly aselsewhere ? Do not folks grieve and die to hisheart's content ? We possess the staple ; and,by Castor and Pollux ! we can bleach it andcomb it and twist it, as cleverly as the sharpestof your light-fingered locust-eaters."You will soon see his works, among othersmore voluminous. In the meanwhile, I cannotend my letter in a pleasant way than with acopy of these verses, which are nearer to theshortest than to the best.Perilla ! to thy fates resign'd.Think not what years are gone.While Atlanta lookt behindThe golden fruit roll'd on.2.Albeit a mother may have lostThe plaything at her breast.PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Albeit the one she cherish most.It but endears the rest.3.Youth, my Peril! a, clings on Hope,And looks into the skiesFor brighter day ; she fears to copeWith grief, she shrinks at sighs.Why should the memory of the pastMake you and me complain ?Come, as we could not hold it fastWe'll play it o'er againPERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.There are odes in Alcaeus which the penwould stop at, trip at, or leap over. Several inour collection are wanting in yours ; this amongthem.1.Wormwood and rue be on his tongueAnd ashes on his head.Who chills the feast and checks the songWith emblems ot the dead !2.By young and jovial, wise and brave,Such mummers are derided.His sacred rites shall Bacchus have,Inspired and undivided.3.Couch by my friends, I fear no maskImpending from above,I only fear the later flaskThat holds me from my love.B 510 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Show these to any priest of Bacchus, especiallyto any at Samos, and he will shake hishead at you, telling you that Bacchus will neverdo without his masks and mysteries, which it isholier to fear than the later Flask, On thissubject, he would prove to you, all fears areempty ones.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.In all ancient nations there are grand repositoriesof wisdom, although it may happen thatlittle of it is doled out to the exigencies of thepeople. There is more in the fables of Espthan in the schools of our Athenian philosophers: there is more in the laws and usages ofPersia, than in the greater part of those communitieswhich are loud in denouncing them forPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 11barbarism. And yet there are some that shockme. We are told by Herodotus, who tells uswhatever we know with certainty a step beyondour thresholds, that a boy in Persia is kept inthe apartments of the women, and prohibitedfrom seeing his father until the fifth year. Thereason is, he informs us, that if he dies beforethis age, his loss may give the parent no uneasiness.And such a custom he thinks commendable.Herodotus has no child, Cleon ! If hehad, far other would be his feelings and hisjudgment. Before that age, how many seedsare sown, which future years, and very distantones mature successively ! How much fondness,how much generosity, what hosts of othervirtues, courage, constancy, patriotism, springinto the father's heart from the cradle of hischild ! And does never the fear come over him,that what is most precious to him upon earth isleft in careless or perfidious, in unsafe or PERICLES AND ASPASIA.worthy hands ? Does it never occur to him thathe loses a son in every one of these five years ?What is there so affecting to the brave and virtuousman, as that which perpetually wants hishelp and cannot call for it ! What is so differentas the speaking and the mute ! And hardlyless so are inarticulate sounds, and sounds whichhe receives half-formed, and which he delightsto modulate, and which he lays with infinite careand patience, not only on the tender attentiveear, but on the half-open lips, and on the eyes,and on the cheeks ; as if they all were listeners.In every child there are many children; butcoming forth year after year, each somewhatlike and somewhat varying. When they aregrown much older, the leaves (as it were) losetheir pellucid green, the branches their gracefulpliancy.Is there any man so rich in happiness that hecan afford to throw aside these first five years ?PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 13is there any man who can hope for another fiveso exuberant in uniting joy ?O my sweet infant ! I would teach thee tokneel before the Gods, were it only to thank 'emthat thou art Athenian and not Persian.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Our good Anaxagoras said to me this morning," You do well, Aspasia, to read history inpreference to philosophy, not only on the recommendationbut according to the practice of Pericles.A good historian will also be a goodphilosopher, but will take especial care that hebenever caught in the attitude of disquisition ordeclamation. The golden vein must run throughhis field, but we must not see rising out of it theshaft and the machinery. We should moderate14 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.or repress our curiosity and fastidiousness.Perhaps at no time will there be written, by themost accurate and faithful historian, so much oftruth as untruth. But actions enow will comeout with sufficient prominence before the greattribunal of mankind, to exercise their judgmentand regulate their proceedings. If statesmenlooked attentively at every thing past, theywould find infallible guides in all emergencies.But leaders are apt to shudder at the idea ofbeing led, and little know what different thingsare experiment and experience. The sagacityof a Pericles himself is neither rule nor authorityto those impetuous men, who would rather haverich masters than frugal friends.The young folks from the school of yoursuitor, Socrates, who begin to talk already oftravelling in Egypt when the plague is over,are likely to return with a distemper as incurable,breaking bulk with daemons and dreams.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 15They carry stem and stern too high out of thewater, and are more attentive to the bustlingand bellying of the streamers, than to thesoundness of the mast, the compactness of thedeck, or the capacity and cleanliness of thehold."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Anaxagoras told me yesterday that he hadbeen conversing with some literary men, philosophersand poets, who agreed in one thingonly, which is, that we are growing worse dayafter day, both in morality and intellect. Hintswere thrown out that philosophy had mistakenher road, and that it was wonderful how shecould be at once so dull and so mischievous.The philosophers themselves made this com-16 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.plaint : the poets were as severe on poetry, andwere amazed that we were reduced so low as tobe the hearers of Sophocles and Euripides, andthree or four more, who however were quitegood enough for such admirers.It is strange," said Anaxagoras, " that weareunwilling to receive the higher pleasures,when they come to us and solicit us, and whenwe are sure they will do us great and lastinggood; and that we gape and pant after thelower, when we are equally sure they will do usgreat and lasting evil. I am incapable," continuedhe, " of enjoying so much pleasure fromthe works of imagination as these poets are,who would rather hate Euripides and Sophoclesthan be delighted by them ; yet who follow theshade of Orpheus with as ardent an intensity oflove as Orpheus followed the shade of Eurydice.Ignorant as I am of poetry, I dared not hazardthe opinion that our two contemporaries werePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 17really deserving of more commendation on thescore of verse, inferior as they might be toMarshal and Thamyris and the Centaur Chiron :and to the philosophers I could only say, Mydear friends ! let us keep our temper firmly, andour tenets laxly ; and let any man correct bothwho will take the trouble.I come to you, Aspasia, to console me forthe derision I bring home with me."I kissed his brow, which was never serene,and assured him that he possessed more comfortthan any mortal could bestow upon him, andthat he was the only one living who neverwanted any.I am not insensible," said he, " that everyyear, at my time of life, we lose some pleasure ;some twig, that once blossomed, cankers."I never was fond of looking forward : I haveinvariably checked both hopes and wishes. Itis but fair then that I should be allowed to turn18 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.away my eyes ftx)m the prospect of age : even ifI could believe that it would come to me asplacidly as it has come to Anaxagoras, I woiildrather lie down to sleep before the knees trembleas they bend. With Anaxagoras I neverconverse in this manner; for old men morewillingly talk of age than hear others talk of it ;and neither fool nor philosopher likes to thinkof the time when he shall talk no longer. I toldmy dear old man that, having given a piece ofmoral to the philosophers, he must not be sounjust as to refuse a like present to the poets.About an hour before I began my letter, hecame into the library, and, to my great surprise,brought me these verses, telling me that, if theywere satirical, the satire fell entirely upon himself.Pleasures ! away ; they please no more.Friends ! are they what they were before ?PERICLES AND ASPASIA. s 19Loves ! they are very idle thingsThe best about them are their wings.The dance ! 'tis what the bear can do ;Musick ! I hate your musick too.Whene'er these witnesses that TimeHath snatcht the chaplet from our prime.Are caird by Nature, as we goWith eye more wary, step more slow.And will be heard and noted down.However we may fret or frown.Shall we desire to leave the sceneWhere all our former joys have been ?No, 'twere ungrateful and unwise . .But when die down our charitiesFor human weal and human woes.Then is the time our eyes should close.ASPASIA TO LeoneWe hear that another state has been risingup gradually to power, in the center of Italy.20 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.It was originally formed of a band of piratesfrom some distant country, who took possessionof two eminences, fortified long before, and overlookinga wide extent of country. Under theseeminences, themselves but of little elevation, arefive hillocks, on which they enclosed the cattleby night. It is reported that here were the remainsof an ancient and extensive city, whichserved the robbers for hiding-places ; and templeswere not wanting in which to deprecatethe vengeance of the Gods for the violences andmurders they committed daily. The situationis unhealthy, which perhaps is the reason whythe city was abandoned, and is likewise a sufficientone why it was rebuilt by the present occupants.They might perpetrate what depredationsthey pleased, confident that no forcecould long besiege them in a climate so pestilential.Relying on this advantage, they seizedfrom time to time as many women as were re-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 21quite, for any fresh accession of vagabonds,rogues, and murderers.The Sabines bore the loss tolerably well,until the Romans (so they call themselves) wentbeyond all bounds, and even took their cattlefrom the yoke. The Sabines had endured allthat it became them to endure ; but the lowingof their oxen, from the seven hills, reached theirhearts and inflamed them with revenge. Theyare a pastoral, and therefore a patient people,able to undergo the exertions and endure theprivations of war, but, never having beenthieves, the Romans over-matched them invigilance, activity, and enterprise; and haveseveral times since made incursions into theircountry, and forced them to disadvantageousconditions. Emboldened by success, they venturedto insult and exasperate the nearest ofthe Tuscan princes.The Tuscanss are a very proud and very•22 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ancient nation, and, like all nations that areproud and ancient, excel chiefly in enjoyingthemselves. Demaratus the Corinthian dweltamong them several years ; and from the Corinthiansthey learned to improve their pottery,which, however, it does not appear that theyever have carried to the same perfection as theCorinthian, the best of it being very indifferentlycopied, both in the form and in the figureson it,Herodotus has written to Pericles all hecould collect relating to them ; and Periclessays the account is interesting. For my part Icould hardly listen to it, although written byHerodotus and redd by Pericles. I have quiteforgotten the order of events. I think they aresuch as neither you nor any one else, exceptingthose who live near them, will ever careabout. But the Tuscanss really are an extraordinarypeople. They have no poets, no histo-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 23rians, no orators, no statuaries, no painters :they say they once had them : so much the moredisgraceful. The Romans went out againstthem and dispersed them, although they blewmany trumpets bravely, and brought (prettynearly into action) many stout soothsayers.The enemy, it appears, has treated them withclemency : they may stil feed soothsayers, blowhorns, and have wives in common.I hope it is near your bed-time : if it is, youwill thank me for my letter.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Who would have imagined that the grave,sedate Pericles, could take such delight in mischief!After reading my dissertation on the24 Pericles AND ASPASIA.Tyrrhenians and Romans, he gave it againinto my hands, saying,Pray amuse your friend Cleon with yourfirst attempt at history."I sent it oiF, quite unsuspicious. In the eveninglie looked at me with a smile of no shortcontinuance, and said at last,Aspasia ! I perceive you are emulous ofour Halicarnassus ; but pray do not publishthat historical Essay either in his name or yourown. He does not treat the Romans quite solightly as you do, and shows rather more justiceto the Tyrrhenians. You forgot to mentionsome important facts recorded by him, and somedoubts as weighty. We shall come to them presently.Having heard of the Romans, but nothingdistinctly, I wished to receive a clearer and afuller account of them, and wrote to Herodotusby the first ship that sailed for Tarentum. ThePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 25city where he is residing lies near it, and I gaveorders that my letter should be taken thither,and delivered into his hands. Above a year iselapsed, during which time Herodotus tells mehe has made all the inquiries that the pursuitof his studies would allow ; that he is continuingto correct the errors, elucidate the doubtfulpoints, and correct the style and arrangement ofhis history ; and that, when he has completed itto his mind, he shall have time and curiosity toconsider with some attention this remarkabletribe of barbarians.At present he has not been able to answermy questions ; for never was writer so sedulousin the pursuit and examination of facts ; whathe sees, he describes clearly; what he hears, herelates faithfully ; and he bestows the same careon the composition as he had bestowed on theinvestigation.The Romans, I imagined, had been subduedVOL. II. c26 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.by Numa, a Sabine ; for it can hardly be creditedthat so ferocious a community sent afriendly invitation, to be governed and commandedby the prince of a nation they hadgrossly and repeatedly insulted. What serviceshad he rendered them ? or by what means hadthey become acquainted with his aptitude forgovernment? They had ever been rude andquarrelsome: he was distinguished for civilityand gentleness. They had violated all that ismost sacred in public and private life : virginswere seized by treachery, detained by force, andcompelled to wipe the blood of their fathers offthe sword of their ravishers. A fratricide kinghad recently been murdered by a magistracy oftraitors. What man in his senses would changeany condition of life to become the ruler ofsuch a people ? None but he who had conqueredand could control them : none but onewho had swords enough for every head amongPERICLES AND ASPASIA.them. Absolute power alone can tame them,and fit them for any thing better; and thispower must reside in the hands of a brave andsagacious man, who will not permit it to beshared, or touched, or questioned. Under sucha man, such a people may become formidable,virtuous, and great. It is too true* that, to bemartial, a nation must taste of blood in itscradle. Philosophers may dispute it ; but timepast has written it down, and time to come willconfirm it. Of these matters the sophists canknow nothing : he who understands them bestwill be the least inclined to discourse on them.Another thing I doubted, and wished toknow. Numa is called a Sabine. The Sabinesare illiterate stil: in the time of Numa theywere ruder ; they had no commerce, no communicationwith countries beyond Italy; andyet there are writers who tell us that he introducedlaws, on the whole not dissimilar to ours,c228 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and corrected the calendar. Is it credible ? Isit possible ? I am disposed to believe that boththese services were rendered by the son of De-paratus,and that the calendar might have beenmade better, were it not requisite on such anoccasion, more than almost any other, to consultthe superstition of the populace.I myself am afraid of touching the calendarhere in Athens, many as have been my conferenceswith Meton on the subject. Done itshall be ; but it must be either just before avictory, or just after.If the Sabine had sent an embassy, or evenan individual, to Athens, in order to collect ourlaws, the archives of the city would retain a recordof so wonderful an event He certainlycould not have picked them up in the pasturesor woodlands of his own country. But the Corinthiansknow them well, and have copied mostof them. All nations are fond of pushing thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 29date of their civilisation as high up as possible,and care not how remotely they place the benefitsthey have received. And as probablysome of the Romans were aware that Numawas their conqueror, they helped to abolish thehumiliating suspicion, by investing him successivelywith the robes of a priest, of a legislator,and of an astronomer.His two nearest successors were, warriorsand conquerors. The third was the son of thatDemaratus of whom we have spoken, and who,exiled from Corinth, settled among the Tyrreland afterwards, being rich and eloquent,won over to his interests the discontented and thevenal of the Romans ; at all times a great majority.We hear that he constructed, of hewnstone, a long a spacious and a lofty channel, toconvey the filth of the town into the river : wehear, at the same time, that the town itself wasfabricated of hurdles and mud, upon ruins of30 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.massy workmanship ; that the best houses wereroofed with rushes, and that the vases of thetemples were earthen. Now, kings in general,and mostly those whose authority is recentand insecure, think rather of amusing the peopleby spectacles, or pampering their appetites byfeasts and donatives, or dazzling their imaginationby pomp and splendour. Theaters, notcommon sewers, suited best the Romans. Theirfirst great exploit was performed in a theater, atthe cost of the Sabines. Moreover they werevery religious, and stole every God and Goddessthey could lay their hands on. Surely, so consideratea person as the son of Demaratuswould have adapted his magnificence to thegenius of the people, who never cared aboutfilth, but were always most zealous in their devotions.This we might imagine would occurto him as more and more requisite on the captureof every town or village ; for, when thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 31Romans had killed the inhabitants, they transferredthe Gods very diligently into their city,that they might not miss their worshippers.Now the Gods must have wanted room by degrees,and might not have liked their quarters.Five hundred temples could have been erectedat less expense than the building of this stupendousduct. Did the son of Demaratusbuild it then ?The people are stil ignorant, stil barbarous,stil cruel, stil intractable ; but they are acutein the perception of their interests, and haveestablished at last a form of government moreresembling the Carthaginian than ours. Astheir power does not arise from commerce, likethe power of Carthage, but strikes its rootsinto the solid earth, its only sure foundation, itis much less subject to the gusts of fortune, andwill recover from a shock more speedily. Neitheris there any great nation in contact with32 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.them. When they were much weaker, theEtruria conquered them, under the commandof their prince Porsena ; but thought they couldleave them nowhere less inconveniently thanin the place they themselves had abandoned.The Sabines too conquered them a second time,and imposed a king over them, but were so unsuspiciousand inconsiderate as not to destroythe city, and parcel out the inhabitants forGreece, Sicily, and Africa.Living as they did on their farms, with nohold upon the Romans but a king, who, residingin the city with few of his own countrymenabout him, was rather a hostage than a ruler,his authority was soon subverted. The Sabinesat this time are partly won by conquest, andpartly domiciliated by consanguinity. TheEtruria are spent and effete. The governmentof the Romans, from royal, is now becomearistocratical ; and the people, deprived of theirPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 33lawful share in the lands they conquered fromso many enemies, swear hatred to kings, andsigh for their return. One flagrant crime consumedthe regal authority ; a thousand smoulderingones eat deep into the consular. Themilitary system stands apart, admirable in itsformation ; and, unless that too falls, the Romancamps will move forward year after year, untilthe mountains and the seas of Italy shallnot contain them. They are heirs to the wealthof worn-out nations, and, when they have seizedupon their inheritance, they will fight withbraver. The Romans will be to Italy what theMacedonians at some future day will be toGreece.The old must give way to the young, nationslike men, and men like leaves."c534 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Buildings of high antiquity have usually beencarried by the imagination very much higherstil. But, by what we hear of the Tuscanss, wemay believe that in their country there are remainsof earlier times, than in ours. Everythingabout them shows a pampered and dissoluteand decaying people.You will hardly think a sewer a subject forcuriosity and investigation : yet nothing inEurope is so vast and so well-constructed asthe sewer at Rome, excepting only the harbour-wallsand propylaea, built recently here atAthens, under the administration of Pericles.I have asked him some further questions on thewonderful work stil extant in the city occupiedby the Romans. I will now give you hisanswer.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 35Do not imagine that, unable as I am toascertain the time when the great sewer ofRome was constructed, I am desirous of establishingone opinion in prejudice of another,or forward in denying that a rich Corinthianmight have devised so vast an undertaking.But in Corinth herself we find nothing of equalmagnitude, nothing at all resembling its architecture: the Tuscanss, who are stated to havebeen employed in building it, have ceased formany ages to be capable of any thing similar ;all their great fabricks may be dated more thanathousand years before the age of Tarquin. Ifeel no interest in the support of an hypothesis.Take it, or reject it ; I would rather that yourejected it, if you would replace it with anotherand a better. Many things pass across themind, which are neither to be detained in itwith the intention of insisting on them as truths,nor are to be dismissed from it as idle and in-36 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.trustee. Whatever gives exercise to our thoughts,gives them not only activity and strength, butlikewise range. We are not obliged to continueon the training-ground ; nor on the other handis it expedient to obstruct it or plough it up.The hunter, in quest of one species of game,often finds another, and always finds what isbetter, freshness and earnestness and animation.Were I occupied in Literature, I should littlefear stumbling in my ascent toward its untroddenand abstruse scenery: being a politician, Iknow that a single false step is a fall, and a fallis ruin. We may begin wrong, and continueso with impunity ; but we must not deviate fromwrong to right."He said this with one of his grave smiles ;and then to me,« A slender shrub, the ornament of yourprivate walk, may with moderate effort bedrawn strait again from any obliquity ; but suchPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 37an attempt, were it practicable, would crackevery fibre in the twisted tree that overshadowthe forest."CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Who told you, Aspasia, that instead ofpoetry,* of history, of philosophy, our writersat Miletus are beginning to compose a speciesof tales, founded on love or madness, and endingin miserable death or wealthy marriage ;and that, at the conclusion of the work, astrict account is rendered of all estrays, of allthat had once come into it and had disappeared?Very true, the people at large run after theThis is an answer to a letter not extant. TheMilesian are said to be the inventors of tales notalways quite decorous.38 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.detail of adventures, and are as anxious to seethetermination as they are to reach the bottomof an amphora: but I beseech you never toimagine that we are reduced in our literature tosuch a state of destitution, as to be without theenjoyment of those treasures which our ancestorsleft behind them. No, Aspasia, we are not yetso famished that a few morsels of more nutritiousfood would overpower us. I assure you,we do not desire to see a death or a marriageset upon the table every day. We are gratefulfor all the exercises and all the excursions ofintellect, and our thanks are peculiarly due tothose by whose genius our pleasure in them isincreased or varied. If we have among us anyonecapable of devising an imaginary tale,wherein all that is interesting in poetry isunited with all that is instructive in history,such an author will not supersede the poets andhistorians, but will walk between them, and becordially hailed by both.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 39ASPASIA TO CLEONE.When we are dull we run to musick. I amsure you must be dull enough after so much ofhistory and of politicks. My Pericles can discoverportents in Macedonia and Italy : Anaximandercould see mountains in the moon. Idesire to cast my eyes no farther than toMiletus.Take your harp.ODE TO MILETUS.1.Maiden there was whom JoveIlluded ito love,Happy and pure was she ;Glorious from her the shore became.And Helle lifted up her nameTo shine eternal o'er the river-sea.40 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.2.And many tears are shedUpon thy bridal-bed.Star of the swimmer in the lonely night !Who with upbraided hairWisest a breast so fair.Bounding with toil, more bounding with delight.3.But they whose prow hath past thy straitsAnd, ranged before Byzantium's gatesBring to the Gods of sea the victim due,Even from the altar raise their eyes.And drop the chalice with surprise.And at such grandeur have forgotten you.At last there swells the hymn of praise .And who inspires those sacred lays ?The founder of the walls ye see."What human power could elevateThose walls, that citadel, that gate ?Miletus, O my sons ! was he."PERICLES AND ASPASIA.5.Hail then, Miletus ! hail beloved townParent of me and mine !But let not power alone be thy renown.Nor chiefs of ancient line,6.Nor visits of the Gods, unlessThey leave their thoughts below.And teach us that we most should blessThose to whom most we owe.7.Restless is Wealth ; the nerves of PowerSink, as a lute's in rain :The Gods lend only for an hour8.All else than Wisdom ; she alone.In Truth's or Virtue's form,Descending from the starry throneThro' radiance and thro' storm.42 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.9.Remains as long as godlike menAfford her audience meet.Nor Time nor War tread down agenThe traces of her feet.10.Always hast thou, Miletus, been the friend,Protector, guardian, father, of the wise ;Therefore shall thy dominion never endTil Fame, despoil'd of voice and pinion, dies.11.With favoring shouts and flowers thrown fast behind,Arctinus ran his race.No wanderer he, alone and blind . .And Alexander was unborn by Thrace.12.There have been, but not here.Rich men who swept aside the royal feastOn child's or bondman's breast,Bidding the wise and aged disappear.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 4313.Revere the aged and the wise,Aspasia . . but thy sandal is not wornTo trample on these things of scorn . .By his own sting the fire-bound scorpion dies.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.To-day there came to visit us a writer who isnot yet an author: his name is Thucydides.We understand that he has been these severalyears engaged in preparations for a history.Pericles invited him to meet Herodotus, whenthat wonderful man was returning to ourcountry, and about to sail from Athens. Untilthen, it was believed by the intimate friends ofThucydides that he would devote his life topoetry, and such is his vigour both of thoughtand of expression, that he would have been the44 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.rival of Pindar. Even now he is fonder oftalking on poetry than any other subject, andblushed when history was mentioned. By degreeshowever he warmed, and listened withdeep interest to the discourse of Pericles on theduties of an historian.May our first Athenian historian not be thegreatest !" said he, " as the first of our dramatistshas been, in the opinion of many. Aeschyluswas the creator of Tragedy, nor did she evershine with such splendour, ever move with suchstateliness and magnificence, as at her firstapparition on the horizon. The verses ofSophocles are more elaborate, the languagepurer, ' the sentences fuller and more harmonious,but in loftiness of soul, and in the awfulnesswith which he invests his characters,Eschylus remains unrivalled and approached.We are growing too loquacious, both onthe stage and off. We make disquisitions whichPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 45render us only more and more dim-sighted, andexcursions that only consume our stores. Ifsome among us who have acquired celebrityby their compositions, calm, candid, contemplativemen, were to undertake the history ofAthens from the invasion of Xerxes, I shouldexpect a fair and full criticism on the orationsof Antiphon, and experience no disappointmentat their forgetting the battle of Salamis. History,when she has lost her Muse, will lose herdignity, her occupation, her character, hername. She will wander about the Agora; shewill start, she will stop, she will look wild, shewill look stupid, she will take languidly to herbosom doubts, queries, essays, dissertations,some of which ought to go before her, some tofollow, and all to stand apart. The field ofHistory should not merely be well tilled, butwell peopled. None is delightful to me, or interesting,in which I find not as many illustratePERICLES AND ASPASIA.vous names as have a right to enter it. Wemight as well in a drama place the actors behindthe scenes, and listen to the dialogue there,as in a history push valiant men back, and protrudeourselves with husky disputations. Shewme rather how great projects were executed,great advantages gained, and great calamitiesaverted. Shew me the generals and the statesmenwho stood foremost, that I may bendto them in reverence ; tell me their names,that I may repeat them to my children. Teachme whence laws were introduced, upon whatfoundation laid, by what custody guarded, inwhat inner keep preserved. Let the booksof the Treasury lie closed as religiously asthe Sibyl's ; leave weights and measures inthe market-place. Commerce in the harbour,the Arts in the light they love. Philosophy inthe shade : place History on her rightful throne,and, at the sides of her. Eloquence and War.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 47Aspasia ! try your influence over Thucydides :perhaps he would not refuse you the pleasureof hearing a few sentences of the work he hasbegun. I may be a plagiary if I am a listener,and yet I would request permission to be present."Thucydides was pleased at this deference,and has promised to return soon-aspasiaTO CLEONE.Polynices, a fishmonger, has been introducedupon the stage. He had grown rich by hishonesty and good nature ; and latterly, in thishot season, had distributed among the poorerfamilies the fish he could not sell in the daytimeat a reasonable price. Others of the sametrade cried out against his unfairness, and hewas insulted and beaten in the market-place.So favorable an incident could not escape the48 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.sagacious scent of our comick writers. He wasrepresented on the stage as aiming at supremepower, riding upon a dolphin through a stormysea, with a lyre in one hand, a dogfish in theother, and singing,I, whom ye see so high onA dolphin's backs am not Arian,But (should the favoring breezes blow me faster)Europeans ! by the Gods ! . . your master !The people were very indignant at this, anddemanded with loud cries the closing of thetheater, and the abolition of comedies for ever.What the abuse of the wisest and most powerfulmen in the community could not effect, theabuse of a fishmonger has brought about.The writers and actors of comedy came in abody to Pericles, telling him they had seen themadness of the people, and had heard withwonder and consternation that it was supportedby some of the archons.He answered, that he was sorry to seePERICLES AND ASPASIA, 49Comedy with a countenance so altered as tomake him tremble for her approaching dissolution; her descent into the regions of Tragedy.He wondered how the Archons should deem itexpedient to correct those, whose office andemployment it had hitherto been to correctthem ; and regretted his inability to interposebetween two conflicting authorities ; he mustleave it entirely to the people, who would soongrow calmer, and renew their gratitude to theirprotectors and patrons.In the midst of these regrets the theater forcomedy was closed. The poets and actors, asthey departed, made various observations."Dogs sweat and despots laugh inwardly,"said Heresies. " Did you note his malice ? theSisyphus !'*We have nothing left for it," said ,"but to fall upon our knees among thescales, fins, and bladders at the fish-stall."VOL. II. D50 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Better," said Aristophanes, " make up toReligion, and look whether the haughty chieftainhas no vulnerable place in his heel for anarrow from that quarter."He has broken your bow," said Pherecydes :take heed that the people do not snatch at thestring : they have shewn that they can pullhard, and may pull where we would not havethem."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Thucydides has just left us. He has beenreading to me a portion of history. At everypause I nodded to Pericles, who I thoughtavoided to remark it purposely, but who inreality was so attentive and thoughtful that itwas long before he noticed me. When the readingwas over, I said to him,So, you two sly personages have laid yourPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 51sober heads together in order to deceive me, asif I am so silly, so ignorant of peculiarity instyle, as not to discover in an instant the fraudyou would impose on me. Thucydides !" saidI, " you have redd it well ; only one could haveredd it better . . the author himself " . . shakingmy head at Pericles.O Aspasia !" said our guest, " I confess toyou 1 was always a little too fond of praise,although I have lived in retirement to avoid ituntil due, wishing to receive the whole sum atonce, however long I might wait for it Butnever did I expect so much as this : it overturnsthe scale by its weight."O Thucydides !" said Pericles, " I amjealous of Aspasia. No one before ever flatteredher so in my presence."I entreated him to continue to write, and tobring down his history to the present times.My reverence for Herodotus," said he,D 252 PERICLES AND ASPASIA."makes me stand out of his way and look athim from a distance, I was obliged to takeanother model of style. I hope to continue mywork beyond the present day, and to concludeit with some event which shall have exalted ourglory and have established our supremacy inGreece.""Go on," said I; "fear no rivals. Othersare writing who fear not even Herodotus, norgreatly indeed respect him. They will be lesscourteous with you perhaps, whose crown isyet in the garden. The creatures run aboutand kick and neigh in all directions, with agadfly on them, ever since they left the racecourseat Olympia. At one moment they laythe muzzle softly and languidly and lovinglyupon each other's neck; at another they rearand bite like Python."I ought to experience no enmity fromthem," said he, " Before my time comes, theirswill be over."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 53PERICLES TO ASPASIA.I am pleased with your little note, and hopeyou may live to write a commentary on thesame author. You speak with your usualjudgment, in commending our historian for hisdiscretion in metaphors. Not indeed that hislanguage is without them, but they are rare,impressive, and distinct. History wants themoccasionally : in oratory they are nearly as requisiteas in poetry; they come opportunelywherever the object is persuasion or intimidation,and no less where delight stands foremost.In writing a letter I would neither seek norreject one : but I think, if more than one cameforward, I might decline its services. If howeverit had come in unawares, I would take notrouble to send it away. But we should accustomourselves to think always with propriety,54 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.in little things as in great, and neither be toosolicitous of our dress in the house, nor negligentbecause we are at home. I think it asimproper and indecorous to write a stupid or asilly note to you, as one in a bad hand or oncoarse paper. Familiarity ought to have anotherand worse name, when it relaxes in itsattentiveness to please.We began with metaphors, I will end withone . . Do not look back over the letter tosee whether 1 have not already used my privilegeof nomination, whether my one is notthere. Take then a simili instead. It is apity that they are often lamps which light nothing,and show only the nakedness of the wallsthey are nailed against.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 55ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Sophocles left me about an hour ago.Hearing that he was with Pericles on business,I sent to request he would favor me witha visit when he was disengaged. After he hadtaken a seat, I entreated him to pardon me, expressinga regret that we hardly ever saw him,knowing as I did that no person could so illwithstand the regrets of the ladies. I added ahope that, as much for my sake as for the sakeof Pericles, he would now and then steal anhour from the Muses in our behalf.Lady !" said he, " it would only be changingthe place of assignation."I shall begin with you," said I, "just as ifI had a right to be familiar, and desire of youto explain the meaning of a chorus in KingOedipus, which, although I have redd the tragedy56 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,many times, and have never failed to be presentat the representation, I do not quite comprehend."I took up a volume from the table , .No," said I, " this is Electro, my favorite :give me the other." We unrolled it together.Here it is : vv^hat is the meaning of thesev^'ords about the Laws P"He looked over them, first without openinghis hips ; then he redd them in a low voice tohimself; and then, placing the palm of his lefthand against his forehead,Well ! I certainly did think I understoodit at the time I wrote it."Cleon ! if you could see him you would fallin love with him. Fifteen olympiad have notquite run away with all his youth. What anoble presence ! what an open countenance !what a brow ! what a mouth ! what a rich bar-periclesAND ASPASIA. 57noxious voice ! what a hearty full of passionand of poetry!REPLY OF PericlesTo the accusation of Cleon,There is a race of men, (and they appear tohave led colonies into many lands,) whose courageis always in an inverse ration to theirdanger. There is also a race who deem that abenefit done to another is an injury done tothem. Would you affront them, speak well oftheir friends ; would you deprive them of repose,labor and watch incessantly for their country.Cleon ! in all your experience, in all the territoriesyou have visited, in all the cities andislands you have conquered for us, have younever met with any such people ? And yet, OD 558 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.generous Cleon ! I have heard it hated thatthe observation is owing to you.Were my ife a private one, were my servicesdone toward my friends alone, had my youthbeen exempt as yours hath been from difficultyand peril, I might never have displeased you ; 1might never have been cited to defend my characteragainst the foulest of imputations. OAthenians ! let me recall your attention to everyword that Cleon has uttered. I know how difficultis the task, where so much dust is blownabout by so much wind. The valorous Cleonhas made your ears tingle and ring with Harmoniousand Aristogiton. I am ignorant which ofthe two he would take for imitation, the handsomeror the braver. He stalks along withgreat bustle and magnificence, but he shows thedagger too plainly : he neglects to carry it inmyrtle.In your astonishment at this sudden processAND ASPASIA. 59dare, there are doubtless many of you who areunable to comprehend the very title of the denunciation.Let me then tell you what it is.Pericles son of Xanthippus . . (may allGreece hear it ! may every herald in every cityproclaim it at every gate !) Pericles son ofXanthippiis is accused of embezzling thepuhlickmoney ^ collected, reserved, and set apart, for thebuilding and decoration of the Parthenon. Theaccuser is Cleon, son of Cleceretus.The scribe has designated the father of ourfriend by this name, in letters very legible,otherwise I should have suspected it was theson of Clients, the parasite of the wealthy, theoppressor of the poor, the assailer of the virtuous,and the ridicule of all. Charges moresubstantial might surely be brought against me,and indeed were threatened. But never shall Irepent of having, by my advice, a little decreasedthe revenues of the common-wealth, in lowering60 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.the price of admission to the theaters, and inoffering to the more industrious citizens, out ofthe publick treasury, the trifle requisite for thisenjoyment. In the theater let them see beforethem the crimes and the calamities of Power,the vicissitudes of Fortune, and the sophistriesof the Passions. Let it be there, and thereonly, that the just man suffers, and that murmursare heard against the dispensations of theGods.But 1 am forgetting the accusation. WillCleon do me the favour to inform you, in whatplace I have deposited, or in what manner Ihave spent, the money thus embezzled? WillCleon tell you that I alone had the custody ofit; or that 1 had any thing at all to do in themaking up of the accounts ? Will Cleon proveto you that I am now richer than I was thirtyyears ago, excepting in a portion of the spoil,won bravely by the armies you decreed I shouldPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 61command; such a portion as the laws allow,and the soldiers carry to their general with triumphantacclamations. Cleon has yet to learnall this ; certainly his wealth is derived from nosuch sources ; far other acclamations does Cleoncourt ; those of the idle, the dissolute, the malignant,the cowardly, and the false. But if heseeks them in Athens, and not beyond, hisparty is small indeed, and your indignation willdrown their voices. What need have I of pilferand peculation? Am I avaricious? am I prodigal?Does the indigent citizen, does thewounded soldier, come to my door and returnunsatisfied ? Point at me, Cleon ! and tell yourfriends to mark that. Let them mark it; butfor imitation, not for calumny. Let them hearfor they are idle enough, whence I possess themeans of relieving the unfortunate, raising thedejected, and placing men of worth and genius(too often in that number !) where all their62 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.fellow citizens may distinguish them. My fatherdied in my childhood ; careful guardians superintendedit, managing my affairs with honestyand diligence. The earliest of my ancestors, ofwhom any thing remarkable is recorded, wasCleisthenes, whom your forefathers named generalwith Solon, ordering them to conquerCirrha. He devoted his portion of the spoilsto the building of a portico. I never haveheard that he came by night and robbed thelaborers he had paid by day : perhaps Cleonhas. He won afterward at the Olympiangames : I never have ascertained that he bribedhis adversaries. These actions are not inhistory nor in tradition: but Cleon no doubthas authorities that outvalue tradition andhistory Some years afterward, Cleisthenesproclaimed his determination to give in marriagehis daughter Agarista to the worthiest man hecould find, whether at home or abroad. It isPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 63pity that Cleon was not living in those days.Agarista and her father, in default of him, couldhear of none worthier than Miracles, son ofAlcmseon. Their riches all descended to me,and some perhaps of their better possessions.These at least, with Cleon's leave, I wouldretain; and as much of the other as may beserviceable to my friends, without being dangerousto the common-wealth.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Now we are quiet and at peace again, Iwish you would look into your Library for morepieces of poetry. To give you some provocation,I will transcribe a few lines on the oldsubject, which, like old fountains, is inexhaustible,while those of later discovery are in dangerof being cut off at the first turn of the plough.64 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.EBINNA TO LOVE.1.Who breathes to thee the holiest prayer,O Love ! is ever least thy care.Alas ! I may not ask thee why 'tis so . .Because a fiery scroll I seeHung at the throne of Destiny,Reason with Love and register with Woe.2.Few question thee, for thou art strongAnd, laughing loud at right and wrong,Seizes, and dashes down, the rich, the poorThy scepter's iron studs alikeThe meaner and the prouder strike.And wise and simple fear thee and adore.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Among the poems of Sappho I find the following,but written in a different hand from thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 65rest. It pleases me at least as much as any ofthem ; if it is worse, I wish you would tell meinwhat it is so. How many thoughts mightshe have turned over and tossed away ! Odiousis the economy in preserving all the scraps ofthe intellect, and troublesome the idleness oftacking them together. Sappho is fond ofseizing, as she runs on, the most prominent andinviting flowers: she never stops to cut andtrim them: she throws twenty aside for onethat she fixes in her bosom ; and what is moresingular, her pleasure at their beauty seemsnever to arise from another's admiration of it.See it or not see it, there it is.Sweet girls ! upon whose breast that God descendsWhom first ye pray to come, and next to spare,O tell me whither now his course he bends,Tell me what hymn shall thither waft my prayer!Alas ! my voice and lyre alike he flies,And only in my dreams, nor kindly then, replies.66 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Instead of expatiating on the merits of theverses you last sent me, or, on the other hand,of looking for any pleasure in taking them topieces, I venture to hope you will be of myopinion, that these others are of equal authenticity.Neither do I remember them in thecopy you possessed when we were together.SAPPHO TO HESPERUS.1.I have beheld thee in the morning hourA solitary star, with thankless eyes, .ungrateful as I am ! who bade thee riseWhen sleep all night had wandered from my bower.2.Can it be true that thou art heWho shines now above the seaPERICLES AND ASPASIA. b/Amidst a thousand, but more bright ?Ah yes, the very same art thouThat heard me then, and hearest now . .Thou keenest, star of love, to throb with light.Sappho is not the only poetess who haspoured forth her melodies to Hesperus, or v/hohad reason to thank him. I much prefer theseof her's to what appear to have been written bysome confident man, and (no doubt) on a feignedoccasion.1.Hesperus, hail ! thy winking lightBest befriends the lover,Whom the sadder Moon for spiteGladly would discover.2.Thou art fairer far than she.Fairer far, and chaster :She may guess who smiled on me,I know who embraced her.68 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.3.Pan of Arcady . . 'twas PanIn the tamarisk-bushes . .Bid her tell thee, if she can.Where were then her blushes.4.And, were 1 inclined to tattle,I could name a second,Whom asleep with sleeping cattleTo her cave she beckon'd.5.Hesperus, hail ! thy friendly rayWatches o'er the lover.Lest the nodding leaves betray.Lest the Moon discover.6.Phryne heard my kisses givenActe's rival bosom . .Twas the huts, I swore by heaven.Bursting into blossom.PERICLES AND ASPASIA, 097.What she heard, and half espiedBy thy gleam, she doubted.And with arms uplifted, criedHow they must have sprouted !8.Hesperus, hail again ! thy lightBest befriends the lover.Whom the sadder Moon for spiteGladly would discover.The old poets are contented with narrowcouches: but these couches are not stuffedwith chafF which lasts only for one season.They do not talk to us from them when theyare half-asleep ; but think it more amusing toentertain us in our short visit with livelythoughts and fancies, than to enrich us with apaternal prolixity of studied and stored-up meditations.70 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.PERICLES TO ALCIBIADES.My Alcibiades, if I did not know your goodtemper from a whole life's experience, I shouldbe afraid of displeasing you by repeating what Ihave heard. This is that you pronounce, inpublick as well as in private, a few words somewhatdifferently from our custom. You cannotbe aware how much hostility you may exciteagainst you by such a practice. Remember,we are Athenians; and do not let us believethat we have finer organs, quicker perceptions,or more discrimination, than our neighbours.Every time we pronounce a word differently fromanother, we show our disapprobation of hismanner, and accuse him of rusticity. In allcommon things we must do as others do. It ismore barbarous to undermine the stability of alanguage than of an edifice that hath stood asPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 71long. This is done by the introduction ofchanges. Write as others do, but only as thebest of others : and if one eloquent man, fortyor fifty years ago, spoke and wrote differentlyfrom the generality of the present, follow him,although alone, rather than the many. But inpronunciation we are not indulged in thislatitude of choice ; we must pronounce as thosedo who favor us with their audience. Neverhazard a new expression in publick: I knownot any liberty we can take, even with ournearest friends, more liable to the censure ofvanity. Whatever we do we must do from authorityor from analogy. A young man, howeverstudious and intelligent, can know, intrinsicallyand profoundly, but little of the writerswho constitute authority. For my part, in thisour country, where letters are far more advancedthan in any other, I can name no one whateverwho has followed up to their origin the derivablePERICLES AND ASPaSIA.tion of words, or studied with much successtheir analogy. I do not, I confess, use all thewords that others do, but I never use one thatothers do not. Remember, one great writermay have employed a word which a greater hasavoided, or, not having avoided it, may haveemployed in a somewhat different signification.It would be needless to offer you these remarks,if our language were subject to the capriciousnessof courts, the humiliation of sycophants,and the defilement of slaves. Another maysuffer but little detriment by the admission ofbarbarism to its franchises ; but ours is attick,and the words, like the citizens we employ,should at once be popular and select.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 73CLEONE TO ASPASIA.The poetical merits of the unhappy Lesbianare sufficiently well-known. Thanks, and morethan thanks, if indeed there is any thing moreon earth, are due for even one scrap from her.But allow me, what is no great delicacy or delightto me, a reprehension, a censure. Anadmirer can make room for it only when itcomes from an admirer. Sappho, in the mostcelebrated of her Odes, tells us that she sweatsprofusely. Now surely no female, howeverlow-born and ill-bred, in short, however Eolian,could without indecorousness speak of sweatingand spitting, or any such things. We neverought to utter, in relation to ourselves, whatwe should be ashamed of being seen in. Writingof war and contention, such an expressionis unobjectionable. To avoid it by circumlocution.II. E74 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,tion, or by another word less expressive anddirect, would be the most contemptible andludicrous of pedantry: and, were it anywherereduced to practice in the conversation of ordinarylife, it would manifestly designate a coarse-grainedunpolishable people. There is nothingin poetry, or indeed in society, so unpleasant asaffectation. In poetry it arises from a deficiencyof power and a restlessness of pretension; in conversation, from insensibility to theGraces, from an intercourse with bad company,and a misinterpretation of better.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.You desire to know what portion of historyit is the intention of Thucydides to undertake.He began with the earlier settlers of Greece,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 75but he has now resolved to employ this sectionas merely the portico to his edifice. The Peloponnesianwar appears to him worthier of thehistorian than any other. He is of opinion thatit must continue for many years and comprehendmany important events, for Pericles is resolvedto wear out the energy of the Spartansby protracting it. At present it has been carriedon but few months, with little advantage toeither side, and much distress to both. Whatour historian has read to us does not containany part of these transactions, which howeverhe carefully notes down as they occur. Wewere much amused by a speech he selected forrecitation, as one delivered by an orator of theCorinthians to the Ephors of Lacedaemon,urging the justice and necessity of hostilities.Never was the Athenian character painted insuch true and Lively colours. In compositionhischaracteristick is brevity, yet the first sene276 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.tetice of the volume runs into superfluity. Thewords, to the best of my recollection, arethese.Thucydides of Athens has composed a historyof the war between the Peloponnesian andAthenians."This is enough ; yet he adds,« As conducted by each of the belligerents."Of course : it could not be conducted by oneonly.I observed that in the fourth sentence hewent from the third person to the first.By what I could collect, he thinks the Peloponnesianwar more momentous than the Persian: yet, had Xerxes^pre wailed against us, notavestige would be existing of liberty or civilisationin the world. If Sparta should, therewill be little enough, and a road will be thrownopen to the barbarians of the north, Macedoniansand others with strange names. We havePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 77no great reason to fear it, although the policyof Thebes, on whom much depends, is ungenerousand unwise.He said moreover, that " transactions of anearlier time are known imperfectly, and wereof small importance either in the wars or anythingelse."Yet without these wars, or some other ofthese transactions, our Miletus and Athens, ourPericles and Thucydides, would not be; somuch does one thing depend upon another. Iam little disposed to over-value the potencyand importance of the eastern monarchies ; butsurely there is enough to excite our curiosity,and interest our inquiries, in the fall of Chaldea,the rise of Babylon, and the mysteries ofEgypt . . not indeed her mysteries in theology,which are impostures there as elsewhere, butthe mysteries in arts and sciences, which willoutlive the Gods. Barbarians do not hold78 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.steadily before us any moral or political lesson ;but they serve as graven images, protuberanteminent and gorgeously uncouth, to support thelamp placed on them by History and Philosophy.If we knew only what they said anddid, we should turn away with horrour anddisgust : but we pound their mummies tocolor our narratives ; and we make them asuseful in history as beasts are in fable.Thucydides shews evidently, by his preliminaryobservations, that he considers the Trojanwar unimportant. Yet, according to Homer,the Grecian troops amounted to above a hundredthousand. In reality, so large a force hathnever been assembled in any naval expedition,nor even one half. How was it provisioned atAulis ? how, on the shores of the Road ? Andall these soldiers, with chariots and horses, wereembarked for Troy, a few years after the first shipof war left the shores of Greece ! yes, a very fewPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 79years indeed ; for the Argo had among her crewthe brothers of Helen, who cannot well be supposedto have been ten years older than herself.It is of rare occurrence, even in the climate ofSparta, that a mother bears children after solong an interval ; and we have no reason to believethat such a time had elapsed between thebrothers and their sister. Suppose the twins tohave been twenty-two years old (for they hadbecome celebrated for horsemanship and boxing)and Helen seventeen, for her daughter was aninfant, (and such beauty must have been soughtearly in marriage,) you will find Utile space leftbetween the expeditions.But away with calculation. We make a badbargain when we change poetry for truth in theaffairs of ancient times, and by no means agood one in any.Remarkable men of remote ages are collectedtogether out of different countries within the80 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.same period, and perform simultaneously thesame action. On an accumulation of obscuredeeds arises a wild spirit of poetry ; and imagesand names burst forth and spread themselves,which carry with them something like enchantmentfar beyond the infancy of nations. Whatwas vague imagination settles, at last, and is receivedfor history. It is difficult to effect andidle to attempt the separation : it is like breakingoff a beautiful crystallization from the vaultof some intricate and twilight cavern, out ofmere curiosity to see where the accretion terminatesand the rock begins.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.We have Tost another poet, and have noneleft, besides the comick. Euripides is gone toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 81the court of Archelaus, A very few years agohe gained the prize against all competitors. Hewas hailed by the people as a deliverer, for subvertingthe ascendency and dominion which Sophocleshad acquired over them. The Atheniansdo not like to trust any man with powerfor life. Sophocles is now an old man, sixtyyears of age at the least, and he had then beenabsolute in the theater for above a quarter of acentury. What enthusiasm ! what acclamations !for overthrowing the despot who had so oftenmade them weep and beat their breasts. Hecame to visit us on the day of his defeat : Euripideswas with us at the time.Euripides," said he, " we are here alone,excepting our friends Aspasia and Pericles. Imust embrace you, now it cannot seem an actof ostentation."He did so, and most cordially.I should be glad to have conquered you,"582 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.continued he ; " it would have been very glorious."I never saw Pericles more moved. Theseare the actions that shake his whole frame, andmake his eyes glisten. Euripides was less affected.He writes tenderly, but is not tender.There are hearts that call for imagination ;there are others that create it.I must abstain from all reflections that falltoo darkly on the departed. We may see himno more perhaps: I am sorry for it. He didnot come often to visit us, nor indeed is thereany thing in his conversation to delight or interestme. He has not the fine manners of Sophocles;nor the open unreserved air, whichPericles tells me he admired so much in thesoldierly and somewhat proud Eschylus ; graveand taciturn, I hear, like himself, unless whensomething pleased him ; and then giving way toebullitions and bursts of rapture, and fillingevery one with it round about.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 83The movers and masters of our souls havesurely a right to throw out their Urbs as carelesslyas they please, on the world that belongsto them, and before the creatures they haveanimated. It is only such insects as petty autocrat,that feel opprest by it, and would stingthem for it. Pericles is made of the same clay.He cannot quite overcome his stateliness, buthe bends the more gracefully for bendingslowly.When I think of Euripides, I think how shorta time it is since he was hailed as a deliverer :and how odious he is become, for breaking inupon our affections at an unseasonable hour,and for carrying our hearts into captivity. Allthe writers of the day were resolved to humblehim, and ran about from magistrate to magistrate,to raise money enough for the magnificentrepresentation of his rival . . I have forgottenthe man's name. Pericles never thwarts theB4 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.passions and prejudices of the citizens. In hisadolescence he visited the humble habitation ofthe venerable Eschylus: throughout life hehas been the friend of Sophocles : he has comfortedEuripides in his defeats, telling him thatby degrees he would teach the people to bebetter judges : he rejoiced with him on his firstvictory, reminding him of his prophecy, and remarkingthat they two, of all the Athenians,had shown the most patience and had been thebest rewarded for it.We hope he may return.FIRST SPEECH OF PERICLES TO THE ATHENIANS,On the Declarations of Corinth and Lacedaemon.The Regency at Lacedsemon has resolved tomake an irruption into Attica, if we attemptany thing adverse to Potidaea, hearing that onPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 85the declaration of hostilities by Corinth, we orderedthe Potidseans, whose infidelity we haddetected, to demolish the wall facing Fallen.In reliance on their treason, Perdiccas and theCorinthians had entered into confederacy, andwere exciting the defection of our Thracianauxiliaries. Perdiccas prevailed with the Chaldeansto dismantle all their towns upon theseaside, and to congregate in Olynthus. Wemade a truce, and afterwards a treaty, withPerdiccas : he evacuates the territory he hadinvaded ; we strictly beleaguer the revolted .The ephors of Lacedsemon now summonto appear before them not only their allies, butwhosoever has any complaint to prefer againstthe Athenians. Hereupon the Megareans comeforward, and protest that they have been prohibitedfrom our markets, contrary to treaty;and what is worse, that we exclude them fromthe possession of Potidsea, so convenient for exodPERICLES AND ASPASIA.tending their power and authority into Thrace.They appear, in their long oration, to have forgottennothing, unless that they had murderedour citizens and embassadors.By what right, O Athenians, is Lacedaemonour judge? Corinth may impel her into waragainst us ; but Corinth can never place her onthe judgment-seat of Greece; nor shall theirunited voices make us answer to the citation.We will declare not to her but to all, our reasonsand our rights. The Corcyreans haderected a trophy at Lucina, and had sparedafter the victory their Corinthian captives : theyhad laid waste the territory of Leucas and theyhad burnt the arsenal of College. Meanwhilethe Corinthians sent embassadors to everypower in the Peloponese, and enlisted marinersfor their service upon every coast. Ifvalour and skill and constancy could haveavailed the Corcyreans, they would have con-periclesAND ASPASIA. 87tinned to abstain, as they had ever done, fromall alliances. They only sought ours whendestruction was imminent; knowing that, inpolicy and humanity, we never could allow theextinction of one Grecian state, nor consequentlythe aggrandisement and preponderanceof another ; and least so when the insolence ofCorinth had threatened our naval ascendancy,(by which all Greece was saved,) and the rivalryof Lacedsemon our equality on land. By ourtreaty with the Lacedaemonianss it is providedthat, if any community be not in alliance withone of the parties, it may confederate witheither, at its discretion ; and this compact itwas agreed should be binding not only on theprincipals but likewise on the subordinates. Insuch a predicament stands Corcyra.It might behove us to chastise the inhumanityof a nation which, like Corinth, would devourher own offspring ; but it certainly is most just8S PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and most expedient, when, instead of reasoningor conferring with us on the propriety of ourinterference, she runs at once to Sparta, conspiringwith her to our degradation, and, ifpossible, to our ruin. Satisfactorily to demonstrateour justice and moderation, I advise thatwe stipulate with Corcyra for mutual defence,never for aggression, and admitting no articlewhich, even by a forced interpretation, may contraveneour treaty with Lacedsemon.SECOND SPEECH OF PERICLES.The jealousy that Sparta hath ever entertainedagainst us, was declared most flagrantly,when Leotychides, who commanded the Grecianforces at Mycale, drew away with him all theconfederates of the Peloponese. We continuedPericles AND ASPASIA. 89to assail the barbarians until we drove themfrom Sestos, their last hold upon the Hellespont.It was then, and then only, that the Athenians,brought back again from miserable refuge theirwives and children, and began to rebuild theirhabitations, and walls for their defence. Didthe Spartans view this constancy and perseverancewith admiration and with pity, as thepatriotick, the generous, the humane, would do ?Did they send embassadors to congratulate yourfathers on their valour, their endurance, theirprosperous return, their ultimate security ?Embassadors they sent, indeed, but insistingthat our walls should never rise again from theirruins. A proposal so unjust and arrogant wetreated with scorn and indignation, when ournumbers were diminished and our wealth exhausted;shall we bend to their decisions andobey their orders now ? If their power of injuringus were in proportion to their malice.90 Pericles AND ASPASIA.their valour to their pride, or their judgment totheir ferocity, then were they most formidableindeed : but turn we to the examination of facts.Having occasion to reduce to obedience a fewrevolted Helots in the city of Ithome, to whomdid they apply? to the Athenians; for theythemselves were utterly ignorant how to attackor even to approach a fortress. Even thenthey showed their jealousy, rewarding ourpromptitude to assist them by the ignominiousdismissal of our troops. What was the consequence? a ten years siege. And these, OAthenians ! are the men who now threaten theAcropolis and Piraeus !I can compare the Lacedaemonianss to nothingmore fitly than to the heads of spears withoutthe shafts. There would be abundantly thepower of doing mischief, were there only themeans and method of directing it. Wherethese are wanting, we have no better cause forPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 91apprehension than at the sparks of fire underour horse's hoof, lest they produce a conflagration; which indeed they might do, if by theirnature they were durable and delectable.Let us see what powerful aid our enemies areexpecting ; what confederates they are stirringup against us. The Megareans, who left theiralliance for ours ; the Megareans, whom wedefended against the Corinthians, and whosewalls we constructed at our own expense fromMegara to Nisaea. Is it on the constancy oron the gratitude of this people that Lacedaemonin her wisdom so confidently relies ? No soonerhad we landed in Euboea, than intelligence wasbrought us that the Peloponnesian were aboutto make an incursion into Attica, that theAthenian garrison was murdered by the Mega-means,who already had formed a junction withthe Corinthians, Sicilians, and Epidaurus.We sailed homeward, and discomfited the PelopsPERICLES AND ASPASIA.designs ; returned, and reduced Euboea. Atruce for thirty years was granted to Lacedaemon,restoring to her Nissea, Colchis, Pegs,and Brazen. Five years afterwards a war brokeout between the Samian and Miletus. Justiceand our treaties obliged us to rescue that faithfuland unfortunate city from the two-fold calamitythat impended over her. Many of theSamian were as earnest in imploring our assistanceas the Milesian were : for, whatever mightbe the event of the war, they were sure of beingreduced to subjection; if conquered, by awronged and exasperated enemy ; if conquerors,by the king. A rapacious and insolent oligarchysaw no other means of retaining its usurpedauthority, than by extending it with rigour, andwere conscious that it must fall from underthem unless the sceptre propt it. Honest menwill never seek such aid, and free men willnever endure such.PERICLES AND ASPASIA-03There may be nations, monarch and aristocratical,where the publick good is little thoughtoi, and often impeded by restless steps towardpersonal or family aggrandisement. But thereis no man, even among these, so barbarous andinhumane, as to be indifferent to the approbationof some one in his city, beloved above allthe rest, from whom the happy rush forward foradmiration, the less fortunate are gratified witha tear : life, they would tell us, is well lost foreither. We Athenians have loftier views, and,I will not say purer, but the same and moreardent aspirations.In the late brief war, the greater part of youhere present have won immortal glory : and letus not believe that those who fell from yourranks in battle are yet insensible to the admirationand the gratitude of their countrymen. Noone among us, whatever services he may haverendered to Athens, has received such praises.94 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.such benedictions, such imperishable rewards, asthey have. Happy men ! they are beyond thereach of calumny and reverses. There is onlyone sad reflection resting with them : they canserve their country no more. How high was thevalue of their lives ! they knew it, and barteredthem for renown. We, in this war unjustlywaged against us, shall be exposed to fewerdangers, but more privations. In the enduranceof these, cur manliness will be put severely tothe proof, and virtues which have not beencalled forth in fifty years, virtues which ourenemies seem to have forgotten that we possess,must again come into action, as if under theeyes of a Themistocles and an Aristides. Wehave all done much ; but we have all done lessthan we can do, ought to do, and will do,Archidamus, king of Sparta, now about tomarch against us, is bound to me by the laws ofhospitality-should he, whether in remem-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 95france of these, or in the design of renderingme suspected, abstain from inflicting on mypossessions the violence he is about to inflict onthe rest of Attica, let it be understood thathenceforth I have no private property in thisland, but, in the presence of the Gods, make afree donation of it to the common-wealth. Letall withdraw their cattle, corn, and other effects,from the country, and hold Athens as one greatcitadel, from which the Deity, who presides overher, hath forbidden us to descend.ORATION OF PERICLES,On the approach of the Lacedaemonian to Athens.Long ago, and lately, and in every age intervening,O Athenians ! have you experienced96 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.the jealousy and insolence of Lacedaemon. Shelistens now to the complaints of Corinth, becausethe people of Corcyra will endure no longer hervexations, and because their navy, in which thegreater part of the mariners have fought andconquered by the side of ours, seek refuge inthe Piraeus. A little while ago she dared to insistthat we should admit the ships of Megara toour harbour, her merchandize to our markets,when Megara had broken her faith with us, andgone over to the Spartans. Even this indignitywe might perhaps have endured. We told theLacedaemonianss that we would admit the Megariansto that privilege, if the ports of Spartawould admit us and our allies : although we andour allies were never in such relationship withher, and therefore could never have fallen oiFfrom her. She disdained to listen to a proposalso reasonable, to a concession so little to be ex-periclesAND ASPASIA. 97petted from us. Resolved to prove to her thatgenerosity, and not fear, dictated it, we chastisedthe perfidious Megara.The king of the Lacedaemonian, Archidamus,a wiser and honest man than any of his people,is forced to obey the passions he wouldcontrol ; and an army of sixty thousand men ismarching under his command to ravage Attica,The braver will rather burn their harvests thantransfer to a sanguinary and insatiable enemythe means of inflicting evil on their relatives andfriends. Few, I trust, are base enough, sacrilegiousenough, to treat as guests, those whomyou, before men and Gods, denounce as enemies.We will receive within our walls the firm andfaithful. And now let those orators who haveblamed our expenditure in the fortification ofthe city, tell us again that it was improvident.They would be flying in dismay had not thosebulwarks been raised effectually. Did it re-VOL. II. . F98 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.quire any sagacity to foresee that Athens wouldbe the envy of every state around ? Was thereany man so ignorant as not to know that hewho has lost all his enemies will soon lose all hisenergy ? and that men are no more men whenthey cease to act, than rivers are rivers whenthey cease to run ? The forces of our assailantsmust be broken against our walls. Our fleetsare our farms henceforward, until the Spartansfind that, if they can subsist on little, they cannotso well subsist on stones and ashes. Theirforces are vast ; but vast forces have never muchhurt us. Marathon and Plataea were scarcelywide enough for our trophies : a victorious army,an unvanquished fleet, Miltiades himself, retiredunsuccessful from the rock of Paros. Shallwe tremble then before a tumultuous multitude,ignorant how cities are defended or assailed?Shall we prevent them from coming to theirdiscomfiture and destruction ? Firmly do I be-periclesAND ASPASIA. 99lieve that the Protectress of our city leads themagainst it to avenge her cause. They mayravage the lands; they cannot cultivate, theycannot hold them. Mischief they will do, andgreat ; much of our time, much of our patience,much of our perseverance, and something of ourcourage, are required. At present I do notnumber this event among our happiest. Wemust owe our glory partly to ourselves andpartly to our enemies. They offer us the meansof greatness; let us accept the offer. Briefdanger is the price of long security. The countryman,from the mists of the morning, not onlyforetells the brightness of the day, but discernsin them sources of fertility ; and he remembersin his supplications to the immortal Gods tothank them alike for both blessings. It is thus,O men of Athens, that you have constantlylooked up at calamities. Never have they depressedyou : always have they chastened yourf2100 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.hearts, always have they exalted your courage.Impelled by the breath of Xerxes, the locustsof Asia consumed your harvests : your habitationscrumbled away as they swarmed along:the temples of the Gods lay prostrate : the Godsthemselves bowed and fell : the men of Athensrose higher than ever. They had turned theirfaces in grief from the scene of devastation andimpiety; but they listened to a provident valour,and the myriads of insects that had plaguedthem were consumed.There is affront in exhortation . . I havespoken.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.On the shore overlooking the fountain ofArethusa there is a statue of Eschylus. AnPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 101Athenian who went to visit it, crowned it withbay and ivy, and wrote these verses at the base.Stranger ! Athenian hands adornA bard thou knowest well.Ah ! do not ask where he was born.For we must blush to tell.Proud are we, but we place no prideOn good, or wise, or brave ;Hence what Ephesus had denied'Twas Arethusa gave.You remember the story of a barbarous king,who would have kept the Muses in captivity.His armoury furnished an enemy of the poetLysis with these materials for skirmishing.TO LYSIS.A curse upon the king of oldWho would have kidnap all the Muses !Whether to barter them for goldOr keep them for his proper uses.10*2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Lysis ! aware he meant them ill.Birds they became, and flew away . .Thy Muse alone continues stillA titmouse to this very day.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.After an interval of nearly three years,Comedy may re-appear on the stage. It is reportedthat Pericles obtained this indulgencefrom the archons; and in consequence of it, heis now represented by the dramatists as a Jupiter,who lightens and thunders, and what not.Before he became a Jupiter, I believe he wasrepresented as the enemy of that God, and mostof the others; and the people, having no publickamusement, no diversion to carry off theirill-humours, listened gloomily to such discourses.Pericles noted it, and turned them into theirfold again, and had them piped to ; but not be ^fore the fly entered the fleece.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 103ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Twenty days, O Cleon, twenty days are notelapsed, since Anaxagoras told me that he wasabout to leave Attica for the Propontis. Iurged him to alter his resolution. He affirmedthat his presence in the house of Pericles hadbrought a cloud over it, which would only disappearby his absence. " Of late," said he,I have received so much kindness from thephilosophers, that I begin to suspect a changeof fortune, by no means in my favour. I mustfly while the weather is temperate, as theswallows do."He mixes not with the people, he converseswith none of them, and yet he appears to havepenetrated into the deepest and darkest recessesof their souls,Pericles has lost their favour ; Anaxagoras is104 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.banished; Aspasia . . but what is Aspasia?Yours ; and therefore you must hear about her.We have all been accused of impiety; Anaxagorasand myself have been brought to trialfor the offence. Diopithes is the name of ouraccuser. He began with Anaxagoras; andhaving proved by three witnesses that he in theirhearing had declared his opinion, that lightningand thunder were the effect of some combustionand concussion in the clouds, and that theyoften happened when Jupiter was in perfectlygood humour, and not thinking at allabout the Athenians, there was instantly sucha rage and consternation in the whole assembly,that the judges were called upon from everyquarter to condemn him for impiety ; sentence,death.Pericles rose. He for the first time in hislife was silenced by the clamorous indignationof the people. All parties, all classes, men,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 105women, children, priests, sailors, tavern-keepers,diviners, slave-merchants, threatened, raved,foamed.Pericles ! you yourself will soon be citedbefore this august tribunal," said Diopithes.The clamour now began to subside. Curiosity,wonder, apprehension of consequences, dividedthe assembly; and, when Pericles lifted up hisarm, the agitation, the murmurs, and the whispers,ceased.O men of Athens !" said he calmly, " Iwish it had pleased the Gods that the vengeanceof Diopithes had taken its first aimagainst me, whom you have heard so often,known so long, and trusted so implicitly. ButDiopithes hath skulked from his ambush andseized upon the unsuspecting Anaxagoras, inthe hope that, few knowing him, few canlove him. The calculation of Diopithes is correct:they who love him are but those few.f5106 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.They however who esteem and reverence himcan only be numbered by him who possesses aregister of all the wise and all the virtuous meninGreece."Anaxagoras stept forward, saying,'• You, O Athenians ! want defenders, andwill want them more : I look for protection tono mortal arm ; I look for it to that divinepower, the existence of which my accuser tellsyou I deny'He shirks the thunder," said one.He sticks to the blind side of Jupiter,"said another.Such were the observations of the pious andmalicious, who thought to expiate all their sinsby throwing them on his shoulders, and drivinghim out of the city. He was condemned by amajority of voices. Pericles followed him throughthe gates, beyond the fury of his persecutors.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 107ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Three days after the banishment of Anaxagoras,the threat of Diopithes was carried into effect;not against the person of Pericles, but against yourAspasia. Diopithes had himseK denounced me, onthe same count as Anaxagoras : and Hermippus,whose entire life has been (they tell me) onesluggish stream of gross impurities, impeachedme as a corrupters of the publick morals.You will imagine, my Cleon, that somethingloose and lascivious was brought forward inaccusation against me. No such thing. Nothingof the kind is considered as having anyconcern with publick morals here in Athens.My crime was, seducing young men from theirparents and friends ; retaining them in conversationat our house ; encouraging them to studythe sciences in preference to the machinations108 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.of Sophists ; to leave the declaimers an emptyroom for the benefit of their voices, and toadhere more closely to logick before theyventure upon rhetorick.You will nov^^ perceive, that all who have themost interest and the most exercise in the variousartifices of deception, were my enemies. Ifeared lest Pericles should run farther into thedanger of losing his popularity, by undertakingmy defence, and resolved to be my own pleader.The hour had been appointed for opening thetrial : I told him it was one hour later. Whenit was nearly at hand, I went out of the houseunobserved, and took my place before the assemblyof the people. My words were these.If any of the accusations brought againstme were well-founded, they would have beenknown to Pericles. It would be strange werehe indifferent to any offence of mine against thelaws, especially such as you accuse me of, unlessPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 109he is, as the accusation would imply, insensibleto honour, propriety, and decency. Is this hischaracter ? He never has had an enemy boldand false enough to say it: I wonder at this;yet he never has."The people, who had been silent, now beganto favor me, when Diopithes asked me, whetherI could deny my conversations with Anaxagoras,and my adherence to his tenets.Love of truth, pity for Anaxagoras, and pride(it may be) in the strength of mind he hadgiven me, and in the rejection of unworthynotions on the Gods, urged me to say,I deny no conversation I ever had withhim, no tenet I ever received, no duty I everlearnt from him. He taught me veneration forthe Gods ; and I pray them to render me gratefulfor it.'*'Pericles at this moment stood at my side.Indignation that he should have followed Anax-110 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.agoras out of the gates, and should have embracedhim affectionately at parting, turnedmany furious faces, furious cries, and furiousgestures against him. He looked round disdainfully,and said aloud,Respect the laws and the unfortunate, youwho revere the Gods !It was net the condemned man I followedout of the city : it was age, which would havesunk under blows; it was rectitude, whichfeared not death ; it was friendship, which if Icannot make you esteem, I will not imploreyou to pardon.At last, O Athenians ! my enemies andyours have persuaded you to assemble in thisplace, and to witness the humiliation and afflictionof one who never failed to succour theunfortunate, and who has been the solace ofmy existence many years. Am I, of all inAthens, the man who should mistake crimes forPERICLES AND ASPASIA. Illvirtues: the man pointed out from among therest as the most insensible to his dignity?How widely then have you erred in calling meto your counsels ! how long, how wilfully, howpertinaciously ! Is it not easier to believe thattwo or three are mistaken now, than that youall, together with your fathers and best friends,whose natal days and days of departure fromus, you still keep holy, have been always so ?"Hermippus and Diopithes, seeing that manywere moved, interrupted him furiously."O Pericles!" cried Hermippus. "we areaware that this woman of Ionia, this Milesian,this Aspasia, entertains the same opinions asyourself."Highly criminal !" answered Pericles, witha smile ; " I hope no other Athenian is cursedwith a wife liable to so grievous an accusation."Scoffer !" cried Diopithes ; " dare you denythat in the summer of this very year, when you112 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.were sailing to lay waste the coasts of the Pelo-ponese, you attempted to pervert the religion ofthe sailors ? The sun was suddenly bedimmed :darkness came over the sea, as far even as untoour city ! the pilot fell upon his face andprayed : and did not you, O Pericles ! raise himup with one hand, and, throwing your mantleover his eyes with the other, • ask whether hefound any thing dreadful in it ? And when heanswered in his piety, ' It is not that's did notyou reply,' The other darkness is no otherwise differentthan in its greater extent, and produced bysomewhat larger than my mantle ?* "Proceed to interrogate," said Pericles.Answer that first, O sacrilegious man !"exclaimed Diopithes.Athenians !" said Pericles, " many of youhere present were with me in the expedition.Do assure Diopithes that it was not myPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 1 13mantle which darkened the sea and sun,that to your certain knowledge both sun andsea were dark before I took it off. So thatthe Gods, if they were angry at all, wereangry earlier in the day. And not only did thesun shine out again, bright and serene as ever,but the winds were favorable, the voyage prosperous,the expedition successful.It appears to me that the Gods are the mostangry when they permit the malicious and thefalse to prevail over the generous and simple-hearted; when they permit the best affectionsto be violated, and the worst to rise up in disorderto our ruin. Nor do I believe that theyare very well pleased at hearing their actionsand motives called in question ; or at winks andintimations that they want discernment to findout offenders, and power and justice to punishthem."114 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.In spite of philosophers," cried Diopithes,we have still our Gods in Athens."And our men too," replied he, " or thesebefore me must only be the shadows of thosewho, but lately under my command, won eternalrenown in Samos."Tears rose into his eyes : they were for me ;but he said in a low voice, audible however inthe silence that had succeeded to a loud andalmost universal acclamation,At least for our lost comrades a few tearsare not forbidden us."The people struck their breasts : the judgesunanimously acquitted me, surrounded Pericles,and followed us home with enthusiasticcongratulations.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 115ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Never did our house receive so many visitorsas on my acquittal. Not only our friends andacquaintances, but every one who had foughtunder Pericles, came forward to offer his felicitationsand his services. I was forgotten . .the danger, the insult, seemed his. When theyhad all retired to dinner, he too left me withmy musick, and I did not see him again untillate the next morning. It was evident he hadslept but little. He came up to me, and pressingmy hand, said, *Aspasia ! 1 have gained a great victory ;the greatest, the most glorious, and the only onenot subject to a reverse."I thought his words related to his defence ofme : I was mistakenIt was yesterday, for the first time," said he.116 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.that I knew the extent of my power. I couldhave demolished the houses of my adversaries ;I could have exiled them from the city; Icould have been their master : I am more ; Iam my own.Great injuries create great power : no feeblevirtues are necessary to its rejection. In polity,"continued he, " the humble may rise, butnot the fallen. States live but once. Had Ino Aspasia, no children, I am ignorant whatsupport I could have found against the impulsesof ambition. Many who seize upon kinglypower, are the more desirous of possessing itbecause they have sons to succeed them. Imprudentmen ! they expose those sons to infinitedangers, and create no new advantages forthem. If they provided for their security, theywould abdicate their power, when about to betakenaway by death from those over whom theyexercised it. If they provided for their glory,iPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 117they would not subject them to the reproach,always merited, of possessing less activity andsagacity than their father. Do they care abouttheir wisdom or their virtue ? they will not castthem among idlers and sycophants, nor abandonthem in a solitary island, where many sing andnone discourse. What life is wretched ? whatstate more abject?"Yours, my dear Pericles !" said I, " is farhappier, but by no means enviable."True !" answered he : "I am subject tothreats, curses, denunciations, ostracism, andhemlock : but I glory in the glory of the state,and I know that I can maintain it."I was listening with attention, when he saidto me with an air of playfulness,Am I not a boaster? am I not proud ofmy command ? am I not over-fond of it, whenI am resolved not to transmit it hereditarily toanother ?"118 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Rightly judged ! dear Pericles !" said I :you always act judiciously and kindly."Political men, like goats," continued he,usually thrive best among inequalities. I havechosen the meadow ; and not on the whole imprudently.My ife has been employed inmaking it more pleasurable, more even, moreproductive. The shepherds have often quarrelledwith me ; and but now the sheep too, intheir wisdom, turned their heads against me."We went into the air, and saw Alcibiadeswalking in the garden. He, not observing us,strode along rapidly, striking with his caneevery tree in the alley. When we came upnearer, he was repeating,The fanatical knaves ! I would knock theheads off all their Mercuries.Noisy demagogues ! I would lead them intothe midst of the enemy . . I would drag themon by the ears . . not fifty should return. TheyPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 119in their audacity, impeach Aspasia ! they bringtears into the eyes of Pericles ! I will bringmore into theirs, by holy Jupiter !"He started at our approach. My husbandlaid his hands upon the youth's shoulder, andsaid to him,But, Alcibiades ! if you do not lead fiftyback, where will you leave the captives ?"He sprang to the neck of his uncle, and,turning his face toward me, blushed, andwhispered,Did she too hear me ?"ASPASIA TO PERICLES.I would not disturb you, my beloved Pericles! but let not any thing else ! Why are youso busy now the danger is over ? why do so manycome to you, with countenances so earnest when120 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.they enter, and so different from composed whenthey go away ? You never break your resolutions,otherwise I should fear they might leadyou above the place of fellow-citizen. Thenfarewell happiness, farewell manliness, security,sincerity, affection, honour !O Pericles ! descend from the car of Victoryon the course itself. In abandoning power andstation, what do you abandon but inquietudeand ingratitude ?PERICLES TO ASPASIA.We never alight from a carriage while it isgoing down a hill, but always at the top or atthe bottom. There is less danger in beingshaken out than there is in leaping out.Were 1 at this juncture to abdicate my authorAND ASPASIA. 121city, I should appear to the people to confess afault, and to myself to commit one.I must defend those who would have defendedme. Rely on my firmness in all things; onPericles, one, immutable.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Alcibiades will one time or other bring usall into peril by his recklessness and precipitation.When he heard I was arraigned, and Periclesthreatened, he ran from house to house amongthe officers of the army, embraced them, kneltbefore them, adjured them to save their generalfrom ignominy, his wife from insult, the cityfi'om mourning, and themselves from inactivity.He swore that if they would not, he would :VOL. n. G122 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.that two thousand of the same age, or ratherolder, would join him and obey him, and thathe would throw judges, accusers, applauders,listeners, over the Piraeus. Not a soldier didhe pass without a kiss, without a pressure ofthe hand, without a promise; not a girl inAthens that was not his sister, not a matronthat was not his mother.Within an hour, in every part of the city therewere cries,The Lacedaemonianss have none of theserogues among them."No accusers there no judges there."Archidamus is wise ; Pericles is wiser :shall the one be a king, the other a culprit?"Shall his war-horse," cried a soldier, " carrypaniers ?"Fore-foot and hind-foot, say I," cried another," against these market-place swine, theseblack-muzzled asses '"PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 123Gut upon them ! what have they won forus ?" cried another.And what have we not won for them ?"roared the next.What was all the stir about ?" asked onemore quiet. " They dared to accuse our Generalof denying their dues to the Gods. Liars !he gives every man his due." A laugh arose.No laughing here ! I uphold it, we soldierscan take as good care of the Gods as they can.Who believes they ever were in danger ? Periclesmight have cracked them by the dozen :he has left them all standing ; not a head missing.Save him, comrades, from the cowards,the poisoners."On all sides of the city the soldiers ran totheir officers, and then toward the house ofPericles. It was with difficulty he could dissuadethem from their resolution, to confer uponhim the same authority and station as Archida-mus holds among the Spartans.g2124 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.We shall then meet the enemy upon equalterms," said they ; '* ay, more than equal ; affabilityfor moroseness, liberality for parsimony."The greater part of the citizens would havefollowed; the turbulent for change, the peaceablefor tranquility.My husband has allayed the tempest: hisambition is higher. Nothing can be taken fromthe name of Pericles, and what is added to itmust be of baser metal.< ASPASIA TO PERICLES.What but the late outrages, or rather, whatbut the ascendancy you have obtained in consequence,could have brought the aristocraticalparty to offer you their services, in helping tokeep down the ferocity of the populace ? ItPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 125might indeed be well to unite them, were it possible;but not being possible, I would ratherplace the more confidence in the less ignorantand turbulent.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Aspasia ! as you are cautious not to lookearnestly at a handsome man, but rather turnyour eyes another way, so must I do in regardto Aristocracy. It is not proper that I shoulddiscover any charms in her.Among the losses I sustained by the flight ofyouth, I ought to regret my vanity. I had notenough of it for a robe, but I had enough for avest ; enough to keep me warm and comfortable.Not a remnant have I now. Why be ashamedof our worthy party ? Did I espouse it for itsI126 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.virtues? Was it ever in high repute for its.fidelity? What is it to me whether a couple ortwo of housed pards bite one another's tailsoff or not, excepting that they lie down thequieter for it afterward ? They have still headsand necks to be led along by. We have onlyto walk up to them firmly, to look at themsteadily, speak to them boldly, lay the handupon them confidently, as their masters, andgrasp them with a tenacity that neither relaxesnor hurts. He who does this, and there aresome who can do it, may go forth and catchother beasts with them, and feast all his friendsin the city.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.There is irritation in your irony, O Pericles !your spirit is not at rest. Unworthily, for thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 1-27first time since I knew you, have you thoughtand spoken ! Thought ! no, Pericles ! passionis not thought. Contumely has produced thisbitterness ; it left you with the words.PERICLES TO ASPASIAAspasia! you have looked into my heart,and purified it. Your indignities sometimes riseup before me ; and it is only when I am promptedto do wrong by others, that I recover all myfirmness. Athens has a right to my solicitudeand devotion. I will forget no favour she hasever shewn me, and remember no enmity.128 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.When the war is over, as surely it must be inanother year, let us sail among the islands ofthe Egsean, and be young as ever. O that itwere permitted us to pass together the remainderof our lives in privacy and retirement !This is never to be hoped for in Athens.I inherit from my mother a small yet beautifulhouse in Tents : I remember it well. Water,clear and cold, ran before the vestibule : a sycamoreshaded the whole building. I think Tentsmust be nearer to Athens than to Miletus.Could we not go now for a few days? Howtemperate was the air, how serene the sky, howbeautiful the country! the people how quiet,how gentle, how kind-hearted !Is there any station so happy as an uncontestedplace in a small community, where man-periclesAND ASPASIA. 129news are simple, where wants are few, whererespect is the tribute of probity, and love is theguerdon of beneficence. O Pericles ! let usgo ; we can return at any time.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.The gratitude and love I owe to Pericles inducesme to write the very day I have landedat Lampsacus. You are prudent, Aspasia ! andyour prudence is of the best quality ; instinctivedelicacy. But I am older than you, or thanPericles, although than Pericles by only sixyears . . and, having no other pretext to counselyou, will rest upon this. Do not press him toabstain from publick business : for, supposinghe is by nature no obstinate man, yet the longpossession of authority has accustomed him tog5130 PERICLES A^D ASPASIA.grasp the tighter what is touched ; as shell-fishcontract the claws at an atom. The simili isnot an elegant one, but I offer it as the mostapposite. He might believe that you fear forhim, and that you wish him to fear : this alonewould make him pertinacious. Let every thingtake its season with him. Perhaps it is necessarythat he should controul the multitude : if itis, he will know it ; even you could not stir him,and would only molest him by the attemptAge is coming on. This will not loosen histenacity of power . . it usually has quite thecontrary effect. But it will induce him to giveup more of his time to the studies he has alwaysdelighted in, which however were insufficient forthe full activity of his mind. Mine is a sluggard :I have surrendered it entirely to philosophy, andit has made little or no progress : it has dweltpleased with hardly anything it has embraced,and has often run back again from fond proposAND ASPASIA. 131sessions to startling doubts. It could not helpitBut as we sometimes find one thing while wearelooking for another, so, if truth escaped me,happiness and contentment fell in my way, andhave accompanied me even to Lampsacus.Be cautious, O Aspasia ! of discoursing onphilosophy. Is it not in philosophy as in love ?the more we have of it, and the less we talkabout it, the better. Never touch upon religionwith anybody. The irreligious are incurableand insensible ; the religious are morbid andirritable : the former would scorn, the latterwould strangle you. It appears to me to benot only a dangerous, but, what is worse, anindelicate thing, to place ourselves where we arelikely to see fevers and phrenzies, writings anddistortions, debilities and deformities. Religionat Athens is like a fountain near Dodona, whichextinguishes a lighted torch, and which gives a132 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.flame of its own to an delighted one held downto it. Keep yours in your chamber ; and let thepeople run about with theirs; but remember, itis rather apt to catch the skirts. Believe me, Iam happy : I am not deprived of my friends.Imagination is little less strong in our lateryears than in our earlier. True, it alights onfewer objects, but it rests longer on them, andsees them better. Pericles first, and then you,and then Meton, occupy my thoughts. I amwith you still ; I study with you, just as before,although nobody talks aloud in the schoolroom.This is the pleasantness part of life. Oblivionthrows her light coverlet over our infancy ; and,soon after we are out of the cradle we forget howsoundly we had been slumbering, and how delightfulwere our dreams. Toil and pleasurecontend for us almost the instant we rise fromit : and weariness follows whichever has carriedus away. We stop awhile, look around us, wonPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 133der to find we have completed the circle ofexistence, fold our arms, and fall asleep again.A N AX AGO R AS TO ASPASIA.Proxenus, a native of Massilia, is lately comeover to visit his relations and correspondents.The Phocseans, you know, were the founders ofLampsacus, long before they were driven, by theinvasion of Cyrus, into Italy and Gaul. Likethe generality of mercantile men, Proxenus islittle attached to any system of philosophy, butappears to hold in some esteem the name andinstitutions of Pythagoras. Formerly we haveconversed, together with Pericles, on this extraordinaryman, regretting that so little is knownof him in the midst of his celebrity. Hardly acentury hath elapsed since he left his native134 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Samos, and settled on the peaceful shores ofItaly. His presence, his precepts, his authority,his example, were unavailing to the preservationof that tranquility, which the beauty of theclimate, the fertility of the soil, and the freedomof the institutions, ought to have established andperpetuated. But it is in the regions of theearth as in the regions of the air, the warm andgenial are absorbed by the cold and void, andtempests and storms ensue. The happiness ofthousands is the happiness of too many, in theclose calculation of some inexpert contriver ; andhe spoils the honey by smoking the hive. Nosooner is a nation at ease, than he v/ho shouldbe the first to participate in the blessing, is themost uneasy ; and, when at last he has found aplace to his mind, before he lies down hescratches a hole in it, as the dogs do. Such hadbeen the case at Samos, and such was likewisethe case at Croton. The difference lay merelyPericles AND ASPASIA. 135in this. Poly crates was a man of abilities, andcapable of holding the government in his singlehand : he loved power, he loved pleasure, hecontented the populace, and he reconciled thewise; Croton was subject to the discretion of anoligarchy, incompetent, arrogant, jealous, andunjust. It is untrue that Pythagoras was everat enmity with him, or was treated by him withdisrespect. The one was as fond of authorityas the other, and neither was willing to divideit. Whatever could be done to promote thestudies of the philosopher was done spontaneouslyby the chief magistrate, who gave himletters of recommendation to the king of Egypt.By these, and perhaps by these only, could heever have penetrated into the innermost recessesof the priesthood. Conversing with them, andobserving their power over the people, he lostnothing of his inclination to possess the same,and added much to the means of acquiring it.136 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Epimenides the Cretan was perhaps the exemplarhe had resolved to follow, but withmitigated severity. Solon with all his wisdom,and never had mortal more, was unable to bringback the Athenians to the simplicity and equityof their forefathers. Knowing well their propensityto superstition, which always acts withits greatest intensity on the cruel and the loose,he invited Epimenides to come and over-awethem by his sanctity and his sacrifices. Wecannot doubt that he left the whole managementof their conversion to the discretion of thestranger. An Epimenides, in all ages of theworld, will possess more influence than a Solon.Lustrations and sacrifices followed prodigies andomens ; and among the marvels and miracleswhich the Cretan seer displayed, the last wasthe greatest in the eyes of Athens. He announcedhis determination to return home, andrefused all the honours and riches the peoplePericles AND Aspasia. 137would have lavished on him, Epimenideswanted nothing : the Gods were less moderate ;they required a human victim. Cravings wastoo happy in devoting his blood at the altar ;Ctesibias, on the bosom of his friend.Proxenus is come in, by appointment, andhas broken off an old story, which you knowas well as I do. I will give you his; but notwithout an account from you in return, of whatis going on among the craft at Athens.ASPASIA TO ANAXAGORAS.Secrecy and mystery drive the uninitiatedinto suspicion and distrust : an honest man neverwill propose, and a prudent man never will complywith, the condition. What is equitable andproper lies wide open on the plain, and is PERICLES AND ASP ASIA.possible to all, without an entrance throughlabyrinth or defile. I do not love Pythagorasnor Epimenides, nor indeed my friend Socratesso much as perhaps I should, who however,beside his cleverness, has many goodqualities. He, like Pythagoras, is endowed withan extraordinary share of intellect; but neitherof them has attained the fixt and measuredscope of true philosophy ; the one being in perpetualmotion to display his surprising tricks ofrhetorical ingenuity, which tend only to theconfusion of truth and falsehood, and consequentlyto indifference in the choice of them ;the other was no less active and restless in theacquisition and maintenance of power. Thebusiness of philosophy is to examine and estimateall those things which come within thecognizance of the understanding. Speculationson any that lie beyond, are only pleasant dreams,leaving the mind to the lassitude of disappoint-periclesAND ASPASIA. 139ment. They are easier than geometry anddialectics ; they are easier than the efforts ofa well-regulated imagination in the structureof a poem. These are usually held forth bythem as feathers and thistle-down ; yet condescendthey nevertheless to employ them; numeralsas matter and mind ; harmony as fluteand fiddle-strings to the dances of the stars. Intheir compositions they adopt the phraseologyand curtsy to the cadences of poetry. Looknearer ; and what do you see before you ? thelimbs of Orpheus, bloodless, broken, swollen,and palpitating on the cold and misty waters ofthe Hebrus. Such are the rhapsodical scrapsin their visionary lucubrations. They wouldpoison Homer, the purest and soundest of moralists,the most ancient and venerable of philosophers,not out of any ill-will to him, but outof love to the human race. There is often anenchantment in their sentences, by which the140 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ear is captivated, and against which the intellectualpowers are disinclined to struggle ; andthere is sometimes, but very rarely, a simplicityof manner, which wins like truth. But whenambition leads them toward the poetical, theyfall flat upon thorny ground. No writer of floridprose ever was more than a secondary poet.Poetry, in her bright estate, is delighted withexuberant abundance, but imposes on her worshippera severity of selection. She has notonly her days of festival, but also her days ofabstinence, and, unless upon some that are setapart, prefers the graces of sedateness to therevelry of enthusiasm. She rejects, as inharmoniousand barbarous, the mimicry of her voiceand manner by obstreperous sophists and arguegrammarians, and she scatters to the winds theloose fragments of the schools.Socrates and his disciples run about thestreets, pick up every young person they meetPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 141with, carry him away with them, and prove tohim that everything he ever heard is false, andeverything he ever said is foolish. He mistlove his father and mother in their way, or notat all. The only questions they ask him arethose which they know he cannot answer, andthe only doctrines they inculcate are those whichit is impossible he should understand. He hasnow fairly reached sublimity, and looks of wonderare interchanged at his progress. Is it sublimeto strain our vision into a fog ? and mustwe fancy we see far because we are lookingwhere nobody can see farther ?ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.The Massilian is intelligent and communicative.Some matters which he related at ourconference you will perhaps remember in PERICLES AND ASPASIA.rodotus : others are his own story ; so let himtell the whole in his own manner.The unbroken force of Persia was broughtunder the walls of Phocaea. Harpagus, equallywise and generous, offered to our citizens themost favorable terms of surrender. They requestedone day for deliberation. Aware oftheir intentions, he dissembled his knowledge,and allowed them to freight their ships, embark,and sail away. His clemency was howeverno security to his garrison. Within a fewdays the expatriated citizens landed again, slewevery Persian within the walls, then, casting amass of iron into the sea, swore they wouldnever return a second time until it rose andfloated on the surface. Some historians wouldpersuade us that, after this cruel vengeance,this voluntary and unanimous oath, the greaterpart returned. Such a tale is idle and absurd.The Persians would too surely have inflictedPericles AND ASPASIA. 143due vengeance on their perfidy. Some howeverdid indeed separate from the main body ofthe emigration, and came to reside here inLampsacus, which their ancestors had founded,and where they continued on the most hospitableterms by frequent intermarriages. . Thebulk of the expedition reached Thalia, a colonyof theirs, led recently into Corsica. Here theycontinued to reside but a little time unmolestedby the jealousy of the Carthaginian and Tyr-athenians.Undaunted by the coalition againstthem, and by the loss of many ships in a battlewith the united fleet of the confederates, theysailed to the neighbourhood of the more ancientGrecian cities, and founded Elea, near Poseidon.And now probably they first becameacquainted with the disciples of Pythagoras.He himself, it is said, retired to Metapontum,and died there. When he went from Samos toCroton he was in the vigour of life ; and not144 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.many years elapsed ere he beheld the overthrowof his institutions. He is reported by some tohave attained an extreme old age, which histranquility and temperance render probable.Even without this supposition, he may perhapshave visited the coast of Gaul, before or afterthe arrival of the Phocseans. Collecting, wemay imagine, additional forces from the manyloans whom the generals of Cyrus had expelled,they began to build the city of Massilia,not long after the settlement at Elea, which thevicinity of powerful states, and its incapacityand insecurity for the mooring of a navy, renderedineligible as the seat of government, oras a constant station."Thus much I had collected from Proxenus,when he began to give me information onanchorages and harbours, imports and exports :I could not in common civility interrupt him, orask any thing better than what it pleased himPERICLES AND ASPASIA. ]45to bestow on me. As our acquaintancestrengthens, I will draw more unreservedlyfrom his stores.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Proxenus runs into some errors both in regardto facts and motives. It is false thatPythagoras, on returning from his voyage inEgypt, was indignant at finding a tyrant in hisnative city. Polycrates was in possession of thesupreme power when the philosopher left theisland, and used it with clemency and discretion.The traveller might have gone and mighthave returned with discontent, but indignationis averse to favours, and these he was by nomeans reluctant to accept. Finding he couldnot be the principal man among his fellow-vol.II. H146 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.citizens, he resolved to attain that rank wherethe supremacy was yet unoccupied. He hadseen enough of the Egyptian and heard enoughof the Indian priesthood, to convince him that,by a system somewhat similar to theirs, absolutepower was more attainable and more safe. Hetook lessons and precautions; and wherever therewas a celebrated and ancient temple, he visited itspriests, and explored the origin and conduct oftheir institutions and authority. In recompensefor these, he is reported to have raised histunic to the holy ones at Olympia, and to havedisplayed a golden thigh. Nothing so royal, sogodlike, had been seen since the reign of Pelops.A golden thigh is worth an ivory shoulder.Such a miracle, we may be sure, was notaltogether lost upon the prophetess at Delphi,the fair Themistocles, who promulgated to himher secrets in return.His doctrines were kept within his ownPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 147circle, under the safeguard of an oath. This inall countries is and ought to be forbidden, asbeing the prerogative of the magistracy. Loveof supremacy was the motive in all his injunctionsand in all his actions. He avoided thetrouble of office and the danger of responsibility: he excluded the commons, and called tohim the nobles, who alone were deemed worthyof serving him. Among these he establishedan equality, which, together with the regularityand frugality of their living, must have tendedto conciliate and gratify in some measure thepoorer citizens. Certain kinds of animal foodwere forbidden, as in India and other countriesless remote, but, contrary to what we have oftenheard asserted, no species of pulse or vegetable.Abstain from the bean, signified, abstain fromelections to political employments. The teacherwas in the place of parent to his disciples, whoappear to have renounced all the natural affects148 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.tons that had sprung up before they enteredthe society. His regimen was mild and generous: its principal merit was, however, the repressionof loquacity ; common in the ardour ofyouth after its chase in the fields of knowledge; commoner, and more unbecoming, inthe morose repose of an arrogant philosophy.The history of Pythagoras, forasmuch as he interestsus in being the leader of a sect and of aparty, is neither long nor obscure. The commonsof Croton soon began to perceive that,under his management, the sons of the aristocracywould be no better inclined, than theirfathers had been, to concede them an equalshare in the government : and the rulers themselves,day after day, lost somewhat of authorityin their families. During the w hole timethat he had. resided in Italy, the people of nearlyall the Greek cities heaved indignantly underoppressive oligarchies. Sybaris, whose wealthPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 149they were absorbing in more than Circaean'luxuries, rose first upon her feet, and expelledthe council of five hundred. They retired forrefuge to the lords of Croton ; and, when theSybarites called for justice on them, the demandwas voted an affront. And now indeedthe veil of sanctity and seclusion was violentlyrent by the disciples of the Samian. He incitedthem to maintain peace and good govern-government,pointed out to them the phantom ofFreedom, how it blasted every region it passedover, and adjured them to the defence of theirrulers, by the purity of their religion. Theymarched, fought a battle, won it, and Sybariswas swept from the earth.Discord, I suspect, O Aspasia ! is the readiestof all the Deities to appear at our invocation.The oligarchy of Croton, long accustomed touncontrolled power and irresponsible injustice,refused to the army, now comprehending150 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.all the active citizens, even the smallest portionof the spoils. Again did the Colonists cry toarms ; and again, and in a better cause, wereconquerors. Pythagoras* and his disciples fledbefore them, and the hall in which they assembledwas reduced to ashes.It is only a free city that is strong ; for it isonly in a free city that the mass of the peoplecan be armed.ASPASIA TO ANAXAGORAS.Men of powerful minds, although they nevergive up Philosophy, yet cease by degrees tomake their professions in form, and lay ultimatelythe presents they have received fromher at the feet of History. Thus did Hero-pythagoraswas a Prae-jesuit.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 151totus, thus did Hecataeus, and thus, let mehope, will Anaxagoras. The deeds of past agesare signally reflected on the advancing cloudsof the future : here insurrections and wrecks andconflagrations; here the ascending, there thedrooping diadem ; the mighty host, the mightierman before it ; and, in the serene line on thehorizon, the emersion of cities and citadels overfar-off" seas. There are those who know in whatquarter to look for them : but it is rarely totheir hands the power of promoting the good,or averting the evil, is entrusted. Yet, O Anaxagoras! all is not hideous in the past, all is notgloomy in the future. There are communitieswhere the best and wisest are not utterly castaside, and where the robe of Philosophy is noimpediment to the steps of men. Idly do oursages cry out against the poets for listeningthe heart and discovering the intellect. Meanwhilethey themselves are occupied in selfish152 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.vanities on the side of the affections ; and, onthe side of the understanding, in fruitless, frivolous,indefinite, interminable disquisitions.If our thoughts are to be reduced to powder, Iwould rather it were for an ingredient in a love-potion,to soften with sympathies the humanheart, than a charm for raising up spectres tocontract and to coerce it. If dust is to bethrown into our eyes, let it be dust from undera bright enlivening sun, and not the effect offrost and wind.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Philosophy is but dry bread : men will notlive upon it, however wholesome : they requirethe succulent food and exciting cup of Religion.We differ in bodily strength, in compactness ofPERICLES AND AS PA SI A. 153bone, and elasticity of sinew ; but we all aresubject to the same softness, and nearly to thesame distemperature, in the nobler animatesof the frame, the brain and blood. Thus it isin creeds : the sage and simple, the ardent enthusiastand the patient investigator, fall intoand embrace with equal pertinacity the mostabsurd and revolting tenets. There are asmany wise men who have venerated the ibisand cat, as there are who have bent their headsbefore Zeus and Pallas. No extravagance indevotion but is defended by some other toweringabove it ; no falsehood but whose featuresare composed to the semblance of truth. Bysome people those things are adored that eatthem; by others, those that they eat. Menmust rest here: superstition, satiated andgorged, can go no farther.The progression of souls is not unreasonable,the transmigration is. That we shall passH 5154 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.hereafter into many states of successive existenceis credible enough ; but not upon earth,not with earthly passions. Yet Pythagoras wasso resolute and so unguarded, that he assertedto himself a series of lives, here among men,by the peculiar and especial favour of the Gods,with a perfect consciousness of every change hehad undergone. Others became dogs, wolves,bears ; or peradventure men again ; but knowingas little of what had happened. Nevertheless,he pretended that these transmigrationswere punishments and rewards. Which is punished?the dead creature or the living? thecriminal man or the guiltless animal ? Some believethey can throw their sins into a fox : others(in Africa for instance) into a priest. Now thepriest may have received what he esteems anequivalent : the fox is at once a creditor and adebtor, with little hope, on either side, of indemnityor balance. It is only when you orPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 155Pericles were my audience, that I ever was inclinedto press hard against the inconsistenciesof philosophers. But we must trace things totheir origin where we can. The greater partof those now prevalent are ascribable to theschool of Samos. Numerals were consideredby the teacher as materials, and not only as thecomponents, but as the elements, of the world.He misunderstood his own theory : the reasonis, he made it his own by theft. The youngpersons who are hearers of the warier Socrates,catch at it in the playground, and the ill-compactedcake crumbles under their hands.Unfavorable as my evidence must appear,and is, I am fortunate in being able to lay beforeyou another and comelier representation ofa philosopher so enriched by genius. I havealways, in all companies, and upon all occasions,been sparing of my questions, and haveexerted the uttermost ingenuity I am master of,156 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.in drawing the truth on, without such an instrumentof torture. Probably I have lost byage a part of my dexterity, or presence of mind,or determination ; for Proxenus, at the close ofour conference, said aloud and sharply,You shall never make that out. I thinkhim a very honest mail ; and I think nobody anhonest man who thinks otherwise."Fair Proxenus !" I replied, " you are nowgreatly more than a philosopher. Some favoriteGod alone could have inspired all this enthusiasms''He grew instantly calm upon my compliment,and said with the most polite complacency,Well ! I am not a match for you Half-athenians; but read this little volume by my friendPsyllus of Metapontum ; it will open your eyes,I warrant it."Blessings upon it then !" said I, bendingPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 157over and taking it with due reverence ; " manyof late have done quite the contrary."Phyllis TO Lysander OF ELEA.On the Lawgiver of the Gauls.Pisander ! when last we met, I promised youI would make farther inquiries into the subject ofour conversation at thehouseof Euryalus, and thatI doubted not of success in attempting to provethe identity of Pythagoras and Samotes. Strange,that the idea should have occurred to no oneelse in the course of so many generations. Wasit not sufficiently clear for the follower of truth?or was it not sufficiently dark and intricate forthe lover of mystery and paradox ? I imagineit stot)d between both, at an equal distance fromthe road of each, and thus it was passed unnoticed.158 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.There is nobody then who can explain to mewhat was the religion of the Gauls at the timeof the Phocsean emigration. Samotes is recordedas their legislator. Legislation here includes,as it necessarily must in ages of barbarism,not only the civil institutions of thepeople, but likewise the religious. Yet neitherthe character nor the tenets, neither the periodnor the country, nor indeed the existence ofSamotes, have ever been ascertained. Ask thepeople who he was, and they will tell you thathe came to them over the sea, long ago. Computationof time, past and future, never occupies,never occurs to, the barbarian. It was long agothat the old tree, against which his cabin leans,sprang up ; long ago since the cabin was built ;long ago since he was a child. Whatever is notvisible to him, or was not, has feeble hold on hismemory, and never enters into his calculation. Aslawgiver of the Gauls, Samotes is acknowledgedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 159to have instructed them both in the ceremonyof human oblations, and in the creed of themetempsychosis : for these are mentioned togetherin the first opening of their history. Butit appears to me that the metempsychosis,which is generally held as the basis of druidism,is adventitious. We shall j&nd that this institutionis composed of two extremely different and obstinatelydiscordant parts. One, the result offerocity, varies but little from what exists in anearly state of most nations ; which diversitymay be accounted for, from their climate, theirwants, their habits, and pursuits. The other isengrafted on its savage stock, by the steddy butnot sufficiently impressive hand of a gentle andprovident philosophy. You ask me when ? bywhom ? One word will solve both questions :by Samotes ; by the man of Samos. Do youdoubt that he ever was in Gaul ? And do youthink it probable that, with his fondness for160 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.travelling, his alacrity in inquiry, he would haveresided many years in Italy, and have neveronce visited a country so near to him, a countryso singular in its customs, at least in the combinationof them, if such customs then existeda country on whose shores the most valiant ofhis own countrymen were landing? If at thisearly epoch the tribes of Gaul believed in themetempsychosis, would not sympathy, wouldnot admiration, have impelled him thither?But if, on the contrary, the doctrine did notprevail, who introduced it ? what author ofgreater weight? I am curious to learn hisname or his country. Perhaps by knowing theone, we may guess the other, since the ideas heimpressed and left behind him are stamped witha peculiar mark. It may be argued that, ableto inculcate lastingly, on the mind of his Gallickproselytes, a dogma which seems to have beenreceived but partially, and to have soon disap-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 161feared, where he lived in the full exercise ofauthority, he still was unable to abolish, as hewould wish to do, their sanguinary rites. Hewas : for it is easier to learn than to unlearn whatincessantly works and excites and agitates ourpassions. The advantages of the metempsychosiswere perhaps the most striking of anythat could be presented to warlike minds; towhich minds, you must have remarked, O Pisander,advantages will present themselves morereadily than disadvantages. Beside, the Druids,whom we cannot well consider at any time avery enlightened order, or likely to see everyconsequence, every contingency, had no directinterest in suppressing such a doctrine. Newcolonies were endeavouring to establish themselvesin their country; and colonies are theunfailing seed of wars. For, if they flourish,they require an accession of territory ; if theydo not flourish, they either turn out vagabonds162 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and robbers, * or employ violence to remove theobstacles that impede their industry. Somethinggreat then and something new was wanting,since the danger that impended was bothnew and great. Immolations before them onone side, and the sublime view of the metempsychosison the other, what could either shakethe confidence or rebate the courage of theGauls ? A new body was new armour, beautiful,strong, in which they would elude therage and laugh at the impotence of War. Itwas delightful to try other scenes of existence,to extinguish their burning wounds in theblood of their enemies, and to mount from theshields of their comrades into fresh life and glory.A religion thus compounded is absurd andcontradictory, but contradiction and absurdity inreligion are not peculiar to barbarians. Thesacrifice of a human victim was deemed themost solemn and important duty, and theyPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 163would rather abandon any other ceremony thanthis. They were savage ; we are civilized : theyfought, and their adversaries were to share theirimmortality : we fight to make others as abjectas ourselves. They had leaders of proud spiritwho raised them to the heavens : we haveheavy oligarchy who bend us to the earth.Rituals, in even the less ardent and intractable,are not soon, nor easily, nor all at once,resigned. We must cease then to marvel thatthe most impressive, the most awful, and perhapsthe most universal of devotions, humansacrifice, should not have been overthrown bythe declining years of Pythagoras. It is truehe retained his faculties to the last ; he retainedalso the energy of his mind ; but the voluntaryexile of Samos was purely a lawgiver in philosophy.His religion was not intolerant nor intrusive,but mainly adapted to the humbler164 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.offices of temperance and peace. Beyond this,little is known, and much is feigned of him. Itwould have been well if historians had relatedto us more of what he did, and less of what hedid not. If, instead of the story of his dying inabean-field, through horrour of its impurity,they had carefully traced and pointed out histravels, they would neither have mentioned hisvoyage to India,* nor have omitted his voyageto Gaul. The priests on the Nile were at alltimes well acquainted with their brethren onthe Indus and Ganges; and indeed I believethat all the great temples of the world havesecret communications. Do not lift up yourhands, my good Pisander ! not underground,not magical, but opened from time to time, inIf Pythagoras had visited India, the learned menwho accompanied Alexander would have enquiredafter him, and would have given the result.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 165cases of difficulty and danger, through confidentialagents.*All religions, in which there is no craft norcruelty, are pleasing to the immortal Gods ;because all acknowledge their power, invoketheir presence, exhibit our dependence, andexhort our gratitude. Therefore, let us neverbe remiss in our duty of veneration to thoseholy men, who not only manifest their goodwilltoward such as think and worship withthem, but also toward the stranger at the stepsof other altars. While orators and poets, andphilosophers too, are riotous and quarrelsome,malicious and vindictive. Religion leads to her-theuse of gun-powder, for instance, if not ofguns, was known to the priests in countries the mostdistant, and of the most different religions. The armyof the Macedonians was smitten by its lightningsunder the walls of the Oxydracians ; the army of theGauls under the walls of Delphi.166 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.self, and calls her own, the priests of all persuasions,who extend their hands one to anotherfrom a distance, unrestricted by jealousy andundefiled by blood.How great, O my friend, is our consolation,in the certainty that our prayers and sacrificesare accepted ! So long as the priests in ourcountry, and around us, live fraternally, let uslikewise be of the household. But if any devastatingreligion should spring up, any whichrouses strife and spreads distrust, any whichsunders man from man, that religion must berejected by the Gods as wicked, and renouncedby their worshippers as ineffectual. The-claimantsof such an imposition shall neverhave from me white flour or salt. Shouldyou question why the milder creed had littleeffect in Gaul ; why the golden rules are notvalued by the people as the precious relicks ofa departed master ; I reply that, in such a statePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 167of society, it was impossible to bring them bodilyinto use. The priests alone (and it is not everypriest who will readily sit down to be instructed)could profit by his knowledge of geometry, orwould apply to practice or speculation histheory of numbers. A few of them are notutterly ignorant of either ; and it is hence thatthe trickling may be traced. Men living in astate of barbarism and warfare would entertainbut small respect for injunctions to abstain fromany obvious and palatable food. Silence, forbearance,quietude, it cannot be expected shouldbe the inmates of a camp. Soldiers without regularsupplies (in which consists the main difficulty,and on which depend the main advantagesin the science of war) must subsist onwhatever they can seize ; and men without regulargovernment (by which I can intend noother than of magistrates chosen by the people)would, if we consider the bean as employed in168 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ballot, be ignorant of the lax and fore interpretation.As the fountains of the most celebrated riversare neither easily discoverable nor large, so itoften happens that things of the greatest moment,in the political and moral world, arederived from an obscure, fi'om a remote, andfrom a slender origin. I have given you myopinion on the cause of the supposition; buthaving heard another, however less probable,I will report it.*In the south of Italy, where Pythagoras resided,were several cities, Tarentum in particular,of Lacedaemonian foundation. One festival ofthis people, whose ancestors were distinguishedfor frugality, was nevertheless, even in the midstof primitive Lacedaemon, even in the bosom ofTemperance herself, deformed with foul excess.Qu. whether any author now extant, exceptingPhyllis in his epistle, mentions this.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 169It was called the Feast of the Nurses. Theycarried male infants to the Temple of Diana,and, after exposing themselves among the tentswhere the populace was assembled, fed themwith the entrails of swine, which had been sacrificed,and with figs, fetches, and beans. Theirmorals, we may believe, were not rendered moreaustere by the fertility and invitations of a deliciousclimate. At a distance from Targetsand Cithseron, they were (allow me the expression)beyond the latitudes of chill checkingbreezes fi'om the headlands of bluff morality;and the voice of the Sirens sounded in earssealed only to the call of reprehension and reproof.The hunter of Laconia would havesmiled to hear them imitate his shout, and tellthe trembling Sibarite, their neighbour, thatsuch were the shouts of Spartans. He wouldhave wondered that terrour should be excited inanother by that which excited only ridicule inVOL. IL I170 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.himself; he would have stared not a little at thestart from the couch, and the rustle of roses onthe marble floor.Pythagoras could not say, Abstain from thecity, abstain from the fellowship of the Valentine; it would have exasperated them againsthim ; but he might have heard related to himsome instance of sensuality which happened at thisfestival, and might have said briefly, yet significantly,abstain from beans. Ordinances haveoften been observed and commemorated far beyondthe intent and expectation of their founder.Certain it is that, formerly as at present, in thepopular states of Italy, the election and rejectionof magistrates were signified by beans ; andno less evidently was it the interest of the philosophicalstranger to dissuade his auditorsfrom the concerns of state. This, while it procuredtoleration and conciliated esteem, introducedthem to such habitudes of close reflection,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 171as withheld them from being the agitators, andfitted them to become, by just degrees, theleaders of the commonwealth. After all, if theypursued any other line of conduct, he at leastwould escape uncensured, and might completewithout juridical, or, what he would more havedeprecated, popular molestation, his scheme ofgeneral reform.Abstain from beans we have considered in amoral and political, but also in a religious pointit may easily be defended, from high authorities.However, I must express my doubts whether inthe lifetime of Pythagoras his followers abstainedfrom this article of food. Is it not probable thatthose who came after him took the letter forthe spirit, as we know it to have happened insome other doctrines, and within a century fromthe founder's death ? To abstain with rigourfrom things indifferent, (and from some indeedthey did abstain,) may not appear consistentI 2172 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.with the exercise of reason. Arrogant it maybethought in him who commanded, and infantinein those who obeyed. But, in the religionswhich have continued the longest, certain foods(it is said) are prohibited ; and the observanceof such prohibition is the moral cause of theirduration. He who will not obey in what is easy,will not obey in what is difficult : but the subjectsof these theocratical governments are everydayrefreshed with the exercise of salutary compliance.At the moment when a sense of dutyis liable to be extinguished in others, in them itis sure to be excited ; there is piety if they fast ;if they satisfy their hunger there is piety. Itappears to me, that the wisest and most provedent of oriental legislators are in nothing moreworthy of our esteem and veneration, than inthe ordinance of these prohibitions. Can weascertain what nations have, or what nationshave not, been cannibals ? Why does it revoltPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 173more strongly against our senses to eat a manthan to kill one ? The crime in itself is surelynot so great. Nature has fixed certain barriers,of which many seem fancifully chosen and arranged,against the irruption of our appetitesThere are animals never brought upon ourtables, although the flesh is said to be wholesome,and the flavour grateful. It is needlessto seek how first it happened that man violatedthe semblance of himself and of his Gods.Was it war, was it fanaticism, or was it famine,that impelled him to the accursed sacrifice?Pisander ! Pisander ! he had tasted the fatness ofthe lamb that he carried in his bosom : he hadtempted the fawn by caresses from afar t it hadlicked his hand, and he had shed its blood !Cannibals have been found where food wasplentiful : and the savage does not loathe for itsugliness the hugest serpent. There must besomething, and it must be in the brute creation.174 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.which he shall fear to consume for the impietyof the deed.The sacrifice of a human victim can only beperformed with the concurrence of prince ormagistracy. Of course Pythagoras could notoppose its consistently with his profession of abstainingfrom their concerns. Nevertheless hewas at liberty to introduce a doctrine which, asthe day of cultivation advanced, would underminethe pyre and release the victim. TheDruids were, and are, and always will be, barbarous.Their order has not existed long, andwill soon terminate, the Gauls being not onlythe most ferocious of mankind, but the mostsuspicious and acute; they are also the mostversatile, the most inconstant, and (what makessad work with solemnities) on the detection ofhalt or blemish, of irrepressible mimicry, of unquenchablederision. Those in the vicinity ofMassilia are free already from the furies ofPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 175fanaticism. Intercourse with the Tuscanss andLigurians has humanized them greatly, and thesofter voice of Ionia has now persuaded them,that the Gods can take us when they want us,without wicker baskets ; and that the harp anddance are as pleasant to them as the cries andagonies of dying men."Thus ends the epistle of Psyllus ; and at leastin the end of it I think we shall agree. Hiscomfits will sweeten my pomegranate.ASPASIA TO ANAXAGORAS.Whatever may be the partiality of your Massilianto Pythagoras, it is evident enough thatthe philosopher of Samos, possessing great acquiredintelligence, and gifted with extraordinarypowers of mind, was an intriguer and an imposePERICLES AND ASPASIA.tor. And truly, O Anaxagoras, it is much tobe desired that others now having were exemptfrom a certain part of such an imputation. Ourfriend Socrates, I am sorry to say, intimates tohis friends in private that he has a kind ofgenius always at his ear, who forewarns him inaffairs apparently the most indifferent. If weconsider it well, we shall be of opinion thatthere are few things so indifferent as they seemto us ; few, the consequence of which may not,visibly or invisibly, act with grave importanceon the future. But if a Genius, a superhumanpower, were to influence the actions of any man,surely it would be those which must necessarilyput in motion the levers and regulators of acommonwealth. We are all under the guidanceof a Deity if we will let him act on us ; but it isas easy to slip from under his guidance, as it isdifficult to escape from the penalties of ourerrour.Already there are some who are jealous of So-periclesAND ASPASIA. 177crates and his Genius; and who perhaps may try,hereafter, whether the Genius will help him toelude the laws. For novelties in religion, asyou know, are not held guiltless ; and a Geniusthat renders a man wiser or better is indeed aninnovator. As they cannot catch him, I fearthey may lay their hands upon our Socrates.ANAXAGORAS TO PERICLES.It is easier to answer the questions than thekindnesses of your letter. I will begin then.We have not two factions; aristocracy haskept aloof from Lampsacus. The people findthemselves so secure and comfortable under theancient laws, that they would no more hazardany innovation, than they would alter theircourse at sea when they were sailing with ai5178 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.favorable wind. They hardly can be broughtto believe that any nation hath abrogated twolaws in twenty or thirty years, or hath beenobliged by prosperity or adversity to enact somany in so brief a space of time. Miletus wasalways just to her colonies. She has foundedmore than sixty ; and not a single one has everhad reason to complain of her exactions or restrictions.All the great empires that have existedin the world, Chaldea, Babylonia, Media,Persia, all these taken together, have not sent outthe hundredth part of what has gone forth fromthe bosom of Miletus. Surely, of political glorythis is the highest : to rear carefully a numerousfamily, educate it honestly, protect it bravely,and provide for it plenteously and independently.Her citizens have more reason to be proud ofthis section in their polity, than some otherswho are much powerfully. Would not everymother wish to see her own features in herPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 179daughter? her own constitutional strength, herown character, her own prosperity ? What inconsistency,then, what folly, what madness, forthe metropolis to wish otherwise in regard toher colony ! Is the right arm stronger by renderingthe left weaker ? Gain we any vantage-groundagainst our enemy by standing on theprostrate body of our child ?To whom am I writing ? to Pericles ? yes, tohim; to the man who best knows that thestrongest reasons of state proceed from themouth of justice.And now let me loose again. Seldom have Iwritten, and never have I spoken, so long at atime on such a subject. Could you ever drawfrom me even an opinion on these matters, in acity where (excepting myself) you alone preservedin them your calmness, equanimity, andcomposure? Even Aspasia, who unites thewisdom of the heart to the wisdom of the PERICLES AND Aspasia.standing, and has more in both than any oneelse in either, was sometimes in perturbation atpoliticks, and sometimes in grief.A while since I sent her a dozen or more ofsuch verses as our young people, and otherswho should know better, are idle enough tocompose in the open air. My neighbour, Prox-ends,the Massilian, has been employed inmaking a collection from the gardens roundabout.The greater part, he tells me, are uponlove and flowers, dews and suns, stars andmoons, evenings and mornings, springs andautumns. He observes that summer is ratherout of favour with the poets; and that wherewinter is mentioned, he has often found thewhole composition scored across with a nail, orwith a piece of tile, or defaced in some otherway as nigh at hand. Proxenus is no poet, andtherefore it is the more amusing to hear himdiscourse on poetry.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 181I am sated with flowers," said he. " TheMuses ought tcukeep out of the market : if theymust come into it, let them not come as green-grocers.See, what a large proportion in mycollection is upon flowers and foliage, with hereand there a solitary turtle-dove, and a nightingaledeplorably belied. A few pious menindeed have written in reverence of the tutelaryGod, and have done all they could to repressthe licentiousness uf the young and thoughtless.The best inscription I have found among themisin the garden of Mnestheus ; and this perhapsis worth preservation rather for its grave admonitionand religious sentiment than its poetry."So far Proxenus. I do not remember whatwere those verses I sent to Aspasia ; there maybemore good sense in these.182 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.INSCRIPTION ON A PLINTH IN THE GARDEN OF MNESTHEUSAT LAMPSACUS.Youngsters ! who write false names, and slink behindThe honest garden-god to hide yourselves.Take heed unto your ways ! the worshipfulRequires from all upright straitforwardness.Away, away then subterfuge with him !I would not chide severely; nor would he.Unless ye thwart him ; for alike we knowYe are not childish than elder folk.Who piously (in doing ill) believeThat every God sees every man . . but one.ASPASIA TO ANAXAGORAS.The style of your Psyllus is, I presume,Massilian. He walks heavily through high-periclesAND ASPASIA. 183stemmed leafy flowers. Does he not deservenow this little piece of imitation ?Forbear to call it mockery; for mockery isalways rude and inhumane.Our friend Socrates has taken a wife. Inevery danger he has been thought singularlybrave ; and, if she is what she is represented,the action proves it. He retains his custom ofsitting in the porticoes, and beckoning topassers, and conversing on loveliness, and commendingequanimity, and driving the schoolmenmad. Yet among the Epithalamium, the cleverestis one which celebrates him for thequality most remote from his character. Thalesand Pherecydes and Pythagoras, and some fewmore, would really have made Philosophy domestick.Our epithalamium, intending nothingsatirical, tells Socrates (whom neither celibacynor marriage have detained at home, and whonever could resist an opportunity of wrangling.184 Pericles AND ASPASIA.while a sophist or a straw was before him) thathe first brought philosophy from heaven intoprivate houses ! I hope he will find her in hisown as often as he wants her : but if he is resolvedto bring her down into ours, such as wehave seen her lately, the city will be all in abustle with the double-bolting of doors.Let the archons look to it.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Pericles tells me that you are less tranquilthan you were formerly, and that he apprehendsyou are affected not a little by the calumnies ofyour enemies.If it is true that there can be no calumnywithout malice, it is equally so that there canbe no malice without some desirable quality toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 185excite it. Make up your mind, Aspasia, to paythe double rate of rank and genius. It is muchto be the wife of Pericles ; it is more to be Aspasia.Names that lie upon the ground are noteasily set on fire by the torch of Envy, but thosequickly catch it which are raised up by fame, orwave to the breeze of prosperity. Every onethat passes is ready to give them a shake and arip ; for there are few either so busy or so idleas not to lend a hand at undoing.You, Pericles, and myself, have a world ofour own, into which no Athenian can enterwithout our permission. Study, philosophize,write poetry. These things I know are difficultwhen there is a noise in the brain ; but begin,and the noise ceases. The mind, slow in itsascent at first, accelerates every moment, and issoon above the hearing of frogs and the sight ofbrambles.186 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.A pestilence has broken out in the city, sovirulent in its character, so rapid in its progress,so intractable to medicine, that Pericles, in despiteof my remonstrances and prayers, insistedon my departure. He told me that, if I delayedit a single day, his influence might be insufficientto obtain me a reception in any town, or anyhamlet, throughout the whole of Greece. Hehas promised to write to me daily, but he declaredhe could not assure me that his letterswould come regularly, although he purposes tosend them secretly by the shepherds, fumigatedand dipt in oil before they depart from Athens.He has several farms in Thessaly under MountOssa, near Silurian. Here I am, a few stadiafrom the walls. Never did I breathe so pure anair, so refreshing in the midst of summer. AndPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 187the lips of my little Pericles are ruddier andsofter and sweeter than before. Nothing iswanting, but that he were less like me, andmore like his father. He would have all mythoughts to himself, were Pericles not absent.CLEONE TO ASPASIA,Aspasia! I will not allow either the littlePericles, or the great one, or both together, topossess all your thoughts. Nay, your letter itselfcontradicts you. Cleon and the plaguemust intercept and divide them occasionally.Pestilences are maladies that rage with moreviolence than others, but, like all violent things,soon pass away. The worst effects of them arethe seditious, and other sad irregularities, thatalways burst forth when the banner of Death is188 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.unfurled in a populous city. But it is mostlythe intemperate that are swept away.Alas ! I must not dissemble the magnitudeof the danger; for I know your resolution, Imight say rashness. What I have written istrue ; but I am most afraid that you will notfear enough. Keep up your courage where youare ; do not exert it anywhere else.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Cleon ! Cleon ! if you could but see Athens,you would find it a ditch to throw all your dogmasinto. The pestilence has not only seizedthe intemperate, but, like that which Chaisesimprecated on the Greeks before Troy, smotenobler heads after the viler. Pericles himselfhas not escaped it. He refused to abstain fromPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 189appearing in the assemblies of the people, andamong the consultations to regulate (as far asmight be) the burial and burning of the dead.His temperance and courage, the most efficaciouspreservatives against contagion, failed atlength in the effect. The fever seized him, andalthough he has risen from his bed free from allsymptoms of the distemper, his strength is impaired,and many years (he tells me) seem tohave crowded into a few days.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Behold, O Aspasia ! I send you verses. Theycertainly are less valuable than some in yourcollection, but, to make up the difference, I inclosea cockle-shell.190 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.1.Beauty ! thou art a wanderer on the earth,And hast no temple in the fairest hieOr city over-sea, where Wealth and MirthAnd all the Graces, all the Muses, smile.2.Yet these have always nurst thee, with such fond,Such lasting love, that they have followed upThy steps thro' every land, and placed beyondThe reach of thirsty Time thy nectar-cup.3.Thou art a wanderer. Beauty I like the raysThat now upon the platan, now uponThe sleepy lake, glance quick or idly gaze,And now are manifold and now are none.4.1 have call'd, panting, after thee, and thouHast turn'd and lookt and said some pretty word.Parting the hair, perhaps, upon my brow.And telling me none ever was prefer'd.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 1915.In more than one bright form hast thou appear'd.In more than one sweet dialect hast thou spoken :Beauty ! thy spells the heart within me heard,Griev'd that they bound it, grieves that they arebroken.All this verbiage I found rudely scrawled ona stone-table, in the garden of my next neighbourArmenia. I perceive it to be of littleworth, by this; it has found an imitator, orrather a correspondent: yet, as he writesangrily, it may not be much amiss.These are scratched under the preceding.I have some merit too, old man !And show me greater if you can.I always took what Beauty gave.Nor, when she snatcht it back, lookt grave.Us modest youths it most beseemsTo drink from out the running streams :192 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Love on their banks delights to dwell . . .The bucket of the household wellHe never tugs at, thinking fit -Only to quench his torch in it.Shameless old fellow ! do you boastOf conquests upon every coast ?I, O ye Gods ! should be content(Yea, after all the sighs I've spent.The sighs, and, what is yet more hard.The minas, talents, gone in nard !)With only one : I would confineMeekly this homesick heart of mine'Twixt Larapsacus and Mammon's shrine.ASPASIA TO ANAXAGORAS.It is really odd enough that no temple oraltar was ever dedicated to Beauty. Vengeance,and other such personages, whom we, Anaxagoras,venture occasionally to call allegorical,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 193have altars enow, and more than enow of worshippers.Whatever, in your satirical mood, you maythink about the cockle-shell, I shall alwaysvalue it, as much nearly as the verses, and Ihave ordered it to be made into a clasp forthem. Taunt me then as often as you please.It will be like girls pelting with roses : if thereis any harm done, it is only to the fingers of thepelter.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Now the fever is raging, and we are separated,my comfort and delight is in our littlePericles. The letters you send me come lessfrequently, but I know you write whenever yourduties will allow you, and whenever men areVOL. II. K194 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.found courageous enough to take charge of them.Although you preserved with Utile care thespeeches you delivered formerly, yet you promisedme a copy of the later, and as many ofthe earlier as you could collect among yourfriends. Let me have them as soon as possible.Whatever bears the traces of your hand, is preciousto me : how greatly more precious what isimprest with your genius, what you have meditatedand spoken ! I shall see your calmthoughtful face while I am reading, and will becautious not to read aloud lest I lose the illusionof your voice.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Aspasia ! do you know what you have askedof me ? Would you accept it, if you thought itPERICLES AND ASPASIA, 195might make you love me less ? Must your affectionsbe thus loosened from me, that the separation,which the pestilence may render aneternal one, may be somewhat mitigated? Isend you the papers. The value will be smallto you, and indeed would be small to others,were it possible that they could fall into any handsbut yours. Remember the situation in which mybirth and breeding and bent of mind have placedme. Remember the powerful rivals I have hadto contend with, their celebrity, their popularity,their genius, and their perseverance. Youknow how often I have regretted the necessityof obtaining the banishment of Cimon, a manmore similar to myself than any other. I doubtwhether he had quite the same management ofhis thoughts and words, but he was adornedwith every grace, every virtue, and invested byNature with every high function of the soul.We happened to be placed by our fellow-citizensK 2 ^196 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.at the head of two adverse factions. Son of thegreatest man in our annals, he was courted andpromoted by the aristocracy : I, of a family noless distinguished, was opposed to him by thebody of the people. You must have observed,Aspasia, that although one of the populacemay, in turbulent times, be the possessor ofgreat power, it rarely has happened that he retainedit long, or without many sanguinary struggles.Moroseness is the evening of turbulence.Every man after a while begins to think himselfas capable of governing as one (whoever he maybe)taken from his own rank. Amidst all theclaims and pretensions of the ignorant and discontented,the eyes of a few begin to be turnedcomplacently toward the more courteous demeanourof some well-born citizen, who presentlyhas an opportunity of conciliating manymore, by affability, liberality, eloquence, commiseration,diffidence, and disinterestedness.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 197Part of these must be real, part may not be.Shortly afterward he gains nearly all the restof the citizens by deserting his order for theirs :his own party will not be left behind, but adheresto him bravely, to shew they are notashamed of their choice, and to avoid the imputationof inconsistency.Aspasia ! I have done with these cares, withthese reflections. Little of life is remaining,but my happiness will be cutaneous with it,and my renown will survive it : for there is noexample of any who has governed a state solong, without a single act of revenge or malice,of cruelty or severity. In the thirty-sevenyears of my administration I have caused nocitizen to put on mourning. On this rock, OAspasia! stand my Propylsea and my Parthenon.198 Pericles AND Aspasia.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Gratitude to the immortal Gods overpowersevery other impulse of my breast. You aresafe.Pericles ! O my Pericles ! come into thispurer air ! live life over again in the smiles ofyour child, in the devotion of your Aspasia !Why did you fear for me the plague within thecity, the Spartans round it? why did you exactthe vow at parting, that nothing but your commandshould recall me again to Athens ? Whydid I ever make it ? Cruel ! to refuse me thefull enjoyment of your recovered health ! cruellerto keep me in ignorance of its decline !The happiest of pillows is not that which Lovefirst presses ; it is that which Death has frownedon and past over.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 199CLEONE TO ASPASIA.It has been wisely said that Virtue hath onlyto be seen to be beloved : but unwisely, thatVice hath only to be seen to be hated. Certainit is that the more habituated we are to thecontemplation of a pure and placid life, themore do we delight in it. I wish it wereequally so that every glance at Vice loosened afeather from her plumage, and that on a nearerapproach and more stedfast observation shegrew hideous. Proofs to the contrary come beforeus every day.Cupolas and Mnesilochus and Calls andCravings, like most other authors, are indifferentto any result from their writings but popularityand emolument. And we are informed here atMiletus that several of your philosophers arenow employing a language, on the powers and200 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.provinces of love, far more seductive to thepassions of their youthful auditors than the mostindecent of theatrical ribaldry. For surely thereis little seductive in a boisterous jocularity,that seizes and holds down the hand from thepainfully blushing forehead, and forces the eyesto see what they would shun. Ionian manners,I am afraid, are as licentious as the Athenian :but ours are become so by our intercourse withthe Persians, the Athenian by theirs with thePhilosophers. It is only of late that such poisonousperfumery has had this influence on thebrain ; it is only since the departure of thesedate unostentatious Anaxagoras, that syllogismshave snapped their fingers at experiment.Against such men the arrows of ridicule arewell directed : but these arrows fall harmlesslyfrom flowing robes ; and indeed the purple dyeis everywhere a panacea.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 201ANAXAGORAS TO PERICLES.Thanks, O Pericles, for your provident careof me ! Provident do I say ? no, any thing butthat ; kind, generous, profuse ; but if you reallysaw the extent of my wants, you would onlysend me notice that you and those about youare well and happy.The fever which has broken out in your citywill certainly spare you if you reside in theAcropolis : and yet you tell me that you are resolvedon taking no such precaution, lest youshould appear to claim an exemption from thecommon peril.What prudent men were my enemies inAthens, to send me back hither ! they would notlet me live nor die among them !You have little curiosity to know any thingabout private men and retired places. Nevers202 PERICLES A>JD ASPASIA.tireless I will tell you and Aspasia what isLampsacus.Shrimps and oysters are the lower order ofthe inhabitants : and these, it is pretended, havereason to complain of the aristocracy abovethem. The aristocracy on their side contendthat such complaints are idle and unfounded;that they are well fed and well clothed, andthat the worst that ever happens to them is tobe taken out of their beds, and to be banded,marshalled, and embarked, in the service oftheir country. In few more words, we. all areeither fishermen or vine-dressers. I myself amachief proprietor : my tenement is small, butmy vineyard is as spacious as any about It isnearly a hundred of my paces broad : its lengthI cannot tell you, for in this direction it is toosteep for me to walk up it. My neighbourshave informed me that there is a fine spaciousview of the Hellespont and headlands from thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 203summit. I only know that there is a nobleGod, a century old at the least . . he who protectsour gardens and vines. An image of himstands either at the top or the bottom of everyavenue in the vicinity. He frowns in many ofthem ; yet, amid all his threats, there is in hisgood-humoured gravity something like a half-invitation.The boys and girls write verses underhim, very derogatory to his power anddignity. They usually write them, I understand,in one another's name; just as if hecould not find them out, and would not punishthem in due season. Enough of this : I havesomewhat less to say about myself. The peoplelove me, for I am no philosopher here, and havescarcely a book in the house. I begin to findthat eyes are valuables and books utensils.Sitting at my door, I am amused at the whistleof curlews, and at their contentions and evolutions,for a better possession than a rabble's ear.204 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Sometimes I go down, and enjoy a slumber onthe soft deep sands ; an unexpected whisper andgentle flap on the face from the passing breezeawakens me, or a startling plash from thecumbersome" wave as it approaches nearer.Idleness is as dear to me, reflection as intense,and friendship as warm as ever. Yes, Pericles !Friendship may pause, may question, may agonize,but her semblance alone can perish.My moon is in the last quarter, and my daysought now to be serene : they are so. Be yoursno less ; yours and Aspasia's !PERICLES TO ASPASIA.One true and solid blessing I owe to mypopularity. Seldom is it that popularity hasafforded any man more than a fallacious one.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 205Late wisdom, and dearly bought, is mine, Aspasia! But I am delaying your delight, at onemoment by the hurry of my spirits, at anotherby the intensity of my reflections. Our Periclesis Athenian in privileges as in birth. Ihave obtained a law to revoke a former one enforcedby me . . and felt no shame. If I couldhope that other statesmen would take examplefrom my faults, if I could hope that at anyfuture time they would cease to be operative,imperious, and self-willed, mistaking the eminenceof station for the supremacy of wisdom, Iwould entreat them to urge no measure inwhich might be traced the faintest sign ofmalice or resentment, whether in regard toparties or individuals. But alas ! the inferiorpart of man is the stronger : we cannot cut thecentaur in twain : we must take him as we findhim composed, and derive all the advantage wecan both from his strength and his weakness.206 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.I am growing the politician again, when Ishould be the husband and father.The odious law, the weight of which I drewupon my own heads is abrogated. The chiliis stated in every Life of Pericles that he obtainedthe enactment of it. This is incorrect. Thelaw was an ancient one, and required fresh vigour andvigilant observance at a time when hostilities wereimminent, and when many thousands were residing inthe city, who would otherwise have claimed a right tovote as citizens, while their connexions were to befound among the inveterate enemies or the secedingallies of Athens. Long antecedently to the administrationof Pericles, it appears that at a certain age theillegitimate were assembled at Cynosure, in thewrestling-ring dedicated to Hercules, who himselfwas in that predicament: and these alone enteredit. On which occasion Themistocles, his motherbeing a Thracian, gave the earliest proof of hisastuteness, by inviting some of unmixt blood andaristocratical lineage to wrestle with him. It is farPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 207drew of women not Athenian, are declared freecitizens. Many good men, many good mothers,have mourned the degradation of theirs throughmy severity.How dear, above the sweetest of Spring, arethe blossoms that appear in the less genialhours of winter ! how dear, above earth, aboveall things upon earth (Aspasia will pardon this,whether true or false) is our little Pericles !Am I dreaming when I imagine I see thisbeautiful boy, with Health and Hope besidehim, kneeling on the border of the tomb, andraising up from it a whole family, in longperspective ! We were gone, I thought, wewere lost for ever. The powerful father mergedfrom improbable that Pericles insisted the ratheron the execution of this law in opposition to Cimon,whose father, Miltiades, had married the daughter ofChorus, a prince of Thrace, and who himself wasdescended also from a ruler of that nation.208 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.his whole progeny in utter darkness ; an infantshall reclaim it.No longer is there a cloud upon my brow:no longer is there, I am apt to think, a pestilencein Athens.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Blessings on the generosity of the Athenians !blessings a thousand fold on the paternal heartof Pericles !O Pericles ! how wrong are all who do notfor ever follow Love, under one form or other !There is no God but he, the framer, the preserverof the world, the pure Intelligence ! Allwisdom that is not enlightened and guided byhim is perturbed and perverted. He will shed,O my husband, his brightest tints over ourPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 209autumnal days. Were we ever happy untilnow ? Ah yes, we were . . but undeserving.A fresh fountain opens before us, subject to nodroughts, no overflowing. How gladly, howgratefully, do I offer to immortal Love the firstlibation !Come hither, my sweet child ! come hithertomy heart ! thou art man, thou art Athenian,thou art free. We are now beyond the reach,beyond the utmost scope and vision, of Calamity.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Alcibiades is now grown up to the highestbeauty of adolescence. I think I should beenamoured of him were I a girl, and disengaged.No, Cleon ! the so easy mention ofhim proves to me that I never should be. He210 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,is petulant, arrogant, impetuous, and inconsistent.Pericles was always desirous that heshould study oratory, in order that it might keephim at home, gratify his vanity the most perfectlyand compendiously, and render himmaster of his own thoughts and those of others.He plainly told Pericles that he could learnlittle from him except dissimulation.Even that," replied Pericles, " is useful andnecessary : it proceeds from self-command. Simulation,on the contrary, is falsehood, andeasily acquired by the meanest intellect. Apowerful man often dissembles : he stands erectin the course of glory, with open brow but withbreath supprest : the feebler mind is ready totake refuge in its poverty, under the sordid garbof whining simulation."He then remarked to Pericles, that his oratorywas somewhat like his economy ; wantingin copiousness and display.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 211Alcibiades !" said my husband, " it is particularlythis part of it which I could wish youto adopt. In oratory, there are few who canafford to be frugal : in economy, there are fewwho can afford to act otherwise than frugally.I am a publick man, and it little becomes meto leave room for suspicion that, by managingill my own small affairs, I may be negligent inthe greater of the commonwealth. There arekingdoms in Thrace and Asia, where the caresof government are consigned to ministers orsatraps, and where it shall be thought honorableand glorious in one of these functionaries todie in debt, after managing the treasury. Butsurely there is in this no proof whatever that hemanaged it discreetly : on the contrary, there isa fair presumption that, neglecting his household,he left the community in worse disorder.Unquestionably he was a dishonest man, to incura debt beyond the extent of his estate. PERICLES AND ASPASIA.balance from accumulation in his own house,can hardly be deemed a merit by the most inconsiderate,in one who can unlock the treasuryto every relative, every friend, every associate,and every dependent. Such persons willgenerally be found to have been gamesters andprodigals, and to have entrusted the subordinatebranches of publick concerns to servants, as unfaithfuland improvident as those menials whoadministered their own : and the reigns of theprinces who employed them, if recorded at all,are recorded as prodigies of expenditure, profligacy,and disaster.Aristides died poor : but Aristides neverwas rich : he threw away nothing but his goodexample. And was his the fault there ? Hewas frugal, he was provident : every action heperformed, every word he uttered, will excite,inform, and direct, remotest generations. Thusindeed it cannot properly be said that, howeverPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 213now neglected, his example was thrown away.Like the seeds of plants which a beneficentGod hath scattered throughout the earth, althoughmany fail to come up in the season oftheir sowing, or soon after, yet do they not decayand perish, but germinate in the sterilesoils many ages later. Aristides will be forefatherto many brave and honest men not descendedfrom his lineage nor his country : hewill be the founder of more than nations : hewill give body, vitality, and activity, to soundprinciples. Had he merely been a philosopher, hecould effect little of this ; commander as he was,imperial Persia served only for a mirrour to reflecthis features from Attica on the world."Alcibiades, in several parts of this discourse,had given signs of weariness and impatience.Pericles perceived it, and reverted to Aristides.At every word that was now spoken he grewmore and more animated: at the close he214 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Sprang up, seized the hand of Pericles, and toldhim he would listen as long as he went on inthat manner.Speak to the purpose, as you have begunto do, and all about Aristides, and I shall likeyou better than Aspasia. I think, after all, Imay perhaps let you be my teachers** He saidthis laughing.My husband replied,I will not undertake it, Alcibiades ! PeradventureI may offer you, from time to time, alittle at once, some serviceable observations,some fruits of my experience : but it is only tograce and beauty that your restless intractablemind is obedient for an hour."Call me any thing, do any thing, or nothing,"said the youth, " if you will only giveme such a smile again."Go and ride into the country*" said myhusband, as he was rising. " If you retainPericles AND ASPASIA. 215your high opinion of me on your return, youwill find me at leisure to continue. I leave you,for the present, with Aristides."Away he went, without a word more to eitherof us. When he was out of the apartment,Pericles said, after a thoughtful and seriouspause,He is as beautiful, playful, and uncertain,as any har-tamed young tiger, feasted and caressedon the royal carpets of Persepolis : noteven Aspasia will ever quite subdue him."CLEONE TO ASPASIA.I shall never more be in fear about you, myAspasia ! Frolicksome and giddy as you onceappeared to me, at no time of your life couldAlcibiades have interested your affections. You216 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.will be angry with me when I declare to youthat I do not believe you ever were in love.The renown and genius of Pericles won yourimagination: his preference, his fondness, hisconstancy, hold, and will for ever hold, yourheart. The very beautiful rarely love at all.Those precious images are placed above thereach of the Passions : Time alone is permittedto efface them ; Time, the father of the Gods,and even their consumer.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Angry ! yes indeed, very angry am I : butlet me lay all my anger in the right place. Iwas often jealous of your beauty, and I havetold you so a thousand times. Nobody for manyyears ever called me so beautiful as Cleon;PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 217and when some people did begin to call me so,I could not believe them. Few will allow thefirst to be first ; but the second and third areuniversal favorites. We are all insurgentsagainst the despotism of excellence.Ah Cleon ! if I could divide my happinesswith you, I do think I should have much to giveyou. I would demand a good deal of your soundjudgment for it ; but you should have it. Weboth of us value our beauty, I suspect, less thanwe used to do, which is certainly wrong ; forwhatever we may be told, or may tell ourselves,we have rather a scantier store of it. However,we are not yet come to the last loaf in thecitadel.I did not see Alcibiades again, that day orthe following. When he came to me, he toldme he was ashamed of having said an uncivilthing.Of which are you ashamed ?" said I, " OVOL. IL L218 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Alcibiades ! for there were several not distinguishedfor courtesy."As usual, in good humour, which alwayspunishes me," said he. " But I remember Imade a rude observation on what lies withinyour department."Economy ?" said I.Before he could answer me, Pericles, informedthat Alcibiades had enquired for him,entered the apartment.I am glad you are come in," cried he ; " for,although I have taken two days to collect mycourage and words, I think I shall have moreof both, now you are present."He then began his apology, which Periclesthus interrupted.Be prepared for chastisement : I shall imposea heavy mulct on your patience. I shallrender an account to you of my administration,and I hope you will permit it to pass.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 219I have a son, as you know, in whose characterparsimony is not among the more prominentvirtues. I am unwilling to shock himby it, which is always apt to occasion a reboundto the opposite side: and I am equally unwillingto offer an example or pretext for luxuryand expense. My own character will permitneither. I never gave a splendid feast : I nevergave a sparing entertainment : I never closedmy dining-room to a man of elegant manners orof sound information. I have not the amplefortune of our cousin Cimon, who always usedit magnificently : and glad am I that I have itnot; for it would oblige me to receive manywho must disgust me, and who would occupymore hours of my leisure than I can spare. Mysystem of domestick life has produced me contentmentand happiness. May yours, my dearAlcibiades, whether like it or unlike it, do thesame !''L 2220 PERICLES AND ASPASIA."Thank you !" said he carelessly, and added,But your manner of speaking, which wefirst began to talk about, the other day, isproper only for yourself, In any other man itwould be ridiculous. Were I to employ it,people would believe I assumed the characterof Jupiter or Hermes walking among mortals.Aspasia's is good enough for me. Many thinkher language as pure and elegant as yours:and I have never known it enrage and terrifymen as yours does."Study then Aspasia in preference," saidhe. " You possess already some of her advantages.A beautiful mouth is always eloquent :its defects are but tropes and figures. Let ustry together which can imitate her best. Neitherof us hath ever seen her out of temper, orforgetful what argument to urge first and mostforcibly. When we have much to say, the chiefdifficulty is to hold back some favorite thought,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. '221which presses to come on before its time, andthereby makes a confusion in the rest. If youare master of your temper, and conscious ofyour superiority, the words and thoughts willkeep their ranks, and will come into action withalltheir energy, compactness, and weight.Never attempt to alter your natural tone ofvoice ; never raise it above its pitch : let it atfirst be somewhat low and slow. This appearslike diffidence ; and men are obliged to listenthe more attentively that they may hear it.Beginning with attention, they will retain itduring the whole speech : but attention is withdifficulty caught in the course of one.I am intruding a little on the province ofAspasia. If she approves of my advice, pursueit ; if she disapproves, be sure I have spokeninconsiderately, although I fancy I have observedsuch effects on several occasions."He ceased : I enforced as well as I could his222 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.admonition. But Alcibiades, with grace nearlyequal, wants his gravity ; and, if ever he shouldbe his successor in the administration of theRepublick, he must become so by other methods.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Proxenus is sailing back to Massilia. Beforehe left us, he collected a large cargo of Inscriptions,chiefly poetical. In Massilia these mattersare curiosities. The people, who cannothave them fresh, are glad to accept them dry,although, according to Proxenus, they are littleacute in relishing or distinguishing them.In his last conversation with me, he gaveevidence that, should he ever fail as a merchant,he hopes to make his fortune as a critick.Among his remarks was this.Pericles AND ASPASIA. 223I cannot for my life imagine why Zephyr issuch a favourite with the poets."I answered that we loans were always shyof him ; but that in other parts, and especiallytoward Gaul and Italy, he certainly was betterbehaved.Better behaved !" cried Proxenus. " Bythe Twins ! he hath split my sail more thanonce."To comfort him, I replied, " He has donethat with his best friends, O Proxenus !"And no longer ago," continued he, " thanlast Boedromion, he carried off my nether garmentthat was drying upon deck."Ah ! there," said I, " mischievous as he is,he could not do the same to them without homicide: few of them have one to spare."At the recollection of his superior wealthand dignity, he grew composed again. TheGods grant him a prosperous voyage ! Ere224 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.this letter shall reach Athens, he must be almostas far as Cythera. What labours andperils do seafaring men undergo ! What marvelsare ships ! They travel in a month farther thanthe fleetest horse can do; to such perfectionhave they been brought, and such confidence isthere now in human courage and skill. As therehath been little or no improvement in them forsome centuries, we may suppose that, contraryto all other inventions, the ingenuity of mortalscan do nothing more for them.I forgot to mention of Proxenus, what may-beit were better not to mention at all, that he isreported to have broken off the extremity of aleaf or two on some curious old vases, and aparticle of a volute* from a small column at the• One Eyes Irwin, who was not poor nor quiteuneducated, tells us in his Travels that he broke off avolute as a relick from what was called Pompey'sPillar. This happened so lately as the last century.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 225comer of a lane. Nothing can so distinctlyprove, say the Lampsacenes, that Proxenus hasafew drops of barbarian blood in him. GenuineGreeks may travel through all the world, andsee every vase, every column, every statue, worthseeing in its whole circumference, without athought of mutilation. Those people who cannotkeep their hands from violating the purestworks of ancient days, ought, if there are notWe are, it seems, about to remove from Egypt theobelisk named Cleopatra's Needle. Do we believethat Egypt is never to come to life again ? It maybesome hundreds, it may be some thousands of years :but these are to the glories of Egypt as pounds areto our national debt . . itself so glorious, and whichhas constituted our glorious men ! Are we sure thatthe Genius who created these eternal works, derivesno portion of his beatitude from the hourly contemplationof them, in the country where they were formedand fixed ?L 5226 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.too many of them, to be confined in separatecages, among the untameable specimens ofzoology.The Lampsacenes, you see by this, are notaverse to protect the Arts.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.I have found eight verses, of which I sendyou only the four last. So entirely do they expresswhat I have felt, it seems as if I myselfhad composed them.They who tell us that love and grief arewithout fancy and invention, never knew inventionand fancy, never felt grief and love.The thorns that pierce most deep are prestOnly the closer to the breast :To dwell on them is now relief.And tears alone are balm to grief !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 227You perhaps will like these better, Aspasia !though very unlike in sentiment and expression.1.Pyrrha ! your smiles are gleams of sunThat after one another rmiIncessantly, and think it fun.2.Pyrrha ! your tears are short sweet rainThat glimmering on the flower-lit plainZephyrs kiss back to heaven again.3.Pyrrha! both anguish me : do pleaseTo shed but (if you wish me ease)Twenty of those, and two of these.228 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Ships are passing and repassing through theHellespont, all hours of the day ; some of themfrom the Piraeus, urging the allies of Athens tocome forward in her defence ; others from thePeloponese, inciting them to rise up in arms,and at once to throw off allegiance.Would there be half this solicitude in eitherof the belligerents to be virtuous and happy,supposing it possible to persuade the one or theother that she might be, and without an effort?supposing it, in other words, to be quite as easyand pleasant to receive a truth as an untruth.Would these mariners and soldiers, and thosestatesmen who send them out, exert half theanxiety, half the energy and prowess, to eatingAND ASPASIA. 229guise the conflagration of a friend's house inthe neighbourhood, as they are exerting now tolay in ashes all the habitations that lie beyondit ? And such are brave men, such are wise men,such are the rulers of the world ! Well hathit been said by some old poet,Men let themselves slide onward by degreesInto the depths of madness; one bold springBack from the verge, had saved them . . but it seemsThere dwells rare joy within it !O thou SireOf Gods and mortals, let the blighting cloudPass over me ! O grant me wholesome restAnd innocent uprisings, although call'dThe only madman on thy reeling earth !230 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.It is well that you are removed from the city,and that the enemies of Athens pay respecteither to your birth-place or your wisdom, eitherto your celebrity or your confidence. I rememberthat, speaking of the human form and countenance,both as existing in life and representedin the ideal, you remarked that the perfectionof beauty is what is farthest fi'om all similitudeto the brutes. Surely then, in like manner,the perfection of our moral nature is in our remotenessfrom all. similitude to their propensities.Now the worst propensity of the worstbeasts is bloodshed, for which we pursue themas nearly as we can to extermination, but whichthey never commit with so little urgency, or toso great an extent, as we do. Until we bringourselves at least to an equality with them, wePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 23Jcan hardly be said to have made much progressin wisdom. It will appear wonderful, and perhapsincredible, to future generations, that whatare now considered the two highest gifts of man,oratory and poetry, should be employed, the onechiefly in exciting, the other in emblazoning,deeds of slaughter and devastation. If we couldsee, in the nature of things, a child capable offorming a live tiger, and found him exercisinghis power of doing it, I think we should say tohim,Vou might employ your time better, child !But then, Aspasia, we must not be oratorsnor poets, nor hope for any estimation in thestate. Beware how you divulge this oddopinion ; or you may be accused, as before, ofcrimes against the purity of morals, against thecustoms of our forefathers, and against theestablished and due veneration of the Gods.I hardly know what I am treading on, when I232 PERICLES AND Aspasia.make a single step toward philosophy. Onsand I fear it is ; and, whether the impressionbe shallow or profound, the eternal tide ofhuman passions will cover and efface it. Thereare many who would be vext and angry at this,and would say, in the bitterness of their hearts,that they have spent their time in vain. Aspasia! Aspasia ! they have indeed, if they areangry or vext about it.ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.We are now so near winter that there maynot be, after the vessel which is about to sail,any more of them bound for Athens, all theremainder of the year. And who knows whatanother may bring or take away ?I remain in health, but feeble. Life slips fromme softly and imperceptibly. I am unwilling toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 233tire myself by blowing a fire which must soongo out, whether I blow it or not. Had I anyspecies of curiosity to send you, were it pebble,sea-weed, or new book, I would send it; not(for it is idle to talk so) as a memorial of me.If the friend is likely to be forgotten, can webelieve that any thing he has about him willrepose a longer time on the memory ?Thus far I had written, when my strengthfailed me. Testicles and ApoUodorus havetold me I must prepare for a voyage. Theshore is neither so broad nor so stormy as theHellespontI was resolved not to go until I had lookedin my garden for some anemones, which Irecollected to have seen blossoming the otherday. It occurred to me that usually they appearin spring : so does poetry. I will presentto you a little of both ; for the first time. Theyare of equal value ; and are worth about as234 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.much as the pebble, or the sea-weed, or the newbook.Where are the blooms of many dyesThat used m every path to rise ?Whither are gone the lighter hours ?What leave they ? . . I can only sendMy wisest, loveliest, latest friendThese weather-worn and formless flowers.Think me happy that I am away from Athens ;1, who always lose my composure in the presenceof crime or calamity. If any one should noteto you my singularities, remembering me a yearhence, as I trust you and Pericles will do, addto them, but not aloud, a singularity of felicity," He neither lived nor died with themultitude" There are however some Clazo-menials who know that Anaxagoras was ofClazomenai.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 235ALCIBIADES TO PERICLES.You commanded me, O Pericles, that I shouldwrite to you, whenever I found an opportunityon land. Phormio cast anchor before Naupac-tus : we command the Gulph of Crissa, andcheck the movements of the Corinthians. Thebusiness of blockading is little to my mind.Writing is almost as insufferable : it is the onlything I do not willingly undertake when myfriends desire it. Beside, I have nothing in theworld to write about. We have done little butsink a few vessels and burn a few villages. Itis really a hard matter to find a table to writeupon, so quick and so complete is the devastationI fancied war had something in it moreanimating and splendid. The people of thePeloponese are brave, however, They sometimesask for their children, (if very young,)236 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.but never for their lives. Why cannot we thinkthem as little worth taking as they of giving ?I am heartily tired of this warfare; andPhormio has told me, in plain words, he isheartily tired of me. Upon this, I requestedhis permission to join without delay our armybefore Potidsea. I expected not only an uncivilrefusal, but a sharp rebuke.The Gods have begun to favor us !" criedPhormio. " This offer is better than theluckiest omen. Alcibiades ! thou art thewhitest of white birds ; and thy flight, whicheverwind it float upon, is worth a victory."I would have been angry ; but laughtersprang uppermost ; so, throwing my arms roundold Phormio's neck, I almost pulled him downwith it.How now, stripling !" cried he, as willingto be angry as I was, " All this buffoonery beforethe commander of the fleet !"PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 237ALCIBIADES TO PERICLES.Hardly could it have been expected that thewhitest of white birds should have been sospeedily on the wing. The day had not closedwhen Phormio told me, that, knowing myfickleness, he had given orders for my voyageback. Every voyage is prosperous that bringsme within sight of an enemy worth seeing.Brave fellows these Potidseans ! They neverlose their appetite, even in the greatest want ofair and exercise. You, who hear every thing,must know that they eat one another, ratherthan surrender. I have been but three days inthe camp, where, to my delight, I found thebrave and kindly Socrates. Do you disapproveof my renewing my intimacy with Philosophyin the midst of battles ? Let Philosophy thenstand aside ; and behold in her place the PERICLES AND ASPaSIA.fender of his country and the saviour of hisfriend.The morning after my arrival, the Potidaeansburst forth with incredible bravery from theirgates, overthrowing all opposition. Now wasmy time. The heavy-armed in general, being oldsoldiers, were somewhat slower ; and many ofthe enemy were assailing me when they cameup : nor indeed was it then in sufficient force.I was wounded and overthrown, and, at thebeginning, stunned : but presently I fancied Iheard the sound of a brisk sword on armourover me, and felt something heavy fall on mylegs. I was drawn forcibly from under the lastof my antagonists. Socrates raised me up, anddefended me from the weapons of not a few,unwilling to retire and irresolute to renew theengagement.I write now, because I am so wounded I cando nothing else.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 239PERICLES TO ALCIBIADES.You are courageous, my Alcibiades, to adegree which I hardly ever observed in another.This alone induces me to doubt whether youwill become, so soon as we both of us wish it,an accomplished and perfect soldier. To rushagainst the enemy before your comrades, is notindeed quite so unseemly as to lag behind ; yetit may be even more detrimental in an officer.With old troops, who know their duty, it isalways so : with younger alone, who want encouragement,it may not be. Socrates deservedthe first honours in the action : his modesty andhis affection transferred them to the imprudentand the vanquished, whom he rescued from theshame of rashness and the wretchedness of captivity.With all my fondness for you, I could nothave given you my vote ; and, had I commanded240 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.against Potidsea, I must have reproved you inpresence of the army.Never, O Alcibiades, inflict on me the miseryof passing so severe a sentence. I praised youbefore others did ; I condemn you after them.Your high spirit deserved its reward ; your temerityits rebuke. I, who have been the carefulguardian of your fortune, am the moreanxious one of your safety and of your fame.In my former letter I gave unobstructed wayto the more pleasurable emotions : and, inevery one that I shall have occasion to write toyou hereafter, I am confident of the same enjoyment.Reply to me, in those, as yourfriend, your comrade, the partaker of your painsand pleasures, and at most the director ofyour studies. But here, my Alcibiades, wemust be grave and serious: I must, for once,not guide, but dictate : no answer is here admissible,excepting the answer of a soldier tohis general.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 241ANAXAGORAS TO ASPASIA.Did I tell you, O Aspasia, we were free andremote from the calamities of war? We wereThe flute and the tyrrel and the harp alonewere heard along our streets; and the pavementwas bestrewn with cistus and lavenderand myrtle, which grow profusely on the rocksbehind us. Melanthus had arrived from theChersonese to marry Phanera; and his friendSosigenes had determined to be united on thesame day with her sister Eurycleia.Those who have seen them say that theywere the prettiest girls in the city : they werealso the happiest; but less happy than theirlovers, who however owed at present but a partof the happiness to either. They were swornfriends from early youth, and had not met since,but always had corresponded.Why cannot men draw a line against war asVOL. II. « M242 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.against plague, and shut up the infected ? Insteadof which, they are proud of being like thedogs in the worst feature ; rushing forth intoevery affray, and taking part in it instantly withequal animosity. I wish we had arrived at sucha degree of docility, and had advanced so manysteps in improvement, that by degrees we mighthope to acquire any thing better of these goodcreatures. We have the worst of every beast,and the best of none.This is not, O Aspasia ! my usual tone ofthinking and discoursing : nor is what has happenedhere among the usual occurrences of mylife. The generous heart needs little to be Remindedwhat are the embraces of young andardent friends ; and the withered one could illrepresent them.Eurycleia, in the silence of fondness, in thefulness of content, was holding the hand of herMelanthus. Love has few moments more sweet,Philosophy none more calm. That momentPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 243was interrupted by the entrance of Sosigenes ;and composure was exchanged for rapture bythe friendly soul of Melanthus. Yes, yes, Aspasia! friendship, even in the young, may bemore animated than love itself. It was notlong, however.Where is Phanera ?"I will call her," said Eurycleia, and wentout.Phanera, whether fond of ornament, I knownot, and ambitious to surpass her sister and enchanther lover, came not speedily, nor indeeddid Eurycleia very soon, for it was not at firstthat she could find her. Conversation hadbegun in the meanwhile about the war. Me-xanthuswas a little more vehement than themildness of his nature, it is said, ever allowedhim before, and blamed the Corinthians for incitingso many states to hostility. Often hadSosigenes been looking toward the door, 2244 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.petting his Phanera, and now began to growimpatient. The words of Melanthus, who feltthe cruelty of war chiefly because it would separatethe two sisters and the two friends,touched the pride of Sosigenes. Unable tomoderate his temper, now excited by the absenceof Phanera after the sister had some timereturned, he said fiercely,It is well to blame the citizens of thenoblest city upon earth, for not enduring anindignity. It is well ; but in slaves alone, orviler dependents."Sosigenes ! Sosigenes !" cried Melanthus,starting up and rushing toward him. At thatinstant the impetuous Sosigenes, believing violencewas about to follow affront, struck himvdth his dagger to the heart.'' I could not then calm thy anger with myembrace ! O too unhappy friend !" while theblood gurgled . through the words, sobbed forthMelanthiis,PERICLES AND Aspasia. 245Alcibiades TO PERICLES.Pericles ! I did wrong and rashly. Thepraises of the Athenians are to me as the humof insects : they linger in my ear, but are senselessand unexciting. I swear to you I will dobetter, but I must see you before I go.Aspasia, whose letter you have sent me since,is even more severe than you have been ; andshe has neither right nor reason. She is theonly woman upon earth that ever railed at rashness,the only one that could distinguish it fromfortitude. But every man must be rash once :it saves him from as much inconvenience andmischief as being oftener rash would incur.Do not consider this nonsense as vindicationor reply : let it not stand in the way of yourpardon.246 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO ALCIBIADES,Are you not ashamed, young man, to leavethe aged behind you, with all their wounds,merely to show how dexterous you are becomein the management of your sword ? UnworthyAlcibiades ! Do not expect that the Athenians,with all their levity and inconsiderateness, willaward to you the honour of superiority in valour.Socrates well deserved it ; not for saving a lifewhich on the next occasion will be thrown away,but for giving to every one capable of profitingby it, an example of steadiness and constancy.Pericles, I hope, will not allow you to disembark,until you have acquired the rudiments ofdiscipline, in the only art in which you everseemed likely to excell. Have you forgotten toothat the pestilence is raging in the city ? Orash Alcibiades ! the sight of Pericles himself,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 247to you at least, could hardly have been worth sodesperate a hazard. But Pericles will reproveyou, confident boy ! Let me hear no more ofyou until I have heard that he has granted youhis forgiveness.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Censure not too severely, O my Pericles,your inconsiderate cousin ! In these days, whenso many of your adherents are fallen, some bythe fever, some by war, we must be parsimoniousin the treasury of friendship, at all timesfar from inexhaustible.A hundred men of more wisdom and morevirtue than Alcibiades would prevail much lesswith the multitude, should any thing sinisterbefall you. May the Gods avert it! but I248 PERICLES AND Aspasia.always fear something; and, what certainly ismore foolish, I fancy my presence could avertfrom you any calamity. I wish I were persuadedthat the Immortals hear us : I wouldthen so perpetually pray for you as hardly togive myself time to read your letters ; and youshould quarrel with the shortness of mine. Butreason, which strengthens our religion, weakensour devotion. Happy are those who have retainedthroughout life their infantine simplicity,which nurses a tractable idol in an unsuspiciousbosom, is assured it knows and heeds the voiceaddressing it, and shuts it up again with a throbof joy, and keeps it warm. For this, the mindmust be nurtured to the last with the samemilky food as in childhood ; the Gods must havetheir tangible images, and must laugh to us outof ivy and flowers.Thinking of you, I had forgotten that I beganto write in favour of Alcibiades. Lest, by task-periclesAND ASPASIA. 249ing him with impetuosity and imprudence, youshould alienate his fickle mind, I myself havewritten to him with quite enough severity. Atleast I think so: you shall judge for yourself.When you have perused it, let it go to him instantly; for here we are uncertain at what pointthe troops will land from Potidaea. I shall begrieved if any thing happens to him. He hasmore life in him than is enough to animate acity ; yet the point of an arrow may extinguishit in an instant. With however long experiencebefore us, we yet might wonder that what is soanimated should ever cease at all. You menoften talk of glorious death, of death met bravelyfor your country. I too have been warmed bythe bright idea in oratory and poetry ; bit ah !my dear Pericles ! I would rather read it on anancient tomb than a recent one.M 5250 PERICLES AND ASPASU.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.I had already warned Alcibiades of his imprudenceand irregularity. Your letter willensure his correction. The reply he sent meis worthy of a man formed for command. Wemust watch over him : he will do great good orgreat evil. Those who are most capable ofboth, always end miserably ; for, although theymay have done many things well, yet the firstor second that they do badly is their ruin.They know not whom to choose as their followerup the scaling-ladder, nor when to loosen theirgrasp of the pinnacle. Intractable as you maythink Alcibiades, there is not a youth in Athensso easily led away by a weaker judgment than hisown. He wishes to excell in everything, andsucceeded : but this wish brings him into contactwith too many ; and he cannot at presentPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 251push them off far enough from him to seeplainly and distinctly what they are. He willsoon stand above them and know them better.I must leave off: the dying call me forth.Blessings on my Aspasia, and her little Athenian!ASPASIA TO CLEONE.The verses I shall presently write out foryou, at the bottom of my letter, are composed,as you will perceive, in the broadest Dorian,on the extraordinary death of Eschylus. Probablythe unhappy poet was murdered by someenemy or some robber. He was found with hisskull fractured, and, it may be, with a tortoisenear him. But who in the world can believethat an eagle dropped it from above ? that thequickest in sight of all animals mistook a baldPERICLES AND ASPASIA.head for a rock ? And did ever man walk inthe fields of Sicily with his head uncovered?If he did, his death might easily be accountedfor, without a tortoise or eagle. Whenever Ifind a book containing this gross absurdity, Iinstantly throw it aside, as the effusion of anidle and silly writer, and am well assured itmust be incapable of instructing or interestingme.The petulant author of the verses you willfind below, is evidently a disappointed poet.Hero and Thereon could never treat Eschyluswith neglect or with indifference. Little asmay be our regard and our respect for royalty,we hardly can suppose any king, who knowsGreek, so barbarous and stupid, as to fancy inhimself a nobility more exalted than in Aeschylus,or gifted by the Gods with a higher office,than stewardship to the greatest of men amongwhom he himself is the richest.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 2531.Bard of Eleusis ! art thou deadSo strangely ! can it beAn eagle dropt upon thy headA tortoise ? no , not he.2.They Who devised the fable, marr'dThe moral of their song :They meant the eagle, by the bard.But placed the creature wrong.3.Quickest in courts those ever moveWhom nature made most slow :Tortoise wears plumes and springs aboveWhile eagle mounts below.ALCIBIADES TO PERICLES.Pray why did you tell Phanomachus to stationsome confidential one near me, who should be234 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.an eternal check on me ? There is littlechance that I should do any thing extravagant,unless the Potidseans invite me to dinner andI accept the invitation. I will not allow anyman to defend me before I stand in need ofdefence, and before I have deserved to save mylife by proving it worth something. I shouldquarrel with Socrates himself, much more withanother, presuming to take what belongs tome,of danger or of glory. It is not kindin you, nor open, nor prudent. Would youwish any one to say, " Pericles takes care ofhis own relatives !" This ought only to besaid of the vilest men in the worst governments;and of you until now it never couldbe. You have given no such orders in regardto Xanthippus. He may be as rash and violentas he pleases. Even here he dares to call meNeaniskos and Kouridion and Ta paidika.*This expression was usually reproachful; notalways; as we see in Plato.rJERICLES AND ASPASIA. . 256By Castor ! if he were not the son of Pericles,his being my cousin should not save from astroke of the sabre that fierce disdainful visage.I promise you it shall soon be seen which ofus is the braver and the better man. I wouldnot say this to you unless that you might lethim know my sentiments. I have no words,written or spoken, for the contumelious : mycomplaints are for the ear of those only whoare kind to me.PERICLES TO ALCIBIADES.Do not think, my Alcibiades, that I recommendedyou to the guardianship of Phanoma-chus, in order that he should exercise over youa troublesome vigilance of controul, or indulgetoward you an unmilitary partiality. But Iam more intimate with him than I am with256 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Xenophon or Aristophanes or Cassiodorus ;'^ andhaving sons, he knows that restraints are oftennecessary on the impatience of military ardour.Your letter is a proof that I judged rightly.My praises of your valour are lost amidst thoseof the army and of the city ; but the delight ithas given me is, I am confident, one among thethoughts that have assuaged your wounds. Onyour return, the citizens will express their senseof your conduct.Endeavour to prove, now that you are acknowledgedto be the first in bravery, that you aremore discreet than Xanthippus. Many in everyarmy are so nearly on an equality in courage, thatany attempt of theirs to show a superiority isineffectual. Unbecoming language can neitherprove nor disprove it, but must detract from itsworth and merit. Discretion, on the contrary,is the sure sign of that presence of mind without♦ These three were appointed to commands withPhanomachus.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 257which valour strikes untimely and impotently.Judgement alone makes courage available, andconciliates power with genius. Consider thatyou never will have attained the scope of yourambition, until you lead and govern those menagainst whom your passions now exasperateyou : and, unless you do conciliate them, younever can induce them to acknowledge yoursuperiority, much less submit to your governance.It is best the germs of power shouldspring forth early, that they may have timeenough for gaining strength : therefore I writeto you, no longer as a youth in pupilage, butas a candidate for the highest offices of thecommonwealth.Try whether your forbearance may not producea better effect on Xanthippus than my remonstrances.I write to you rather than tohim, because I rely more firmly on your affection.Be worthy of such a secret, O Alci-258 Pericles AND ASPASIA.blades ! and think how highly I must esteemyour prudence and manliness, when I delegateto you, who are the younger, the power of correctingin him the faults which I have beenunable to eradicate or suppress. Go, and, inthe spirit with which I send it, give my love toXanthippus. He may neglect it, he may despiseit, he may cast it away, but I will gatherit all up again for him : you must help me.ALCIBIADES TO PERICLES.Pericles, I was much edified by your letter ;but, pardon me, when I came to the close of itI thought you rather mad.« What !" said I, "beard this panther !"However, when I had considered a little moreand a little better on it, I went to him and deliveredyour love. He stared at me, and thenPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 239desired to see the direction. " Ay," said he,I remember the handwriting. He oftenerwrites to me than I to him. I suppose he hasless to do and less to think of."The few other words he added are hardlyworth the trouble of repetition. In fact, theywere not very filial. Dear Pericles ! I wouldlove him, were it only out of perversity. But,beside all other rights over me, you have mademe more disposed than ever to obey you, inmaking me more contented with myself, as youhave by this commission. I may do somethingyet, if we can but fumigate or pray away theplague. Of two thousand four hundred soldiers,who landed but forty days before me, from theBosphorus, under the command of Anon, sonof Nicias, one thousand and fifty are alreadydead. I shall have nobody to persuade or manage,or even to fight with, if we go on so.260 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ALCIBIADES TO PERICLES.Potidaea has surrendered. The dead of thecity are scarcely more shadows than the living,and yet how bravely they fought to the last. Ishould have been sorry for them a few monthsago ; but I have now learned what it is to be asoldier. We must rise superior to pain, andthen take another flight, farther afield, andrise superior to pity. Beside, the Potidaeanswere traitors ; and next, they were against us :and furthermore, they were so wicked as to eatone another, rather than submit. This showstheir malice. Now we have done nothing halfso bad toward them ; and I assure you, if othersare disposed to such cruelty, I will take no partin it. For who would ever kiss me afterward?PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 261PERICLES TO ALCIBIADES.The remembrance of past days that werehappy, increases the gloominess of those thatare not, and intercepts the benefits of thosethat would be.In the midst of the plague this reflectionstrikes me, on the intelligence I have receivedfi'om Lampsacus. You likewise will be sorry,O Alcibiades, to hear that Anaxagoras is dying.Although he seldom conversed with you, andseldom commended you in private, yet, believeme, he never omitted an occasion of pointingout to your friends any sign you had manifestedof ability or virtue. He declined the characterof teacher, yet few have taught so much, whereverhis wisdom was accessible. Philosophersthere have been indeed, at Athens and elsewhere,earnest in the discovery and in the PERICLES AND ASPASIA.termination of truth ; but, excepting Thales andPherecydes, none among them has been freefrom ostentation, or from desire of obtainingthe absolute and exclusive possession of weakand ductile minds. Now the desire of greatinfluence over others is praiseworthy only wheregreat good to the community may arise from it.To domineer in the arbitrary sway of a dogmaticaland grasping, yet loose and empty-handedphilosophy, which never bears upon inventionsand uses, nor elevates nor tranquilizes the mind ;and to look upon ourselves with a sweet complacencyfrom so petty an eminence, is worsethan boyish ambition. To call idlers andstragglers to us, and to sit among them and regaleon their wonder, is the selfishness of anindigent and ill-appointed mind. Anaxagoraswas subject to none of these weaknesses, nor tothe greater of condescending to reprove, or toargue with, those who are. He made every duePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 263allowance for our infirmities of understanding,and variations of temper, the effect of them;and he was no less friendly toward those whodiffered widely in opinion from him, than towardthose who quite agreed. When a friend of hiswas admiring and praising him for it, he interruptedhim, saying,Why not? Is it not too self-evident forlanguage, that, if I had taken the same road, Ishould have gone in the same direction? andwould not the same direction have led to thesame conclusion ?"Yes, Alcibiades ! it is indeed self-evident,and, were it spoken unwarily, it would be reprehendedfor being so : and yet scarcely oneman in ten millions acts consistently upon it.There are humanities, my friend, which requireour perpetual recollection, and are needfulto compensate, in some measure, for those manyothers we must resign, to the necessities andexactions of war.I264 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Serene and beautiful are our autumnal daysin Thessaly. We have many woods about us,and many woodland sounds among them. Inthis season of the year I am more inclined topoetry than in any other ; and I want it nowmore than ever to flow among my thoughts, andto bear up the heavier.I hesitate, O Cleon, to send you what I havebeen writing. You will say it is a strange fancyof mine, and fitter for me in those earlier hoursof life, when we were reposing in the Island.Nothing, I must confess, would be more ill-placedthan a Drama or Dialogue in the worldbelow ; at least if the Shades entered into captiousdisquisitions or frivolous pleasantries. Butwe believe that our affections outlive us, andthat Love is not a stranger in Elysium.Humours, the idioms of life, are lost in the traj:!-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 265siphon, or are generalized in the concourse andconvergency of innumerable races : passions, theuniversal speech, are throughout intelligible.The Genius of Homer is never to be gainsaidby us : and he shews us how heroes, and womenworthy of heroes, felt and reasoned. A longdialogue, a formal drama, would be insupportable: but perhaps a single scene may win attentionand favour from my own Cleon.I imagine then Agamemnon to descend fromhis horrible death, and to meet instantly hisdaughter. By the nature of things, by the suddennessof the event, Iphigeneia can have heardnothing of her mother's double crime, adulteryand murder.I suspend my pen. Although I promisedyou, in the morning, my short Acherusianscene, I am almost ready to retract my words.Everybody has found out that I am deficient intenderness. While I was writing, I could notVOL. II. N266 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.but shed tears . . just as priests do libations,you will say, to save other people the trouble.THE SHADES OF AGAMEMNON AND OFIphigenia.Iphigenia.Father ! I now may lean upon your breast,And you with unreserved eyes will graspIphigeneia's hand.We are not shadesSurely ! for yours throbs yet.And did my bloodWin Troy for Greece ?Ah ! 'twas ill done, to shrink ;But the sword gleam'd so sharp ; and the good priestTrembled, and Pallas frown'd above, severe.AGAMEMNON.Daughter !Iphigenia.Beloved father ! is the bladeAgain to pierce a bosom now unfitPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 267For sacrifice? no blood is in its veins.No God requires it here ; here are no wrongsTo vindicate, no realms to overthrow.You standing as at Aulis in the fane.With face averted, holding (as before)My hand ; but yours burns not, as then it burn'd ;This alone shews me we are with the Blest,Nor subject to the sufferings we have borne.I will win back past kindness.Tell me then.Tell how my mother fares who loved me so.And griev'd, as 'twere for you, to see me part.Frown not, but pardon me for tarryingAmid too idle words, nor asking howShe prais'd us both (which most?) for what we did.AGAMEMNON.Ye Gods who govern here ! do human pangsReach the pure soul thus far below ? do tearsSpring in these meadows ?Iphigenia.No, sweet father, no . .I could have answered that ; why ask the Gods ?n2268 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.AGAMEMNON.Iphigeneia ! O my child ! the EarthHas gendered crimes unheard-of heretofore,And Nature may have changed in her last depthsTogether with the Gods and all their laws.Iphigenia,Father ! we must not let you here condemn ;Not, were the day less joyful : recollectWe have no wicked here ; no king to judge.Poseidon, we have heard, with bitter rageLashes his foaming steeds against the skies.And, laughing with loud yell at winged fire.Innoxious to his fields and palacesAffright the eagle from the sceptred hand ;While Pluto, gentlest brother of the threeAnd happiest in obedience, views sedateHis tranquil realm, nor envies theirs above.No change have we, not even day for nightNor spring for summer.All things are serene,Serene too be your spirit ! None on earthEver was half so kindly in his house.PERICLES AND ASPASIA.And so compliant, even to a child.Never was snatcht your robe away from me.Though going to the council. The blind manKnew his good king was leading him indoors.Before he heard the voice that marshal'd Greece.Therefore all prais'd you.Proudest men themselvesIn others praise humility, and mostAdmire it in the scepter and the sword.What then can make you speak thus rapidlyAnd briefly ? in your step thus hesitate ?Are you afraid to meet among the goodIncestuous Helen here ?AGAMEMNON.Oh! Gods of Hell!Iphigenia.She hath not past the river.We may walkWith our hands links nor feel our house's shame.AGAMEMNON.Never mayst thou, Iphigeneia ! feel it !270 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Aulis had no sharp sword, thou wouldst exclaim,Greece no avenger . . I, her chief so late.Through Erebus, through Elysium, writhe beneath it.Iphigenia.Come ; I have better diadems than thoseOf Argos and Mycenae . . come away.And I will weave them for you on the bank.You will not look so pale when you have walkedA little in the grove, and have told allThose sweet fond words the widow sent her child,AGAMEMNON.Oh Earth ! I suffered less upon thy shores !CAside.JThe bath that bubbled with my blood, the blowsThat spilt it (O worse torture !) must she know ?Ah ! the first woman coming from MycenaeWill pine to pour this poison in her ear.Taunting sad Charon for his slow advance.Iphigeneia !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. *271Iphigenia.Why thus turn away ?Calling me with such fondness ! I am here.Father ! and where you are, will ever be.AGAMEMNON.Thou art my child . . yes, yes, thou art my child.All was not once what all now is ! Come on.Idol of love and truth ! my child ! my child !(Alone,)Fell woman ! ever false ! false was thy lastDenunciation, as thy bridal vow ;And yet even that found faith with me ! The dirkWhich sever'd flesh from flesh, where this hand rests.Severs not, as thou boasted in thy scoffs,Iphigeneia's love from Agamemnon :The wife's a spark may light, a straw consume.The daughter's not her heart's whole fount hathquench,'Tis worthy of the Gods, and lives for ever.272 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Iphigenia.What spake my father to the Gods above ?Unworthy am I then to join in prayer ?If, on the last, or any day before.Of my brief course on earth, I did amiss.Say it at once, and let me be unblest ;But, O my faultless father ! why should you ?And shun so my embraces ?Am 1 wildAnd wandering in my fondness ?We are shades ! !Groan not thus deeply ; blight not thus the seasonOf full-orb'd gladness ! Shades we are indeed.But mingled, let us feel it, with the blest.I knew it, but forgot it suddenly,Altho' I felt it all at your approach.Look on me ; smile with me at my illusion . .You are so like what you have ever been(Except in sorrow !) I might well forgetI could not win you as I used to do.It was the first embrace since my descentI ever aim'd at : those who love me live.Save one, who loves me most, and now would chide me.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 273AGAMEMNON.We want not, O Iphigeneia, weWant not embrace, nor kiss that cools the heartWith purity, nor words that more and moreTeach what we know, from those we know, and sinkOften most deeply where they fall most light.Time was when for the faintest breath of thineKingdom and life were little.Iphigenia.Value themAs little now.AGAMEMNON.Were life and kingdom all !Iphigenia.Ah ! by our death many are sad who loved us.They will be happy too.Cheer ! king of men !Cheer ! there are voices, songs . . Cheer ! arms advance.n5274 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.AGAMEMNON.Come to me, soul of peace ! These, these alone.These are not false embraces.Iphigenia.Both are happy !AGAMEMNON.Freshness breathes round me from some breeze above.What are ye, winged ones ! with golden urns ?THE HOURS(Descending.)The Hours . . To each an urn we bring.Earth's purest goldAlone can holdThe lymph of the Lethe spring.We, son of Atreus ! we divideThe dulcet from the bitter tideThat runs athwart the paths of men.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 275No more our pinions shalt thou see.Take comfort ! We have done with thee,And must away to earth agen.(Ascending.)Where thou art, thouOf braided brow !Thou cull'd too soon from Argive bow'rs !Where thy sweet voice is heard amongThe shades that thrill with choral song.None can regret the parted Hours.CHORUS OF Arrives.Maiden ! be thou the spirit that breathesTriumph and joy into our song !Wear and bestow these amaranth wreathes,Iphigeneia ! they belongTo none but thee and her who reigns(Less chaunted) on our bosky plains,SEMICHORUS.Iphigeneia ! 'tis to theeGlory we owe and victory.27^ PERICLES AND ASPASIA,Clash, men of Argos, clash your armsTo martial worth and virgin charms.OTHER SEMICHOBUS.Ye men of Argos ! it was sweetTo roll the fruits of conquest at the feetWhose whispering sound made bravest hearts beat fast.This we have known at home ;But hither we are comeTo crown the king who ruled us first and last.CHORUS.Father of Argos ! king of men !We chaunt the hymn of praise to thee.In serried ranks we stand agen.Our glory safe, our country free.Clash, clash the arms we bravely boreAgainst Salamander's God-defended shore.SEMICHORUS.Blessed art thou who hast repelledBattle's wild fury. Ocean's whelming foamBlessed o'er all, to have beheldWife, children, house avenged, and peaceful home !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 277OTHER SEMICHORUS.We too, thou seest, are nowAmong the happy, though the aged browFrom sorrow for us we could not protect.Nor, on the polish granite of the wellFolding our arms, of spoils and perils tell.Nor lift the vase on the lov'd head erect.SEMICHORUS.What whirling wheels are those behind ?What plumes come flaring through the wind.Nearer and nearer ? From his carHe who defied the heaven-born Powers of warPetites springs ! But dust are weTo him, O king, who bends the mailed knee.Proud only to be first in reverent praise of thee.OTHER SEMICHORUS.Clash, clash the arms ! None other raceShall see such heroes face to face.We too have fought ; and they have seenNor sea-sand grey nor meadow greenWhere Dardan stood against their men . .Clash ! lo Paean ! clash agen !278 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Repining for lost days repress . .The flames of Troy had cheer'd us less.CHORUS.Hark ! from afar more war-steeds neigh.Thousands o'er thousands rush this way.Ajax is yonder ! ay, beholdThe radiant arms of Lycian gold !Arms from admiring valour won,Tydeus ! and worthy of thy son.'Tis Ajax wears them now ; for heRules over Adrian's stormy sea. ^He threw them to the friend who lost(By the dim judgement of the host)Those wet with tears which Thetis gaveThe youth most beauteous of the brave.In vain ! the insatiate soul would goFor comfort to his peers below.Clash ! ere we leave them all the plain.Clash ! lo Paean ! once again !Hide these things away, Cleon ! I darenever show them to any but Pericles. I canPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 279reach no further than a chorus; hardly that.Tragedy is quite above me : I want the strength,the pathos, the right language. Fie ! when thereare so many who would teach me. Concede,that the shades were not happy at once in Elysium; and that the Hours are not more shadowythan they. Eschylus brings into our world Beingsas allegorical : and where shall we fix aboundary between the allegorical and divine ?ASPASIA TO CLEONE.You build your nest, Aspasia, like the swallow.Bringing a little on the bill at once.And fixing it attentively and fondly.And trying it, and then from your soft breastWarming it with the inmost of the plumage.Nests there are many, of this very yearMany the nests are, which the winds shall shake.The rains run thro', and other birds beat down ;Yours, O Aspasia ! rests against the templeOf heavenly Love, and thence inviolate.It shall not fall this winter nor the next.280 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.The Lacedaemonianss, we hear, have occupiednot only all Attica, but are about to enter, ifthey have not entered already, the territory oftheir confederates, the Thebes, and to jointheir forces. Whither will you go, my Aspasia?Thessaly is almost as perilous as Boeotia. It isworse than criminal to be so nearly allied tothe greatest man on earth, who must alwayshave the greatest enemies. There are morewho will forgive injury than there are who willforgive station: and those who assail in vainthe power of Pericles, will exert their abilitiesin diminishing his equanimity and happiness.I fear your fondness will have induced youagain to enter the city, that you may assuageand divide those cares which must weigh heavilyon his wisdom and patriotism; and the more,since his health has been undermined by thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. '281pestilence. I dare not advise you to forego aduty : but remember he has commanded you toremain away. Your return would afflict him.I am quite incapable of judging for you. WereI with you, then perhaps I might know manythings which should influence your decision.And can two years have passed over sincethis evil entered your city, without my flying tocomfort you ? Two years have indeed passedover; but my house too has had its days ofmourning. The prayers of my father wereheard : he died contentedly, and even joyfully.He told me he had implored of the Gods thatthey would bestow on me a life as long andhappy as his own, and was assured they would.Until we have seen some one grow old, ourexistence seems stationary. When we feelcertain of having seen it (which is not early)the earth begins a little to loosen from us.Nothing now can detain me at Miletus, although282 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.when I have visited you I shall return. Youmust return with me, which you can do fromany region but Attica. Pericles will not refuse,for you have already conciliated me his favour.In the meanwhile, do not think yourself boundby the offices of humanity, to bestow those careson others which are all required for your ownfamily. Do not be so imprudent as to let themost intimate of your friends persuade you tovisit them. You have a child, you have a husband,and, without your presence, you possessthe means of procuring every human aid for theinfected. O that I were with you ! to snatchyou away from the approach of the distemper.But I sadly fear I should grow hard-heartedtoward others, in your danger.I must be with my Aspasia ; and very soon.O Athens ! Athens ! are there not too manyof the dead within thy walls already ? and arenone there who never should have been ?*This seems to refer to Xeniades.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 283PERICLES TO ASPASIA.The pestilence has taken from me both my sons.You, who were ever so kind and affectionate tothem, will receive a tardy recompence, in hearingthat the least gentle and the least gratefuldid acknowledge it.I mourn for Paratus, because he loved me ;for Xanthippus, because he loved me not.Preserve with all your maternal care our littlePericles. I cannot be fonder of him than Ihave always been; I can only fear more forhim.Is he not with my Aspasia? What fearsthen are so irrational as mine ? But oh ! I amliving in a widowed house, a house of desolation! I am living in a city of tombs andtorches ! and the last I saw before me were formy children.284 PERICLES AND A SPA SI A.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.It is right and orderly, that he who haspartaken so largely in the prosperity of theAthenians) should close the procession of theircalamities* The fever that has depopulated ourcity, returned upon me last night, and Hippocratesand Acron tell me that my end is near.When we agreed, O Aspasia, in the beginningof our loves, to communicate our thoughts bywriting, even while we were both in Athens,and when we had many reasons for it, we littleforesaw the more powerful one that has renderedit necessary of late. We never can meet again.The laws forbid it, and love itself enforcesthem. Let wisdom be heard by you as imperturbably,and affection as authoritatively, asever : and remember that the sorrow of PericlesPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 285can arise but from the bosom of Aspasia. Thereis only one word of tenderness we could say,which we have not said oftentimes before ; andthere is no consolation in it. The happy neversay, and never hear said, farewell.Reviewing the course of my life, it appears tome,at one moment, as if we met but yesterday ;at another, as if centuries had past within it ; forwithin it have existed the greater part of thosewho, since the origin of the world, have been theluminaries of the human race. Damon calledme from my musick to look at Aristides on hisway to exile : and my father pressed the wristby which he was leading me along, and whisperedin my ear,Walk quickly by ; glance cautiously ; it isthere Miltiades is in prison"In my adolescence I offered the rites of hospitalityto Pindar and Empedocles : not longafterward I embraced the neck of Eschylus,286 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.about to abandon his country. With SophoclesI have argued on eloquence ; with Euripides onpolity and ethicks ; I have discoursed, as becamean inquirer, with Protagoras and Democritus,with Anaxagoras and Meton. From HerodotusI have listened to the most instructive history,conveyed in a language the most copious andthe most harmonious; a man worthy to carryaway the collected suffrages of universal Greece;a man worthy to throw open the temples ofEgypt, and to celebrate the exploits of Cyrus.And from Thucydides, who alone can succeedto him, how recently did my Aspasia hearwith me the energetick praises of his just supremacy!As if the festival of life were incomplete, andwanted one great ornament to crown it, Phidiasplaced before us, in ivory and gold, the tutelaryDeity of this land, and the Jupiter of Homerand Olympus.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 287To have lived with such men, to have enjoyedtheir familiarity and esteem, overpays all laboursand anxieties. I were unworthy of the friendshipsI have commemorated, were I forgetful ofthe latest . . Sacred it ought to be, formed as itwas under the portico of Death . . my friendshipwith the most sagacious, the most scientifick,the most beneficent of philosophers, Acron andHippocrates. If mortal could war againstPestilence and Destiny, they had been victorious.I leave them in the field : unfortunatehe who finds them among the fallen !And now, at the close of my day, when everylight is dim, and every guest departed, let meown that these wane before me, remembering, asI do, in the pride and fulness of my heart,that Athens confided her glory and Aspasia herhappiness to me.Have I been a faithful guardian ? do I resignthem to the custody of the Gods undiminished288 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and unimpaired ? Welcome, then, welcome, mylast hour ! After enjoying for so great a numberof years, in my publick and my privatelife, what I believe has never been the lot ofany other, I now extend my hand to the urn, andtake without reluctance or hesitation what is thelot of all.ALCIBIADES TO ASPASIA.I returned to Athens in time to receive thelast injunctions of my guardian. What I promisedhim, to comfort him in his departure, Idare not promise his Aspasia, lest I fail in theengagement ; nevertheless I will hope that mynatural unsteadiness may sometimes settle onhis fixt principles. But what am I, what are allmy hopes, in comparison with the last few wordsof this great man, surely the greatest that earthPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 289has ever seen, or ever will see hereafter ! Letme repeat them to you, for they are more thanconsolation, and better. If on such a loss, I orany one could console you, I should abominateyou eternally.I found him surrounded by those few friendswhom pestilence and despair had left in thecity. They had entered but a little while beforeme; and it appears that one or other ofthem had been praising him for his exploits.In these," replied he, " fortune hath hadher share : tell me rather, if you wish to gratifyme, that never have I caused an Athenian toput on mourning."I burst forward from the doorway, and threwmy arms around his neck.O Pericles ! my first, last, only friend ! afarbe that hour yet !" cried I, and my tears rolledabundantly on his cheeks. Either he felt themnot, or dissembled and disregarded them ; for,VOL. II. o290 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.seeing his visitors go away, he began with perfectcalmness to give me such advice as wouldbe the best to follow in every occurrence, andchiefly in every difficulty. When he had ended,and I was raising my head from above his pillow,(for I continued in that posture, ashamed thathe, who spake so composedly, should perceivemy uncontrollable emotion,) I remarked I knewnot what upon his bosom. He smiled faintly,and said,Alcibiades ! I need not warn you againstsuperstition : it never was among your weaknesses.Do not wonder at these amulets : aboveall, do not order them to be removed. Thekind old nurses, who have been carefully watchingover me day and night, are persuaded thatthese will save my life. Superstition is rarelyso kind-hearted ; whenever she is, unable as weareto reverence, let us at least respect her.After the good patient creatures have found, asPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 291they must soon, all their traditional charms unavailing,they will surely grieve enough, andperhaps from some other motive than theirfallibility in science. Inflict not, O Alcibiades !a fresh wound upon their grief, by throwingaside the tokens of their affection. In hourslike these we are the most indifferent to opinion,and greatly the most sensible to kindness."The statesman, the orator, the conqueror, theprotector, had died away ; the philosopher, thehumane man, yet was living . . alas ! few momentsmore.ALCIBIADES TO ASPASIA.Must I again, Aspasia, torment my soul?again must I trouble yours ? Has the pestilencethen seized me, that I want hardihood, strength,understanding, to begin my labour ? No ; I walko2292 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.through the house of mourning, firmly, swiftly,incessantly : my limbs are alert as ever.Write it I must. Somebody was at the gates ;admittance was, it seems, not granted readily.I heard a voice, feeble and hoarse, and, lookingforth, saw two women, who leaned against thelintels.Let her enter, let her enter : look at her :she is one of us."These words were spoken by the younger ;and maliciously. Scarcely had she uttered themwhen her head dropped forward. The strangercaught and supported her, and cried help!help ! and rubbed her temples, and, gazing onher with an intensity of compassion, closed hereyelids ; for death had come over them. In myhorrour, my fright and dastardly cowardice Ishould rather call it, I failed to prevent or checkher.Aspasia has then her equal on the earth !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 293Aspasia is all that women in their wildestwishes can desire to be; Cleon, all that theImmortals are. But she has friendship, she hassympathy : have those ?She has, did I say ? And can nothing thenbring me back my recollection ? not even she !I want it not . . those moments are present yet,and will never pass away.She asked for you.Aspasia," answered I, " is absent."Not with her husband ! not with her husband!" cried she.Pericles," I replied, " is gone to theBlessed."She was with him then, while hope remainedfor her ! I knew she would be. Tellme she was."And saying it, she grasped my arm, andlooked earnestly in my face. Suddenly, as itappeared to me, she blushed slightly : on her294 PERICLES AND Aspasia.countenance there was, momentarily, somewhatless of its paleness. She walked into the aviary :the lattice stood open : the birds were not flown,but dead. She drew back ; she hesitated ; shedeparted. I followed her: for now, and notearlier, I bethought me it was Cleon, BeforeI came up to her, she had asked a question ofan elderly man, who opened his lips but couldnot answer her, and whose arm, raised withdifficulty from the pavement, when it would havedirected her to the object of her inquiry, droppedupon his breast. A boy was with him,gazing in wonder at the elegance and composureof her attire, such as, in these years of calamityand of indifference to seemliness, can nowherebe found in Athens. He roused himself fromhis listless posture, beckoned, and walked beforeus. Reaching the garden of Epimedea, we enteredit through the house ; silent, vacant, thedoors broken down. Sure sign that some family.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 295perhaps many, had, but few days since, utterlydied off within its chambers. For nearly all thehabitations, in all quarters of the city, arecrowded with emigrants from the burghs ofAttica. The pestilence is now the least appallingwhere it has made the most havock.But how hideous, how disheartening, is the suddenstride before our eyes, from health andbeauty to deformity and death ! In this wasteand desolation there was more peacefulness, Ibelieve, than anywhere else beyond, in the wholeextent of our dominions. It was not to last.A tomb stood opposite the entrance : Cleonrushed toward it, reposed her brow against it,and said at intervals,I am weary : I ache throughout : I thirstbitterly: I cannot read the epitaph""The boy advanced, drew his finger slowlyalong, at the bottom of the letters, and said,Surely they are plain enough . .296 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Xeniades son of Charondas^^He turned round and looked at me, well satisfied.Cleon lowered her cheek to the inscription;but her knees bent under her, and shewas fain to be seated on the basement.Cleon !" said I, . . she started at thename . . " Come, I beseech you, from that sepulcher."The reproof is just," she replied . . " Here,too, even here, I am an allen !"Aspasia ! she will gladden your memory nomore : never more will she heave your bosomwith fond expectancy. There is none to whom,in the pride of your soul, you will run with herletters in your hand. He, upon whose shoulderyou have redd them in my presence, lies alsoin the grave : the last of them is written.REFLECTIONS ON ATHENSAT THEDECEASE OF PERICLES.For many years, and indeed for many ages, ithas been the fashion to condemn the governmentof Athens, and every one at all similar inits principles: and these censures are passedand transmitted, by gentlemen who never peruseda single author of that country, and areutterly ignorant of its polity. Among the objectionsurged against it, is this; that it wasliable to turbulence and subversion.First for turbulence ; and few words will do.Ebullitions are often the representatives of eruptions,rebellions, and revolutions. At schoolsthere is more turbulence in a holiday than in awhipping-day. Which would the gentlemenprefer ?o 5298 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Now to subversion. A mausoleum and apyramid are less liable to be overthrown thanahospital and an alms-house: are they use-fuller? But we find by one glance at the historyof Athens, that few governments have beenso durable. She flourished for nearly a millennium;interrupted, it is true, by the supremacyof Pisistratus, the struggle of his successor,the Spartan imposition of the thirtyOligarchy, the intrusive satrapy of the Per-sianized Macedonian, and the bloody grasp ofSulla ; altogether a segment of a century. Shewas no less happy, no less liberal in her institutions,when, forty years after this champion ofaristocracy, she became the residence of TitusPompous; nor later, when she found herselfthe cherished home of another who deservedlike him the appellation of Attics, the elegantand generous Heroes. The Romans neitherin the republick nor under the emperors deprivedher of her municipal privileges, normeddled materially with her ancient forms.She stood, in all her strength and beauty,against the whirlwind of Macedon that sweptaway the wealth of Asia, and against the malariaof Rome that prostrated the liberties of Europe ;and she fell when the world had fallen. Athens wasPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 299not ruined by the violence of the citizens, nor bythe improvidence of the rulers, but by the mostintractable malady that ever befell mankind.Nor indeed was she then so ruined but thatshe rose again in full splendour a few yearsafterward, and displayed before Greece all thepageantry of intellect in a Socrates and a Plato ;all its solider glory in an Aristotle, a Demosthenes,and a Potion. It was Athens who notonly defeated and dispersed the naval and militarypower of Xerxes ; but it also was Athenswho, becoming in her turn the assailant, overthrewthe realm of Darius. For after the victoryof Cimon, a young impetuous Macedonianhad only to strike boldly at the heart of Persia,carouse in Persepolis, and sleep in Babylon.Mischief was done to the commonwealth, atvarious times, by the inflammatory speeches ofintemperate and venal demagogues : but hathno such mischief ever been done by such characters,in governments reputedly better balanced,and among a calmer people ? It wouldbe folly to wish the introduction of the Atheniansystem of government into England; and hardlyless (although somewhat less) to resist thosegradual changes which, in one form or other,all things must undergo. Every season hath300 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.its peculiar distempers, which may be checkedand remedied in that season, but which arechronical and incurable if they last beyond it.But among the moderns there has rarely beena ruler or a minister inclined to take instructionfrom the example of past ages. Amongthe ancients, by whom polity was more studied,few neglected this advantage; and none withimpunity. The plague of Athens obliteratedall human calculations, nor was any thing to belearned in the records of antiquity that couldcountervail its effects. It seized on Pericles ;and the gates of the city flew open to the Spartans.They could inflict no punishment moreopprobrious than the restoration of the oligarchy.Athens soon threw them off" again,and, with short intervals of grief and disgrace,she remained the favorite abode of eloquence,of poetry, and philosophy: so that,whatever were the defects of her constitution,they cannot be said to have been fatal.Certain men, who might have learnt betterin the lowest of her schools, are pleased torepresent her as insignificant. Philosophy,loosely picked up in France and meagerlyfed in Scotland, failed to crutch up the weakerside of Hume from this bias. By what wePERICLES AND ASPASIA, 301have been accustomed to see, we may wellimagine that nothing can correct the opinionsof Frenchmen in regard to greatness. MonsieurRapin calls the Peloponnesian a war betweentwo petty states.The Athenians at that time were the mostpowerful nation in the universe ; and Athens,in that half-century, contained within her wallsa greater number of great men than the universe(with the exception of Italy and England)has contained since. A war between the Tartarsand China is a war between two great nations,as Monsieur Rapin would call them ; yetno more interest is excited by them than bymeasles in a rabbit-warren. France is also agreat nation : yet what great man did Francebring forward in her long and sanguinary revolution? Him of whom she chiefly boasts, sheintroduced from Corsica ; a vast galley, mooredeternally in the sea for the receptacle of crime.We have lately seen the counterpart of Napoleonin a less successful traitor of that country :the same incestuous connexions ; the same vulgarityand effrontery; the same rudeness, bluffness,selfishness ; the same impetuosity and incontinenceof temper ; the same contempt forveracity; the same desertion of friends; theS02 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.same denunciation of accomplices; the sameimprovidence and miscalculation; the sameprurience for promiscuous celebrity ; the samedisregard for generous affection, fair reputation,and righteous judgement; the samefavorite cast of much certainty for more uncertainty; the same prodigality and waste of humanlife ; the same indifference to national content ;the same faintheartedness in the hour of danger;the same destitution of resources in the accessof distress ; the same annihilation in defeat : lessguilt ; more compunction : a worse engineer ; abetter epigrammatist. Bonaparte gained all theprizes in the lottery because he took all thetickets. When he had won them, he squanderedthem away in a winter night, and wenthome without a shirt on his shoulders. This isthe man whom some call great, and some unfortunate! His competitor for renown wouldhave attained it by speedier and simpler means ;and, according to the best computation from allthe documents before us, at about a millionthof the expense to humanity. Yet the leastcraving of the two monsters would have killedthe wisest man in France, and the only onein our later times fit to reign there. Letthe people, now they have chosen him, makePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 303the most of him, with whatever blemishes. Itwould have been foolish to throw clean linen,had there been any at hand, into a boiler ofimpurities and black froth.A populous nation is one thing, a great nationis another. Of these there have been buttwo in ancient times, and but one in modern.Dii patrie ! service nepotes !If ever we become the second nation in theworld, we become the vilest. That peoplealone can pretend to preeminence in militaryglory, which hath contended with disproportionatelygreater numbers, not once nor twice,but repeatedly, habitually, and vanquished themcompletely. Thus did Sweden in the reign ofGustavus Adolphus and of Charles the Twelfth ;and thus hath England done for seven centuries.That people alone can aspire to political glory,which hath risen calmly against abuses, and hathremoved them without violence, without one attitudeof hostility, without one cry for revenge :which hath consolidated her power withoutcannon, and hath guarded her chief magistratein his palace without the ante mural of a jail.Nay, all this, however much, is not enough.There must also be the firm resolution to fight304 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.for those who have shed their blood for you,without calling on others to fight instead. Moreyet must there be. Reverence for veracity, disdainfor prevarication, and shame that prohibitsyou from absconding from an acknowledgeddebt. Learn this, Monsieur Tiers ! and nobodywill complain that Despotism has thrownhis handkerchief to the prostitutes of the press-gang,and that it has fallen on no decanter ahead.With far more integrity than our neighbours, weconciliate fewer adherents ; with far more knowledgeand information, we bring less into publickuse. In those who are called diplomatists, wehave been, for nearly a century, behind themost barbarous of nations, European or Asiatick.The contradiction and the wonder cease,when we ascend to the source of the evil : thatevil which the Spartans inflicted, as the cruellestand most deadly they could inflict, on Athens;the Oligarchy. To this likewise must be assignedour periodical wars, tenderly protractedand carefully husbanded; and, what is moreiniquitous than the most iniquitous war, andproduces more strife and hatred, our bloatedoverwhelming church establishment. Everyrising generation requires a ten years' war toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 305support the younger branches of the dominantfaction : and the publick must pay the servilepolishers of golden tufts with deaneries andbishopricks. England is now the only countryin Europe where the primeval system of Papacyprevails unshorn. In Italy it has lost nearlyall its wealth and nothing of its respectability ;in England nearly all its respectability and nothingof its wealth. That which was granted formany purposes is now diverted into one ; theonly one almost for which it was not granted ;the provision of sons and daughters. Hencethe descendants of persons whose chief meritwas subserviency, and whose knowledge wasconfined within the covers of a Greek classick,raise up their heads in society above the ancientgentlemen and heraldic nobility of the land.The greek is not a more difficult language thanthe welsh. I had a groom who acquired the welshof a scullion, in seven or eight months, and yetnever rose by merit or interest to become adoctor of divinity. In Athens, among the functionaries,civil, military, and sacerdotal, therewas neither prodigality nor intolerance. Therewere Gods enow for parties to form about, butevery man was contented with his own, whomhe hoped to propitiate by gratitude and goodsPERICLES AND ASPASIA.nature. Instead of that moroseness and exclusionwhich the Blessed Founder of Christianity-cameupon earth expressly to remove, theydanced, they sang, they opened their hearts toconviviality and confidence. Unoppressed hytaxation, their labours were light ; and, unbru-talked by bigotry, their festivals were joyous.Eternal misery was desired for none, and againstnone denounced : and their days of rest werenot set apart for the sowing of dissensions. Oneword condescendingly used among the mostgentle and generous with us, was never heardamong them. There is nothing so intolerableas toleration : that is the word. Suppose oneman should say to another, who has been fightingin his defence, or who has been helping himto carry a burden, *' I will tolerate your presence: I will tolerate your opinion : I will evenlet you sit down in my presence : nay, if youwill be civil, you at last may speak to me."We should think this insulting enough : whatthen if, inviting him to dinner with us, wemarked the dishes he might eat of, and dictatedthe words in which he should thank his God forour bounty ! We complain that an insolent andmad barbarian has reduced a brave nation toservitude. He, with our connivance, he, withPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 307our cooperation, has perpetrated this iniquity.But he has only brought his enemy to the samecondition as his people. We refuse to the companionof our dangers the cup out of which wehave assuaged our thirst, and empty it on theground before him. We refuse him what wehave given to the Scotch : we refuse him thatwithout which there can be no union: thatwithout which there must be, and ought to be,resistance and separation. We have no rightand no interest to withhold one atom of whatbelongs, in equity, as much to Ireland as toScotland or to England. Give that ; and thenproclaim it treason to devise a repeal of theunion. Let the poor of the country be educatedand maintained out of the estates held bythe clergy for both those purposes. Religion isneither more nor less than education : it teachesthe simplest and the greatest of our duties, andhas abundant cause to renew perpetually its admonition.When schools and houses of industry,and cottages fit for human beings to inhabit,are built and established, then let theremainder of the funds be divided in just proportions,and given to the ministers of religion.We are shocked at the idea of domestick servitudeamong so enlightened a nation as the308 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Athenians. But they who served in that capacitywere deprived of few pleasures and enjoyments.Publick opinion branded the cruelmaster, whenever such appeared, and privateinterest restricted him. Plenteous food, leisure,festivals, confidence, familiarity, literature itself,softened the asperity, and concealed in somemeasure the inequality, of his condition. Hehad always a protector and usually a friend. Onthe contrary, he who ought to be the protectorof the Irishman lives in another land,and he who is his friend must be sought in anotherworld. It is dangerous, and it has beencriminal, to seek him.We read the ancients to little purpose, andthe pleasure we receive from them is no betterthan childish, if we draw no parallels in partsof their history and in parts of ours. There aremany from which we can draw none at all.Here however is one sufficiently obvious to theleast inquisitive.Two powerful nations have been vitally affectedby natural calamities. The former ofthese calamities was inevitable by human prudence,and uncontroulable by human skill : thelatter was to be foreseen at any distance by themost ignorant, and to be avoided by the mostPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 309unwary. I mean in the first the Plague of theAthenians; in the second the starvation of theFrench. The first happened under the administrationof a man transcendently brave ; a mancautious, temperate, eloquent, prompt, sagacious,above all that ever guided the councilsand animated the energies of a state : the second,under a soldier of fortune, expert and enthusiastick,but often deficient in moral courage,not seldom in personal; rude, insolent, rash,rapacious ; valuing but one human life amongthe myriads at his disposal, and that one farfrom the worthiest, in the estimation of anhonest and a saner mind. It is with reluctantshame I enter on a comparison of sucha person and Pericles. On one hand we beholdthe richest cultivation of the most variedand extensive genius ; the confidence of courage,the sedateness of wisdom, the stateliness of integrity;on the other, coarse manners, rudelanguage, violent passions continually exploding,a bottomless void on the side of truth, and arueful waste on that of common honesty. Thedisparity is as great between the Athenianand the Corsican, as between the countries thatproduced them, or even as between the writersin the two countries who narrate their exploits.310 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.The system of warfare determined on by Pericles,was that which by degrees must have brokendown the energy and wealth of the confederates :that which was schemed by the adventurer ofAjaccio, had been proved by the testimony ofall ages to be exactly the one which must terminatein the discomfiture and ruin of the invader.Before he made war on Russia, heshould have divided Germany into its smallestcomponent states, parcelling them out amongthe members of the reigning families, and thussowing ill-will and disunion. He should have increasedthe territories of the free cities muchbeyond the extent of the principalities, butleaving not even to the most opulent of thesea population of two millions. Poland aloneshould have possessed the whole of her ancientdominions, with such addition as would composetwenty millions of subjects, and extendalong two seas. The road was then open toPetersburg, which should have been convertedfrom a city into a fortress, in the hands of itsancient masters the Swedes. Moscow wouldhave rejoiced at seeing an upstart rival reducedto this condition, and her nobility wouldhave regained their power and dignity. Sweden,Poland, Hungary, and Turkey, would havePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 311formed a defensive league: Antic and theBaltick would have brought up constant suppliesto an army, marching in divisions alongthe coast, and the artillery as well as the storeswould have partly accompanied and partly followedit. Thus forty thousand horses wouldhave been saved, and more than half the provisions; nor could any part of the army havebeen surrounded, or much molested. Russiacould not have opposed to the invader, on anypoint of the march, a hundred and fifty thousandmen. She cannot even now bring into the fieldtwo hundred thousand, to the distance of twentydays' march, although she has one good general,and, what is better, something of a commissariat.She was then without both. In the centerof her own country she is invincible and unassailable,and always was so. To strike her witheffect you must strike her like the wolf, at theextremities. The French army, conducted byGustavus Adolphus, or Montecuculi, or Frederickof Prussia, or the Duke of Wellington,could have conquered the world. So manypernicious faults were not committed by Xerxesor Darius, whom ancient historians call feebleprinces, as were committed by Napoleon, whomthe modern do not call feeble, because he felt312 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.nothing for others, coerced pertinaciously, promisedrashly, gave indiscriminately, looked tranquilly,and spoke mysteriously. Even in hisflight, signalized by nothing but despondency,Segur, his panegyrist, hath clearly shewn that,had he retained any presence of mind, any sympathy,or any shame, he might have checkedand crippled his adversary. One glory he shareswith Trajan and with Pericles, and neither timenor malice can diminish it. He raised up andrewarded all kinds of merit, even in those artsto which he was a stranger. In this indeed heis more remarkable, perhaps more admirable,than Pericles himself; for Pericles was astranger to none of them. Literature and theArts however, although they alone embellishempires, are insufficient to ensure them prosperityand power, even where the foundationsare less deficient in solidity. The causes ofduration and of decadence in governments areinteresting above all others to the philosophicalmind. Athens seems to be always in somedanger ; and yet, in the next chapter to thatthrough which we trembled for her, she springsup and surmounts the most imminent. Thesecret is this. Every citizen was interestedalike in her preservation. Offices were awardedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 313by ballot, which were east on the names of allcitizens capable of fulfilling them. Hence everyman might have an opportunity of shewing hisdesert, and might ultimately attain the highestdistinction. By the English constitution, aportion of this is, and must remain, impracticable; but a greater, much greater, may be convenientlycarried into effect. We shall then beless degraded in the sight of foreign nations ;where one minister plenipotentiary is seen fightingin the streets ; to another is offered a wagerthat he cannot guess the latitude of London bytwenty degrees; and a third observes, on hisapproach to Vienna through the Netherlands,that this Rhine is an odd river ; it ran behindus hut three days ago.If any other station than the royal is permittedto remain hereditary, the royal will becomeits instrument to destroy or diminish theenergy and authority of the popular. It hasbeen so ; but it must never be again. The wealthof the nation was voted to the Peerage and itsdependents, by those whom the Peerage seatedin parliament for that purpose. To reduce theinordinate stipend of unnecessary offices is nowdenominated the spoliation of their children : tosupport the ministers of religion by meltingVOL. II. p314 PERICLES AND Aspasia.down her gorgeous graceless decorations, issacrilege and atheism. We do not indeed allview the matter in this light. Some of us, whohave travelled much and lived long in othercountries, have remarked that in Italy, andthroughout the continent, the papacy has herReformed Church ; and that in England alonethe Reformed Church has her papacy. We areafraid of atheism, and, next to atheism, of republicanism: two ideas which generally go together.Fear of republicanism prohibited the governmentsof Europe from establishing it in thatcountry where we may almost say it was indigenous.The ministers of England were unawarethat giving a king to Greece was givingGreece to Russia. Warning of this was loudenough in the Imaginary Conversations : but, inEngland, advice, to be well received, must bedearly paid for. Let us hope, however, that noaggression, on the part of Russia, will induceus to become the confederates, of those whobasely deserted their duties when they mighthave smitten her with effect. Leave them eitherto fight their own battle, or to skulk away andcall us cowards. Austria and France must uniteagainst Russia, and never can unite on any otherground. We may whistle to the stauncher whenPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 315we want her. No nation can injure us, no nationdares attempt it. We have stood firmly againstthe united armies of the world, and have shakenthem off like dust. How was it? Becauseevery man had confidence in himself and in hisneighbour ; because, in short, every stone in theedifice is immovable by its own vast weight.Our suspended arms have been pelted with dirtby those who felt them sorely: our more gloriousliterature by those who never could feel it.Agamemnon had Thersites for reviler. Homerhad Soils, Pericles had Cleon, Demostheneshad Milford, Milton had Grub Street and St.Rameses ; and, that one true subject more mayserve legitimate Comedy, Shakspeare has Chateaubriand.They who would introduce into any of the moreancient European kingdoms the Athenian systemof government, are ignorant or wicked men : thematerials are unsuitable to the work. It is onlyHolland, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Germany,(republican by its constitution even down to ourown days,) and Greece, that contain them.Many of these nations must, within anothercentury, resolve themselves into forms essentiallypopular. The despotic spirit of Russiaherself breathes the dissolution of monarchy onp2316 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Greece, and sows dissensions between her states,perpetually hostile for almost three thousandyears. Perhaps her own empire may split asunder,and into fragments, before the consummationof this design. The policy of Austriadictates the necessity of fixing the barrier whileshe can; while Turkey and Poland are convertibleinto efficient auxiliaries. Generousminds contemplated with rapture the regeneration(as it was announced) of France. Time,our great teacher, has demonstrated that aniron hand alone can offer her the indissolublering of union, and shut the door against Discord.Like the Muscovite wife, she despises her lordand master unless he exerts his authority bykicks and stripes. In our own country weneither want nor could sustain democracy : onthe contrary, we must repress its first advances.Nothing can do this but removing the cause ofits excitement. We must correct the anomalyof the feudal system, which, among interestsand institutions utterly incompatible with it, haswithin our memory controlled the royal authority,to a greater degree than in the reign of theweakest of the Plantagenet ; and which moreoverhas augmented its potency by enlisting intoits ranks the foremost and most efficient of thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 317vulgar. We must also eject from our church itsbaronial power and princely wealth : we mustallow no longer an English bishop to outweighin riches a dozen or more of cardinals. Insteadof coming to London at the beck of a minister,or at the news of a death at Lambeth or Winchesteror Durham, let them superintend eachhis college, where every young man aspiring toorders should finish his education, and take hisdegrees.* They ought to be instructors, liketheir Master, and monitors like his apostles.Many things are to be borne, and honest menwill bear them reluctantly, lest more watersburst through the sluice than are good for fertilization.I would not, as matters are, destroythe House of Lords : I would not, as in hisdrunken democracy Mr. William Pitt did, conspireto bring it into contempt. Here, as everywhereelse in pohty, we should avoid all possibleinnovations. To remove abuses is indeed toinnovate, in our government; but my meaningis, that we must introduce nothing which wantsanalogy in practice or in principle.Mr. Fox would have reduced the peers to aCranmer, according to Burnet, recommended thatyoung clerks should he trained up under the bishops, bothin their studies and in a course of devotion. Dr. Chalmersgoes farther, about the Universities.318 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.series of cyphers. He was unlucky in all his projects.On one occasion he said he had a 'peacein his pocket, when he no more had a peace init than he had a guinea. He was however lessdemocratic, less subversive of social order andnational dignity, than his rival. To descendfrom Pericles, to such as these, is like descendingfrom the downs of Lufton to the streets ofBristol. The better of the two had an equaledmatch in Cleon : the latter, before he left us,tossed up a serpent into the air which went oiFwith a fizz in Canning. May we never see againsuch a wasteful expenditure of gunpowder andcoarse paper ! May the present men who governus deserve the offices they hold, and the popularitythey enjoy, by wisdom and moderation ; bywaiving off the advances of holy personages whoindulge in the sentiments and in the languageof the lottery-office, and would be lords as wellas masters ; by declining the services of thosewhom the loudness of the popular voice shookoff from them, as heavy snow-wreaths drop fromthe brow of hills recovering their verdure ;men remarkable, the one for his scoffs andscorn at every feature and every step of honesty,the other for his intolerable arrogance and insatiablerapacity. May they abstain from armedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 319interference in the affairs of others, leaving themto those who are more nearly interested; believingthat the politician must not always dowhat the man would wish to do ; and fully awarethat those wolves and foxes are unsafe to bindwhich growl and whine even while they arebeing fed. We must burn every page of history,and forget that to-day had yesterday, beforewe can trust in their fidelity. Let themfight for themselves ; not against us, if we canavoid it with honour ; not in conjunction withus at any rate.The legislature, at two epochs widely distinct,has recognised, devised, and framed, anelective peerage. This has been done for twoparts in three of the empire. Had it been foronly one, there would have been guide and authorityenough : it has been done for two, andby ministers called the most constitutional andconservative : he surely who shall bring it aboutfor the third, cannot fairly be called otherwise.The body should be so constituted as to be thestay and support of the agricultural interest,which the invention of machinery and the spiritof speculation have depressed. Unless it be soitwill, under any form, become a byword, andbe scarcely more respectable in itself than the320 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.rabble of lawyers and literature tricked out forstage-effect in the millinery of the Palais Royal,and holding courts for the trial of hang-dogsand incendiaries. Provided our peerage neverexceed nine hundred, nor the portion electedas functionaries more than three hundred, whyshould not gentlemen distinguished for wealthand abilities, and possessing hereditary landedproperty to the low amount of only a hundredthousand pounds, be called, or stand inasituation to be called, to the high council-boardof their country ? They would moderateintemperate ambition, and direct the most speculativeto English views. Young men, inflamedby the speeches of Pericles and Demosthenes,may fall deeply in love with the simplex mungof republicanism : but the Roman history,and another which yet awaits the pen of genius,far richer in the display of worth and intellect,will shew him that it has badly suited some evenof the bravest and most energetick nations. Wefollow in polity the homoeopathy of the physicians.We enthrone a king that we may escapea despotism : we tolerate a peerage that we mayrepress an oligarchy. But it is hard to tolerate,shovelled up against us in heaps from the barand the exchange, the blackest mire of both.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 321As things are now constituted in Europe, nogovernment can be liberal, efficient, and durable,of which nearly all above the foundation is notaristocratic al : but aristocracy in our country,must renounce her close connexion with oligarchy.Her drum must be beaten for recruitsin fine weather; never in damp and squally.She must reject a heterogeneous accretion fromthe putrescent rubbish of the counting-house :she must never stoop to measure for admittancethe smart literary aspirants, who might in smallnumbers be ornamental to the House of Commons: but she must invite to her ranks stout,upright, responsible men from the country, wholeave something there, and carry something withthem.We want a Terminus that shall stand fastand firm against the aggression of Democracy,and the grasp of Commerce. Both are useful,both are necessary, but not to rule England.Little is the danger that we shall be overwhelmedby the waters from above ; they mayfall heavily, as they have often done, but theuniversal ruin can only be accomplished by thebursting up of the great deeps beneath us.p oLETTER TO AN AUTHOR.You remark, and indeed complain, that I havediscontinued the right spelling of many words :and you will censure me again more stronglyfor the reason. It is this : I did not intend topublish the Letters with my name ; because agreat party in England, and every Scotchmanand half-scotchman in the world, is my swornenemy. Among the rest. Lord Brougham, who,before he was Lord Brougham, was consultedby my publisher on the legality of certain expressionsin the Imaginary Conversations, andreturned the manuscript without an answer.Had he entered into it, he might have learntsome things which he never knew, and he mighthave seen others which he never will attain.He has much intuition : did it inform him whatI thought of him ? Certainly I never venturedto express those sentiments , for I am cautious.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 3*23in all personal matters especially, to keep withinthe boundary of to Trpeiroy,I destined the little profit that might arisefrom the Letters to the necessities of another, asLady B. knows ; and, when that person was foundunworthy, I requested my hearty Tory friend,Mr. James, whose Mary of Burgundy Scotthimself (were he envious) might have envied,to bestow it on any author in want of moneymore than myself, if any such could be found.I should have acted ill and imprudently, had Idiminished it by obtruding an obnoxious name,undefended by the circumvallation of club-houses,and without a sentinel to challenge anassailant.Mr. Hartley Coleridge, who inherits the geniusof his father, is incorrect in mentioning mewith a set of people (Elphinstone and Milford atthe head of them) who attempt to spell everyword as we pronounce it. What, in the nameof God, is there in common between these folksand me ? Certainly not this folly : no suchidea ever entered my head. There is not asingle word, in the five volumes of the ImaginaryConversations, spelt differently from whatI have found it in some learned and judiciousauthor, or deduced from strict analogy. The324 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.last deviation from vulgar use is authorized byMiddleton. I do not consider him an excellentwriter, as many do: some even call him thepurest and most elegant. My objection is, that,like the french tragedians, he gives to antiquitya modern cast of character. There are alsomany gross provincialisms in him, scanty as heotherwise is in idiom, and these appear the mostinopportune when they rush tumultuously intoCiceronian sentences. I think he is right inspelling the word theater as he does ; and highlyto be praised in grantor. We might as wellvfYitQfaveur and honour as grandeur. If wedesire to write well, we must be careful not toremind the reader of any language but his own.We must not receive him in the narrow apartmentsof town dialect, but must invite him intothe country, where old things are fresh andflourishing, and where languages have theirbranches about them. It was not so in all thenations nor in all the ages of antiquity. Therude Romans seized upon the words urbanityand politeness: they were the property of theAthenians. For, although many of the wealthierlived mostly in the country like english gentlemen,yet Attica was small in extent, and notsimply the interests of their Commonwealth, onPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 325which every man might come forward and declarehis sentiments, called them frequently intothe city, but also the noble works of art Inthese we have only Flaxman; and few knowthat we have him ; the highest and purest geniusthat sculpture has gloried in since the time ofPhidias, yet unable to execute his great designs.He might make not only statuaries, but painters,if we had stuff to make them of; as Rafael wascalled forth by the miracle of Ghiberti. Hecould not, nor could Michael Angelo, have beenwhat he was, without it. At the Baptistery hewas first enamoured with the beauty of form,and invested with the graces of composition.Afterward, as his strength increased, his puritydeclined ; and, in leaving Florence for Rome, heleft Paradise for Eden. But I must not forgetthat I am now where I shall be laughed at, if Igo on.Shall a word so especially english in its importbe the only one of the same order left in itsfrench dress ? When the french have droppedthe s in isle, shall w^ (with Milton against us)retain it ? Their language has many consonantsand many syllables that serve only for shew, likeother things about them, but ours wants none such.It is strange enough that I, who alone attempt to326 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.blow away the gathering dust and motes of innovation,should be accused of innovating.Those who reverence least the authority of theirelders and their betters are the loudest in theoutcry. So when Bonaparte was (if ever hewas) more perfidious than usual, he cried out,modern Carthage ! perfidious Albion ! And Iremember once to have seen an Irishman, astout fellow of similar character, and not awhit more civil or wary, kicking another beforehim through the street, and shouting indignantly,You bloody tyrant ! My authority is oflittle or no weight : but the time will come, andcannot be far distant, when printers and pufferswill cease to be holden in much greater. Wemeasure our own eighth against our own doors :when we happen to look into the structures ofElizabeth's date, and Cromwell's, we shall findthe marks of taller men. We shall see suchwords as sovran, wherefor, until, til, stil, hart,instead of heart ; harte will distinguish theanimal. We shall never find there eoccel, repel,rebel, recal, appal. I venture to assert thatneither the greek language nor the latin, in itslast depravation, affords an instance of so suddenand so senseless a change. Never does thesingle I express the sound of this final syllable.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 327And why should proceed be spelt in one way,recede in another ? convey differently from inveigh,than which last nothing can be devisedmore uncouth. On the contrary, explain andcomplain, in the final syllable, should be writtendifferently, the origin being different : the samein before and wherefore, which last should nomore have an e at the end than wherein should.Milton writes sovran, not sovereign, which isnot deduced from reigning as it would seem,but from the italian soprano, I have neverbeen able to accomplish my design of uniformityin the printing of my various works : in this last,you will perceive my dissent from those fashionableswho believe, in their hurry for reformation,that an english word can end in c. Wetake physic, but we are not yet sic.Formidable as may appear these preparations,there are not thirty words that require to bereinstated; and these, instead of asking for more,would some of them take a little less than theyonce had. We remember the time when anyonewould have been thought a cockscomb whohad used in conversation, or even in prose compositionof the gravest kind, the word respond :but that time was before every thing was superband magnificent, or execrable, appalling, and328 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.awful ; it was when a poet might possess, entirelyto himself, a small voter's freehold. Inever had the courage to leap over the littlesweet-briar hedge he planted to run between us.Nay, although I talk of my horses and dogsrather more than is suitable to the dignity ofothers, yet in speaking of them I do not saythe dog who, &c." nor " the horse who, &c."pretty as the word is, breaking the sameness ofthat, and softening the ugliness of which. It isamong the manifold blessings of our language,as it is of the italian of the best age, that wemay often omit these relatives : and they who doitcautiously and unerringly give us one unquestionableproof of their discernment and elegance.But whose has acquired a larger acceptation ;and our most considerate authors and bestgrammarians use it not only for of whom, butlikewise of which ; which having no possessivepeculiarly its own. To say continually of which,or even whereof, (which is better,) would bewearisome. Furthermore I must confess myhesitation and awkwardness, and unfitness forfashionable print. I dare not write wo: I thinkit should be prohibited in any author who hasnot three rings to each finger. For my part, 1indulge in such luxuries when they grow com-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 329mon, and not before, and am resolved to put onthis short-skirted, smart-looking weed, onlywhen /o, to, and sho, have joined in the procession.Already we have too many anomalies ;and I would rather diminish than augment thenumber, where the Genius of the language lookswith complacency on it. The verb originate,used actively, startles me from my propriety.In these matters my courage is not likely toincrease with my years : I was always timid inthem, even when I was rash in every thing else ;and, almost at every step I took, I consultedmany grave and abstemious and severe authorities.If we wish to write well, we must keepour greek and latin out of sight. We may besure those vegetables are the wholesome andmost savoury which remind us least of the nutrimentthey have received.An apology is necessary for any thing we doorthink rightly, unless it be sanctioned by thecountenance of the literary Demos. In the correctionof anomalies, the vulgar eye at first isoffended ; but only the weak eye can be inflamedby it. Cicero blames as rustick the writing andpronunciation of cives for cives, which all writersof latin wrote soon afterward, until they werecorrected by Fronto. In the time of Marcus330 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Aurelius Antoninus, who, although he wrote inGreek, was versed and skilful in latin, effortswere made to support the ancient institutionsof. the language. So far back as the days ofCicero there was a dread of innovation, and heappears to find refreshment at the old well ofPlautus, whom he praises frequently. AulisGenius tells us that even some of Cicero's wordshad become obsolete ; for instance, eocantlare.Yet Quinctilian thought of him as many havethought since, when he said, Ille se profecissescat cui Cicero valde placebif. Here indeedhis own expression is not precisely what an ancientauthor would have used. It wants thelogick of language. Its true and accurate interpretationis. He may he sure he has mademuch proficiency whom Cicero shall greatlyplease. Now this sounds better in englishthan in latin, which is rider. A writer ofCicero's age would have used placuerit, placet,or placet: all three unexceptionable, and expressingno contingency or futurity, as the otherdoes, in strictness of propriety : for it says,He may now be sure that he has mademuch proficiency whom Cicero will hereafterplease." Cicero himself would have writtenplacuerit, for the sound; common writers pla-periclesAND ASPASIA. 331seat ; the lover of simplicity placet. In the ageof Quinctilian they did not like a natural courseand easy termination, but wished to displaystrength and dexterity, by giving their sentencesa sudden jerk, and throwing them on theirhaunches. Hence we find perpetually the spon-dick close, preceded by an anapest, a dactyl,or a tribrachys. Quinctilian, Fronto, and Sym-marius,were too ostentatious of this trick:Pliny and Tacitus wrote like gentlemen; butTacitus got into the habit of casting a squintsturn of the eye at every whisper, and of throwinga mysterious gloom on every puddle.We have seen that whoever has been mosteminent, in scholarship and genius, among theancients and ourselves, has been most studiousto correct the imperfections of his nativetongue. The French have labored on a scantiersoil with equal industry : and, as fruit isoften best where climate is least indulgent,their labours have been crowned with success.To what a degree of delicacy has that languagebeen brought, which, judging by its pronunciation,seems intended never to have been written,and out of which it requires a Stranger to elicita tone of poetry. In the language in which thedouble li of Versailles, &c. is without a definite332 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.sound; in which oit, e%, oient, have one indistinguishable,and in which all these are like e, is itnot admirable that Voltaire should have writtenwith a grace beyond the grace of Athens, Rousseauwith such variety and energy, and Bossuetwith such a fulness of harmony, such a depth ofintonation, as was never heard in oratory sinceDemosthenes shook the throne of Philip. Itwould be difficult to find in Bossuet such a pieceof tawdriness as this in Cicero, who, togetherwith stuff of graver colour and closer texture,hath many such in his wardrobe. " Heir primumopens illus civitatis ^victce, ^comminutcB,^depressceque sunt." Is not this enough, and tospare ? No ; he goes on in triplets again, " Inhoc port Atheniensium ^nobilitatis, "imperii^glorice" . . what now ? pretty nearly the sameas before, but somewhat less than depressed (absolutelysunk and swamped) naufragium factum. . Is this quite certain ? It was so before ;but now only eocistimatur. Invested with itstrue title, Existimatur is hob major to theusual peal, esse videatur. Now do not read thisto boys and barristers. We, who know whatgreatness is, are never irreverent; but theymight be. Great men must have their confessors,but may choose them.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 833We are little aware how much our languagehath suffered since the time of Goldsmith. Inwriting this last sentence I am reminded thathe never uses the word hath. This is fastidiousand feminine. I would always use it where thenext word begins with 5, or with c having thesound of s. Others of the present day, I observe,employ it exactly in those positions. Isthere any ear that is better pleased with Hassurely than with Hath surely ; Has seldom thanHath seldom f It has been remarked to me,and I see it, that some of our best writers havebecome more terse, more correct, more varied,more harmonious, by having redd my ImaginaryConversations. That is much : they havenot house-room at present for the opinions. Iam careless how many or how few adopt these,but language is a publick concern. None wasever so much corrupted, in the spelling at least,within so short a space of time. We writerecal impel, repel, dispel. Why should thecompound syllable have this power ? It wouldbe more reasonable (however little so) to writetel ; because here could be no ambiguity in thepronunciation. Formerly the single /, final,used always to indicate an unaccented sound :so did the t. Is it not odious to use latin334 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.words anywhere for english ; simile for simili ;a stimulus for a stimulant ; ratio for ration orrate ? And again for greek names to givelatin, as ephori, Stride, Mycenae, when wereject the form of the diphthong in our idiom ?It is piteous when we can find no truly englishtermination. In that case however we may abstainat least from groping in the latin for it.That language has done for us all it can do, andat last is beginning to corrupt us. The geniusand charms of Goldsmith could not release ourshoulders from the heavy old man that bestrodethem. We may hyphen it away as we please,but there never were and never can be suchwords as " cherishes," " refreshes," &c. : theenglish language, the human voice, disclaimsthem.Analogy would release us from many of ourperplexities and incongruities. But in Englandit is thought an act of rudeness to offer anythingto one who does not ask for it. To shewthe right road to him who stops and doubtsabout it, is only a little too officious ; but it isinsolent in the last degree to call back him whois going far astray. Some defects of analogyare of ancient date ; others, not modern indeed,but before our times, and now beyond our reach.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 335The first is exemplified in the accent of concordand record differing from that of accord andsounding too like conquered. We derive littlebenefit from the beautiful letter r, which theold grammarians (a blunt-eared race everywhere)called the canine. Yet there are few wordssingularly sweet without it. Take the first thatoffer: Eriphyle, Deianira, Parthenope, Hamadryades,Amaryllis, Heroine, Ermine,and Jrmida. Whoever takes the trouble tocount this letter, and s, in three pages of englishpoetry and three of greek, will find themfrequenter in the greek, taking the % of bothinto the computation ; for % is only a graver s.The letter m is the least sonorous ; and thesatin poets in time began to discover its inconvenience; so that, when 5 was received again infull force, m was the only consonant elided.How they managed it we cannot tell. It musthave been in some such manner as the devilfolded up his tail, in the poem that Porson stolefrom Southey. M however meets us four timesin the prettiest nonsense verse that ever boywrote.Sylvester tenui musa meditates avena.That we may exhibit what our vigorous tongues336 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.are capable of performing, we throw back uponthe first syllable the accent of commendable,corollary, contemplative, &c. Not contentedhere, we render one of the most beautiful wordsin our language the ugliest I can recollect inany, sojourn we pronounce sujjern. Surely itwill be necessary soon to establish an ItalianOpera in every town, at the expense of government,that we may experience what happinessthere is in the harmony of a language.I had almost forgotten an ancient folly, crawlingforth in another direction, persevere for per-sever. There is not, I venture to affirm, a singleone of these objections which the most captiousand inconsiderate can reprehend ; neither isthere one example which we can hope to seecorrected. We have Southey and Fonblanqueamong us, as great authorities as any who havegone before them ; yet, in this court of appeal,I apprehend we shall find them sitting side byside upon the bench of the Conservatives. Ilikewise am radically a Conservative in everythinguseful ; and, during my stay at this inncalled Human Life, I would trust any thing tothe chambermaids rather than my englishtongue.Some dozens more of similar questions startPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 337up before me, only to be repressed. The atheniandialect, beautiful as it was, and susceptiblebut of few alterations, did however go forwardin its improvement, until the age of Menander.This, although we receive it on the testimonyof grammarians, is almost incredible to us unlearnedmen, whose ears have been pillowed onthe roses of Aristophanes and Plato. Our ownlanguage seems varying every day, under cooks,auctioneers, and compositors. I dare not use rougenor costume: we have our native red and nationaldress. Utterance is a trisyllable, why not entrance,as in Shakspeare ? Synonymous anonymous,anomalous, should all be spelt with an0. We write forego, not forget, nor forgive.Our native tongue contains, in the final sound ofits words, a richer variety than even the greekitself : and there is more harmony in one singlebook of Paradise Lost than in all the poetry thatever was heard upon earth since the angels sangat its creation. Yet we squander all these advantagesaway, as we are used to do with lighterthings. Our letters have their Attila, Pitt, andRobespierre !Happily we likewise have a body of goodwriters both in prose and poetry. The poeticalworld had lain dormant for three wholeVOL. II. Q338 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.centuries, interrupted only by a few loud breathingfrom the masculine breast of Ennius, whenLucretius sprang up, like an orb of fire, andawoke into life a generation of poets, who leftbehind them no successors. From the banishmentof Ovid until the banishment of Dante,(for the periods of genius are to be marked byits calamities,) there were the long dark ages,thirteen hundred years, the only space of equalduration, since the beginning of the world,throughout which scarcely a glimpse of poetryburst forth anywhere. In Asia some artificiallights were tost about ; but in Europe the irregularand incalculable Dante, whose magnitudeeclipsed the brightest luminaries of ancient Italy,was preceded only by some brief and vivid coruscationsfrom the rocks of Iceland and Scandinavia.This wonderful man, inferior but toShakspeare, Homer, and Milton, resembledthe poet of our Commonwealth in three mainpoints; his daring genius, his abomination ofsacerdotal tyranny, and his ardour to establishthe laws and improve the condition of his language.The latin, in his time, had been contaminatedby barbarians, and had taken refugein the cloister, yet, fastidious as our moderncri ticks may be, lost nothing of its analogies,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 339nothing of its orthography, and little of itsbeauty, for many centuries. The greek likewiseis perspicuous and delightful in the Dissertationsof Dion Chrysostom. These howeverdid not obtain for him his superlatively splendidname.Ovid and Tibullus seem to have written withthe most purity, of the poets. Virgil and Propertiusand Horace studied more to gratify thehumours and peculiarities of a generous patron,whose character was essentially greek ; and weshall find in them a display of hellenic, tropes,and figures, more recondite and elaborate thanin the Greeks themselves. Some happy verseshave escaped from under the heaviness of Propertius,and come forth with the sweetest effect ;as little slaves look most joyous where the masteris dozing or lying down. Of Virgil's verse allpraises are inadequate and vain . . never wassuch harmony heard afterward but in the loftierspheres of a Shakspeare and a Milton. We areinformed by Aulis Genius that he was inconstantin the spelling of certain words. Thismay well be. We also have some which arespelt in two manners : for instance, again and(in poetry) agen ; enough and enow : but in thelast the pronunciation is become more widely340 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.different. There is no edition of Virgil, noteven Heine's, in which the spelling is carefullyobserved. We find in it the letter ?/, of whichthe Romans were as ignorant as they were of w.Did Virgil write cu and not (like Catullus)quod ? Certainly he did not write cujus : for chad not taken the place of q when that old wordwas in use, and he was the last who wrote it.I am rather too excursive on the subject:but it is one which occupied more than merelythe leisure-hours of Cicero and of Caesar. Andif ever we should have a writer who aspires tothe glory of eloquence, and who attempts tocompose with their purity, he must previouslytake many a turn in this vacant portico.I had much extended my remarks on thissubject, in that volume of the Imaginary Conversationswhich contains the dialogue betweenTooke and Johnson ; and I thought of detachingits materials from the body of the work, and publishingit apart. At this time an American travellerpassed through Tuscany, and favored me witha visit at my country seat. He expressed a wishto reprint in America a large selection of myImaginary Conversations, omitting the political.He assured me they were the most thumbedbooks on his table. With a smile at so ener-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 341getick an expression of perhaps an undesirabledistinction, I offered him unreservedly and unconditionallymy only copy of the five printedvolumes, interlined and interleaved in mostplaces, which I had employed several years inimproving and enlarging, together with mymanuscript of the sixth, unpublished. He wroteto me on his arrival in England, telling me thatthey were already on their voyage to their destination.Again he wrote, informing me that afriend, a nameless one, had left them at anAmerican merchant's in Florence. I inquiredthere, and found the man indignant at such acharge against his punctuality : he declared henever had seen or heard of them. Without aquestion in regard to the anonymous friend, Itold the American traveller in few words thatthey were lost, and requested him to take nomore trouble on the occasion than I myselfshould do. I never look for any thing, lest Ishould add disappointment, and something ofinquietude, to the loss. I regret the appearanceof his book more than the disappearance ofmine. My letter of introduction to Mr, R.(whom he simply and unceremoniously calls abarrister) procured him, at my request, admittanceto C. L. and his sister, both of whomq33t*2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.he seems to have Jidgctted. My letter of presentationto Lady B. threw open (I am afraid)too many folding-doors, some of which havebeen left rather uncomfortably ajar. No doubthis celebrity as a poet, and his dignity as adiplomatist, would have procured him all thosedistinctions in society, which he allowed sohumble a person as myself the instrumentalityof conferring. Here and there are persons,great and small, who interest me little : yet Iwish the traveller had spoken in a slight degreemore respectfully of my friend R., the mostcourageous man in existence, who determinedto resign his profession when he had acquiredby it ten thousand pounds, and who did thenresign it, when he was gaining ground daily.We should raise a statue to every lawyer of suchintegrity : we might do it without fear of indictmentfor obstructing the streets. Another wishis, that the ingenious and good-natured travellerhad represented somewhat less ludicrously,C. L. and his sister ; not knowing or not mindingthat he is the most exhilarating and cordialof our writers, and she the purest. If, amid theaccidents of human life, the anonymous friendbe living ; and if it hath pleased God, by thesea-voyage or any other means, to have restoredPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 343to him the blessing of memory, so that'll mayrecollect where he deposited the volumes andmanuscripts ; and if he will consign them to mypublishers, I shall be happy to remunerate himhandsomely for the salvage. Should we be unsuccessfulfor the present, I am yet confidentthat, either in bottle or bladder, the unpublishedportion, however mutilated and disfigured, willbe cast upon the shores of the Atlantick, andreach the hands to which it was entrusted. Ihave always found my ink grow paler by transfusion; and I cannot tell how it may stand inAmerica after an exposure so corrosive.Greatly as I have been flattered by the visitsof American gentlemen, I hope that for thefuture no pencilled of similar compositions willdeviate in my favour to the right-hand of theroad from Florence to Fiesole. In case of mistake,there is a charming view of the two cities,and of Valdarno and Vallombrosa, from theiron-gate at the entrance to my grounds : I couldnot point out a more advantageous position.THE END.LONDON:IBOTSON AND PALMER, PRINTERS, SAVOY Street, STRAND.