PERICLES AND ASPASIAVOL. I.Lately PublishedIn One Volume, Post 8vo.CITATION AND EXAMINATIONOFWILLIAM SHAKSPEARE,EUSEBV TREEN, JOSEPH Canary, AND SIL13S Cough, Clerk.BEFORE THE WORSHIPFUL SIR THOMAS I.UCY, KNIGHT,TOUCHING DEER STEALING,Now First Published from Original Papers.TO WHICH IS ADDED,A CONFERENCE OF MASTER EDMUND SPENSER,h GENTLEMAN OF NOTE,WITH THE EARL OF ESSEX, TOUCHING THE STATE OF IRELANDIN 1596.This book deserves to have its dwelling place near the loved andeverlasting name of Shakspeare, and we are very sure that posteritywill find it there. It is an honour to its author and to English literature.It is an addition to the rare list of books that will live. It isevident from internal evidence that the book is by Mr. Walter SavageLandor." /?.in»winer.PERICLES AND ASPASIAWALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, Esq.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. LLONDONSAUNDERS AND Motley, CONDUIT STREET.1836.meiLONDONIBOTSON AND PALMER, PRINTERS, SAVOY STREET, STRAND.LOAN STACKGIFT955-.2-TO HIS EXCELLENCYTHE EARL OF Margrave,LORD LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND.My Lord,When an author is desirous of prefixingan illustrious name to his title-page, ithas usually been thought proper, of late, tosolicit the permission. I, who never ask anythingof any man, would least of all ask this ;and, were it peradventure in my hands, Ishould be apt to let it drop out of them. Longbefore you were in possession of power (youwill remember) I prognosticated it from theaspect of the times. I clearly saw the necessityof your becoming more than a man of rank, orVI DEDICATION.even of genius. Your Excellency will correctthe faults, and inasmuch as sagacity, integrity,firmness, and moderation can do it, will compensatefor the iniquities and atrocities of sixcenturies : you will unite Great Britain andIreland; which our princes and parliaments,until now, have never wisely planned norhonestly intended.With the high respect due to your Excellencyfrom every friend of peace and justice inboth countries,I am,&c.WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR.ADVERTISEMENT.He who opens these Letters for a History ofthe Times, will be disappointed. Did he findit in a Montague's or a Walpole? And yetperhaps he ran over them with pleasure. Ifhe cannot do the same here, if he regrets thatmany are wanting of Pericles, let him take comfortin learning by heart the two first " Years"of Thucydides, and in repeating, as he walksalong, the sterling and strenuous orations theycontain. It is easy to throw pieces of historyinto letters : many have done it : but there isno species of composition so remote from verisimilitude.Who can imagine to himself aVil ADVERTISEMENT.couple of correspondents sitting down for sucha purpose, and never turning their eyes towardany other object? Better stand on the fragments,of antiquity, and look about us.It was difficult to avoid every expression andevery thought attributed to Pericles by theancients, and particularly in composing theorations : yet this has been done. The longerof them, which he might be conceived to havespoken on many occurrences, as general andstatesman, have been omitted.Fill Fiesolana,July 4, 1835.PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO Cleon.Cleon ! I write from Athens. I hasten tomeet your reproaches, and to stifle them in myembrace. It was wrong to have left Miletus atall : it was wrong to have parted from youwithout entrusting you with my secret. No,no, neither was wrong. I have withstood manytears, my sweet Cleon, but never your's ; youcould always do what you would with me; andI should have been windbound by you on theVOL. I, B2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Meander, as surely and inexorably as the fleetat Aulis by Diana.Ionia is far more beautiful than Attica, Miletusthan Athens; for about Athens there isno verdure — no spacious and full and flowingriver; few gardens, many olive-trees, so manyindeed that we seem to be in an eternal cloudof dust. However, when the sea-breezes blow,this tree itself looks beautiful ; it looks, in itspliable and undulating branches, irresolute asAriadne when she was urged to fly, and pale asOrythyia when she was borne away.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Come out, Aspasia, from among those olives.You would never have said a word about anyPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 3such things, at such a time, unless you hadmet with an adventure. When you want tohide somewhat, you always run into the thicketsof poetry. Pray leave Ariadne with Bacchus,she cannot be safer ; and Orythyia with Boreas,if you have any reverence for the mysteries ofthe gods. Now I have almost a mind to say,tell me nothing at all of what has happened toyou since you left us. This would punish youas you deserve, for you know that you are dyingto tell it. The venerable and good-natured oldwidow, Epimedea, will have trouble enough, Iforesee, with her visiter from Asia. The Milesiankid will overleap her garden-wall, andbrowse and butt everywhere. I take it as amatter of certainty that you are with her, for Inever heard you mention any other relative inAthens, and she was, I remember, the guest ofyour house. How she loved you, dear goodwoman ! She would have given your father,B 24 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Antiochus, all her wealth for you. But whenyou were seven years old you were worth seventimes over what you are now. I loved you thenmyself. Well, I am resolved to relieve you ofyour secret.Prodigal scattered of precious hopes, and ofsmiles that seem to rise from the interest youfeel, and not from the interest you excite, whatvictim have you crowned with flowers, and selectedto fall at your altar ?ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Spirit of divination ! how dared you find meout ? And how dared you accuse me of ?You who poetic more extravagantlyyourself. Mine, I do insist upon it, is noPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 5worse than we girls in general are apt towrite : " and no better," you will reply, " thanwe now and then are condemned to Hasten to,or disposed to read."Poetry is the weightless integument that ourbutterflies always shed in our path ere theywing their way toward us. It is precisely ofthe same form, colour, and substance, for thewhole generation. Are all mine well ? and allyours? I shall be very angry to hear thatmine are. If they do not weep, and look wan,and sicken, why then I must, out of very spite.But may the Gods, in their wisdom, keep notonly their hearts, but their persons too, justwhere they are ! I intend to be in love here atAthens. It is true, I do assure you, when Ihave time, and idleness, and courage for it.Ay, ay, now your eyes are running over allthe rest of the letter. Well, what have youfound ? where is the place ? I will keep youb PERICLES AND ASPASIA.in suspense no longer. As soon as there wasany light at all, we discovered, on the hill abovethe city, crowds of people and busy preparations.You are come to it.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I was determined to close my letter whenyour curiosity was at the highest, that youmight flutter and fall from the clouds likeIcarus. I wanted two things; first, that youshould bite your lip, an attitude in which youalone look pretty ; and secondly, that you shouldsay half angrily, " This now is exactly likeAspasia." I will be remembered; and I willmake you look just as I would have you.How fortunate ! to have arrived at Athens, atPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 7dawn, on the 12th of Elaphebolion. On thisday begin the festivals of Bacchus, and thetheatre is thrown open at sunrise.What a theatre ! what an elevation ! what aprospect of city and port, of land and water,of porticos and temples, of men and heroes, ofdemi-gods and gods !It was indeed my wish and intention, whenI left Ionia, to be present at the first of theDionysius; but how rarely are wishes andintentions so accomplished, even when windsand waters do not interfere !I will now tell you all. No time was to belost, so I hastened on shore in the dress of anAthenian boy, who came over with his motherfrom Lemnos. In the giddiness of youth, heforgot to tell me that, not being yet eighteenyears old, he could not be admitted, and leftme on the steps. My heart sank within me, somany young men stared and whispered; yetPERICLES AND ASPASIA.never was stranger treated with more civility.Crowded as the theatre was, (for the tragedyhad begun,) every one made room for me.When they were seated, and I too, I lookedtowards the stage; and behold there lay beforeme, but afar off, bound upon a rock, amore majestical form, and bearing a countenancemore heroic, I should rather say moredivine, than ever my imagination had conceived !1 know not how long it was before I discoveredthat as many eyes were directed towards me astowards the competitor of the gods. I wasneither flattered by it nor abashed. Every wish,hope, sigh, sensation, was successively with thechampion of the human race, with his antagonistJove, and his creator Eschylus. Howoften, O Cleon, have we throbbed with his injuries! how often hath his vulture torn ourbreasts ! how often have we thrown our armsaround each other's neck, and half-renouncedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 9the religion of our fathers ! Even your image,so inseparable at other times, came not acrossme then ; Prometheus stood between us. Hehad resisted in silence and disdain the cruellesttortures that Almightiness could inflict; andnow arose the Nymphs of Ocean, which heavedits vast waves before us ; and now they descendedwith open arms and sweet benigncountenances, and spake with pity ; and theinsurgent heart was mollified and quelled.I sobbed — [ dropt.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Is this telling me all ? you faithless creature !There is much to be told when Aspasia faintsin the theatre : and Aspasia in disguise !B 510 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.My sweet and dear Aspasia ! with all yourbeauty, of which you cannot but be conscious,how is it possible you could have hoped to beundetected? Certainly there never was anywoman, or any man, so little vain as you are.Formerly you were rather so about your poetry :but now you really write it well, you have overcomethis weakness ; nay, you doubt whetheryour best verses are tolerable. You have toldme this several times, and you always say whatyou think, unless when any one might be hurtor displeased. I am glad the observation comesacross me, for I must warn you upon it.Take care then, Aspasia! do not leave offentirely all dissimulation. It is as feminine avirtue, and as necessary to a woman, as religion.If you are without it, you will have agrace the less, and (what you could worse spare)a sigh the more.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 11ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I was not quite well when I wrote to you.When I am not quite well I must always writeto you ; I am better after it.Where did I leave off?Ah, Cleon ! Cleon ! I have learnt yourlesson ; I am dissembling ; it must not be withyou. My tears are falling. I acted unworthily.And are these tears indeed for my fault againstyou ? I cannot tell ; if I could, I would candidly.Every thing that has happened, everythingthat shall happen hereafter, I will layupon your knees. Counsel me — direct me.Even were I as sensible as you are, I shouldnot be able to discover my own faults. Theclearest eyes do not see the cheeks below, northe brow above them.To proceed then in my narrative. Everythingappeared to me an illusion but the tramPERICLES AND ASPASIA.gey. What was divine seemed human, andwhat was human seemed divine.An apparition of resplendent and unearthlybeauty threw aside, with his slender arms, theyouths, philosophers, magistrates, and generals,that surrounded me, with a countenance as confident,a motion as rapid, and a command asunresisted as a god.Stranger !" said he, " I come from Pericles,to offer you my assistance."I looked in his face ; it was a child's.We have attendants here who shall conductyou from the crowd," said he.Venus and Cupid !" cried one.We are dogs," growled another.Worse !" rejoined a third, " we are slaves."Happy man ! happy man ! if thou arttheirs," whispered the next in his ear, and followedus close behind.I have since been informed that Pericles, whosate below us on the first seat, was the only manPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 13who did not rise. No matter ; why should he ?why did the rest ? But it was very kind in himto send his cousin ; I mean it was very kindfor so proud a man.Epimedea wept over me when I entered herhouse, and burned incense before the Gods, andled me into my chamber.I have a great deal to say to you, my dearAspasia ; but you must go to sleep : your bathshall be ready at noon ; but be sure you sleeptill then," said she.I did indeed sleep, and (will you believe it ?)instantly and soundly. Never was bath morerefreshing, never was reproof more gentle, thanEpimedea's.I found her at my pillow when I awoke, andshe led me to the marble conch.Dear child !" said she, when I had stept in,you do not know our customs. You shouldhave come at once to my house; you nevershould have worn men's clothes : indeed you14 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.should not have gone to the theatre at all;but, being there, and moreover in men's habiliments,you should have taken care not to havefainted, as they say you did. My husband,Thessaly, would never hear of fainting; heused to tell me it was a bad example. But hefainted at last, poor man ! and — I minded hisadmonition. Why ! what a lovely child you aregrown, my little Aspasia ! Is the bath too hot ?Aspasia! can it be? why, you are no childat all !"I really do believe that this idle discourse ofEpimedea, which will tire you perhaps, was theonly one that would not have wearied out myspirits. It neither made me think nor answer.What a privilege ! what a blessing ! how seldomto be enjoyed in our conferences with the silly!Ah ! do not let me wrong the kind-heartedEpimedea ! Those are not silly who have foundthe way to our hearts ; and far other names dothey deserve who open to us theirs.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 15ASPASIA TO CLEONE.The boy about whom I wrote to you in myletter of yesterday, is called Alcibiades.* HeAlcibiades had no right to be at the theatre ; buthe might have been sent for on the occasion or havetaken the liberty to come in, hearing a bustle, forthere was nobody in Athens whom he feared or caredfor, either in his childhood or after. Thucydides callsAlcibiades a youth in the twelfth year of the Peloponnesianwar, nine years after the death of Pericles.Alcibiades was, on the mother's side, grandson ofMiracles, whose grand-daughter, Isidore, marriedCimon. Her father, Euryptolemus, was cousin-germainof Pericles. It is impossible that men so prudentand well-tempered as Pericles and Cimon, thetwo most perfect models of a gentleman that everexisted upon earth, could have been enemies. Theyheaded two opposite parties, and conscientiously. Onthis principle, Thessaly, son of Cimon, was the accuserof his cousin, Alcibiades.The leaders in Athens looked beyond and over their16 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.lisps and blushes at it. His cousin, Pericles,you may have heard, enjoys the greatest powerand reputation, both as an orator and a general,of any man in Athens. Early this morning thebeautiful child came to visit me, and told me thatwhen his cousin had finished his studies, whichhe usually had done about three hours aftersunrise, he would desire him to come also.I replied, "By no means do it, my beautifuland brave protector ! Surely, on consideringthe matter, you will think you are taking toogreat a liberty with a person so distinguished."I take no liberties with any other," said he.When I expressed in my countenance a littlesurprise at his impetuosity, he came forwardand kissed my brow. Then, said he, moresubmissively, " Pardon my rudeness. I likevery well to be told what to do by those whoare fond of me ; but never to be told what notown families. Dangerous precedent ! laudably avoidedby popular statesmen since.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 17to do ; and the more fond they are of me theless I like it. Because when they tell me whatto do, they give me an opportunity of pleasingthem ; but when they tell me what not to do, it isa sign that I have displeased, or am likely to displeasethem. Besides — I believe there are someother reasons, but they have quite escaped me.It is time I should return," said he, " or Ishall forget all about the hour of his studies,(I mean Pericles,) and mine too."I would not let him go, however, but inquiredwho were his teachers, and repeated tohim many things from Sappho, and Alcaeus,and Pindar, and Simonides. He was amazed,and told me he preferred them to Fate and Necessity,Python and Pythonissa.I could now have kissed him in my turn, buthe drew back, thinking (no doubt) that I wastreating him like a child — that a kiss is nevergiven but as the price of pardon, and that Ihad pardoned him before for his captiousness.18 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Aspasia ! I foresee that henceforward you willadmire the tragedy of Prometheus more thanever. But do not tell any one, excepting sofond a friend as Cleon, that you prefer theauthor to Homer. I agree with you that theconception of such a drama is in itself a stupendouseffort of genius ; that the execution isequal to the conception ; that the character ofPrometheus is more heroick than any in heroickpoetry; and that no production of the sameextent is so magnificent and so exalted. Butthe Iliad is not a region, it is a continent ; andyou might as well compare this prodigy to it asthe cataract of the Nile to the Ocean. In theone we are overpowered by the compressionand burst of the element ; in the other we arePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 19carried over an immensity of space, boundingthe earth, not bounded by her, and having nothingabove but the heavens.Let us enjoy, whenever we have an opportunity,the delight of admiration, and performthe duties of reverence. May others hatewhat is admirable ! We will hate likewise, Omy Aspasia ! when we can do no better. I amunable to foretell the time when this shallhappen: it lies, I think, beyond the calculationsof Seton,I am happy to understand that the Athenianshave such a philosopher among them. Hithertowe have been inclined to suppose that philosophyat Athens is partly an intricate tissue ofsubtile questions and illusory theories, knottedwith syllogisms ; and partly an indigested massof unexamined assertions and conflicting dogmas.The loans are more silent, contemplative,and recluse. Knowing that Nature20 PERICLES AND Aspasia.will not deliver her oracles in the crowd, norby sound of trumpet, they open their breaststo her in solitude, with the simplicity ofchildren, and look earnestly in her face for areply. Meton, and Democritus, and Anaxagoras,may perhaps lay their hands upon theleaping of your tettinxes, and moderate theirchirping, but I apprehend that the genius ofthe people will always repose upon the wind-skinsof the sophists. Comedy might be theircorrector ; but Comedy seems to think she hastwo offices to perform ; from one side of thestage to explode absurdity, and from the otherto introduce indecency. She might, under wiseregulations, (and these she should impose uponherself,) render more service to a state thanPhilosophy could in whatsoever other character.And I wonder that Aristophanes, sostrong in the poetical faculty, and unrivalled incritical acuteness, should not perceive that aPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 21dominion is within his reach which is within thereach of no mortal beside ; a dominion wherebyhe may reform the manners, dictate the pursuits,and regulate the affections of his countrymen.Perhaps he never could have done it soeffectually, had he been better and begun otherwise; but having, however unworthy might havebeen the means and methods, seized upon theirhumours, they now are as pliable to him aswaxen images to Tressilian witches. He keepsthem before the fire he has kindled, and he hasonly to sing the right song.Beware, my dear Aspasia, never to offendhim. He holds more terrors at his commandthan Eschylus. The tragic poet rolls thethunder that frightens, the comic wields thelightning that kills. Aristophanes has thepower of tossing you among the populace of athousand cities for a thousand years.22 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.A great poet is more powerful than Sesostris,and a wicked one more formidable than Palais.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Epimedea has been with me in my chamber.She asked me whether the women of Ionia hadleft off wearing ear-rings. I answered that I believedthey always had worn them, and that theywere introduced by the Persians, who had receivedthem from nations more remote.And do you think yourself too young," saidshe, " for such an ornament ?" producing atthe same instant a massy pair, inlaid with thelargest emeralds. " Alas ! alas ! " said she,your mother neglected you strangely. TherePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 23is no hole in the ear, right or left ! We canmend that, however ; I know a woman who willbring us the prettiest little pan of charcoal, withthe prettiest little steel rod in it; and, beforeyou can cry out, one ear lets light through.These are yours," said she, " and so shall everythingbe — house, garden, quails, leveret.""Generous Epimedea !" said I, " do not saythings that pain me. I will accept a part of thepresent ; I will wear these beautiful emeralds onone arm. Thinking of nailing them in myears, you resolved to make me steady, but I amunwilling they should become dependencies ofAttica."All our young women wear them ; theGoddesses too."The Goddesses are in the right," said I ;their ears are marble, but I do not believeany one of them would tell us that women were24 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.made to be the settings of pearls and emeralds."I had taken one, and was about to kiss her,when she said, «' Do not leave me an odd earring: put the other in the hair."Epimedea," said I, " I have made a vow-neverto wear on the head . any thing but onesingle flower, one single wheat-ear, green oryellow, and ivy or vine-leaves : the number ofthese are not mentioned in the vow."Rash child !" said Epimedea, shaking herhead ; " I never made but two vows ; one w aswhen I took a husband."And the other ? Epimedea !"No matter," said she ; " it might be, forwhat I know, never to do the like again."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 25ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Pericles has visited me. After many graveand gentle inquiries, often suspended, all relatingto my health ; and after praises of Miletusand pity for my friends left behind, hetold me that, when he was quite assured of myperfect recovery from the fatigues of the voyage,he hoped I would allow him to collect from meatmy leisure-hours, the information he wantedon the literature of Ionia. Simple-hearted man !in praising the authors of our country, heshowed me that he knew them perfectly, fromfirst to last. And now indeed his energy wasdisplayed : I thought he had none at all. Withhow sonorous and modulated a voice did herepeat fire more poetical passages of our elderVOL. I. c26 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.historians ! and how his whole soul did leanupon Herodotus ! Happily for me, he observednot my enthusiasm. And now he brought meinto the presence of Homer. " We claim him,"said he ; " but he is yours." Observe with whatpartiality he always dwells on Asia ! Howinfinitely more civilized are Glaucus and Sarpedonthan any of the Grecians he was calledupon to celebrate ! Priam, Paris, Hector,what polished men ! Civilisation has nevermade a step in advance, and never will, onthose countries ; she had gone so far in the daysof Homer. He keeps Helen pretty rigorously outof sight, but he opens his heart to the virtues ofAndromache. " What a barbarian is the sonof a goddess ! Minerva must seize him by thehair to avert the murder of his leader ; but atthe eloquence of the Phrygian king the stormof the intractable homicide bursts in tears."*« And Eschylus," said I, but could not con-periclesAND ASPASIA. 27tine : blushes rose into my cheek, and painedme at the recollection of my weakness.He has left us," said Pericles, who perceivedit, but pretended not — "I am grievedthat my prayers were inadequate to detain him.But what prayers or what expostulations caninfluence the lofty mind, labouring and heavingunder injustice and indignity? Eschylus knewhe merited, both by his genius and his services,the gratitude and admiration of the Athenians.He saw others preferred before him, and hoistedsail. At the rumour of his departure, such wasthe consternation, as if the shield of Minerva inthe Parthenon had dropt from her breast uponthe pavement. That glory shines now uponthe crown of Hiero which hath sunk forAthens."You have still great treasures left," said I ;for he was moved.True," replied he, " but will not every onec 228 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.remark, who hears the observation, that weknow not how to keep them, and have neverweighed them ?"I sate silent; he resumed his serenity.We ought to change places," said he, " atthe feet of the poets. Eschylus, I see, is yours ;Homer is mine. Aspasia should be a Pallas toAchilles ; and Pericles a subordinate power,comforting and consoling the afflicted demi-god.Impetuosity, impatience, resentment, revengeitself, are pardonable sins in the very softest ofyour sex : on brave endurance rises our admiration."*' I love those better who endure with constancy,"said I.Happy !" replied he, '' thrice happy ! OAspasia, the constancy thus tried and thus rewarded!"He spoke with tenderness; he rose with majesty;bowed to Epimedea; touched gently,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 29scarcely at all, the hand I presented to him,bent over it, and departed.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I told you I would love, O Cleon ! but I amso near it that I dare not.Tell me what I am to do ; I can do any thingbut write and think.Pericles has not returned.I am nothing here in Athens.Five days are over ; six almost.O what long days are these of Elaphebolion !^ PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Take heed, Aspasia ! All orators are deceivers; and Pericles is the greatest of orators.I will write nothing more, lest you shouldattend in preference to any other part of myletter.Yes ; I must repeat my admonition : I mustspeak out plainly; I must try other words —stronger — more frightful. Love of supremacy,miscalled political glory, finds most, and leavesall, dishonest.The Gods and Goddesses watch over andpreserve you, and send you safe home again !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 31ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Fear not for me, Cleon ! Pericles has attainedthe summit of glory; and the wisdomand virtue that acquired it for him are mysureties.A great man knows the value of greatness ;he dares not hazard it ; he will not squander it.Imagine you that the confidence and affectionof a people, so acute, so vigilant, so jealous, asthe Athenians, would have rested so firmly andconstantly on one inconstant and infirm ?If he loves me the merit is not mine ; thefault will be if he ceases.32 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.I must and will fear for you, and the morebecause I perceive that you are attracted as thebees are, by an empty sound, the fame of youradmirer. You love Pericles for that very qualitywhich ought to have set you on your guardagainst him. In contentions for power, thephilosophy and the poetry of life are droppedand trodden down. Domestic affections can nomore bloom and flourish in the hardened racecourseof politics, than flowers can find nourishmentin the pavement of the streets. In thepolitician the whole creature is factitious ; ifever he speaks as before, he speaks either frommemory or invention.But such is your beauty, such your genius,it may alter the nature of things. EndowedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 33with the power of Circe, you will exert it appositely,and restore to the most selfish and mostvoracious of animals the uprightness and dignityof man.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.It is not wisdom in itself, O Aspasia ! it isthe manner of imparting it that affects the soul,and alone deserves the name of eloquence. Ihave never been moved by any but yours.Is it the beauty that shines over it, is it thevoice that ripens it, giving it those lovelycolours, that delicious freshness ; is it the modestyand diffidence with which you present itto us, looking for nothing but support ? Sufficientwere any one of them singly; but allc 534 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.united have come forward to subdue me, andhave deprived me of my courage, my self-possession,and my repose.I dare not hope to be beloved, Aspasia ! Idid hope it once in my life, and have been disappointed.Where I sought for happiness, noneis offered me : I have neither the sunshine northe shade.If, then, I was so unfortunate in earlier days,ought I, ten years later, to believe that she, towhom the earth, with whatever is beautiful andgraceful in it, bows prostrate, will listen to measher lover? I dare not; too much have Idared already. But if, O Aspasia ! I shouldsometimes seem heavy and dull in conversation,when happier men surround you, pardon myinfirmity.I have only one wish — I may not utter it : Ihave only one fear — this at least is not irrational,and I will own it ; — the fear that Aspasiacould never be sufficiently happy with me.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 35ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Do you doubt, O Pericles, that I shall besufficiently happy with you ? This doubt ofyours assures me that I shall be.I throw aside my pen to crown the Gods;and I worship thee first, O Pallas ! who protectedthe life, enlightened the mind, establishest the power, and exalted the glory ofPericles.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.I tremble both for you and your lover. Thepeople of Athens may applaud at first the36 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.homage paid to beauty and genius ; neverthelessthere are many whose joy will spring from malignity,and who will exult at what they think(I know not whether quite unjustly) a weaknessin Pericles.I shall always be restless about you. Letme confess to you, I do not like your sheer democracies.What are they good for? Why,yes, they have indeed their use; the filth andferment of the compost are necessary for raisingrare plants.O how I wish we were again together in thatisland on our river, which we called the Fortunatet It was almost an island when yourfather cut across the isthmus of about ten paces,to preserve the swan-nest.Xeniades has left Miletus. We know notwhither he is gone, but we presume to hismines in Lemnos. It was always with difficultyhe could be persuaded to look after his affairs.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 37He is too rich, too young, too thoughtless. Butsince you left Miletus, we have nothing here todetain him.I wish I could trifle with you about yourPericles. Any wager upon it, he is the onlylover who never wrote verses upon you.In a politician a verse is an ostracism.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.My Pericles (mine, mine he is) has writtenverses upon me ; not many, nor worth hisprose, even the shortest sentence of it. Butyou will read them with pleasure for theirpraises of Miletus.No longer ago than yesterday an ugly youngphilosopher declared his passion for me, as you38 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.shall see. I did not write any thing back toPericles — I did to the other. I will not runthe risk of having half my letter left unread byyou, in your hurry to come into the poetry.Here it all is.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Flower of Ionia's fertile plains.Where Pleasure leagued with Virtue reigns.Where the Pierian Maids of old.Yea, long ere Ilion's tale was told,Too pure, too sacred for our sight.Descended with the silent nightTo young Arctinus, and MeanderDelay'd his course for Alexander !If there be city on the earthProud in the children of her birth.Wealth, science, beauty, story, song.These to Miletus all belong.To fix the diadem on his browFor ever, one was wanting — thou.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 39I could not be cruel to such a suitor, even ifhe asked me for pity. Love makes one half ofevery man foolish, and the other half cunning.Pericles touched me on the side of Miletus, andSocrates came up to me straightforward fromPrometheus.SOCRATES TO ASPASIA.1.He who stole fire from heaven.Long heav'd his bold and patient breast, 'twas rivenBy the Caucasian bird and bolts of Jove.Stolen that fire have 1,And am enchain'd to dieBy every jealous Power that frowns above.2.I call not upon thee againTo hear my vows and calm my pain.Who fittest high enthron'dWhere Venus rolls her gladsome star.Propitious Love ! But thou disown'd40 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.By sire and mother, whosoe'er they are,Unblest in form and name, Despair !Why dost thou follow that bright demon ? whyHis purest altar art thou always nigh ?I was sorry that Socrates should suffer somuch for me.Pardon the fib, Cleon ! — let it pass — I wassorry just as we all are upon such occasions,and wrote him this consolation.1.O thou who fittest with the wise,And searches higher lore.And openest regions to their eyesUnvisited before !I'd run to loose thee if I cou'd,Nor let the vulture taste thy bloodBut, pity ! pity ! Attic bee !'Tis happiness forbidden me.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 412.Despair is not for good or wise,And should not be for love ;We all must bear our destiniesAnd bend to those above.Birds flying o'er the stormy seasAlight upon their proper trees.Yet wisest men not always knowWhere they should stop, or whither go.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I am quite ashamed of Alcibiades — quiteangry with him. What do you imagine he hasbeen doing? He listened to my conversationwith Pericles, on the declaration of love fromthe Philosopher Bound, and afterwards to the42 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.verses I repeated in answer to his, which pleasedmy Pericles extremely, not perhaps for themselves,but because I had followed his advice inwriting them, and had returned to him with thecopy so speedily.Alcibiades said he did not like them at all,and could write better himself. We smiled atthis; and his cousin said, " Do then, myboy !"Would you believe it ? he not only wrote, butI fear (for he declares he did) actually sentthese :O Satyr-son of Sophroniscus !Would Alton cut me an hibiscus,I'd wield it as the goatherds do.And swing thee a sound stroke or two.Bewilder, if thou canst, us boys.Us, or the sophists, with thy toys.Thy kalokagathons — beware !Keep to the good, and leave the fair.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 43Could he really be the composer ? what thinkyou ? or did he get any of his wicked friends tohelp him ? The verses are very bold, veryscandalous, very shocking. I am vexed andsorry ; but what can be done ? We must seemto know nothing about the matter.The audacious little creature — not very little,he is within three fingers of my height— is halfin love with me. He flames up at the mentionof Socrates — can he be jealous ?Pericles tells me that the philosophers hereare as susceptible of malice as of love. It maybeso, for the plants which are sweet in someplaces are acrid in others.He said to me, smiling, " I shall be representedin their schools as a sophist, becauseAspasia and Alcibiades were unruly. O thatboy ! who knows but his mischievous verses willbe a reason sufficient, in another year, why I44 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.am unable to command an army or haranguean assembly of the people ?"XENIADES TO ASPASIA.Aspasia ! Aspasia ! have you forgotten me ?have you forgotten us Our childhood wasone, our earliest youth was undivided. Whywould you not see me ? Did you fear that youshould have to reproach me for any fault I havecommitted ? This would have pained you formerly; ah, how lately !Your absence — not absence, flight — hasbroken my health, and left me fever and frenzy.Eumenides is certain I can only recover my healthby composure. Foolish man ! as if composurePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 45were more easy to recover than health. Wasthere ever such a madman as to say, " You drillnever have the use of your Urbs again unlessyou walk and run !"I am weary of advice, of remonstrance, ofpity, of every thing ; — above all, of life.Was it anger (how dared I be angry withyou?) that withheld me from imploring thesight of you ? Was it pride ? Alas ! what prideis left me ? I am preferred no longer ; I amrejected, scorned, loathed. Was it always so?Well may I ask the question ; for every thingseems uncertain to me but my misery. Attimes I know not whether I am mad or dreaming.No, no, Aspasia ! the past was a dream,the present is a reality. The mad and thedreaming do not shed tears as I do. And yetin these bitter tears are my happiest moments ;and some angry demon knows it, and pressesmy temples that there shall fall but few.46 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.You refused to admit me. I asked too little,and deserved the refusal. Come to me. Thisyou will not refuse, unless you are bowed toslavery. Go, tell your despot this, v/ith mycurses and defiance.I am calmer, but insist. Spare yourself, Aspasia,one tear, and not by an effort, but by aduty.ASPASIA TO XENIADES.I am pained to my innermost heart that youare ill.Pericles is not the person you imagine him.Behold his billet ! And cannot you think ofme with equal generosity ?True, we saw much of each other in ourPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 47childhood, and many childish things we didtogether. This is the reason why I went outof your way as much as I could afterwards.There is another too. I hoped you would lovemore the friend that I love most. How muchhappier would she make you than the flightyAspasia ! We resemble each other too much,Xeniades ! we should never have been happy,so ill-mated. Nature hates these alliances :they are like those of brother and sister. Inever loved any one but Pericles. None elseattracts the admiration of the world. I stand,O Xeniades ! not only above slavery, but abovesplendour, in that serene light which Homerdescribes as encompassing the Happy on Olympus.I will come to visit you within the hour ;be calm, be contented ! love me, but not toomuch, Xeniades !48 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Xeniades, whom I loved a little in my childhood,and (do not look serious now, my dearestPericles !) a very little afterwards, is sadly ill.He was always, I know not how, extravagant inhis wishes, although not so extravagant as manyothers; and what do you imagine he wishesnow ? He wishes — but he is very ill, so ill hecannot rise from his bed, — that I would go andvisit him. I wonder whether it would be quiteconsiderate : I am half inclined to go, if youapprove of it.Poor youth ! He grieves me bitterly.I shall not weep before him ; I have wept somuch here. Indeed, indeed, I wept, my Pericles,only because I had written too unkindly.PERICLES AND ASPASIA, 49PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Do what your heart tells you : yes, Aspasia,do all it tells you. Remember how august itis. It contains the temple, not only of Love,but of Conscience ; and a whisper is heard fromthe extremity of the one to the extremity ofthe other.Bend in pensiveness, even in sorrow, on theflowery bank of youth, whereunto runs thestream that passes irreversibly ! let the garlanddrop into it, let the hand be refreshedby it — but — may the beautiful feet of Aspasiastand firm !VOL. I.50 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.XENIADES TO Aspasia.You promised you would return. I thoughtyou only broke hearts, not promises.It is now broad daylight : I see it clearly,although the blinds are closed. A long sharpray cuts off one corner of the room, and weshall hear the crash presently.Come; but without that pale silent girl: Ihate her. Place her on the other side of you,not on mine.And this plane-tree gives no shade whatever.We will sit in some other place.No, no ; I will not have you call her to us.Let her play where she is — the notes are low —she plays sweetly.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 51ASPASIA TO PERICLES.See what incoherency ! He did not write it,not one word. The slave who brought it, toldme that he was desired by the guest to writehis orders, whenever he found his mind composedenough to give any.About four hours after my departure, hecalled him, mildly, and said, " I am quite recovered."He gave no orders, however, and spake nothingmore for some time. At last he raisedhimself up, and rested on his elbow, and began(said the slave) like one inspired. The slaveadded, that finding he was indeed quite wellagain, both in body and mind, and capable ofmaking as fine poetry as any man in Athens,he had written down every word with the greatestD 252 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.punctuality ; and that, looking at him for more,he found he had fallen into as sound a slumberas a reaper's.Upon this I ran off with the verses,"said he.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Tears, O Aspasia, do not dwell long uponthe cheeks of youth. Rain drops easily fromthe bud, rests on the bosom of the maturerflower, and breaks down that one only whichhath lived its day.Weep, and perform the offices of friendship.The season of life, leading you by the hand,will not permit you to linger at the tomb ofthe departed ; and Xeniades, when your firstPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 53tear fell upon it, entered into the number ofthe blessed.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.What shall I say to you, tender and sweetCleon ! The wanderer is in the haven of happiness— the restless has found restWeep not ; I have shed all your tears — notall — they burst from me again.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.O ! he was too beautiful to live ! Is thereany thing that shoots through the world so54 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.swiftly as a sunbeam ! Opiates has told meevery thing. He sailed back without waitingat the islands ; by your orders, he says.What hopes could I, with any prudence, entertain?The chaplet you threw away wouldhave cooled and adorned my temples ; but howcould he ever love another who had once lovedyou ? I am casting my broken thoughts beforemy Aspasia: the little shells upon the shore,that the storm has scattered there, and that feethave trampled on.I have prayed to Venus ; but I never prayedher to turn toward me the fondness that wasyours. I fancied, I even hoped, you might acceptit ; and my prayer was — " Grant I maynever love !" Afar from me, O Goddess ! bethemalignant warmth that dries up the dewsof friendship.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 55ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Pericles has insisted on it that I shouldchange the air, and has recommended to me anexcursion to the borders of the state.If you pass them a little way," said he,you will come to Tanagra, and that will inflameyou with ambition."The honour in which I hold the name ofCorinna induced me to undertake a journey toher native place. Never have I found a peopleso hospitable as the inhabitants. Living at adistance from the sea, they are not traders, noradventurers, nor speculators, nor usurers, butcultivate a range of pleasant hills, covered withvines. Mercury is the principal God they worship; yet I doubt whether a single prayer was56 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ever offered up to him by a Tanagra for successin thievery.The beauty of Corinna is no less celebratedthan her poetry. I remarked, that the womenspeak of it with great exultation, while the menapplaud her genius ; and I asked my venerablehost, Agesilaus, how he could account for it ?I can account for nothing that you ladiesdo," said he, " although I have lived amongstyou seventy-five years : I only know that it wasexactly the contrary while she was living. Weyouths were rebuked when we talked about herbeauty ; and the rebuke was only softened bythe candid confession, that she was clever — inher ways*Come back with me to Athens, O Agesi-laus !" said I, " and we will send Aristophanesto Tanagra."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 57ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I have been reading all the poetry of Corinnathat I could collect. Certainly it is better thanHesiod's, or even than Myrtis's, who taughther and Pindar, — not the rudiments of the art,for this is the only art in which the rudimentsare incommunicable, — but what was good, whatwas bad, in her verses, why it was so, andhow she might correct the worse and improvethe better.Hesiod, who is also a Boeotian, is admirablefor the purity of his life and soundness of hisprecepts, but there is hardly a trace of poetryin his ploughed field.I find in all his writings but one verse worthtranscribing, and that only for the melody.In a soft meadow and on vernal flowers."d568 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.I do not wonder he was opposed to Homer.What an advantage to the enemies of greatness(that is, to mankind) to be able to matchone so low against one so lofty !The Greek army before Troy would havebeen curious to listen to a dispute betweenAgamemnon and Achilles, but would have beentransported with ecstasy to have been presentat one between the king of men and Thersites.There are few who possess all the poetry ofany voluminous author. I doubt whether thereare ten families in Athens in which all theplays of Eschylus are preserved. Many keepwhat pleases them most: few consider thatevery page of a really great poet has somethingin it which distinguishes him from an inferiororder : something which, if insubstantial as thealiment, serves at least as a solvent to the aliment,of strong and active minds.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 59I asked my Pericles what he thought ofHesiod.I think myself more sagacious," said he.Hesiod found out that half was more than all ;I have found out that one is."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.A slave brought to me, this morning, anenormous load of papers, as many as he couldcarry under both arms. They are treatises bythe most celebrated philosophers. Some hoursafterwards, when the sun was declining, Periclescame in, and asked me if I had examinedor looked over any portion of them. I told himI had opened those only which bore the superscriptionof famous names, but that, unless he60 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.would assist me, I was hopeless of reconcilingone part with another in the same writers.The first thing requisite," said I, " is, thatas many as are now at Athens should meet together,and agree upon a nomenclature of terms.From definitions we may go on to propositions ;but we cannot make a step unless the foot restssomewhere."He smiled at me. " Ah, my Aspasia !" saidhe, " Philosophy does not bring her sons together; she portions them off early, gives them ascanty stock of worm-eaten furniture, a chair ortwo on which it is dangerous to sit down, andat least as many arms as utensils ; then leavesthem : they seldom meet afterwards."But could not they be brought together bysome friend of the mother ?" said I, laughing.Aspasia I" answered he, '' you have livedbut few years in the world, and with only onephilosopher — Yourself."PERICLES AND Aspasia. 61I will not be contented with a compliment,"said I, " and least of all from you. Explainto me the opinions of those about you."He traced before me the divergencies olevery sect — from our countryman Thales tothose now living. Epimedea sat with her eyeswide open, listening attentively. When he wentaway, I asked her what she thought of hisdiscourse. She half closed her eyes, not fromweariness, but (as many do) on bringing out ofobscurity into light a notable discovery ; and,laying her forefinger on my arm, " You haveturned his head," said she. " He will do nolonger ; he used to be plain and coherent ; andnow — did ever mortal talk so widely ? I couldnot understand one word in twenty, and whatI could understand was sheer nonsense."Sweet Epimedea !" said I, " this is what Ishould fancy to be no such easy matter."Ah ! you are growing like him already,"62 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.said she ; " I should not be surprised to find,some morning, a cupola at the top of this prettyhead."Pericles, I think I never told you, has alittle elevation on the crown of his ; I shouldrather say his head has a crown, others havenone.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Do, my dear Aspasia, continue to write tomeabout the poets ; and if you think there isany thing of Myrtis or Corinna, which is wantingto us at Miletus, copy it out. I do notapprove of the Prologues. Nothing can bemore tiresome — hardly any thing more wicked —than many of them. It may be well, occa-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 63signally, to give something of the historicalform to the dramatic, as it is, occasionally, togive something of the dramatic to the historical; but never to turn into ridicule and buffoonerythe virtuous, the unfortunate, or thebrave. Whatever the Athenians may boast oftheir exquisite judgment, their delicate perceptions,this is a perversion of intellect in itshighest place, unworthy of a Thracian. Thereare many bad tragedies both of Eschylus andSophocles, but none without beauties — fewwithout excellencies. I tremble then at yourdoubt. In another century it may be impossibleto find a collection of the whole, unlesssome learned and rich man, like Pericles, orsome protecting king, like Hiero, should preservethem in his library.64 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Prudently have you considered how to preserveall valuable authors. The cedar doors ofa royal library fly open to receive them : ay,there they v^^ill be safe — and untouched.Hiero is, however, no barbarian. He deservesa higher station than a throne ; and heis raised to it. The protected have placed theprotector where neither the malice of men northe power of Gods can reach him — beyondTime — above Fate.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 65CLEONE TO ASPASIA.From the shortness of your last, I am quitecertain that you are busy for me in looking outpieces of verse. If you cannot find any ofMyrtis or Corinna, you may do what is better ;you may compose a panegyric on all of our sexwho have excelled in poetry. This will earnfor you the same good office, when the worldshall produce another Aspasia.Having been in Boeotia, you must also knowa great deal more of Pindar than we do. Writeabout any of them ; they all interest me ; andmy mind has need of exercise. It is still toofond of throwing itself down on one place.PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CleanedAnd so, Cleon, you wish me to write aeulogy on Myrtis and Corinna, and all theother poetesses that ever lived ; and this is forthe honour of our sex ! Ah, Cleon ! nostudied eulogy does honour to any one. It isalways considered, and always ought to be,as a piece of pleading, in which the pleadersays every thing the most in favour of hisclient, in the most graceful and impressivemanner he can. There is a city of Greece, Ihear, in which reciprocal flattery is so necessary,that, whenever a member of the assemblydies, his successor is bound to praise him beforehe takes the vacant seat.I do not speak this from my own knowledge ;indeed I could hardly believe in such frivolity.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 67until I asked Pericles if it were true ; or rather,if there were any foundation at all for thereport.Perfectly true," said he ; " but the citizensof this city are now become our allies ; thereforedo not curl your lip, or I must uncurl it,being an archon."Myrtis and Corinna have no need of me.To read and recommend their works, to pointout their beauties and defects, is praise enough.How !" methinks you exclaim. " To pointout defects ! is that praising?"Yes, Cleon ; if with equal good faith andaccuracy you point out their beauties too. Itis only thus a fair estimate can be made ; andit is only by such fair estimate that a writercan be exalted to his proper station. If youtoss up the scale too high, it descends againrapidly below its equipoise; what it containsdrops out, and people catch at it, scatter it, andlose it.68 . PERICLES AND ASPASIA.We not only are inclined to indulge in rathermore than a temperate heat (of what we wouldpersuade ourselves is very wholesome severity)towards the living, but even to peer sometimesinto the tomb, with a wolfish appetite for anunpleasant odour.We must patronise, we must pull down ; infact, we must be in mischief, men or women.If we are capable of showing what is good inanother, and neglect to do it, we omit a duty ;we omit to give rational pleasure, and to conciliateright good-will ; nay more, we are abettors,if not aiders, in the vilest fraud, the fraudof purloining from respect. We are entrustedwith letters of great interest; what a basenessnot to deliver them !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 69ASPASIA TO CLEONE.It is remarkable that Athens, so fertile inmen of genius, should have produced no womenof distinction ; while Boeotia, by no means celebratedfor brightness of intellect in either sex,presented to the admiration of the world herMyrtis and Corinna. At the feet of Myrtis itwas, that Pindar gathered into his throbbingbreast the scattered seeds of poetry; and itwas under the smile of the beautiful Corinnathat he drew his inspiration and wove his immortalcrown.He never quite overcame his grandiloquence.The animals we call half-asses, by a word ofthe sweetest sound, although not the most seducingimport, he callsThe daughters of the tempest-footed steeds !"PERICLES AND ASPASIA.O Fortune ! that the children of so illustriousa line should carry sucking-pigs into the marketplace,and cabbage-stalks out of it !CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Will you always leave off, Aspasia, at thevery moment you have raised our expectationsto the highest? A witticism, and a suddenspring from your seat, lest we should see yousmile at it — these are your ways ; shame uponyou ! Are you determined to continue all yourlife in making every one wish something ?Pindar should not be created like ordinarymen.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 71ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I have not treated Pindar like an ordinaryman ; I conducted him into the library ofCleon, and left him there. However, I wouldhave my smile out, behind the door. The verseI quoted, you may be sure, is much admiredby the learned, and no less by the brave andworthy men whom he celebrates for charioteer-ship,and other such extremities ; but we, of oldMiletus, have been always taught that wordsshould be subordinate to ideas, and we neverplace the pedestal on the head of the statue.Now, do not tell any body that I have spokena single word in dispraise of Pindar. Men arenot too apt to admire what is admirable in theirsuperiors, but, on the contrary, are very apt todetract from them, and to seize on any thing72 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.which may tend to lower them. Pindar wouldnot have written so exquisitely if no fault hadever been found with him. He would havewandered on among such inquiries as those hebegan in : —Shall I sing tha wide-spreading and nobleIsmenus ? or the beautiful and white-ankleBelie ? or the glorious Cadmus 9 or the mightyHercules ? or the blooming Bacchus?"Now, a poet ought to know what he is aboutbefore he opens his lips. He ought not to ask,like a poor fellow in the street, " Good people !what song will you have 9" This, however, wasnot the fault for which he was blamed by Corinna.In our censures, we are less apt toconsider the benefit we may confer than theingenuity we can display.She said, " Pindar ! you have brought a sackof corn to sow a perch of land; and, insteadof sprinkling it about, you have emptied thesack at the first step,"PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 73Enough: this reproof formed his character:it directed his beat, it singled his aim,it concentrated his forces. It was not bythe precepts of Corinna, it was not by herexample, it was by one witticism of a wiseand lovely woman, that he far excels allother poets in disdain of triviality and choiceof topics. He is sometimes very tedious tousin his long stories of families, but we maybesure he was not equally so to those whowere concerned in the genealogy. We areamused at his cleverness in saving the shoulderof Pelops from the devouring jaw of a hungryGod. No doubt he mends the matter; neverthelesshe tires us.Many prefer his Dithyrambic to his Olympian,Isthmian, Pythian, and Nemean Odes :I do not ; nor is it likely that he did himself.We may well suppose that he exerted theii\ost power on the composition, and the mostVOL. I. E74 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.thought on the correction, of the poems hewas to recite before kings and nations, inhonour of the victors at those solemn games.Here the chorusses and bands of musick werecomposed of the first singers and players in theworld ; in the others there were no performersbut such as happened to assemble on ordinaryfestivals, or at best at a festival of Bacchus.In the Odes performed at the games, althoughthere is not always perfect regularity of correspondingverse, there is always enough of itto satisfy the most fastidious ear. In theDithyrambic there is no order whatsoever, butverses and half-verses of every kind, cementedby vigorous and sounding prose.I do not love dances upon stilts ; they mayexcite the applause and acclamations of thevulgar, but we, Cleon, exact the observanceof established rules, and never put on slippers,however richly embroidered, unless they pair.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 75CLEONE TO ASPASIA.We hear that between Athens and Syracusethere has always been much communication.Let me learn what you have been able to collectabout the Ives of Pindar and Eschylus inSicily.Is it not strange that the two most high-mindedof poets should have gone to reside in aforeign land, under the dominion of a king ?I am ashamed of my question already. Suchmen are under no dominion. It is not in theirnature to offend against the laws, or to thinkabout what they are, or who administers them ;and they may receive a part of their sustenancefrom kings, as well as from cows and bees.We will reproach them for emigration, whenwe reproach a man for lying down in his neigh -276 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.hour's field, because the grass is softer in itthan in his ownASPASIA TO CLEONE.Not an atom have I been able to collect inregard to the two poets, since they went to thecourt of Hiero ; but I can give you as correctand as full information as if I had been seatedbetween them all the while.Hiero was proud of his acquisition ; thecourtiers despised them, vexed them wheneverthey could, and entreated them to commandtheir services and rely upon their devotion.What more? They esteemed each other;but poets are very soon too old for mutuallove.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 77He who can add one syllable to this, shallhave the hand of Cleon,CLEONE TO ASPASIA,Torturing girl ! and you, Aspasia, may justlysay, ungrateful girl ! to me. You did not giveme what I asked for, but you gave me what isbetter, a glimpse of you. This is the mannerin which you used to trifle with me, making theheaviest things light, the thorniest tractable,and throwing your own beautiful brightnesswherever it was most wanted.But do not slip from me again. Eschylus,we know, is dead ; we hear that Pindar is. Didthey die abroad ?Ah poor Xeniades ! how miserable to beburied by the stranger !78 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Eschylus, at the close of his seventieth year,died in Sicily. I know not whether Hiero receivedhim with all the distinction he merited,or rewarded him with the same generosity asPindar ; nor indeed have I been able to learn,what would very much gratify me, that Pindar,who survived him four years, and died lately,paid those honours to the greatest man of themost glorious age since earth rose out of chaos,which he usually paid with lavish hand to theprosperous and powerful. I hope he did ; butthe words wealth and gold occur too often inthe poetry of Pindar.Perhaps I may wrong him, for a hope is akinto a doubt; it may be that I am mistaken, sincewe have not all his poems even her'fe in Athens.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 79Several of these too, particularly the Dithyrambic,are in danger of perishing. The odeson the victors at the games will be preservedby the vanity of the families they celebrate;and, being thus safe enough for many years,their own merit will sustain them afterwards.It is owing to a stout nurse that many havelived to an extreme old age.Some of the odes themselves are of littlevalue in regard to poetry, but he exercises inall of them as much dexterity as the worthieshe applauds had displayed in their exploits*To compensate the disappointment you complainedof, I will now transcribe for you anodeof Corinna to her native town, being quitesure it is not in your collection. Let me firstinform you that the exterior of the best housesin Tanagra is painted with historical scenes,adventures of Gods, allegories, and other things ;and under the walls of the city flows the rivulet80 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Thermidor. This it is requisite to tell youof so small and so distant a place.Corunna TO TAN AGRA.From Athens,1.Tanagra I think not I forgetThy beautifully-storied streets ;Be sure my memory bathes yetIn clear Thermidor, and yet greetsThe blythe and liberal shepherd-boy.Whose sunny bosom swells with joyWhen we accept his matted rushesUpheaval with sylvan fruit; away he bounds, andblushes.2.I promise to bring back with meWhat thou with transport wilt receive.The only proper gift for thee.Of which no mortal shall bereavePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 81In later times thy mouldering walls.Until the last old turret falls ;A crown, a crown from Athens won,A crown no God can wear, beside Latona's son.There may be cities who refuseTo their own child the honours due,And look ungently on the Muse ;But ever shall those cities rueThe dry, unyielding, niggard breast.Offering no nourishment, no rest,To that young head which soon shall riseDisdainfully, in might and glory, to the skies.Sweetly where cavern'd Dire flowsDo white-arm'd maidens chaunt my lay,Flapping the while with laurel-roseThe honey-gathering tribes away ;E 58*2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.And sweetly, sweetly, Attick tonguesLisp your Comma's early songs ;To her with feet more graceful comeThe verses that have dwelt in kindred breasts at home.O let thy children lean aslantAgainst the tender mother's knee.And gaze into her face, and wantTo know what magic there can beIn words that urge some eyes to dance.While others as in holy tranceLook up to heaven ; be such my praise !Why linger? I must haste, or lose the Delphic bays.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Epimedea, it appears, has not corrupted verygrossly your purity and simplicity in dress.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. b3Yet, remembering your observation on armlets,I cannot but commend your kindness and sufferancein wearing her emeralds. Your opinionwas formerly, that we should be careful not tosubdivide our persons. The arm is composedof three parts; no one of them is too long.Now the armlet intersects that very portion ofit which must be considered as the most beautiful.In my idea of the matter, the sandalalone is susceptible of gems, after the zone hasreceived the richest. The zone is necessary toour vesture, and encompasses the person, inevery quarter of the humanized world, in oneinvariable manner. The hair too is divided bynature in the middle of the head. There is acousinship between the hair and the flowers ;and from this relation the poets have called bythe same name the leaves and it. They appearon the head as if they had been seeking oneanother. Our national dress, very different from84 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.the dresses of barbarous nations, is not the inventionof the ignorant or the slave; but the sculptor,the painter, and the poet, have studied how bestto adorn the most beautiful object of their fanciesand contemplations. The Indians, who believethat human pains and sufferings are pleasing tothe deity, make incisions in their bodies, andinsert into them imperishable colours. Theyalso adorn the ears and noses and foreheads oftheir Gods. These were the ancestors of theEgyptian; we chose handsomer and better-temperedones for our worship, but retained thesame decorations in our sculpture, and to a degreewhich the sobriety of the Egyptian hadmerely reduced and chastened. Hence we retainthe only mark of barbarism which dishonorsour national dress, the use of earrings.If our statues should all be broken bysome convulsion of the earth, would it be believedby future ages that, in the country andPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 85age of Sophocles, the women tore holes in theirears to let rings into, as the more brutal ofpeasants do with the snouts of sows !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Cleon, I do not know whether I ought towrite out for you any thing of Minerals.What is amatory poetry without its tenderness ?and what was ever less tender than his ? Takehowever the verses, such as they are. Whetherthey make you smile or look grave, without anygrace of their own they must bring one forward.Certainly they are his best, which cannot besaid of every author out of whose rarer works Ihave added something to your collection.I wish not Thasos rich in mines.Nor Naxos girt around with vines.Nor Crete nor Samos, the abodesOf those who govern men and Gods,PERICLES AND Aspasia.Nor wider Lydia, where the soundOf tymbrels shakes the thymy ground.And with white feet and with hoofs clovenThe deal dance is spun and woven :Meanwhile each prying younger thingIs sent for water to the spring,Under where red Priapus rearsHis club amid the junipers ;In this whole world enough for meIs any spot the Gods decree ;Albeit the pious and the wiseWould tarry where, like mulberries.In the first hour of ripeness fallThe tender creatures, one and all.To take what falls with even mindJove wills, and we must be resign'd.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.There is less effrontery in those verses ofMinerals than in most he has written. HePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 87is among the many poets who never make uslaugh or weep ; among the many whom we takeinto the hand like pretty insects, turn themover, look at them for a moment, and toss theminto the grass again. The earth swarms withthese ; they live their season, and others similarcome into life the next.I have been reading works widely differentfrom theirs ; the Odes of the lovely Lesbian.I think she has injured the phaleucian verse,by transposing one foot, and throwing it backward.How greatly more noble and more sonorousare those hendecasyllabicks commencingthe Scholium on Harmonious and Aristogiton,than the very best of her's, which, to my ear,labor and shuffle in their movement. Hergenius was wonderful, was prodigious. I amneither blind to her beauties nor indifferent toher sufferings. We love for ever those whomwe have wept for when we were children : we88 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.love them more than even those who have weptfor us. Now, I have grieved for Sappho, andso have you, Aspasia ! we shall not thereforebe hard judges of her sentiments or her poetry.Frequently have we listened to the most absurdand extravagant praises of the answer shegave Alcaeus, when he told her he wished to saysomething, but shame prevented him. Thisanswer of her's is a proof that she was deficientboth in delicacy and in tenderness. CouldSappho be ignorant how infantine inarticulateis early love? Could she be ignorant that shameand fear seize it unrelentingly by the throat,while hard-hearted impudence stands at ease,prompt at opportunity, and profuse in declarations?There is a gloom in deep love, as in deepwater: there is a silence in it which suspendsthe foot; and the folded arms and the dejectedhead are the images it reflects. No voice shakesPERICLES AND Aspasia. 89its surface : the Muses themselves approach itwith a tardy and a timid step, and with a lowand tremulous and melancholy song.The best Ode of Sappho, the Ode to Anac-doria,Happy as any God is he* &c.shows the intemperance and disorder of passion.The description of her malady may be quitecorrect, but I confess my pleasure ends at thefirst strophe, where it begins with the generalityof readers. I do not desire to know the effectsof the distemper on her body, and I rim out ofthe house into the open air, although the symptomshave less in them of contagion than ofunseemliness. Both Sophocles and Euripidesexcite our sympathies more powerfully andmore poetically.I will not interfere any farther with your reflections; and indeed when I began, I intendedto remark only the injustice of Sappho's reproof9d PERICLES AND ASPASIA.to Alcaeus in the first instance, and the justiceof it in the second, when he renewed his suit toher after he had fled from battle. We find itin the only epigram attributed to her.He who from battle runs awayMay pray and sing, and sing and pray ;Nathless, Alcaeus, howsoe'erDulcet his song and warm his pray'rAnd true his vows of love may be,He ne'er shall run away with me.In my opinion no lover should be dismissedwith contumely, or without the expression ofcommiseration, unless he has committed somebad action. O Aspasia ! it is hard to love, andnot to be loved again, I felt it early ; I stillfeel it. There is a barb beyond the reach ofdittany ; but years, as they roll by us, benumbin some degree our sense of suffering. Seasoncomes after season, and covers as it were withPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 91soil and herbage the flints that have cut us socruelly in our course.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Alcaeus, often admirable in his poetry, was avain-glorious and altogether worthless man. Imust defend Sappho. She probably knew hischaracter at the beginning, and sported a witticism(not worth much) at his expense. Hemade a pomp and parade of his generosity andcourage, with which in truth he was but scantilysupplied, and all his love lay commodiously atthe point of his pen, among the rest his first.He was unfit for publick life, he was unfit forprivate. Perverse, insolent, selfish, he hatedtyranny because he could not be a tyrant. Sufficientlywell-born, he was jealous and intolerantof those who were nothing less so, and92 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.he wished they were all poets that he might exposea weakness the more in them. For rarelyhas there been one, however virtuous, withoutsome vanity and some invidiousness ; despiserof the humble, detractor of the high, iconoclastof the near, and idolater of the distant.Return we to Alcaeus. Factitious in tenderness,factitious in heroism, addicted to falsehood,and unabashed at his fondness for it, he attackedand overcame every rival in that quarter. Hepicked up all the arrows that were shot againsthim, rejected all the venom of every point, andwas almost an Archilochus in satire.I do not agree with you in your censure ofSappho. There is softness by the side ofpower, discrimination by the side of passion.In this, however, I do agree with you, that herfinest ode is not to be compared to many chorussesin the tragedians. We know that Sapphofelt acutely; yet Sappho is never pathetick.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 93Euripides and Sophocles are not remarkablefor the purity, the intensity, or the fidelity oftheir loves, yet they touch, they transfix, theheart Her imagination, her whole soul, is absorbedin her own breast : she is the prey ofthe passions ; they are the lords and masters.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Do you remember the lively Hegemon, whosecurls you pressed down with your forefinger tosee them spring up again ? Do you rememberhis biting it for the liberty you had taken ; andhis kissing it to make it well ; and his tellingyou that he was not quite sure whether someother kisses, here and there, might not be requisiteto prevent the spreading of the venom ?And do you remember how you turned pale ?and how you laughed with me, as we went away,94 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.at his thinking you turned pale because youwere afraid of it ? The boy of fifteen, as hewas then, hath lost all his liveliness, all hisassurance, all his wit; and his radiant beautyhas taken another character. His cousin Prax-inde, whom he was not aware of loving untilshe was betrothed to Calls, a merchant ofSamos, was married a few months ago. Thereare no verses I read oftener than the loosedithyrambic of poor Hegemon. Do peoplelove any where else as we love here at Miletus ?But perhaps the fondness of Hegemon may abateafter a time; for Hegemon is not a woman.How long and how assiduous are we in spinningthat thread, the softest and finest in the web oflife, which Destiny snaps asunder in one moment!yERlCLES AND ASPASIA. 95HEGEMON TO PRAXINOE.Is there any season, O my soul.When the sources of bitter tears dry up.And the uprooted flowers take their places againAlong the torrent-bed ?Could I wish to live, it would be for that season,To repose my limbs and press my temples there.But should I not speedily start awayIn the hope to trace and follow thy steps !Thou art gone, thou art gone, Praxinoe !And hast taken far from me thy lovely youth.Leaving me naught that was desirable in mine.Alas ! alas ! what hast thou left me ?The helplessness of childhood, the solitude of age.The laughter of the happy, the pity of the scorner,A colourless and broken shadow am I,Seen glancing in troubled waters.96 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.My thoughts too are scattered ; thou hast cast them off;They beat against thee, they would cling to thee,But they are viler than the loose dark weeds.Without a place to root or rest in.I would throw them across my lyre; they drop from it ;My lyre will sound only two measures ;That Pity will never, never come.Or come to the sleep that awakened not unto her.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Tell Hegemon that his verses have made adeeper impression than his bite, and that theAthenians, men and women, are pleased withthem. He has shown that he is a poet, by notattempting to show that he is overmuch of one.Forbear to inform him that we Athenians disapproveof irregularity in versification ; we arelittle pleased to be rebounded from the end ofPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 97a line to the beginning, as it often happens, andto be obliged to turn back and make inquiriesin regard to what we have been about. Therehave latterly been many compositions in whichit is often requisite, to read twice over the verseswhich have already occupied more than a dueportion of our time in reading once. The is by no means a pleasant or agraceful exercise, but it is quite intolerablewhen we invert it to a jump-skip-and-hop.I take some liberty in these strange novel compounds,but no greater than our friend Aristophaneshas taken, and not only without reproofor censure, but with great commendation forit. However, I have done it for the first andlast time, and before the only friend with whomthey can be pardonable. Henceforward, I promiseyou, Cleon, I will always be Attick, or,what is graceful and better still, Ionian. Youshall for ever hear my voice in my letters, andVOL. I. r98 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.you shall know it to be mine, and mine only.Already I have had imitators in the style of myconversations, but they have imitated others too,and this hath saved me. In mercy and pure beneficenceto me, the Gods have marred the resemblance.Nobody can recognise me in mymetempsychosis. Those who had hoped andheard better of me, will never ask themselves,Was Aspasia so wordy, so inelegant, affected,and perverse ? Inconsiderate friends have hurtme worse than enemies could do: they havehinted that the orations of Pericles have beenretouched by my pen. Cleon ! the Gods themselvescould not correct his language. Humaningenuity, with all the malice and impudencethat usually accompany it, will never be able toremodel a single sentence, or to substitute asingle word, in his speeches to the people.What wealth of wisdom has he not thrown awaylest it encumber him in the Agora ! how muchPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 911more than ever was carried into it by the mostpopular of his opponents ! Some of my expressionsmay have escaped from him in crowdedplaces ; some of his cling to me in retirement :v;^e cannot love without imitating ; and we areasproud in the loss of our originality as of ourfreedom. I am sorry that poor Hegemon hasnot had an opportunity of experiencing all this.Persuade his friends never to pity him, truly orfeignedly, for pity keeps the wound open : persuadethem rather to flatter him on his poetry,for never was there poet to whom the love ofpraise was not the first and most constant ofpassions. His friends will be the gainers by it :he will divide among them all the affectionhe fancies he has reserved for Praxinoe. Withmost men, nothing seems to have happened solong ago as an affair of love. Let nobody hintthis to him at present. It is among the manytruths that ought to be held back ; it is amongF 2TOO PERICLES AND ASPASIA.the many that excite a violent opposition at onetime, and obtain at another (not much lateravery ductile acquiescence ; he will receive ithereafter (take my word for him) with onlyone slight remonstrance — you are too hardupo7i ns lovers: then follows a shake of thehead, not of abnegation, but of sanction, likeJupiter's.Praxinoe, it seems, is married to a merchant,poor girl ! I do not like these merchants. Letthem have wealth in the highest, but net beautyin the highest; cunning and calculation canhardly merit both. At last they may aspire, if anycivilized country could tolerate it, to honoursand distinctions. These too let them have, butat Tyre and Carthage.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 101CLEONE TO ASPASIA.How many things in poetry, as in other matters,are likely to be lost because they aresmall ! Cleobuline of Linton wrote no longpoem. Her lover was Cydnus of Colophon.There is not a single verse of her's in all thatcity ; proof enough that he took no particularcare of them. At Miletus she was quite unknown,not indeed by name, but in her worksuntil the present month, when a copy of themwas offered to me for sale. The first thatcaught my eyes was this ;Where is the swan of breast so whiteIt made my bubbling life run brightOn that one spot, and that alone.On which he rested ; and 1 stoodGazing : now swells the turbid flood ;Summer and he for other climes are flown !102 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.I will not ask you at present to say any thingin praise of Cleobuline, but do be grateful toMyrtis and Corinna !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Grateful I am, and shall for ever be, toMyrtis and Corinna ; but what odour of bud orincense can they wish to be lavished on theempty sepulchre, what praises of the thousandwho praise in ignorance, or of the learned whopraise from tradition, when they remember thatthey subdued and regulated the proud unrulyPindar, and agitated with all their passion thecalm pure breast of Cleon !Send me the whole volume of Cleobuline ;transcribe nothing more. To compensate youPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 103as well as I can, and indeed I think the compensationis not altogether an unfair one, hereare two little pieces from Myrtis, autographs,from the library of Pericles.Artemis, while Arian sighs,Raising her white and taper finger.Pretends to loose, yet makes to linger,The ivy that overshadow her eyes.^^ Wait, or you shall not have the kiss,"Says she ; but he, on wing to pleasure,Are there not other hours for leisure ?For love is any hour like this ?"Artemis ! faintly thou respondent.As falsely deems that fiery youth ;A God there is who knows the truth,A God who tells me which is fondest.Here is another, in the same hand, a veryclear and elegant one. Men may be negligent104 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.in their hand-writing, for men may be in ahurry about the business of Use ; but I neverknew either a sensible woman or an estimableone whose writing was disorderly.Well, the verses are prettier than my reflection,and equally true.I will not love !These sounds have oftenBurst from a troubled breast ;Rarely from one no sig-hs could softenRarely from one at rest.Myrtis and Corinna, like Anacreon andSappho who preceded them, were temperate inthe luxuries of poetry. They had enough todowith one feeling ; they were occupied enoughwith one reflection. They culled but few grapesfrom the bunch, and never dragged it across theteeth, stripping off ripe and unripe.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 105CLEONE TO ASPASIA.The verses of Myrtis, which you sent melast, are somewhat less pleasing to me thanthose others of hers which I send you in return.A few loose ideas on the subject (I knownot whether worth writing) occur to me at thismoment. Formerly we were contented withschools of philosophy ; we now begin to talkabout schools of poetry. Is not that absurd?There is only one school, the universe; oneonly school-mistress, Nature. Those who arereported to be of such or such a school, are ofnone ; they have played the truant. Some aremore careful, some more negligent, some bringmany dishes, some fewer, some little seasoned,some highly. Ground however there is forf5106 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.the fanciful appellation. The young poets atMiletus are beginning to throw off their allegianceto the established and acknowledged lawsof Athens, and are weary of following in thetrain of the graver who have been crowned.The various schools, as they call them, haveassumed distinct titles; but the largest andmost flourishing of all would be discontented, Iam afraid, with the properest I could inscribeit with, the queer We really have at presentin our city more good poets than we ever had ;and the queer might be among the best if theypleased. But whenever an obvious and naturalthought presents itself, they either reject itfor coming without imagination, or they phry-granite it with such biting and hot curling-irons,that it rolls itself up impenetrably. Theydeclare to us that pure and simple imaginationis the absolute perfection of poetry ; and if everthey admit a sentence or reflection, it must bePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 107one which requires a whole day to unravel andwind it smoothly on the distaff.To me it appears that poetry ought neitherto be all body nor all soul. Beautiful features,limbs compact, sweetness of voice, and easinessof transition, belong to the Deity who inspiresand represents it. We may loiter by the streamand allay our thirst as it runs, but we shouldnot be forbidden the larger draught from thedeeper well.FROM Mortis.Friends whom she lookt at blandly from her couchAnd her white wrist above it, gem-bedewed.Were arguing with Pentheus : she had heardReport of Creon's death, whom years beforeShe listened to, well-pleas'd ; and sighs arose ;For sighs full often fondle with reproofsAnd will be fondled by them.When I came.108 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.After the rest to visit her, she said,Myrtis ! how kind ! Who better knows than thouThe pangs of love ? and my first love was he !Tell me, if ever, Eros ! are reveal'dThy secrets to the earth, have they been trueTo any love who speak about the first ?What ! shall these holier lights, like twinkling starsIn the few hours assign'd them, change their place,And, when comes ampler splendour, disappear ?Idler I am, and pardon, not reply.Implore from thee, thus questioned ; well I knowThou strikes, like Olympian Jove, but once.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Lysicles, a young Athenian, fond of travelling,has just returned to us from a voyage in Thrace.A love of observation, in other words curiosity,could have been his only motive, for he neverPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 109was addicted to commerce, nor disciplined inphilosophy ; and indeed were he so, Thrace ishardly the country he would have chosen. Ibelieve he is the first that ever travelled withno other intention than to see the cities andknow the manners of barbarians. He representsthe soil as extremely fertile in its nature,and equally well cultivated, and the inhabitantsas warlike, hospitable, and courteous. All thisis credible enough, and perhaps as generallyknown as might be expected of regions so remoteand perilous. But Ly sides will appearto you to have assumed a little more than thefair privileges of a traveller, in relating that thepeople have so imperfect a sense of religion asto bury the dead in the temples of the Gods,and the priests so avaricious and shameless asto claim money for the permission of this impiety.He told us, furthermore, that he hadseen a magnificent temple, built on somewhat of110 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.a Grecian model, in the interior of which thereare many flat marbles fastened with iron crampsagainst the walls, and serving for monuments.Continuing his discourse, he assured us thatthese monuments, although none are ancient,are of all forms and dimensions, as if the Thracianwere resolved to waste and abolish thesymmetry they had adopted, and that they areinscribed in an obsolete language ; so that thepeople whom they might animate and instruct,by recording brave and virtuous actions, passthem carelessly by, breaking ofi* now and thena nose from a conqueror, and a wing from anagathodemon.Thrace is governed by many princes. Oneof them. Teres of Odyssey,* has gained great adheresnot only governed the larger part ofThrace, but influenced many of the free and independentstates in that country, and led into the fieldthe Gets, the Agrarian, the Lessons, and the Pceo-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. Illvantages in war. No doubt, this is uninterestingto you, but it is necessary to the course ofmy narration. Will you believe it ? yet Lysiclesis both intelligent and trustworthy — will youbelieve that, at the return of the Thracianprince to enjoy the fruits of his victory, heordered an architect to build an arch for himselfand his army to pass under, on their roadinto the city ? As if a road, on such an occasion,ought not rather to be widened than narrowed !If you will not credit this of a barbarian, whois reported to be an intelligent and prudentman in other things, you will exclaim, I fear,against the exaggeration of Lysicles and mynians. Thucydides says that to coast his kingdomrequired four days and four nights for the swiftestvessel sailing before the wind ; and that by land anexpeditious walker would hardly cross it in thirteendays. Stances, the son of Teres, ravaged all Macedoniain the reign of Perdiccas.112 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.credulity, when I relate to you on his authoritythat, to the same conqueror, by his command,there has been erected a column sixty cubitshigh, supporting his effigy in marble !Imagine the general of an army standingupon a column of sixty cubits to show himself !A crane might do it after a victory over apygmy ; or it might aptly represent the virtuesof a rope-dancer, exhibiting how little he wassubject to dizziness.I will write no more about it, for really I ambeginning to think that some pretty Thracianhas given poor Lysicles a love-potion, and thatit has affected his brain a little.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Never will I believe that a people, howeverotherwise ignorant and barbarous, yet capablePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 1 13of turning a regular arch and of erecting a loftycolumn, can be so stupid and absurd as youhave represented. What ! bury dead bodies inthe temples ! cast them out of their own housesinto the houses of the Gods ! Depend upon it,Aspasia, they were the bones of victims; andthe strange uncouth inscriptions commemoratevotive offerings, in the language of the priests,whatever it may be. So far is clear. Regardingthe arch, Lysicles saw them removing it,and fancied they were building it. This mistakeis really ludicrous. The column, you musthave perceived at once, was erected, not to displaythe victor, but to expose the vanquished.A blunder very easy for an idle traveller tocommit. Few of the Thracian, I conceive,even in the interior, are so utterly ignorant ofGrecian arts, as to raise a statue at such aheight above the ground, that the vision shall114 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.not comprehend all the features easily, and thespectator see and contemplate the object of hisadmiration, as nearly and in the same positionas he was used to do in the Agora.The monument of the greatest man shouldbe only a bust and a name. If the name aloneis insufficient to illustrate the bust, let themboth perish.Enough about Thracian; enough abouttombs and monuments. Two pretty Milesian,Agapenthe and Peristera, who are in love withyou for loving me, are quite resolved to kissyour hand. You must not detain them longwith you : Miletus is not to send all her beautyto be kept at Athens. We have no suchtreaty.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 115ASPASIA TO CLEONE.There is such a concourse of philosophers,all anxious to show Alcibiades the road toVirtue, that 1 am afraid they will completelyblock it up before him. Among the rest is myold friend Socrates, who seems resolved totransfer to him all the philosophy he designedfor me, with very little of that which I presentedto him in return.And (would you believe it ?) Alcibiades, whobegan with ridiculing him, now attends to himwith as much fondness as Hyacinthus did toApollo. The graver and uglier philosophers,however they differ on other points, agree inthese ; that beauty does not reside in the body,but in the mind ; that philosophers are theonly true heroes; and that heroes alone are116 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.entitled to the privilege of being implicitlyobeyed by the beautiful.Doubtless there may be very fine pearls invery uninviting shells; but our philosophersnever wade knee-deep into the beds, attractedrather to what is bright externally.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Alcibiades ought not to have captious orinquisitive men about him. I know not whatthe sophists are good for ; I only know theyare the very worst instructors. I^ogick, howeverperverted, is not for boys ; argumentationis among the most dangerous of earlypractices, and sends away both fancy and modesty.The young mind should be nourishedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 117with simple and grateful food, and not too copious.It should be little exercised until itsnerves and muscles show themselves, and eventhen rather for air than any thing else. Studyis the bane of boyhood, the aliment of youth,the indulgence of manhood, and the restorativeof age.I am confident that persons like you andPericles see little of these sharpers who platricks upon words. It is amusing to observehow they do it, once or twice. As there aresome flowers which you should smell but slightlyto extract all that is pleasant in them, andwhich, if you do otherwise, emit what is unpleasantor noxious, so there are some menwith whom a slight acquaintance is quite sufficientto draw out all that is agreeable, a moreintimate one would be unsatisfactory and unsafe.118 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Pericles rarely says he likes any thing ; butwhenever he is pleased, he expresses it by hiscountenance, although when he is displeased henever shows it, even by the faintest sign. Itwas long before I ventured to make the observationto him. He replied,It would be ungrateful and ungentle not toreturn my thanks for any pleasure imparted tome,when a smile has the power of conveyingthem. I never say that a thing pleases mewhile it is yet undone or absent, lest I shouldgive somebody the trouble of performing orproducing it. As for what is displeasing, Ireally am very insensible in general to mattersof this nature ; and when I am not so, I experiencemore of satisfaction in subduing my feelingthan I ever felt of displeasure at the oc-periclesAND A SPA SI A. 119currency which excited it. Politeness is initself a power, and takes away the weight andgalling from every other we may exercise. Iforesee," he added, " that Alcibiades will be anelegant man, but I apprehend he will never beapolite one. There is a difference, and agreater than we are apt to perceive or imagine.Alcibiades would win without conciliating : hewould seize and hold, but would not acquire.The man who is determined to keep others fastand firm, must have one end of the bond abouthis own breast, sleeping and waking."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Agapenthe and Peristera, the bearers of yourletter, came hither in safety and health, lateas the season is for navigation. They complain120 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.of our cold climate in Athens, and shudder atthe sight of snow upon the mountains in thehorizon.Hardly had they been seen with me, beforethe housewives and sages were indignant attheir effrontery. In fact, they gazed in wonderat the ugliness of our sex in Attica, and at thegravity of philosophers, of whom stories so ludicrousare related. I do not think I shall beable to find them lovers here. Peristera hathlost a little of her dove-like faculty, (if ever shehad much,) at the report which has been raisedabout her cousin and herself. Dracontides wasvery fond of Agapenthe ; she, however, was byno means so fond of him, which is always thecase when young men would warm us at theirfire before ours is kindled. For, honestly toconfess the truth, the very best of us are morecapricious than sensitive, and more sensitivethan grateful. Dracontides is not indeed a manPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 121to excite so delightful a feeling. He is confidentthat Peristera must be the cause of Aga-gentle'sdisinclination to him; for how is itpossible that a young girl of perverted mindcould be indifferent to Dracontides? Unableto discover that any sorceress was employedagainst him, he turned his anger toward Perishand declared in her presence that her malignityalone could influence so abusively thegenerous mind of Agapenthe. At my requestthe playful girl consented to receive him.Seated upon an amphora in the aviary, she wasstroking the neck of a noble peacock, while thebird pecked at the berries on a branch ofarbutus in her bosom. Dracontides entered,conducted by Peristera, who desired her cousinto declare at once whether it was by any malignityof her's that he had hitherto failed toconciliate her regard.O the ill-tempered, frightful man!" criedVOL. I. G12*2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Agapenthe ; " does any body that is not maliciousever talk of malignity ?"Dracontides went away, calling upon the Godsfor justice.The next morning a rumour ran throughoutAthens, how he had broken off his intendednuptials, on the discovery that Aspasia haddestined the two loans to the pleasures ofPericles. Moreover, he had discovered that oneof them, he would not say which, had certainlythreads of several colours in her threadbare, notto mention a lock of hair, whether of a deadmanor no, might by some be doubted; andthat the other was about to be consigned toPyrilampes, in exchange for a peacock andsundry smaller birds.No question could be entertained of the fact,for the girls were actually in the house, and thebirds in the aviary.Agapenthe declares she waits only for thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 123spring, and will then leave Athens for her dearMiletus, where she never heard such an expressionas malignity.O what rude people the Athenians are !"said she.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Rather than open my letter again, I writeanother.Agapenthe's heart is won by Mnasylus. Inever suspected it.On his return out of Thessaly (whither Ifancy he went on purpose) he brought a cage ofnightingales. There are few of them in Attica ;and none being kept tame, none remain with usthrough the winter. Of the four brought byMnasylus, one sings even in this season of theyear. Agapenthe and Peristera were awakenedg2124 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.in the morning by the thrilling song of a birdlikea nightingale, in the aviary. They wentdown together ; and over the door they foundthese verses.Maiden or youth, who stances here.Think not, if haply we should fearA stranger's voice or stranger's face,(Such is the nature of our race,)That we would gladly fly againTo gloomy wood or windy plain.Certain we are we ne'er should findA care so provident, so kind,Altho' by flight we repossessThe tenderest mother's warmest nest.O may you prove, as well as we.That even in Athens there may beA sweeter thing than liberty.This is surely the hand-writing of Mnasy-lus," said Agapenthe.How do you know his hand-writing ?" criedPeristera.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 125A blush and a kiss, and one gentle push, werethe answer.Mnasylus, on hearing the sound of footsteps,had retreated behind a thicket of augustineand hyacinthus, in which the aviary is situated,fearful of bringing the gardener into reproof foradmitting him. However, his passion was uncontrollable; and Peristera declares, althoughAgapenthe denies it, that he caught a kiss uponeach of his cheeks by the interruption. Certainit is, for they agree in it, that he threw hisarms around them both as they were embracing,and implored them to conceal the fault of poorold Alton, " who shewed me," said he, " morepity than Agapenthe will ever shew me."Why did you bring these birds hither?"said she, trying to frown.Because you asked," replied he, " the otherday, whether we had any in Attica, and told meyou had many at home."126 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.She turned away abruptly, and, running uptomy chamber, would have informed me why.Superfluous confidence ! Her tears wettedmy cheek.Agapenthe !" said I, smiling, " are you sureyou have cried for the last time, O ! what rudepeople the Athenians are /"ASPASIA TO PERICLES.I apprehend, O Pericles, not only that Imay become an object of jealousy and hatredto the Athenians, by the notice you have takenof me, but that you yourself, which affects megreatly more, may cease to retain the wholeof their respect and veneration.Whether, to acquire a great authority overthe people, some things are not necessary toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 127be done on which Virtue and Wisdom are atvariance, it becomes not me to argue or consider;but let me suggest the inquiry to you,whether he who is desirous of supremacy shoulddevote the larger portion of his time to oneperson.Three affections of the soul predominate;Love, Religion, and Power. The first two are oftenunited ; the other stands widely apart from them,and neither is admitted nor seeks admittance totheir society. I wonder then how you canlove so truly and tenderly. Ought I not ratherto say I did wonder? Was Pisistratus affectionate? Do not be angry ? It is certainly thefirst time a friend has ever ventured to discovera resemblance, although you are habituatedto it from your opponents. In theseyou forgive it ; do you in me ?128 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Pisistratus was affectionate : the rest of hischaracter you know as well as I do. You knowthat he was eloquent, that he was humane,that he was contemplative, that he was learned ;that he not only was profuse to men of genius,but cordial, and that it was only with such menhe was familiar and intimate. You know thathe was the greatest, the wisest, the most virtuous,excepting Solon and Lycurgus, that everruled any portion of the human race. Is it nothappy and glorious for mortals, when, insteadof being led by the ears, under the clumsy andviolent hand of vulgar and clamorous adventurers,a Pisistratus leaves the volumes ofHomer and the conversation of Solon, forthem?We may be introduced to Power by Humanity,and at first may love her less for her ownPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 129sake than for Humanity's, but by degrees webecome so accustomed to her as to be quiteuneasy without her.Religion and Power, like the Cariatides insculpture, never face one another ; they sometimeslook the same way, but oftener stand backto back.We will argue about them one at a time, andabout the other in the triad too : let me havethe choice.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.We must talk over again the subject of yourletter ; no, not talk, but write about it.I think, Pericles, you who are so sincere withme, are never quite sincere with others. Youhave contracted this bad habitude from yourcustom of addressing the people. But amongG 5130 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.friends and philosophers, would it not be betterto speak exactly as we think, whether ingeniouslyor not ? Ingenious things, I am afraid,are never perfectly true : however, I would notexclude them, the difference being very widebetween perfect truth and violated truth ; Iwould not even leave them in a minority; Iwould hear and say as many as may be, lettingthem pass current for what they are worth,Anaxagoras rightly remarked that Love alwaysmakes us better. Religion sometimes. Powernever.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Pericles was delighted with your letter oneducation. I wish he were as pious as youare; occasionally he appears so. I attackedhim on his simulation, but it produced a suddenand powerful effect on Alcibiades. You willPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 131collect the whole from a summary of our conversation.So very true," said he, " is the remark ofAnaxagoras, that it was worth my while to controvertit. Did you not observe the attentionpaid to it by young and old ? I was unwillingthat the graver part of the company shouldargue tomorrow with Alcibiades, on the natureof love, as they are apt to do, and should persuadehim that he would be the better for it.On this consideration, I said, while you wereoccupied, ' O Anaxagoras ! if we of this householdknew not how religious a man you are, yourdiscourse would in some degree lead us to countenancethe suspicions of your enemies. Religionis never too little for us ; it satisfies all thedesires of the soul. Love is but an atom of it,consuming and consumed by the stubble onwhich it falls. But when it rests upon theGods, it partakes of their nature, in its essence132 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.pure and eternal. Love indeed works greatmiracles. As in the Ocean that embraces theEarth, whatever is sordid is borne away anddisappears in it, so the flame of Love purifiesthe temple it burns in.' "Only when first lighted," said Anaxagoras.Generally the heat is either spent or stiflingsoon afterwards ; and the torch, when it is extinguished,leaves an odour very different frommyrrh and frankincense."He had turned the stream. Pericles thenproceeded.Something of power," said he, " hath beenconsigned to me by the favour and indulgenceof the Athenians. I do not dissemble that Iwas anxious to obtain it ; I do not dissemblethat my vows and supplications for the prosperityof the country were unremitted. Itpleased the Gods to turn toward me the eyesof my fellow citizens, but had they not blessedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 133me with religion they never would have blessedme with power, better and more truly called aninfluence on their hearts and their reason, ahigh and secure place in the acropolis of theiraffections. Yes, Anaximander ! yes, Melon !I do say, had they not blessed me with it ; for,in order to obtain it, I was obliged to place adaily and a nightly watch over all my thoughtsand actions. In proportion as authority wasconsigned to me, I found it both expedient andeasy to grow better, time not being left me forsedentary occupations or frivolous pursuits, andevery desire being drawn on and absorbed inthat mighty and interminable, that rushing, renovating,and purifying one, which comprehendsour country. If any young man would win tohimself the hearts of the wise and brave, andis ambitious of being the guide and leader ofthem, let him be assured that his virtue willgive him power, and power will consolidate and134 PERICLES AND A Aspasia.maintain his virtue. Let him never thensquander away the inestimable hours of youthin tangled and trifling disquisitions, with suchas perhaps have an interest in perverting or unsettlinghis opinions, and who speculate intohis sleeping thoughts and dandle his nascentpassions; but let him start from them withalacrity, and walk forth with firmness ; let himearly take an interest in the business and concernsof men ; and let him, as he goes along,look stedfastly at the statues of those who havebenefited his country, and make with himselfa solemn compact to stand hereafter amongthem."I had heard the greater part of this already,all but the commencement. At the conclusionAlcibiades left the room ; I feared he was consciousthat something in it was toa closely applicableto him. How I rejoiced when I sawhim enter again, with a helmet like Minerva'sPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 135on his head, a spear in his hand, crying, " ToSparta, boys ! to Sparta !"Pericles whispered to me, but in a voiceaudible to those who sate farther off, " Alcibiades,I trust, is destined to abolish the influenceand subvert the power of that restlessand troublesome rival."ASPASIA TO PERICLES.I disbelieve, O Pericles, that it is good forus, that it is good for men, women, or nations,to be without a rival.Acquit me now of any desire that, in yourgenerosity, you should resolve on presentingme with such a treasure, for I am without theability of returning it. But have you neverobserved how many graces of person and demeanourwe women are anxious to display, in136 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.order to humble a rival, which we were unconsciousof possessing until opposite charms provokedthem ?Sparta can only be humbled by the prosperityand liberality of Athens. She was everjealous and selfish ; Athens has been too oftenso. It is only by forbearance toward dependentstates, and by kindness toward theweaker, that her power can long preponderate.Strong attachments are strong allies. Thistruth is so clear as to be colourless, and Ishould fear that you would censure me forwriting what almost a child might have spoken,were I ignorant that the important truth hasmade little impression on the breasts of statesmen.I admire your wisdom in resolving toincrease no farther the domains of Attica ; andin designing to surround her with the outworksof islands, and to encompass her more closelywith small independent communities. It isPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 137only from such as these that Virtue can comeforward neither hurt nor heated ; the crowd istoo dense for her in larger. But what is mostlyour consideration, it is only such as these thatare sensible of benefits. They cling to youafflicted in your danger ; the greater look onwith folded arms, nod knowingly, cry sad work !when you are worsted, and turn their backson you when you are fallen.PERICLES TO ASPASIA.There are things, Aspasia, beyond the artof Phidias. He may represent Love leaningupon his bow and listening to Philosophy ; butnot for hours together : he may representLove, while he is giving her a kiss for herlesson, tying her arms behind her: loosingthem again must be upon another marble.138 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.The philosophers are less talkative in ourconversations, now Alcibiades has given up hismind to mathematicks and strategy, and seldomcomes among them.Pericles told me they will not pour out therose-water for their beards, unless into a Corinthianor golden vase.But take care," added he, " to offend nophilosopher of any sect whatever. Indeed, tooffend any person is the next foolish thing tobeing offended. I never do it, unless when itis requisite to discredit somebody who mightotherwise have the influence to diminish myestimation. Politeness is not always a sign ofwisdom ; but the want of it always leaves roomfor a suspicion of folly, if folly and imprudenceare the same. I have scarcely had time toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 139think of any blessings that entered my housewith you, beyond those which encompass myself;yet it cannot but be obvious that Alcibiadeshath now an opportunity of improvinghis manners, such as even the society of scholastickmen will never countervail. This is ahigh advantage on all occasions, particularly inembassies. Well-bred men require it, and letit pass : the ill-bred catch at it greedily ; asfishes are attracted from the mud, and netted,by the shine of flowers and shells."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.At last I have heard him speak in public.Apollo may shake the rocks of Delphi, andmay turn the pious pale ; my Pericles rises withserenity ; his voice hath at once left his lips140 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and entered the heart of Athens. The violentand desperate tremble in every hostile city ; athunderbolt seems to have split in the center,and to have scattered its sacred fire unto thewhole circumference of Greece.The greatest of prodigies are the prodigiesof a mortal ; they are, indeed, the only ones :with the Gods there are none.Alas ! alas ! the eloquence and the wisdom,the courage and the constancy of my Pericles,must have their end ; and the glorious shrine,wherein they stand pre-eminent, must one daydrop into the deformity of death !O Aspasia ! of the tears thou art shedding,tears of pride, tears of fondness, are there none(in those many) for thyself? Yes; whateverwas attributed to thee of grace or beauty, sovaluable for his sake whose partiality assignedthem to thee, must go first, and all that heloses is a loss to thee ! weep then on.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 141PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Do you love me ? do you love me ? Stay,reason upon it, sweet Aspasia ! doubt, hesitate,question, drop it, take it up again, provide,raise obstacles, reply indirectly. Oracles aresacred, and there is a pride in being a diviner.ASPASIA TO Pericleswill do none of those things you tell me todo; but I will say something you forgot to say,about the insufficiency of Phidias.He may represent a hero with unbent brows,a sage with the lyre of Poetry in his hand,Ambition with her face half-averted from theCity, but he cannot represent, in the samesculpture, at the same distance, Aphrodite142 PERICLES AND ASj^ASIA.higher than Pallas. He would be derided if hedid ; and a great man can never do that forwhich a little man may deride him.I shall love you even more than I do, if youwill love yourself more than me. Did everlover talk so ? Pray tell me, for I have forgottenall they ever talked about. But, Pericles! Pericles ! be careful to lose nothing ofyour glory, or you lose all that can be lost ofme ; my pride, my happiness, my content ;every thing but my poor weak love : keep glorythen for my sake !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I am not quite certain that you are correctin your decision, on the propriety of sculpturingthe statues of our deities from one sole material.Those, however, of mortals and nymphsPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 143and Genii should be marble, and marble only.But you will pardon a doubt, a long doubt, adoubt for the chin to rest upon in the palm ofthe hand, when Cleon thinks one thing andPhidias another. I debated with Pericles onthe subject.In my opinion," said he, " no material forstatuary is so beautiful as marble ; and, far fromallowing that two or more materials should composeone statue, I would not willingly see an interruptionmade in the figure of a God orGoddess, even by the folds of drapery. I wouldventure to take the cestus from Venus, distinguishingher merely by her own peculiar beauty.But in the representations of the more awfulPowers, who are to be venerated and worshippedas the patrons and protectors of cities, we musttake into account the notions of the people.In their estimate, gold and ivory give splendourand dignity to the Gods themselves, and our144 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.wealth displays their power ! Beside . . butbring your ear closer . . when they will not indulgeus with their favour, we may borrow theircloaks and ornaments, and restore them whenthey have recovered their temper."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.After I had written to you, we renewed ourconversation on the same subject. I inquiredof Pericles whether he thought the appellationof golden was applied to Venus for her preciousgifts, or for some other reason. His answerwas:Small statues of Venus are more numerousthan of any other deity ; and the first that weregilt in Greece, I believe, were hers. She isworshipped, you know, not only as the GoddessPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 145of beauty, but likewise as the Goddess of fortune.In the former capacity we are her rapturousadorers for five years perhaps ; in thelatter we persevere for life. Many carry herimage with them on their journeys, and there isscarcely a house in any part of Greece whereinit is not a principal ornament."I remarked to him that Apollo, from thecolour of his hair and the radiance of his countenance,would be more appropriately representedin gold, and yet that the poets were unmindfulto call him the golden.They never found him so," said he ; " butVenus often smiles upon them in one department.Little images of her are often of solidgold, and are placed on the breast or underthe pillow. Other deities are seldom of suchdiminutive size, or such precious materials. Itis only of late that they have even borne thesemblance of them. The Egyptians, the in-VOI. 1. H146 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.vendors of all durable colours, and indeed ofevery thing else that is durable in the arts, devisedthe means of investing other metals withdissolved gold ; the Phoenicians, barbarous andindifferent to elegance and refinement, couldonly cover them with tabular incrustations.By improving the inventions of Egypt, bronze,odious in its own proper colour for the humanfigure, and more odious for Divinities, assumesa splendour and majesty which almost compensatefor marble itself."Metal," said I, " has the advantage in durability."Surely not," answered he ; " and it is moreexposed to invasion and avarice. But either ofthem, under cover, may endure many thousandyears, I apprehend, and without corrosion. Thetemples of Egypt, which have remained twothousand, are fresh at this hour as when theywere first erected ; and all the violence of Cam-periclesAND ASPASIA. 147bases and his army, bent on effacing the images,have done little more harm, if you look at themfrom a short distance, than a single fly would doin a summer day, on a statue of Pentelicanmarble. The Egyptians have labored more tocommemorate the weaknesses of man than theGrecians to attest his energies. This howevermust be conceded to the Egyptians ; that theyare the only people on earth to whom destructionhas not been the first love and principaloccupation. The works of their hands willoutlive the works of their intellect: here atleast I glory in the sure hope that we shalldiffer from them. Judgment and perception ofthe true and beautiful will never allow our statuariesto represent the human countenance, asthey have done, in granite, and porphyry, andbasalt. Their statues have resisted Time andWar ; ours will vanquish Envy and Malice.Sculpture has made great advances in myh2148 PERICLES AND Aspasia.time ; Painting still greater : for until the lastforty years it was inelegant and rude. Sculpturecan go no farther ; Painting can : she mayadd scenery and climate to her forms. Shemay give to Philoctetes, not only the wing ofthe sea-bird, wherewith he cools the throbbingof his wound ; not only the bow and the quiverat his feet, but likewise the gloomy rocks, theVulcanian vaults, and the distant fires ofLemnos, the fierce inhabitants subdued by pity,the remorseless betrayer, and the various emotionsof his retiring friends. Her reign isboundless, but the fairer and the richer part ofher dominions lies within the Odyssea. Paintingby degrees will perceive her advantagesover Sculpture ; but if there are paces betweenSculpture and Painting, there are parasangsbetween Painting and Poetry. The differenceis that of a lake confined by mountains, and ariver running on through all the varieties ofPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 149scenery, perpetual and unimpeded. Sculptureand Painting are moments of life ; Poetry is lifeitself, and every thing around it and above it.But let us turn back again to the positionwe set out from, and offer due reverence to thetruest diviners of the Gods. Phidias in tendays is capable of producing what would outliveten thousand years, if man were not resolved tobe the subverter of man^s glory. The Godsthemselves will vanish away before theirimages."O Cleon ! this is painful to hear. I wishPericles, and I too, were somewhat more religious: it is so sweet and graceful.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.She, O Aspasia, who wishes to be more re-hgious, hath much religion, although the PERICLES AND ASPASIA.utility of her imagination and the velocity of herpursuits do not permit her to settle fixedly onthe object of it. How could I have ever lovedyou so, if I believed the Gods would disapproveof my attachment, as they certainly would ifyou under-rated their power and goodness !They take especial care both to punish the unbeliever,and to strike with awe the witnesses ofunbelief. I accompanied my father, not longsince, to the temple of Apollo ; and when wehad performed the usual rites of our devotion,there came up to us a young man of somewhatpleasing aspect, with whose family ours wasanciently on terms of intimacy. After my fatherhad made the customary inquiries, he conversedwith us about his travels. He had just leftEphesus, and said he had spent the morning in acomparison between Diana's temple and Apollo's.He told us that they are similar in design ; butthat the Ephesian Goddess is an ugly lump ofPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 151dark-coloured stone ; while our Apollo is ofsuch transcendent beauty that, on first beholdinghim, he wondered any other God had aworshipper. My father was transported withjoy at such a declaration.Give up the others," said he ; " worshiphere, and rely on prosperity."Were I myself to select," answered he,any deity in preference to the rest, it shouldnot be an irascible, or vindictive, or unjustone."Surely not," cried my father , . "it shouldbe Apollo ; and our Apollo ! What has Dianadone for any man, or any woman? I speaksubmissively . . with all reverence . . I do notquestion."The young man answered, " I will forbear tosay a word about Diana, having been educatedin great fear of her : but surely the treatment152 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,of Marsyas by Apollo was bordering on severity."Not a whit," cried my father, " if understoodrightly."His assent to the request of Phaeton," continuedthe young man, " knowing (as he did)the consequence, seems a little deficient in thatforesight which belongs peculiarly to the God ofprophecy."My father left me abruptly, ran to the font,and sprinkled first himself, then me, lastly theguest, with lustral water.We mortals"" continued he gravely, " shouldnot presume to argue on the Gods after our owninferior nature and limited capacities. Whatappears to have been cruel might have beenmost kindly provident."The reasoning is conclusive," said the youth ;you have caught by the hand a benighted andPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 153wandering dreamer, and led him from the brinkof a precipice. I see nothing left now on theroad-side but the skin of Marsyas, and it wouldbe folly to start or flinch at it"My father had a slight suspicion of his sincerity,and did not invite him to the house. Hehas attempted to come, more than once, evidentlywith an earnest desire to explore thetruth. , Several days together he has been seenon the very spot where he made the confessionto my father, in deep thought, and, as we hope,under the influence of the Deity.I forgot to tell you that this young person isPhrases, son of Portio the Can.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.If ever there was a youth whose devotion wasardent, and whose face (I venture to say, 154 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.though I never saw it) was prefigured for theoffices of adoration, I suspect it must be Phrases,son of Portio the Can.Happy the man who, when every thoughtelse is dismissed, comes last and alone into thewarm and secret foldings of a letter !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Alcibiades entered the library one daywhen I was writing out some verses. He discoveredwhat I was about, by my hurry in attemptingto conceal them.Alcibiades !" said 1, " we do not like tobe detected in any thing so wicked as poetry.Some day or other I shall perhaps have myrevenge, and catch you committing the samesin with more pertinacity."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 155Do you fancy," said he, " that I cannotwrite a verse or two, if I set my heart upon it ?"No," replied I ; " but I doubt whether yourheart, in its lightness and volubility, would notroll off so slippery a plinth. We rememberyour poetical talents, displayed in all theirbrightness on poor Socrates."Do not laugh at Socrates," said he. " Theman is by no means such a quibbler and impostoras some of his disciples would represent him,making him drag along no easy mule-load, byHercules ! no summer robe, no every-day vesture,no nurse of an after-dinner nap, but atrailing, troublesome, intricate piece of sophistry,interwoven with flowers and sphinxes, stolenfrom an Egyptian temple, with dust enoughin it to blind all the crocodiles as far as to thecataracts, and to dry up the Nile at its highestoverflow. He is rather fond of strangling anunwary interloper with a string of questions, of156 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.which it is difficult to see the length or theknots, until the two ends are about the throat;but he lets him off easily when he has fairly sethis mark on him. Anaxagoras tells me thatthere is not a school in Athens where thescholars are so jealous and malicious, while hehimself is totally exempt from those worst andmost unphilosophical of passions ; that the parasiticalweed grew up together with their veryroot, and soon overtop the plant, but that itonly hangs to his railings Now Anaxagorasenvies nobody, and only perplexes us by theadmiration of his generosity, modesty, andwisdom.I did not come hither to disturb you, Aspasia! and will retire when I have given yousatisfaction, or revenge; this, I think, is theword. Not only have I written verses, and, asyou may well suppose, long after those uponthe son of Sophroniscus, but verses upon love."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 157Are we none of us in the secret ?" said I.You shall be," said he ; " attend and pity."I must have turned pale, I think, for I shuddered.He repeated these, and relieved me.I love to look on lovely eyes.And do not shun the sound of sighs.If they are level with the ear ;But if they rise just o'er my chin,O Venus ! how I hate their din !My own I am too weak to bear.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.We are but pebbles in a gravel walk,Some blacker and some whiter, pebbles still.Fit only to be trodden on.These words were introduced into a comedy,lately written by Polus, a remarkably fat person158 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and who appears to have enjoyed Use and libertyas much as any citizen in Athens. I happen tohave rendered some services to Chlorides, theactor, to whom the speech is addrest. Hebrought me the piece before its representation,telling me that Polus and his friends had resolvedto applaud the passage, and to turn theirfaces toward Pericles. I made him a little present,on condition that, in the representation,he should repeat the following verses in reply,instead of the poet's.Fair Polus !Can such fierce winds blow over such smooth seas !I never saw a pebble in my lifeSo richly set as thou art : now by Jove,He who would tread upon thee can be noneExcept the proudest of the elephants.The tallest and the surest-footed beastIn all the stables of the kings of lud.The comedy was interrupted by roars ofPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 159laughter : the friends of Polus slunk away, andhe himself made many a violent effort to dothe same; but Amphicydes, who stood next,threw his arms round his neck, crying,Behold another Crus I devoting himselffor his country. The infernal Powers requireno black bull for sacrifice ; they are quite satisfied.Eternal peace with Boeotia! eternalpraise to her ! what a present ! where was hefatted ?"We had invited Polus to dine with us, andnow condoled with him on his loss of appetite.The people of Athens were quite out of favourwith him.I told them what they were . fit for," criedhe, " and they proved it. Amphicydes . .I do not say he has been at Sparta . . Imyself saw him, no long time ago, on theroad that leads to Megara . . that city rebelledsoon after. His wife died strangely : she had160 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.not been married two years, and had grownugly and thin : he might have used her forabroom if she had hair enough . . perhapshe did; odd noises have been heard in thehouse. I have no suspicion or spite againstany man living . . and, praise to the Gods ! Ican live without being an informer."We listened with deep interest, but couldnot understand the allusion, as he perceived byour looks.You will hear tomorrow," said he, " howunworthily I have been treated. Wit drawsdown Folly upon us, and she must have herfling. It does not hit ; it does not hit."Slaves brought in a ewer of water, with severalnapkins. They were not lost upon Polus,and he declared that those two boys had moresagacity and intuition than all the people inthe theatre.In your house and your administration, OPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 161Pericles, every thing is timed well and donewell, without our knowing how. Dust willrise," said he, " dust will rise ; if we would notraise it we must never stir. They have begunwith those who would reform their manners;they will presently carry their violence againstthose who maintain and execute the laws."Supper was served.A quail, O best Polus !" *O best Polus ! O wonderful / O lady ! &c.The editor has thought it his duty to be quiteliteral in translating, n jSeXTio-re : n eavfiaarie : H Sea-iroiva,&c. Conversation was never carried on without them,even among philosophers, as we see in Plato, &c. Anapology ought to be offered for not adorning the textwith the Greek, it being the fashion to enrich thetoilet with antiquities. Poverty must plead for theeditor ; when he publishes the Letters of Cleopatra, hepromises his fair friends that he will be more liberalof the Coptic ; the original Greek being lost, andthe Coptic being the only known version.162 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.A quail, O wonderful ! may hurt me : butbeing recommended . ."It disappeared.The breast of that capon . ."Capons, being melancholic, breed melan-^holy within."Coriander seed might correct it, togetherwith a few of those white plump pine-seeds."'* The very deliberation !"It was corrected.Tunny under oil, with marjoram and figs,pickled locusts, and mustachios — for your stomachseems delicate."Alas ! indeed it is declining. Tunny !tunny ! I dare not, O festoon of the Graces !I dare not verily. Chian wine alone can appeaseits seditious."They were appeased.Some livers were offered him, whether offishor fowl, I know not, for I can hardly bearPERICLES AND ASPASIA: 163to look at that dish. He waved them away,but turned suddenly round, and said, " Youth !I think I smell fennel."There is fennel, O mighty one !" repliedthe slave, " and not fennel only, but parsleyand honey, pepper and rosemary, garlick fromSalamis, and . ."Say no more, say no more ; fennel is enoughfor moderate men, and brave ones. It remindsme of the field of Marathon."The field was won ; nothing was left upon it.Another slave came forward, announcingloudly and pompously, " Gosling from Brauron !Sauce . . prunes, mustard-seed, capers, fenugreek,sesamum, and squills."Squills !" exclaimed Polus, " they soothethe chest. It is not every cook that is deep inthe secrets of nature. Brauron ! an ancientcity : I have friends in Brauron ; I will taste,were it only for remembrance of them."164 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.He made several essays, several pauses.But when shall we come to the squills ?"said he, turning to the slave ; " the qualities ofthe others are negative."The whole dish was presently.Our pastry," said I, " O illustrious Polus !is the only thing I can venture to recommendat table; the other dishes are merely on sufferance;but, really, our pastry is good: Iusually dine entirely upon it."Entirely !" cried he, in amaze.With a glass of water," added I, " and somegrapes, fresh or dry."To accompany you, O divine Aspasia !though in good truth this said pastry is but a sandysort of road ; no great way can be made in it."The diffident Polus was not a bad engineerhowever, and he soon had an opportunity ofadmiring the workmanship at the bottom of thesalver.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 165Two dishes of roast meat were carried tohim. I know not what one was, nor couldPolus easily make up his mind upon it : experimentfollowing experiment. Kid however wasan old acquaintance.Those who kill kids," said he, " deservewell of their country, for they grow up mischievous: the Gods, aware of this, make themvery eatable. They require some management,some skill, some reflection: mint, shalt, dandelion,vinegar : strong coercion upon 'em.Chian wine, boy !"What does Pericles eat?"Do not mind Pericles. He has eaten ofthe quails, and some roast fish, besprinkled withdried bay-leaves for sauce."Fish ! ay, that makes him so vigilant.Cats . ."Here he stopt, not however without a diversionin his favour from me, observing that166 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.he usually dined on vegetables, fish, and somebird: that his earlier meal was his longest,confectionary, honey, and white bread, composingit."Chian or Lesbian?"*« He enjoys a little wine after dinner, preferringthe lighter and subacid."Wonderful man !" cried he ; " and all fromsuch fare as that !"When he rose from table he seemed by hiscountenance to be quiet again at heart; neverthelesshe said in my ear, with a sigh, " DidI possess the power of Pericles, or the persuasionof Aspasia, by the Immortals ! I wouldenrich the gallies with a grand dotation. Everysoul of them would I — yes, every soul of them —monsters of ingratitude, hypocrites, traitors,they should for Egypt, for Carthage, Mauritania,Numidia. He will find out before long whatdogs he has been skimming the kettle for."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 167It required an effort to be perfectly composed,at a simili which I imagine has neverbeen used in the Greek language since the daysof Medea ; but I cast down my eyes, and saidconsolatory, " It is difficult to do justice tosuch men as Pericles and Polus."He would now have let me into the secret,but others saved me.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Anaxagoras is the true, firm, constant friendof Pericles ; the golden lamp that shines perpetuallyon the image I adore. Yet sometimeshe speaks severely. On one of these occasions,Pericles took him by the hand, saying,O Anaxagoras ! sincere and ardent lover168 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.of Truth ! why do not you love her in sucha manner as never to let her see you out ofhumour ?"Because," said Anaxagoras, " you dividemy affections with her, much to my shame."Pericles was called away on business ; I thensaid,O Anaxagoras ! is not Pericles a truly greatman ?"He answered, " If Pericles were a truly greatman, he would not wish to appear different fromwhat he is ; he would know himself, and makeothers know him; he seems to guard againstboth. Much is wanting to constitute his greatness.He possesses, it is true, more comprehensivenessand concentration than any living ;perhaps more than any since Solon ; but hethinks that power over others is better thanpower over himself; as if a mob were worth aman, and an acclamation were worth a Pericles."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 169But," said I, «' he has absolute commandover himself; and it is chiefly by exerting itthat he has obtained an ascendency over theminds of others."Has he rendered them wiser and more virtuous?" said he.You know best," replied I, " having livedmuch longer among them."Perhaps," said Anaxagoras, " I may wronghim ; perhaps he has saved them from worsedisasters."You think him then ambitious !" said I,with some sadness.Ambitious !" cried he, " how so ? He mighthave been a philosopher, and he is content tobe a ruler."I was ill at ease.Come," said I, " Anaxagoras ! come intothe garden with me. It is rather too warm indeedout of doors, but we have many ever-vol.I. I170 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,greens, high and shady, and those who, likeyou and me, never drink wine, have little todread from the heat."Whether the ilexes and bays and oleandersstruck his imagination, and presented thesimili, I cannot tell, but he thus continued inillustration of his discourse.There are no deciduous plants, Aspasia !the greater part lose their leaves in winter, therest in summer. It is thus with men. Thegenerality yield and are stript under the firstchilly blasts that shake them. They who haveweathered these, drop leaf after leaf in the sunshine.The virtues by which they arose topopularity, take another garb, another aspect,another form, and totally disappear. Be notuneasy ; the heart of Pericles will never dry up,so many streams run into it."He retired to his studies ; I spoke but littlethat evening, and slept late.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 171ASPASIA TO CLEONE.How can I ever hope to shew you, in all itsbrightness, the character of my friend ? I willtell you how; by following Love and Truth.Like most others who have no genius, I do notfeel the want of it, at least not here.A shallow water may reflect the sun as perfectlyas a deeper.The words of Anaxagoras stuck to me likethistles. I resolved to speak in playfulness withthe object of our conversation. First I beganto hint at enemies. He smiled.The children in my orchard," said he, " arenot yet grown tall enough to reach the fruit ;they may throw at it, but can bring nonedown."Do tell me, O Pericles !" said I, " now weI 2172 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.are inseparable for ever, how many struggleswith yourself (to say nothing of others) youmust have had, before you attained the positionyou have taken."It is pleasant," answered he, " to thinkof our glory than of the means by which weacquired it.When we see the horses that have won atthe Olympian games, do we ask what oats theyhave eaten to give them such velocity andstrength? Do those who swim admirably evertrouble their minds about the bladders theyswam upon in learning, or inquire what beastssupplied them ? When the winds are filling oursails, do we lower them and delay our voyage,in order to philosophise on the particles of aircomposing them, or to speculate what regionproduced them, or what becomes of them afterwards?"PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 173CLEONE TO ASPASIA.At last, Aspasia, you love indeed. The perfectionsof your beloved interest you less thanthe imperfections, which you no sooner take upfor reprehension, than you admire, embrace,and defend. Happy, happy, Aspasia ! but areyou wise, and good, and equable, and fond ofsincerity, as formerly? Nay, do not answerme. The Gods forbid that I should force youto be ingenious, and love you for it. Howmuch must you have lost before you are praisedfor that !Archelaus, of all our philosophers the mostquiet man, and the most patient investigator,will bring you this. He desires to be thehearer of Anaxagoras.174 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I received our countryman with great plea 'sure. He was obliged to be my hearer for severalhours : I hope his patience will never beso much tried by Anaxagoras. I placed themtogether at table ; but Anaxagoras would notbreak through his custom; nothing of philosophy.Our repast would have been even lesstalkative than usual, had not Anaxagoras askedour guest whether the earlier Milesian authors,poets or historians, had mentioned Homer.I find not a word about him in any one ofthem," replied he, " although we have theworks of Cadmus and Phocyhdes, the formerno admirable historian, the latter an indifferentpoet, but not the less likely to mention him,and they are supposed to have lived withinPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 175three centuries of his age Permit my firstquestion to you, in my search after truth, to bethis ; whether his age were not much earlier ?"This is not the only question," said Anaxagoras," on which you will hear from me theconfession of my utter ignorance. I am interestedin every thing that relates to the operationsof the human mind ; and Pericles has inhis possession every author whose works havebeen transcribed. The number will appearquite incredible to you : there cannot be fewerthan two hundred. I find poetry to which isattributed an earlier date than to Homer's ; butstupidity and barbarism are no convincingproofs. I find Cretan, Ionian, Laconia, andBoeotian, written certainly more than three centuriesago ; the language is not copious, is notfluent, is not refined. Pericles says it is all ofit inharmonious : of this I cannot judge, hecan. Provides and Minerals wrote no better176 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.verses than the servant-girls sing upon our staircases.Archilochus and Alcman, who lived acentury earlier, composed much grander; butwhere there is at once ferocity and immodesty,either the age must have been barbarous or thepoet must have been left behind it. Sapphowas in reality the reviver of poetry, teaching itto humanize and delight; Simonides broughtit to perfection. The muse of Lesbos, as sheis called, and Alcaeus, invented each a novelspecies of strophe. Aspasia prefers the poetryof Sappho, and the metre of Alcaeus," whichhowever, I think she informs us, is less adaptedto her subjects than her own is."It appears to me," said I, " that every onewho felt strong in poetry was ambitious of beingan inventor in its measures. Archilochus, thelast of any note, had invented the iambic."True, O Aspasia !" said Pericles, " butnot exactly in the sense usually received. HePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 177did not invent, as many suppose, the sectarianiambic, which is coeval almost with the languageitself, and many of which creep into theclosest prose composition, but he was the firstwho subjoined a shorter to it, the barb to thedart, so fatal to Globule and Lycambes."His first," said I, " is like the trot of amastiff, his second is like the spring at thethroat.Homer alone has enriched the languagewith sentences full of harmony. How long hisverse was created, how long his Gods had livedbefore him, how long he himself before us,is yet uncertain, although Herodotus is of opinionthat he is nearer to us than Pericles andAnaxagoras admit. But these two philosophersplace sun, moon, and stars, beyond all reasonablelimits ; I know not how far off."We none of us know," said Pericles ; " butAnaxagoras hopes that, in a future age, humanI 5178 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.knowledge will be more extensive and morecorrect ; and Meton has encouraged us in ourspeculations. The heavenly bodies may keeptheir secrets two or three thousand years more,but one or other will betray them to somewakeful favourite, some Endymion beyond Lat-mos,perhaps in regions undiscovered, certainlyin uncalculated times. Men will knowmore of them than they will ever know ofHomer. Our knowledge on this miracle of ourspecies is unlikely to increase."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Pericles, who is acknowledged to have afiner ear than any of our poets or rhetoricians,is of opinion that the versification in all thebooks, of both Iliad and Odyssea, was modusAND ASPASIA, 179lated by the same master-key. Sophocles too,certainly less jolted than you would suppose, bythe deep ruts, angular turns, and incessant jerksof the iambic, tells me that he finds no other*heroick verses at all resembling it in therhythm, and that, to his apprehension, it is notdissimilar in the two poems.But I must continue, while I remember themperfectly, the words of Pericles.The Ulysses of the Iliad and Odyssea isnot the same, but the Homer is. Might notthe poet have collected, in his earlier voyages,many wonderful tales about the chieftain ofIthaca ; about his wanderings and return ;about his wife and her suitors ? Might notafterwards the son or grandson have solicitedhis guest and friend to place the sagacious, thecourageous, the enduring man, among theothers whom he was celebrating in detachedpoems, as leaders against Troy ? He describes180 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.with precision every thing in Ithaca : it is evidenthe must have been upon the spot. Of allother countries, of Sicily, of Italy, of Phrygia,he quite as evidently writes from tradition andrepresentation. Phrygia was subject to theAssyrian kings at the time when he commenceshis siege. The Greeks, according to him, hadbeen ravaging the country many years, and hadswept away many cities. What were the Assyriankings doing? Did the Grecians lose nomenby war, by climate, by disease, by time, inthe whole ten years ? Their horses must havebeen strong and long-lived ; an excellent breed !to keep their teeth and mettle for five-and-twenty.I should have imagined that some ofthem must have got lamed, some few perhapsfoundered ; surely here and there a chariot canhave had but one remaining, and he, in all probability,not in the very best condition. Howhappened it that the Trojans had Greek names,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 181and the leader of the Greeks an Egyptian one ?When I was at Byzantion, I had the curiosityto visit the imaginary scene of their battles. Isaw many sepulchral monuments, of the mostdurable kind, conical elevations of earth,on which there *were sheep and goats at pasture.There were ruins beyond, but neitherof a great city nor of an ancient one. Theonly ancient walls I saw were on the Europeancoast ; those of Byzantion, which Aspasia claimsas the structure of Miletus, and which thepeople of Megara tell us were founded by theirforefathers, less than two centuries ago. Butneither Miletus nor Megara was built whenthese walls were entire. They belong to theunknown world, and are sometimes called Pelasgian,sometimes Cyclopian; appellationswithout meaning; signs that signify nothing;inscriptions that point out the road to places182 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.where there is neither place nor road. Wallsof this massive structure surround the ruins ofPhocoea, destroyed by Cyrus; they are alsofound in Etruria."Cleon ! are you tired? rest then.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Several times had Pericles been silent, expectingand inviting our guests to assist him inthe investigation.I have no paradox to maintain, no partialityto defend," said he. " Some tell us thatthere were twenty Homers, some deny thatthere was ever one. It were idle and foolish toshake the contents of a vase in order to letthem settle at last. We are perpetually la-periclesAND ASPASIA. 183boring to destroy our delight, our composure,our devotion to superior power. Of all theanimals upon earth we least know what is goodfor us. My opinion is, that what is best for usis our admiration of good. No man livingvenerates Homer more than I do. He was theonly author I read when I was a boy, for ourteachers are usually of opinion that wisdomand poetry are like fruit for children, unwholesomeif too fresh. Simonides had indeed grownsomewhat sound; Pindar was heating; Aeschylus. . ay, but Eschylus was almost at the nextdoor. Homer then nourished my fancy, animatedmy dreams, awoke me in the morning,marched with me, sailed with me, taught memorals, taught me languages, taught me music,and philosophy, and war.Ah, were he present at this hour amongus ! that I might ask him how his deities enteredTroy. In Phrygia there was but one184 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Goddess, the mother of all the Gods, Cybele,Unlike our mortal mothers, she was displeasedif you noticed her children; indeed she disownedthem. Her dignity, her consequence,her high antiquity, induced the natives of theislands, and afterwards the other Greeks, toplace their little Gods under her protection,and to call her their mother. Jupiter had hisIda, but not the Phrygian ; and Pallas wasworshipped in her citadels, but not above thestreams of Similis and Salamander. Our holyreligion has not yet found its way far beyondus ; like the myrtle and olive, it loves the sea-air,and flourishes but upon few mountains inthe interior. The Cabiri still hold Samothrace;and we may almost hear the cries ofhuman victims in the north.If there were any true history of the timeswe are exploring, perhaps we might find in itthat many excursions, combined and simulta-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 185nous, had utterly failed ; and that the disastersof many chiefs engaged in them were partlyconcealed from the nations they governed bythe sacred veil of poetry. Of those who arereputed to have sailed against Troy, none returnedprosperous, none with the men he hadled out; most were forbidden to land againupon their native shores, and some who attemptedit were slain. Such is usually the fateof the unsuccessful. It is more probable thatthe second great naval expedition of the Greekswent out to avenge the disasters of the first,the Argonauts ; and the result was nearly thesame. Of the Argonauts few returned. Spartalost her Castor and Pollux ; Thessaly her Jason ;and I am more disposed to believe that thehead of Orpheus rolled down the Phases thandown the Hebrus.The poets gave successes which the Godsdenied. But these things concern us little;186 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.the poet is what we seek. Needless is it to remarkthat the Iliad is a work of much reflectionand various knowledge ; the Odyssea is themarvellous result of a vivid and wild imagination.Aspasia prefers it. Homer, in nearlythe thirty years which I conceive to have intervenedbetween the fanciful work and thegraver, had totally lost his pleasantries. Polyphemuscould amuse him no longer; Circelighted up in vain her fires of cedar-wood ; Calypsohad lost her charms ; her maidens weremute around her; the Lestrigons lay asleep;the Syrens sang,'come hither, O passer by ! come hither,O glory of the Chains !and the smooth waves quivered with the sound,but the harp of the old man had no chordthat vibrated.In the Odyssea he invokes the Muse ; inPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 187the Iliad he invokes her as a Goddess he hadinvoked before. He begins the Odyssea as thetale of a family, to which he would listen asshe rehearsed it ; the Iliad as a song of warriorsand divinities, worthy of the Goddess herselfto sing before the world.Demonstrate that metaphors are discoverable,drawn from things believed to have beeninvented in the Homeric age ; what does itprove ? merely that Homer, who lived amongthe islands, and among those who had travelledinto all the known regions of the world, hadcollected more knowledge than the shepherdsand boar-hunters on the continent.Demonstrate that some books in the compilationretain slight traces of a language notexactly the same as the others. What then?Might they not have been composed while hevisited countries in which that dialect was indigenous?or might they not have been found there188 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.at the first collection of the songs, having undergonesome modification from the singers, adaptedto the usages and phraseology of the people ?Alio doubts that what was illegible or obscurein the time of Lycurgus, was renderedclearer by the learned Spartan ? That someCretan words, not the Dorian of Sparta, hadcrept in ; that others were substituted ; thatSolon, Pisistratus, and Hipparchus, had also tocorrect a few of these corrections, and manythings more ? They found a series of songs ;never was there a series of such length withoutan oversight or gap.Shall the alpine be sounded in my ear ?Homer may have introduced it by way of allusionin one poem, not wanting it in the other.The Grecians of his time never used it inbattle ; eastern nations did ; and perhaps hadhe known the Phrygian better, its blasts wouldhave sounded on the plains of Troy. He wouldPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 189have discovered that trumpets had been usedamong them for many ages. We possess noknowledge of any nation who cultivated thescience of musick so early, or employed sogreat a variety of wind instruments. Little didhe know of Phrygia, and as little do we knowof him. His beautiful creation lies displayedbefore us; the creator is hidden in his ownsplendour. I can more easily believe that hishand constructed the whole, than that twentymen could be found, at nearly the same time,each of genius sufficient for the twentieth part ;because in many centuries there arose not asingle one capable of such a production as thatportion.Archilochus and Simonides are excellentonly in their shorter poems; they could nothave whistled so well throughout a long march.Difficulties are to be overcome on both sides.We have no grammarians worthy of the PERICLES AND ASPASIA.nation; none in any district of Greece hathstudied the origin and etymology of his language.We sing like the birds, equally ignorantwhence our voice arises. What is worse,we are fonder of theories than of truth, and believethat we have not room enough to buildup any thing, until we subvert what we find beforeus. Be it so ; but let it be only what isobnoxious, what opposes our reason, what disturbsour tranquillity of mind ; not what showsus the extent of the one, the potency of theother, and, consoling us for being mortal, assuresus that our structures may be as durableas those of the Gods themselves. The name ofHomer will be venerated as long as the honestof theirs ; I dare not say longer ; I dare not sayby wiser men. I hope I am guilty of no impiety; I should aggravate it by lowering Homer,the loftiest of their works."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 191ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Aristophanes often dines with us;, neverthelesshe is secretly an enemy of Pericles, and,fearing to offend him personally, is satirical onmost of our friends. Meton, whose characteryou know already, great in astronomy, great ingeometry, great in architecture, was consultedby Pericles on beautifying the streets of thecity, which are close and crooked. No soonerhad Aristophanes heard this, than he began tocompose a comedy, entitled The Birds. Hehas here represented our quiet contemplativeMeton, with a rule and compass in his hands,uttering the most ludicrous absurdities. Metonis a plain, unassuming, inoffensive man, andnever speaks inconsiderately. The characteris clumsily drawn; but that fault was easily192 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.corrected, by representing poor Meton underthe chastisement of the cudgel. There is somuch wit in this, I doubt whether any audiencecan resist it. There is magick in every stroke,and what was amiss is mended and made wholeagain ere the hammer falls. How easy a wayof setting all things to rights, with only onedissentient voice !In the same Comedy is ridiculed the projectof Pericles, on a conformity of weights andmeasures in Attica and her dependencies.More wit ! another beating !When Aristophanes made us the next visit,Pericles, after greeting him with much good-nature,and after various conversation with himseemed suddenly to recollect something, and,with more familiarity than usual, took himgently by the elbow, led him a little aside, andsaid with a smile, and in a low voice,My dear friend Aristophanes ! I find youPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 193are by no means willing to receive the samemeasure as you give ; but remember, the peoplehave ordered the adjustment, the surest preservativeagainst fraud, particularly that bywhich the poorer are mostly the sufferers.Take care they do not impeach you, knowingas you do how inefficient is my protection. Itis chiefly on such an occasion I should be sorryto be in a minority."Aristophanes blushed and looked alarmed. Periclestook him by the hand, whispering in hisear, " Do not let us enter into a conspiracyagainst Equity, by attacking the uniformity ofweights and measures ; nor against Comedy, bygiving the magistrates a pretext to forbid itsrepresentation."Aristophanes turned toward Pantarces, whostood near him, and said,I can write a comedy as well as most ; Periclescan act one better than any."VOL. I. K194 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Aristophanes, in my opinion, might haveeasily been the first Ijrric poet now having, exceptSophocles and Euripides; he chose rather tobe the bitterest satirist. How many, adornedwith all the rarities of intellect, have stumbledon the entrance into life, and have made a wrongchoice in the very thing which was to determinetheir course for ever ! This is among the reasons,and perhaps is the principal one, why thewise and the happy are two distinct classes ofmen.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I had retired before Aristophanes went home.On my return, it was evident that some onepresent had indeed against the poet's effrontery,for I was in time to catch these words ofPericles.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 195Why should I be angry with the writers ofcomedy? Is it because they tell me of thefaults I find in myself ? Surely not ; for he whofinds them in himself may be quite certain thatothers have found them in him long before, andhave shown much forbearance in the delay.Is it because I am told of those I have notdiscovered in me ? Foolish indeed were this.I am to be angry, it seems, because a man forewarnsme that I have enemies in my chamber,who will stab me when they find me asleep, andbecause he helps me to catch them and disarmthem.But it is such an indignity to be ridiculed !I incurred a greater when I threw myself intothe way of ridicule : a greater still should Isuffer if I tried whether it could be remediedby resentment."Ridicule often parries resentment, but resentmentnever yet parried ridicule.k2196 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO HERODOTUS.Herodotus ! if there is any one who admiresyour writings more than another, it is I. Noresidence in Attica will ever make me preferthe dialect to ours ; no writer will charm myear as you have done ; and yet you cannot bringme to believe that the sun is driven out of hiscourse by storms ; nor any of the consequencesyou deduce from it, occasioning the overflow ofthe Nile. The opinion you consider as unfounded,namely, that it arises from the meltingof the snows, and from the periodical rains onthe mountains of Ethiopia, is however that ofPericles and Anaxagoras, who attribute it alsoto Thales, in their estimation the soundest andshrewdest of philosophers. They appear tohave very strange notions about the sun, abouthis magnitude, his position, and distance; andPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 197I doubt whether you could persuade them thatthe three stoutest winds are able to move himone furlong. I am a great doubter, you see;but they, I do assure you, are greater. Periclesis of opinion that natural philosophy hasmade but little progress ; and yet that manymore discoveries have burst open before thestrenuous inquirer than have been manifestedto the world ; that some have been supprest bya fear of the publick, and some by a contemptfor it.In the intellectual," said he, " as in thephysical, men grasp you firmly and tenaciouslyby the hand, creeping close at your side, stepfor step, while you lead them into darkness;but when you conduct them into sudden light,they start and quit you."O Herodotus ! may your life and departurebe happy ! But how can it be expected ! Noother deities have ever received such honours198 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.as you have conferred upon the Muses ; andalas, how inefficient are they to reward or protecttheir votaries !CLEONE TO ASPASIA.The tragedy of Phrynicus, on the devastationof our city by the Persians, will outlast all thecities now flourishing on earth.* Heavy was themulct to which the poet was condemned by theAthenians for the tears he drew from them inthe theatre.Is it not remarkable that we have never foundany Milesian poem on the same subject? Surelythere must have been several. Within howThis tragedy, which produced a more powerfuleffect than any other on record, has failed however tofulfil the prophecy of Cleon : the Ode of Aletheia, onwhich she places so small a value, has outlived it.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 199short a period have they perished ! Lately, insearching the houses of such inhabitants aswere suspected of partiality to the interests ofLacedaemon, these verses were discovered.They bear the signature of Aletheia, daughterof Charades and Stage.We have often heard her story. Often havewe sat upon the mound of ruins under whichshe lies buried : often have we plucked from itthe white cyclamen, sweetest of all sweet odours,and played with its stiff reverted little horns,pouring forth a parsimonious fragrance, wononly when we applied to them tenderly andclosely.Whether poor Aletheia gave for life morethan life's value, it were worse than curiosity toinquire. She loved her deliverer ; and, at theinstigation of many less gentle, she was slainfor loving him. When the city was again inpossession of the citizens, she was stoned to200 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.death for favouring the invader ; and her motherrushed forward and shared it. These arethings you know ; her poem, her only one extant,you do not. You will find in it little ofpoetry, but much of what is better and rarer,true affection.ALETHEIA TO PHRAORTES.1.Phraortes ! where art thou ?The flames were panting after us, their dartsHad pierced to many heartsBefore the Gods, who heard nor prayer nor vow ;2.Temples had sunk to earth, and other smokeO'er riven altars brokeThan curled from myrrh and nard,When like a God amongArm'd host and unarm'd throngThee I discern'd, implored, and caught one brief regard.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 2013.Thou passes : from thy sideSudden two bowmen rideAnd hurry me away.Thou and all hope were gone . .They lost me . . and aloneIn a closed tent mid gory arms I lay.4.How did my tears then burnWhen, dreading thy return.Behold thee reappear !Nor helm nor sword nor spear. . .5.In violet gold-hem'd vestThou comest forth . . too soon !Fallen at thy feet, clasps to thy breast,I struggle, sob, and swoon.6.O send me to my mother ! . . bid her come.And take my last farewell !One blow ! . . enough for both . . one tomb . .'Tis there our happy dwell."k5202 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.7.Thou orders : call'd and goneAt once are they who breathe for thy command.Thou stoutest nigh me, soothing every moan,And pressing in both thine my hand,8.Then, and then only, when it toreMy hair to hide my face ;And gently did thy own bend o'erThe abject head war-doom'd to dire disgrace.9.Ionian was thy tongue.And when thou basest me to raiseThat head, nor fear in aught thy gaze,I dared look up . . but dared not long.10.*' Wait, maiden, wait ! if none are hereBearing a charm to charm a tear.There may (who knows ?) be found at lastSome solace for the sorrow past."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 20311.My mother, ere the sounds had least.Burst in, and drew me down :Her joy o'erpowered us both, her breastCovered lost friends and ruin'd town.12.Sweet thought ! but yielding nowTo many harsher ! By what blowArt thou dissevered from me ? War,That hath career too far,Closet his pinions . . " Come, Phraortes comeTo thy fond friends at home !"13.Thus beckons Love . . Away then, wishes wild !O may thy mother be as blestAs one whose eyes will sink to restBlessing thee for her rescued child I14.Ungenerous still my heart must be :Throughout the young and festive trainWhich thou revisited againMay none be happier (this I fear) than she i204 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Perhaps I like the Ode of Aletheia more thanyou do, because you sent it me ; and you perhapswould have liked it more than I, had Isent it you. There are writings which must lielong upon the straw before they mellow to thetaste ; and there are summer fruits that cannotabide the keeping.My heart assures me that Aletheia, had shelived, might have excelled in poetry ; and theloss of a lover is a help to it. We must deferour attempts to ascertain her station in theworld of poetry : for we never see the just dimensionsof what is close before our eyes.Faults are best discovered near, and beautiesat some distance.Aletheia, who found favour with Cleon, isPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 205surely not unworthy to take her seat in thelibrary of Pericles.I will look for a cyclamen to place within thescroll : I must find it and gather it, and placeit there myself. Sweet hapless Aletheia !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Nothing is pleasant to me than exploringin a library. What a delight in being a discoverer! Among a loose accumulation ofpoetry, the greater part excessively bad, theverses I am about to transcribe are perhaps theleast so.Life passes not as some men say,If you will only urge his stay,And treat him kindly all the while.206 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.He flies the dizzy strife of towns,Cowers before thunder-bearing frowns.But freshens up again at song and smile.Arcadia ! we will place him here,And promise that nor sigh nor tearShall ever trouble his repose.What precious seal will you impressTo ratify his happiness ?That rose thro' which you breathe ? — Come, bringthat rose.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Knowing how desirous I have always beento learn the history of Athens for these lastfifty years, and chiefly that part of it in whichmy Pericles has partaken so largely; and toPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 207reward my forbearance in abstaining fromevery close and importunate inquiry, heplaced a scrap of paper in my hands thismorning.Read that," said he.It was no easy matter ; few sentences wouldhave been legible without my interpreter ; indeedthere were not many erased.This speech," replied he, " occupied meone whole night, and somewhat of the nextmorning : I had so very much not to say."Aware that the party of Cimon would interestthe people in his behalf, so that a leaderfrom among his relatives or friends might beproposed and brought forward, Pericles wasresolved to anticipate these exertions. See hisfew words.We have lost, O Athenians ! not a town,nor a battle ; these you would soon regain ; but208 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.we have lost a great man, a true lover of hiscountry, Cimon, son of Miltiades.I well remember the grief you manifestedat the necessity of removing him, for a time,from among the insidious men who would haveworked upon his generous temper, ductile asgold. Never could I have believed I had sufficientinterest with some I see before me, firmalmost unto hardness, whose patriotism and probityhad been the most alarmed; but theylistened to me with patience, and revoked thesentence of banishment. Cimon returned fromSparta, took the command of your armies, vanquishedthe Persians, and imposed on themsuch conditions as will humble their pride forever.Our fathers were ungenerous to his : wewill, as becomes us, pay their debts, and removethe dust from their memory. MiltiadesPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 209was always great, and only once unsuccessful :Cimon was greater, and never unfortunate, butinthe temporary privation of your affections.History offers us no example of so consummatea commander.I propose that a statue be erected to Cimon,son of Miltiades, vanquisher of the Persians."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.There are secrets which not even love shouldtry to penetrate. I am afraid of knowing whocaused the banishment of Cimon ; certainly hewas impeached by Pericles, who neverthelesspraised him highly whenever his name wasmentioned. He has allowed me to transcribehis speech after the sentence of the judges, andwith it his letter of recall.210 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.TO THE ATHENIANS,On the Banishment of Cimon.In your wisdom, O Athenians, you have decreedthat Cimon, son of Miltiades be exiledfrom our city.Whatever may have been the errors or thecrimes of Cimon, much of them should, in justiceto yourselves, and in humanity to the prosecuted,be ascribed to the perversity of thatfaction, which never ceases or relaxes in itsattempts to thwart your determinations, and todeprive you of authority at home, of respect inthe sight of Greece.But I adjure you to remember the servicesboth of Cimon and of Miltiades ; and to affordthe banished man no reason or plea to call inquestion your liberality. Permit the rents ofhis many farms in Attica to be carried to himPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 211in Sparta ; and let it never be said that a citizenof Athens was obliged to the most illiberal andpenurious of people for a sustenance. Not indeedthat there is any danger of Sparta entertaininghim too honourably. She may pay forservices ; but rather for those which are to beperformed, than for those which have been ; andto the man rather who may do her harm, thanto him who can do it no longer.Let us hope that, at some future day, Cimonmay be aware of his mistake, and regard withmore veneration the image of his father, thanthe throne of his father's enemy.LETTER OF PERICLES TO CIMON.There are feW cities, O Cimon, that havemen for their inhabitants. Whatever is out ofGreece, and not Grecian, is nearer the animalworld than the intellectual: some even in212 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,Greece are but midway. Leave them behindyou ; return to your country, and conquer herassailants. Wholesome is the wisdom that wehave gathered from misfortune, sweet the reposethat dwells upon renown, and beautiful thelife that is the peristyle of immortality.SPEECH OF PERICLES.On the defection of Euboea and Megara.Euboea has rejected our authority and alliance,Megara our friendship. Under what pretext? That we have employed in the decorationof our city the sums of money they stipulatedto contribute annually; a subsidy toresist the Persians. What ! must we continuea war of extermination with Persia, when sheno longer has the power to molest us ? whenpeace has been sworn and proclaimed? Dowe violate the compact with our confederates ?PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 213No ; men of Athens ! our fleets are in harbour,every ship in good condition; our arsenalsare well-stored; and we are as prompt andas able now to repel aggression as we everwere.Are our dues then to be withhold fromus, because we have anticipated our engagements?because our navy and our army are inreadiness before they are wanted? because,while our ungrateful allies were plotting ourruin, we were watching over their interests andproviding for their security? States, like privatemen, are subject to the distemper of ingratitude,erasing from the memory the impressionof past benefits ; but it appears to be peculiarto the Megarians to recompense them withhatred and animosity. Not only have we protectedthem from aggression, by building forthem the very walls from which they now defyus ; but, when Antonius sent against them, at214 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Mount Cithseron, the whole force of the Mediancavalry, under the command of Majesties, andwhen they called aloud to every near battalionof the Grecian army, and when Pausanias invain repeated the exhortation, three hundredAthenians, led by Olympiodorus son of Lam-pon,threw themselves forward from Erythrae,and, after losing many brave comrades, rescuedfrom imminent death the fathers of those degeneratemen who are now in the vanguardof conspirators against us. Ingratitude maybeleft to the chastisement of the Gods, butthe sword must consolidate broken treaties. Nostate can be respected if fragment after fragmentmay be detached from it with impunity ;if traitors are permitted to delude and discomposethe contented, and to seduce the ignorantfrom their allegiance ; if loyalty is proclaimed aweakness, sedition a duty, conspiracy wisdom,and rebellion heroism. It is a crime then forPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 215US to embellish our city ! it is a reproach to enlargeand fortify our harbours ! In vain havewe represented to the clamorous and refractory,that their annual contributions are partly dueto us for past exertions, and partly the price ofour protection at this time, and in future ; andnot against Persia only, but against pirates.Our enemies have persuaded them that rebellionand war are better things . . our enemies,who were lately theirs, and who by this perfidiousinstigation are about to become so morecruelly than ever. Are Athenians avaricious ?are Athenians oppressive? Even the slavesin our city have easier access to the comfortsand delights of life than the citizens of almostany other. Until of late the Megarians wereproud of our consanguinity, and refused to becalled the descendants of Apollo, in hopes tobe acknowledged as the children of Panton.Although in later times they became the allies216 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.of Sparta, they cannot but remember that wehave always been their friends, often their deliverers; and it is only for their dishonesty andperfidy that we now are resolved at last to prohibitthem from the advantages of our ports.Sparta and Corinth have instigated them;Corinth, whose pride and injustice have excitedCorcyra, with her fleets, to seek deliverance inthe Piraeus. What have we to fear from sostrange a union as that of Corinth and Sparta ?Are any two nations so unlike ? so little formedfor mutual succour or for mutual esteem ?Hitherto we have shared both our wealth andour dangers with Euboea. At the conclusionof a successful war, at the signature of a mosthonourable and advantageous peace, we arederided and reproached. What is it they discoverto despise in us ? I will tell you what itis. It is the timid step of blind men : thisthey saw in us while they were tampering withPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 217Sparta. Not ashamed of their seduction, theynow walk hand in hand, with open front, andcall others to join in their infamy. They haverenounced our amity, they have spurned our expostulations,they have torn our treaties, andthey have defied our arms. At the peril ofbeing called a bad citizen, I lament your blindness,O Megara and Euboea !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I find, among the few records in my hands,that Pericles went in person, and conqueredthe faithless Megara and the refractory Euboea.Before he sailed to attack the island, he warnedthe Athenians against an inconsiderate parsimony,which usually terminates in fruitless expenditure.He told them plainly that Euboeawas capable of a protracted and obstinate re-VOL. I. L218 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.distance ; and he admonished them that, whateverreverses the arms of Athens might experience,they should continue the war, and considerthe dominion of the island a thing necessaryto their existence as a nation ; that whoevershould devise or counsel the separation ofEuboea from Athens, be declared guilty of treason,and punished with death.If Thebes, in a future war," said he,should take possession of this productivecountry, and shut up, as she easily might, thepassage of the Euripus, she would gain anascendency over us, from which we never couldrecover. Losses, defeats, inadequate supplies,may tempt her ; she would always have Spartafor an allie on such an occasion. Indeed, it iswonderful that the Boeotian, as brave a race ofmen as any in Greece, and stronger in thebody, should not have been her masters. Perhapsit is the fertility of her own territory thatPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 219kept her content with her possessions, and indisposedthe cultivators of so rich a soil fromenterprise and hazard. Euboea is no less fertilethan Boeotia, from which she is separated bythe distance of a stone's throw. Give me fiftygallies, and five thousand men, and Euboea shallfall ere Sparta can come to her assistance."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Perpetual as have been the wars of Attica,she is overpeopled. A colony hoisted sail forthe Chersonese ; another to repeople the ruinedwalls of Sybaris. Happy the families whosefathers give them lands to cultivate, instead ofkeeping them in idleness at home ; such are thefounders of colonies. The language of thiscity is spoken in Italy, in Sicily, in Asia, inl22*20 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Africa, and even on the coast of Gaul, amongthe yelping and yells of Timbers and Chambers.Surely the more beneficent of the Gods mustlook down with delight on these fruit-treesplanted in the forest. May the healthiestdews of heaven descend upon them !We are now busied in the Propylaea ; they,although unfinished, are truly magnificent.Which will remain the longest, the traces of thewalls or of the colonies? Of the future weknow nothing, of the past little, of the presentless ; the mirrour is too close to our eyes, andour own breath dims it.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.I have only time to send you a few perfumesand a few verses. These I transcribe out of aPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 2*21little volume of Erinna : the perfumes came tomefrom Syria.Blessed be the man whose beneficent providencegave the flowers another life ! We seemto retain their love when their beauty has departed.ERINNA TO LEUCONOE,If comfort is unwelcome, can I thinkReproof aught less will be !The cup I bring to cool thee, wilt thou drink,Fever'd Leuconoe ?Rather with Grief than Friendship wouldst thou dwell,Because Love smiles no more !Bent down by culling bitter herbs, to swellA cauldron that boils o'er.222 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Thanks for the verses ! I hope Leuconoewas as grateful as I am, and as sensible to theirpower of soothing.Thanks too for the perfumes ! Pericles isashamed of acknowledging he is fond of them ;but I am resolved to betray one secret of his :I have caught him several times trying them,as he called it.How many things are there that people pretendto dislike, without any reason, as far as weknow, for the dislike or the pretence !I love sweet odours. Surely my Cleon herselfmust have breathed her very soul into these !Let me smell them again : let me inhale theminto the sanctuary of my breast, lighted up byher love for their reception.But, ah Cleon ! what an importunate andPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 223exacting creature is Aspasia! Have you nowillows fresh-peeled? none lying upon the.bank for baskets, white, rounded, and delicateas your fingers ! How very fragrant, they wereformerly ! I have seen none lately. Do youremember the cross old Hermesionax ? how beran to beat us for breaking his twigs ? and how,after looking in our faces, he seated himselfdown again, finished his basket, disbursed froma goat-skin a corroded clod of rancid cheese,put it in, pushed it to us, forced it under myarm, told us to carry it home with the Gods !and lifted up both hands and blest us.I do not wish that one exactly ; cheese is thecruellest of deaths to me, and Pericles abhorsit.I am running over trifling occurrences whichyou must have forgotten. You are upon thespot, and have no occasion to recall to memoryhow the munificent old basket-maker looked224 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.after us, not seeing his dog at our heels;how we coaxed the lean, shaggy, suspiciousanimal; how many devices we contrived tothrow down, or let slip, so that the good manmight not see it, the pestilence you insisted oncarrying ; how many names we called the dogby, ere we found the true one, Cyrus ; how,when we had drawn him behind the lentiscus,we rewarded him for his assiduities, holdingeach an ear nevertheless, that he might notcarry back the gift to his master ; and how welaughed at our fears, when a single jerk of thehead served at once to ingulph the treasure andto disengage him.I shall always love the smell of the peeledwillow. Have you none for me ? Is there noyoung poplar then, with a tear in his eye onbursting into bud ? I am not speaking by metaphorand critically. I want the poplars, thewillows, the water-lilies, and the soft greenPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 225herbage. How we enjoyed it on the Meander !what liberties we took with it ! robbing it ofthe flowers it had educated, of those it wasrearing, of those that came confidently out tomeet us, and of those that hid themselves ;none escaped us. For these remembrances,green is the colour I love best. It brings meto the Fortunate Island and my Cleon ; itbrings me back to Childhood, the proud littlenurse of Youth, brighter of eye and lighter ofheart than Youth herself.These are not regrets, Cleon, they are respirations,necessary to existence. You may callthem half-wishes, if you will. We are poor indeed,when we have no half-wishes left us. Theheart and the imagination close the shutters theinstant they are gone.Do not chide me then for coming to you afterthe blossoms and buds and herbage : do notkeep to yourself all the grass on the Meander.l5226 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.We used to share it ; we will now. I love itwherever I can get a glimpse of it. It is thehome of the eyes, ever ready to receive them,and spreading its cool couch for their repose.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Demophile, poor honest faithful creature !has yielded to her infirmities. I have spentalmost as many hours with her in these lastautumnal months, as I did in the earliest of myexistence. She could not carry me in her armsagain, but she was happy when mine were abouther neck, and said they made her stronger.Do you remember how often she dropt myhand to take yours, because you never cried ?saying,People never weep nor work, themselves,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 227who can make others weep and work for them.That little one will have weeper and workertoo about her presently. Look at her, Cleon !Cannot you look like that ? Have not you twolips and two eyes ? Aspasia has not three. Trynow ! Mind how I do it !"Good simple heart !When she was near her end, she said to me,Do you ever go and read those names andbits of verses on the stones yonder ? You andAspasia used formerly. Some of them tell us tobe sad and sorry for folks who died a hundredyears ago ; others to imitate men and w omen wenever should have had a chance of seeing, hadthey been living yet. All we can learn from themisthis, that our city never had any bad peoplein it, but has been filled with weeping and wailingfrom its foundation upwards."These things puzzled Demophile : she wassomewhat vext that she could not well compressPERICLES AND ASPASIA.lend them, but praised the Gods that ourhouse was safe, when many others must havebeen rent asunder : such a power of lamentation!My name," said she, " I believe, is a verydifficult and troublesome one to pinfold in atombstone : nobody has ever tried how it wouldsound in verse : but, if you and Aspasia thinkme w orth remembering, I am sure you could domore with it than others could ; and you wouldlead your little ones, when the Gods have givenyou any, to come and see it, and tell them manythings of old Demophile."I assured her that, if I outlived her, I wouldprove, in the manner she wished, that my memoryand love outlived her likewise.She died two days afterwards.Nothing is difficult, not even an epitaph, ifwe prefer the thoughts that come without calling,and receive the first as the best and truest.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 229I would not close my eyes to sleep until I hadperformed my promise.Demophile rests here : we will not sayThat she was aged, lest ye turn away ;Nor that she long had suffered ; early woesAlone can touch you ; go, and pity those !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Ah poor Demophile ! she remembered methen ! How sorry I am I cannot tell her I rememberher !Cleon ! there are little things that leave nolittle regrets. I might have said kind words,and perhaps have done kind actions, to manywho now are beyond the reach of them. Onelook on the unfortunate might have given aday's happiness; one sigh over the pillow of230 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,sickness might have ensured a night's repose ;one whisper might have driven from their victimthe furies of despair.We think too much upon ivhat the Godshave given us, and too Utile why.We both are young ; and yet we have seenseveral who loved us pass away ; and we cannotlive over again as we lived before. A portionof our lives is consumed by the torch we followat their funerals. We enter into another stateof existence, resembling indeed and partakingof the former, but another ! it contains thesubstance of the same sorrows, the shadow ofthe same joys. Alas ! how true are the wordsof the old poet.We lose a life in every friend we lose.And every death is painful but the last.I often think of my beautiful nurse, Myrtle,now married very happily in Clazomene. MyPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 231first verses were upon her. These are theverses I thought so good, that I wrote a longdissertation on the trochaick meter, to proveit the most magnificent of meters ; and I mentionedin it all the poets that ever wrote, fromepigrammatic to epick, praising some and censuringothers, a judge without appeal upon all.How you laughed at me ! Do you rememberthe lines ? I wonder they are not worsethan they are.Myrtle ! may heaven reward theeFor thy tenderness and care !Dressing me in ail thy virtues.Docile, duteous, gentle, fair.One alone thou never heeded,I can boast that one alone ;Grateful beats the heart thy nursling,Myrtle ! 'tis all thy own.23*2 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.PERICLES TO Aspasia.Receive old Locris, and treat her affably.She has much influence in her tribe. Theelderly of your sex possess no small authorityin our city, and I suspect that in others toothey have their sway. She made me trembleonce. Pilots asked her how she liked myspeech, I forget upon what occasion : she answered,His words are current words, and ringwell; but unless he gives us more of them forthe trouble of our attendance, he shall not bearchon, I promise him."Now I know not how long I could protract aspeech, nor how long I could keep my headunder water : these are accomplishments I havenever studied. Locris and I are still friendsPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 233however. In my favour she has waved her promise,and lets me be archon.*PERICLES TO ASPASIA.Send me a note whenever you are idle andthinking of me, dear Aspasia ! Send it alwaysby some old slave, ill-drest. The people willthink it a petition, or something as good, andthey will be sure to observe the pleasure itthrows into my countenance. Two winds atonce will blow into my sails, each helping meonward.If I am tired, your letter will refresh me ; ifoccupied, it will give me activity. Beside,what a deal of time we lose in business !Plutarch says he never was archon; he meansperhaps ^r*i archon.234 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO PERICLES.Would to heaven, O Pericles ! you had nobusiness at all, but the conversation of yourfriends. You must always be the greatest man inthe city, whoever may be the most popular. I wishwe could spend the whole day together ; mustit never be ? Are you not already in possessionof all you ever contended for ?It is time, methinks, that you should leaveoff speaking in publick, for you begin to be negligentand incorrect. I am to write you a notewhenever I am idle and thinking of you !Pericles ! Pericles ! how far is it from idlenessto think of you ! We come to rest beforewe conftP to idleness.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 235PERICLES TO ASPASIA.In our republick it is no easy thing to obtainan act of divorce from power. It usually isdelivered to us by the messenger of Death, orpresented in due form by our judges where theoyster keeps open house.Now, oysters are quite out of season in thesummer of life ; and life, just about this time,I do assure you, is often worth keeping. Ithought so even before I knew you, when Ithought but little about the matter. It is acasket not precious in itself, but valuable inproportion to what Fortune, or Industry, orVirtue, has placed within it.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.When Pericles is too grave and silent, Iusually take up my harp and sing to it: for236 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.musick is often acceptable to the ear when itwould avoid or repose from discourse. He tellsme that it not only excites the imagination, butinvigorates eloquence and refreshes memory:that playing on my harp to him is like besprinklinga tessellated pavement with odoriferouswater, which brings out the images, coolsthe apartment, and gratifies the senses by itsfragrance.'•' That instrument," said he, " is the rod ofMercury ; it calls up the spirits from below, orconducts them back again to Elysium. Withwhat ecstacy do I throb and quiver under thoserefreshing showers of sound !"Come sprinkle me soft musick o'er the breast.Bring me the varied colours into lightThat now obscurely on its tablet rest.Shew me its flowers and figures fresh and bright.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 287Waked at thy voice and touch, again the chordsRestore what restless years had moved away.Restore the glowing cheeks, the tender words.Youth's short-lived spring and Pleasure's summer-day.I believe he composed these verses while Iwas playing, although he disowns them, askingme whether I am willing to imagine that myexecution is become so powerless.You remember my old song : it was this Ihad been playing.(Song.)The reeds were green the other day.Among the reeds we loved to play.We loved to play while they were green.The reeds are hard and yellow now.No more their tufted heads they bowTo beckon us behind the scene.238 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.'^ What is it like ?" my mother said.And laid her hand upon my head ;Mother ! I cannot tell indeed.I've thought of all hard things I knowsIVe thought of all the yellow too ;It only can be like the reed.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Panenus is our best painter: he was educatedby Phidias, who excels all the painters incorrectnessof design. Panenus has travelledinto Egypt, in which country, he tells us, thecolours are as fresh upon the walls of the templesas when they were painted ; two thousand yearsago. Pericles wishes to have a representationof me in the beginning of every Olympiad.Alas ! what an imprudence ! The most youthfullover never committed one greater.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 239I will not send a stranger to you, Cleon ! Iwill send the fugitive of Miletus when Epicwas giving her the lecture in the bath.Be quiet now; say nothing; even the bathitself is quite imaginary.Panenus plays upon the harp. I praisedhim for the simplicity and melody of thetune, and for his execution. He was but littlepleased.Lady," said he to me, " a painter can betwo things ; he can be painter and statuary,which is much the easier: make him a third,and you reduce him to nothing."Yet Pericles," said I, " plays rather well."Rather well, I can believe," said he, " becauseI know that his master was Damon, whowas very skilful and very diligent. Damon, likeevery clever composer I have met with, or indeedever heard of, was a child in levity anddissipation. His life was half feast, half concert."240 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.But, Panenus," said I, " surely we may befond of musick, and yet stand a little on thisside of idiocy."Aspasia !" he replied, " he who loves notmusick is a beast of one species ; he who over-lovesit is a beast of another, whose brain issmaller than a nightingale's, and his heart thanalizard's. Record me one memorable saying,one witticism, one just remark, of any greatmusician, and I consent to undergo the punishmentof Marsyas. Some among them are innocentand worthy men ; not many, nor the first.Dissipation, and, what is strange, selfishness,and disregard to punctuality in engagements,are common and nearly general in the moredistinguished of them.O Musick ! how it grieves me, that imprudence,intemperance, gluttony, should opentheir channels into thy sacred stream !"Panenus said this : let us never believe a wordPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 241of it. He himself plays admirably, althoughno composer.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.O Aspasia ! have you heard (you surelymust) that the people of Samos have declaredwar against us ? It is hardly sixty years sinceour beautiful city was captured and destroyedby the Persians. In vain hath she risen fromher ashes with fresh splendour ! Another Phry-nisus will have perhaps to write anothertragedy upon us.Is it an offence to be flourishing and happy ?The unfortunate meet and embrace : the fortunatemeet and tear each other to pieces.What wonder that the righteous Gods allow toprosperity so brief a space !VOL. I. M242 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Be composed and tranquil : read the speechof Pericles to the Athenians.SPEECH OF PERICLES.The Milesian, it appears, have sent embassadorsto you, O men of Athens ! not entreatingthe co-operation of your arms, but theinterposition of your wisdom and integrity.They have not spoken , nor indeed can theydeem it necessary to speak, of dangers recentlyundergone together with you, of ancient, faithful,indissoluble alliances, or the glory of descendingfrom the same forefathers. On thisplea Miletus might have claimed as a rightwhat she solicits as a favour.Samos, O Athenians, has dared to declarewar against the people of Miletus. She enviesus our commerce, and, unable to find aplea for assailing us, strikes our friend in ourPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 243sight, and looks impudently in our faces to seewhether we will resent it.No, Athenians, we will not resent it, until wehave sent embassadors, to ask her why she hastaken up arms against the peaceful and unoffending?It were well were it permitted usto abstain. Yes, I feel I am hazarding yourfavour by recommending delay and procrastination: but I do not apprehend that we arelosing much time. We have weapons, wehave ships, we have the same soldiers whoquelled braver enemies. The vanquished seemagain to be filing up the ranks we havethinned. They murmur, they threaten, theyconspire, they prepare (and preparation denouncesit) hostility. Let them come forthagainst us. Wealth rises up to our succour inthat harbour : Glory stands firm and bids themdefiance on those walls.Wait, wait ! twenty days only ; ten ; not ten ?m2244 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Little becomes it me, O Athenians ! to opposeyour wishes or to abate your ardour.Depart then, heralds ! and carry with youwar."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.I have asked Pericles to let me see all hisspeeches. He declared to me that he has keptno copies, but promised that he would attemptto recover some of them from his friends. Iwas disappointed and grieved, and told him Iwas angry with him. He answered thus, takingme by the hand.So, you really are angry that I have beennegligent in the preservation of my speeches,after all my labour in modelling and correctingthem. You are anxious that I should be praisedas a writer, by writers who direct the publickPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 245in these matters. Aspasia! I know theirvalue. Understand me correctly and comprehensively.I mean partly the intrinsick worthof their commendations, and partly (as we payin the price of our utensils) the fashion. I havebeen accused of squandering away both thepublick money and my own : nobody shall everaccuse me of paying three obols for the mostgrandly embossed and most sonorous panegyrick.I would excite the pleasure (it weretoo much to say the admiration) of judiciousand thoughtful men ; but I would neither soothenor irritate these busybodies. I have neitherhoney nor lime for ants. We know that goodwriters are often gratified by the commendationof bad ones; and that even when the learnedand intelligent have brought the materialsto crown their merits, they have looked towardthe door, at some petulant smirking page, forthe thread that was to bind the chaplet Little do246 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.I wish to hear what I am, much less what I amnot. Enough for me to feel the consciousnessand effect of health and strength : surely it isbetter than to be told by those who salute me,that I am looking very well,You may reply that the question turns notupon compliments, but upon censure.Really I know not what my censurers maywrite, never having had the advantage of readingtheir lucubrations ; all I know is this, if I amnot their Pericles, I am at least the Pericles ofAspasia and the Athenians."ASPASIA TO CLEONE.We were conversing on oratory and orators,when Anaxagoras said, looking at Pericles andsmiling,They are described by Hesiod in two verses,which he applies to himself and the poets ;PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 247Lies very like the truth we tell.And, when we wish it, truth as well."Meton relaxed from his usual seriousness, buthad no suspicion of the application, although hesaid,<' Cleverly applied indeed !''Pericles enjoyed equally the simplicity ofMeton and the slyness of Anaxagoras, and said,Meton ! our friend Anaxagoras is so modesta man, that the least we can do for him is toacknowledge his claims as heir general toHesiod. See them registered."I have never observed the temper of Pericleseither above or below the enjoyment of a joke ;he invites and retaliates, but never begins, lesthe should appear to take a liberty.There are proud men of so much delicacy,that it almost conceals their pride, and perfectlyexcuses it.248 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Meton never talks, but answers questionswith great politeness, although with less clearnessand precision than you would expect. Iremarked to him, one evening, that mathematicianshad great advantages over others in disputation,from the habitude they had acquiredof exactness in solving their problems.We mathematicians," answered he, " layclaim to this precision. I need not mention toyou, Aspasia, that of all the people who assembleat your house, I am the only one thatever wants a thought or word. We are exactin our own proper workmanship. Give us time,and we can discover what is false in logick ;but I never was acquainted with a mathematicianwho was ready in correcting in himself aflaw of ratiocination, or who produced the fittingthing, in any moderate time. Composition isquite beyond our sphere. I am not envious ofothers ; but I often regret in myself that, whilePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 249they are delivering their opinions freely andeasily, I am arranging mine ; and that, in commonwith all the mathematicians of my acquaintance,I am no prompt debater, no acutelogician, no clear expositor, but begin in hesitationand finish in confusion."I assure you, Cleon, I have been obliged togive order and regularity to these few words ofthe wise contemplative Meton, and to removefrom among them many that were superfluousand repeated. When he had paused, I told himI sometimes wished he would exercise hispowerful mind in conversation.I have hardly time," said he, " for study,much less for disputation. Rarely have I knowna disputant who, however dexterous, did noteither drive by Truth or over her, or who stoppedto salute her, unless he had something fine ornovel to display. He would stumble over mycubes and spheres, and I should leave my legin his noose."M 5250 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.And yet Anaxagoras and you agree welltogether," said I.Anaxagoras," replied he, « usually asks meshort questions, and helps me himself to explainthem. He comes to me when I am alone,and would find no pleasure in showing to othersmy perplexity. Seldom do I let him go again,until he has given me some help or some incitementin my studies. He suggests manythings—"Silence, good Meton !" cried Anaxagoras,or I may begin to talk of a luminary whoselight has not yet reached the earth."The three men smiled, they have some meaningcommunicated to me. Perhaps it is a remarkof Pericles, in encouragement of Anaxagoras,that, while others pass before us like ahalf-obol tow-link across a dark alley, anddazzle and disappear, his loftier light has notyet come down to the intellects of his fellow-periclesAND ASPASIA. ^51citizens; or perhaps it may really have a referenceto some discovery in astronomy.Pericles goes in person to command the expeditionagainst Samos. He promises me itwill soon be ready to sail, and tells me to expecthim back again within a few months. Artemisis preparing machines of great magnitude forthe attack of the city. He teaches me that theSamianss are brave and wealthy, and that nocity is capable of such a resistance. Certainlynever were such preparations. I hope at leastthat the report of them will detain your enemiesat home, and at all events that, before theyland, you will leave Miletus and come to me.The war is very popular at Athens : I dare sayit is equally so at Samos — equally so atMiletus. Nothing pleases men like renewingtheir ancient alliance with the brutes, andbreaking off the more recent one with theirfellow creatures.252 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.War is it, O grave heads ! that yeWith stern and stately pomp decree ?Inviting all the Gods from farTo join you in the game of war !Have ye then lived so many yearsTo find no purer joy than tears?And seek ye now the highest goodIn strife, in anguish, and in blood ?Your wisdom may be more than ours.But you have spent your golden hours.And have methinks but little rightTo make the happier fret and fight.Ah ! when will come the calmer dayWhen these dark clouds shall pass away ?When (should two cities disagree)The young, the beauteous, and the free.Rushing with all their force, shall meet.And struggle with embraces sweet.Til they who may have suffered mostGive in, and own the battle lost.Philosophy does not always play fair with us.She often eludes us when she has invited us,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 253and leaves us when she has led us the farthestway from home. Perhaps it is because we havejumped up from our seats at the first lesson shewould give us, and the easiest, and the best.There are few words in the precept,Give pleasure : receive it :Avoid giving pain : avoid receiving it.For the duller scholar, who may find it difficultto learn the whole, she cuts each line in themiddle, and tells him kindly that it will servethe purpose, if he will but keep it in hismemory.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Will you never be serious, even upon themost serious occasions? There are so manyGrecian states, on both continents and in theislands, that surely some could always be found254 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.both willing and proper to arbitrate on anydissension. If litigations are decided by arbiterswhen two men contend, (as they often are,)surely it would be an easier matter with citiesand communities ; for they are not liable to theirritation arising from violent words, nor to thehatred that springs up afresh between two menwho strive for property, every time they comewithin sight. I believe the Greeks are thehappiest people upon earth, or that ever areLikely to exist upon it ; and chiefly from theirseparation into small communities, independentgovernments, and laws made by the people forthe people ! But unless they come to the determinationthat no war whatever shall be undertakenuntil the causes of quarrel are examined,and the conditions of accommodationboth proposed and enforced by others, fromwhom impartiality is most reasonably to be expected,they will exist without enjoying thePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 255greatest advantage that the Gods have offeredthem. Religious men, I foresee, vt^ill be sorryto displease the God of battles. Let him haveall the kingdoms of the world to himself, but Iwish he would resign to the quieter Deities ourlittle Greece.Preparations are going on here for resistanceto the Samianss, and we hear that Athenian shipsare cruising off their island.In case of necessity, every thing is ready formy departure to the sources of the Meander.I will prove to you that I am not hurried norfrightened; I have leisure to write out whatperhaps may be the very last verses written inMiletus, unless we are relieved.LITTLE Alae,TO HER FATHER, ON HER STATUE BEING CALLED LIKE HER.Father ! the little girl we seeIs not, I fancy, so like me . .You never hold her on your knee.256 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.^\'hen she came home the other dayYou kist hers but I cannot say-shekist you first and ran away.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Herodotus, on returning from his victory atthe Olympian games, was the guest of Pericles.You saw him afterwards; and he might havetold you that Pericles was urgent with him toremain at Athens. True, as a stranger, hewould have been without influence here in politicalaffairs. It is evident that he desires nosuch thing, but prefers, as literary men shouldalways do, tranquility and retirement. These hemay enjoy in perfection where he is, and writethe truth intrepidly. Pericles has more thanonce heard from him. Life passes in no partof the world so easily and placidly as among theGrecian colonies in Italy. They rarely quarrel,PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 257they have room enough, men enough, wealthenough, and not too much. One petty tyranthas sprung up amongst them lately, and hasimprisoned, exiled, and murdered the bestcitizens.Pericles was asked his advice what should bedone with him. He answered,I never interfere in the affairs of others.It appears to me that, where you have nothingbut a weasel to hunt, you should not bringmany dogs into the field, nor great ones ; butinfact the rat-catcher is the best counsellor onthese occasions : he neither makes waste nornoise."The tyrant, we hear, is sickening, and manyepitaphs are already composed for him; theshortest is.The pigmy despot Matins lies here !He was not godless ; no : his God was Fear.Herodotus tells, that throughout the lower258 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Italy, poverty is unknown ; every town wellgoverned, every field well ploughed, everymeadow well irrigated, every vineyard prunedscientifically. The people choose their highermagistrates from the most intelligent, providedthey are not needy. The only offices that aresalaried are the lower, which all the citizenshave an equal chance of attaining; some bylot, some by suffrage. This is the secret whythe governments are peaceful and durable. Norich man can become the richer for them ; everypoor man may, but honestly and carefully.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Corinna was honored in her native place asgreatly as abroad. This is the privilege of oursex. Pindar and Eschylus left their country.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 259not because the lower orders were indifferentor unjust to them, but because those who wereborn their equals could not endure to see themrise their superiors.What a war against the Gods is this !It seems as if it were decreed by a publickedict, that no one shall receive from them anygift above a certain value ; and that, if theydo receive it, they shall be permitted to returnthe Gods no thanks for it in their native city.So then ! republicks must produce genius,and kings reward it !So then ! Hiero and Archelaiis must be elevatedto the rank of Cimon and Pericles ! Oshame ! O ignominy !What afflicts me deeply is the intelligence wereceive that Herodotus has left Ionia. He wascrowned at the Olympian games; he was invitedto a publick festival in every city he visitedthroughout the whole extent of Greece, even260 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.his own was pleased with him, yet he too hasdeparted — not to Archelaiis or to Hiero, but tothe retirement and tranquility of Italy.I do believe, Aspasia, that studious men, wholook so quiet, are the most restless men in existence.ORATION OF PERICLES TO THE SOLDIERSROUND SAMOS.Little time is now left us, O Athenians, betweenthe consideration and the accomplishmentof our duties. The justice of the cause,when it was first submitted to your decision inthe Agora, was acknowledged with acclamations;the success of it you have ensured byyour irresistible energy. The port of Samos isin our possession, and we have occupied all theeminences round her walls. Patience is now asPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 261requisite to us as to the enemy : for, althoughevery city which can be surrounded, can becaptured, yet in some, where courage and numbershave been insufficient to drive oiF the besieger.Nature and Art may have thrown upobstacles to impede his progress. Such isSamos ; the strongest fortress in Europe, exceptingonly Byzantion. But Byzantion fellbefore our fathers ; and, unless she become lessdeaf to the reclamations of honour, less indifferentto the sanctitude of treaties ; unless sheprefer her fellow-soldiers to her common enemy,freedom to aristocracy, friends to strangers,Greeks to Asiatics, she shall abase her Thracianfierceness before us. However, we willneither spurn the suppliant nor punish the repentant: our arms we will turn for ever, as weturn them now, against the malicious rival, thealienated relative, the apostate confederate, andthe proud oppressor. Where a sense of dignity262 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.is faint and feeble, and where reason hath lainunexercised and inert, many nations have occasionallybeen happy, and even flourishing underkings : but oligarchy hath ever been a curse toall, from its commencement to its close. Toremove it eternally from the vicinity of Miletus,and from the well-disposed of that very city bywhich hostilities are denounced against her, isat once our interest and our duty. For oligarchyin every part of the world are necessarilyour enemies, since we have always shown ourfixt determination to aid and support with allour strength the defenders of civility and freedom.It is not in our power, (for against ourinstitutions and consciences we Athenians cando nothing,) it is not in our power, I repeat it,to sit idly by, while those who were our fellow-combatantsagainst the Persian, and who sufferedfrom his aggression even more than wedid, are assailed by degenerate loans, whosePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 263usurpation rests on Persia. We have enemieswherever there is injustice done to Greeks ;and we will abolish that injustice, and we willquell those enemies. Wherever there are equallaws we have friends ; and those friends we willsuccour, and those laws we will maintain. Onwhich side do the considerate and religious lookforward to the countenance of the Gods ? Oftenhave they deferred indeed their righteous judgments,but never have they deserted the long-sufferingand the brave. Upon the groundwhere we were standing when you last heardmy appeal to you, were not Xerxes and hisnaiads encamped ? What drove them from it ?The wisdom, force, and fortitude, breathed intoyour hearts by the immortal Gods. Preservethem with equal constancy ; and your return, Ipromise you, shall not have been more gloriousfrom Salamis than from Samos.264 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Samos has fallen. Pericles will have givenyou this information long before my letter canreach you, and perhaps the joy of the lightheartedAthenians will be over ere then. Sosoon dies away the satisfaction of great exploits,even of such as have swept a generation frombefore us, have changed the fortunes of a thousandmore, and indeed have shaken the last linkin the remotest. We hear, but perhaps theestimate is exaggerated, that the walls of Miletus,of Ephesus, of Priene, are, in comparisonto Samos, as the fences of a farm-yard are tothem. Certain it is that the vanquished fleetwas more formidable than the united naviesof Corinth and of Carthage, which are rated agnext in force to the Athenian.By this conquest, we are delivered from im-periclesAND A SPA SI A. 265minent danger ; yet, I am ashamed to say it,our citizens are ungrateful already. It is bythe exertions of the Athenians that they arenot slaves ; and they reason as basely as if theywere. They pretend to say that it was jealousyof Samos, and the sudden and vast increase ofher maritime power, but by no means any affectionfor Miletus, which induced them to takeup arms ! Athens had just reason for hostility ;why should she urge, in preference, unjust ones ?Alas ! if equity is supported by violence, littlecan be the wonderment if power be preceded byfalsehood. Such a reflection may be womanish;but are not all peculiarly so which are quiet,compassionate, and consistent? The manlymind, in its continual course of impedimentsand cataracts, receives and gives few trueimages ; our stagnant life in this respect hasgreatly the advantage.Xanthus, the friend (you remember) of poorVOL. I. N266 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Xeniades, fought as a volunteer in the Athenianarmy, and was entrusted with the despatchesto our government.Xanthus I" said the General, " your countrymenwill hereafter read your name, althoughit is not written here; for we conquerors ofSamos are no little jealous one of another. Goand congratulate the Milesian; they will understandus both."I asked him many questions. He repliedwith much simplicity, " I was always too muchin it to know any thing about it. The principalthing I remember is, that Pericles (I wastold) smiled at me for a moment in the heatof battle, and went on to another detachment."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 267CLEONE TO ASPASIA.The wind, I understand, has delayed my lastletter in harbour, and continues adverse. Everydaywe receive some fresh vessel from Samos,and some new intelligence. True is it, we discover,that the prevailing party had been supportedat once by the Peloponnesian and thePersians. The chastisement of the delinquentsis represented as very much too mild. " Theywould have made us slaves, let us make themso." Such, with scourges and tortures, werethe denunciations of the people and the soldiery; and more vehemently in Samos than inMiletus. The leaders of the oligarchy (nowsupprest for ever) were two men of low extraction,Lysimachus and Elpenor. We dailyhear some story, well known in Samos only,of these incendiaries. Lysimachus was 268 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.riches by the collocation of his wife with an olddotard, worn out by gluttony and disorderedin intellect. By his last testament, made whenhe had lost his senses, he bequeathed her fiftytalents. The heirs refused to pay them ; andLysimachus would have pleaded her cause beforethe people, had they not driven him awaywith shouts and stones. Nevertheless he wasthought a worthy champion of the faction, andthe rather as his hatred of his fellow-citizensand former companions must be sincere and inextinguishable.Elpenor is far advanced in age.His elder son was wounded by accident, anddied within the walls. Avarice and parsimonyhad always been his characteristicks, under theveil however of morality and religion. Thespeech he made at the funeral is thus reported,It hath been, O men of Samos ! the decreeof the immortal Gods, whose names be everblessed ! . . . "PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 269Hold hard there ! Cannot you see that thereare no more sparks in the pyre ? . the winesmells sadly . . throw no more on them . . takeit home to the cellar" ." to remove frommy aged eyes, from my frail embraces, the delightof my life, the stair of my declining years,all spent in the service of my beloved countryIt is true I have another son, rising out of hisadolescence . . here beside me . . O my child !Molismogis ! Molismogis ! on such a melancholyoccasion dost thou, alas ! tie indissolublyand wastefully that beautiful piece of packthread? Hard knots ! hard knots ! hard fate !hard fate ! Thy poor bereaved mother maywant it ; and it will fail her in the hour ofneed."Two torches were borne before the funeral.One of them presently gave signs rather prematurelyemblematical of our mortal state, andcould be restored to its functions by no exertion270 PERICLES AND ASPASIA,of the bearer, first waving it gently toward itscompanion, then shaking it with all his might,horizontally, vertically, diagonally, then holdingit down despondently to the earth. Elpenorbeckoned to him, and asked him in his ear howmuch he had paid for it.Haifa drachma."Fraud I" cried Elpenor, " fraud, even atthe tomb ! before the dead, and before the Godsof the dead ! From whom did you make thepurchase ?*'From Gylippides, son of Oracles."Tell Gylippides, son of Oracles," calmlysaid Elpenor, " that in my love of equity, inmy duty to the state, in my piety to the Gods,in my pure desire to preserve the tranquilityof his conscience, I cite him before the tribunal,unless he refund an obol." Thenaloud, " It was not in this manner, O Athenians! that our forefathers reverenced the dead."PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 271He gave way under his grief, and was carriedback with little commiseration. Elpenor isamong the richest men in Greece, unless theconquerors have curtailed his treasures. It isbut reasonable that every thing such men possessshould compensate the people for years ofrapine, disunion, and turbulence; for the evillaws they enacted, and for the better they mis-administeredand perverted.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Enough, enough is it for me to see my Periclessafe at home again. Not a word has hespoken, not a question have I asked him, aboutthe odious war of Samos. He made in Samos, Ihear, a most impressive oration, to celebratethe obsequies of those brave soldiers who fell.272 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.In Athens, there all is exultation, he has renderedthe slain the most glorious of the triumphant,and the fatherless the proudest of theliving. But at last of how little worth is thepraise of eloquence ! Elpenor and Lysimachuslead councils and nations ! Great Gods ! surelyye must pity us when we worship you . . we,who obey, and appear to reverence, the vilest ofour species ! I recover my step ; I will not againslip into this ofFal. Come, and away to Xanthus.Ay, ay, Cleon ! Simplicity, bravery, well-meritedand well-borne distinction ! . . Takehim, take him : we must not all be cruel . . toourselves.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Aspasia ! you mistake. Grant me the presenceof friendship and the memory of love ! ItPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 273is only in this condition that a woman can besecure from fears and other weaknesses. I mayadmire Xanthus ; and there is pleasure in admiration.If 1 thought I could love him, Ishould begin to distrust and despise myself. Iwould not desecrate my heart, even were it inruins; but I am happy, very happy ; not indeedaltogether as I was in early youth . . perhaps itwas youth itself that occasioned it. Let methink so ! Indulge me in the silence and solitudeof this one fancy. If there was any thingelse, how sacred should it ever be to me ! Ahyes, there was ! and sacred it is, and shall be.Laodamia saw with gladness, not with passion,a God, conductor of her sole belovedThe shade of Xeniades follows the steps ofXanthus.N 5274 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Parties of pleasure are setting sail, every dayalmost, for Samos. We begin to be very brave ;we women, I mean. I suspect that no few ofus take an unworthy delight in the humiliationand misery of the fair Samianss. Not havingseen, nor intending to see them myseK, I canonly tell you what I have heard of their calamities.Loud outcries were raised by the popularorators against such of them as were suspectedof favoring the Persian faction, and it was demandedof the judges that they should be deportedand exposed for slaves. This menace,you may well imagine, caused great anxiety andalarm, even among those who appeared to bequite resigned to such a destiny while the gallantyoung Athenians were around the walls.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 275But, to be sold ! and the Gods alone knowto whom ! Old morose men, perhaps, andjealous women ! We suspect it was at the instigationof Pericles that a much severer chastisementhas befallen them. They have beencondemned to wear the habiliments of Persians.Surely no refinement of cruelty can surpass thedecree, by which a Greek woman is divested ofthat beautiful dress which alone can be calledan ornament to the female form. This decreehas been carried into execution ; and you wouldpity even the betrayers of their country. Whetherin ignorance of what the Persian habit is,or from spite and malice, the Samian ladies areobliged to wear sleeves of sufficient amplitudeto conceal a traitor in each ; and chains, intersectingthe forehead with their links and ornaments;and hair not divided along the wholesummit of the head, but turned back about thecentre, to make them resemble the heads of276 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.some poisonous snakes. This barbarian garb hasalready had such an effect on many, that theyhave cast themselves into the sea ; and othershave entreated that they may, as was firstthreatened, rather be sold for slaves.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Odious, as undoubtedly was the conduct ofthe Samian oligarchy and priesthood, and liableas are all excesses to a still farther exaggerationin the statement of them, you will hardly believethe effrontery of the successful demagogues.Not contented with undeniable proofs, in regardto the enormous and mismanaged wealth tornaway from the priests of Bacchus, they have inventedthe most improbable falsehood that themalevolence of faction ever cast against the in-PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 277silence of power. They pretend that certainmen, some of ancient family, more of recent, hadconspired to transmit the reins of governmentto their elder sons. Possession for life is notlong enough ! They are not only to pass laws,but (whenever it so pleases) to impede them !They decree that the first-born male is to be thewisest and best of the family, and shall legislatefor all Samos ! Democracy has just to go onestep farther, and to persuade the people (readyat such times to believe anything) that the oligarchyhad resolved to render their power hereditary,not only for one generation, but for seven.The nation, so long abused in its understanding,would listen to and believe the report, ignorantthat arbitrary power has never been carried tosuch extravagance even in Persia itself, althoughit is reported, that in India the lower orders ofpeople were hereditarily subject to the dominationof a privileged class. But this may be278 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.false ; and indeed it must be, if what is likewisetold us concerning them be true, which is,that they have letters among them.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.You have given me in your two last lettersa great deal of curious information, about thediscoveries that the demagogues made, or pretendedto have made, in Samos. It is credibleenough that the oligarchy were desirous of transmittingtheir authority to their children: butthat they believed so implicitly in the infatuationof the citizens, or the immutability of humanevents, as to expect a continuation of power inthe same families for seven generations, is toogross and absurd, even to mislead an insurgentand infuriated populace. He indeed must becomposed of mud from the Nile, who can endurePERICLES AND ASPASIA. 279with patience this rancorous fabrication. InEgypt, we are told by Herodotus in his Erato,that the son of a herald is of course a herald ;and, if any man hath a louder voice than he, itgoes for nothing.Hereditary heralds are the proper officers ofhereditary lawgivers ; and both are well worthyof dignity where the deities are cats.Strange oversight ! that no provision shouldever have been devised, to ensure in these tutelarand truly household Gods an equal security forlineal succession !ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Abuses of many kinds, and of great enormity,have been detected by the Samianss in theiroverthrown government. What exasperates thepeople most, and indeed the most justly, is the280 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.discovery that the ruling familles have grosslyabused the temples, to the high displeasure ofthe Gods. Sacrilege has been carried to sucha pitch, that some among them have appointeda relative or dependent to the service of morethan one sanctuary. You remember that ancientlyall the worship of this island was confinedto Juno. She displeased the people, Iknow not upon what occasion, and they sufferedthe greater part of her fanes to fall in ruins,and transferred the richest of the remainder tothe priests of Bacchus. Several of those whohad bent the knee before Juno, took up thethyrsus with the same devotion. The peopledid indeed hope that the poor and needy, andparticularly such as had lost their limbs in war,or their parents or their children by shipwreck,would be succoured out of the wealth arisingfrom the domains of the priesthood; and therather as these domains were bequeathed byPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 281religious men, whose whole soul rested uponJuno, and whose bequest was now utterly frustrated,by taking them from the sister of Jupiterand giving them exclusively to his son. Beside,it was recollected by the elderly, that out ofthese vast possessions aid was afforded to thestate when the state required it; and that,wherever there stood one of these temples,hunger and sickness, sorrow and despair, werecomforted and assuaged. The people, it appears,derived no advantages from the change,and only grew more dissatisfied and violent;for, if those who had officiated in the temples ofJuno were a little more licentious than becamethe ministers of a Goddess, they did not runinto the streets, and through the country places,drunk and armed ; nor did they seize upon thegrapes, because they belonged to Bacchus ;nor upon the corn, because it is unwholesometo drink wine without bread; nor upon the282 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.cattle, because man cannot live on bread alone.These arguments you may suspect of insufficiency: what then will you think when you hearanother reason of theirs, which is, that thenation has no right to take from (hem whatbelongs to the Goddess. The people cry,How then can it belong to you ? Pushed uponthis side, they argue that they cannot be deprivedof their salaries, because they are fromland. What ! reply the citizens. Are not goldand silver the products of land also ? Butlong possession . . We will remedy that too, aswell as we can. The soldiers and sailors havethe most reason to complain, when they seetwelve priests in the enjoyment of more salarythan seven thousand of the bravest combatants.The military are disbanded, and deprived ofpay, at the instant when their services are nolonger necessary ; yet no part, it appears, of asuperfluous and idle priesthood is to be reducedPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 283or regulated; on the contrary, it is rapaciousand irreligious to take away three temples froma venerable occupant of four. Was ever soldierso impudent as to complain that rations werenot allowed him in four detachments of hisarmy ? The downfall of the old faction will beof little benefit to Samos, while these insultsand iniquities press upon the people. Unlessthose who are now entrusted with power, resolveto abolish the gross abuses of the priesthood,the wealth of which is greater and worseapplied in Samos than it is even in thosecountries where the priests are soprano, andvenerated as deities, little imports it by whomthey are governed, or what Gods they venerate.It is better to be ruled by the kings of Lacedaemon,and wiser to salute in worship the sunof Persia. Never surely will the island be pacified,until what was taken from Juno shallalso be taken from Bacchus, and until the284 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.richest priest be reduced in his emoluments farbelow the level of a polemarch.ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Those of your letters, my Cleon, which relateto the affairs of Samos, and especially to thepriests of Juno and Bacchus, have led me intomany reflections. The people of Athens arethe most religious of any upon earth ; but Idoubt whether they are the most just, the mostgenerous, the most kindly. There is not afriend, whatever benefit they may have receivedfrom him, whom they would not abandon ordenounce, on a suspicion of irreverence to Pallas; and those in general are the most fanaticaland furious whom, as Goddess of wisdom, shehas least favored. Your neighbours, the Sa-periclesAND ASPASIA. 285means, are more judicious in their worship ofJuno. They know that, as long as Jupiter hatha morsel of ambrosia, she will share it, althoughhe may now and then indulge in a draught ofnectar to which her lips have no access. TieSamianss have discovered that wealth is not arequisite of worship, and that a temple needsnot a thousand para sangs of land for its inclosure.If we believed that Gods could be jealous,we might fear that there would be much illblood between Juno and Bacchus. It is moreprobable that they will look on calmly, and lettheir priests fight it out. The Persians inthese matters are not quite so silly as we are.Herodotus tells us that, instead of altars andtemples, the verdure of the earth is chosen fortheir sacrifice ; and musick and garlands, prayersand thanksgivings, are thought as decent andacceptable as comminations and blood. It doesnot appear that they are less moral, or less re-286 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.religious, than those who have twenty Gods, andtwenty temples for each. The wiser men inAthens tell us that the vulgar have their prejudices.Where indeed is the person who neverhas repeated this observation ? Yet believe me,Cleon, it is utterly untrue. The vulgar havenot their prejudices : they have the prejudicesof those who ought to remove them if they hadany. Interested men give them, not their religion,but clubs and daggers for enforcing it;taking from them, in return, their time, theirlabour, their benevolence, their understanding,and their wealth. And are such persons to beinvested with the authority of lawgivers, and thesplendour of satraps ? The Samianss have decidedthat question. Priests of Bacchus, letthem diffuse the liberality and joyousness, andcurtail a little from the swaggering stateliness, ofhim whom the poet calls in his dithyrambic,she tiger-home and mortaUmothered God.PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 287ASPASIA TO CLEONE.Hephaestion, whom I never have mentionedto you, and whom indeed I hardly know byname,is going to Italy, and has written thispoem on the eve of his departure. It is saidthat his verses are deficient in tenderness andamenity. Certain it is, that he by no meansindulges in the display of them, whatever theymay be. When Pericles had read the following,I asked him what he thought of the author.I think," replied Pericles, " that he will neverattempt to deprive me of my popularity."I am afraid he is an ill-tempered man : yet Lhear he has suffered on many occasions, andparticularly in regard to his fortune, very greatinjustice with equally great unconcern. He isnever seen in the Agora, nor in the theatre, norin the temples, nor in any assemblage of the288 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.people, nor in any society of the learned ; norhas he taken the trouble to enter into a confederacy,or strike a bargain, as warier men do,with any praiser; no, not even for the loan ofa pair of palms in the Keramicos.I have now said all I believe you will think itrequisite for me to say, on a citizen so obscure,and so indifferent a poet. Yet even he, poorman ! imagines that his effusions must endure.This is the most poetical thought I can find inhim ; but perhaps he may have written what isbetter than my specimen.THE lAMBICKS OF HEPH^STION.Speak not too ill of me, Athenian friends !Nor ye, Athenian sages, speak too ill !From others of all tribes am I secure.1 leave your confines : none whom you caress.Finding me hungry and athirst, shall dipInto Ephesus the grey bowl to quenchPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 289My thirst, or break the horny bread, and scoopStiffly around the scanty vase, wherewithTo gather the hard honey at the sides.And give it me for having heard me sing.Sages and friends ! a better cause remainsFor wishing no black sail upon my mast.'Tis, friends and sages ! lest, when other menSay words a little gentler, ye repent.Yet be forbidden by stern pride to shareThe golden cup of kindness, pushing backYour seats, and gasping for a draught of scorn.Alas ! shall this too, never lack before.Be, when you most would crave it, out of reach !Thus, on the plank, now Neptune is invoked,I warn you of your peril : I must live.And ye, O friends ! howe'er unwilling, may.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.Aspasia ! I have many things to say in replyto your last letter.VOL. I. o290 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Believe me, I can take little interest in anyill-tempered man. Hephaestion is this, you tellme, and there is nothing in his lamhicks tomake me doubt it. Neither do they contain,you justly remark, any thing so characteristickof a poet as the confidence he expresses that heshall live. All poets, good and bad, are possessedby this confidence ; because the mindsof them all, however feeble, however capacious,are carried to the uttermost pitch ofenthusiasm. In this dream, they fancy theystand upon the same eminence, or nearly so,and look unto the same distance. But no poet,or other writer, supposing him in his senses,could ever think seriously that his works willbe eternal ; for whatever had a beginning mustalso have an end ; and in this predicament arelanguages. Like the fowls of the air, they aredriven from the plains and take refuge in themountains, until at last they disappear, leavingPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 291some few traces, some sounds imperfectlycaught up. Highly poetical works, or those inwhich eloquence is invested with the richestattributes of poetry, are the only ones that canprolong the existence of a dialect Egypt andPhoenicia and Chaldea, beyond doubt, containmany treatises on the arts and sciences, althoughunpublished, and preserved only by the priesthood,or by the descendants of the authors anddiscoverers. These are certainly to pass awaybefore inventions and improvements more important.But if there is any thing of genius, intheir hymns, fables, or histories, it will remainamong them, even when their languages shallhave undergone many variations : and afterwards,when they are spoken no longer, itwill be incorporated with others, and finally beclaimed as original and indigenous by nationsthe most remote and dissimilar. Many streams,whose fountains are now utterly dried up, have292 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.flowed from afar to be lost in the ocean ofHomer. Our early companions, the animals ofgood old Esp, have spoken successively inevery learned tongue. And now a few words onthat gentlest and most fatherly of masters.Before we teach his fables to children, weshould study them very attentively ourselves.They were written for the wisest and the mostpowerful, whose wisdom they might increase,and whose power they might direct. There aremany men, of influence and authority, apt enoughto take kindly a somewhat sharp bite from a dogor monkey, and to be indignant at the slightesttouch on the shoulder from a fellow-creature.It is improbable that a fable will do many ofthem much good, but it may do a little to onein twenty, and the amount is by no means unimportantin that number of generations. Theonly use of Esp to children, after the delighthe gives them, is the promotion of familiarityPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 293and friendship with animals, in proportion asthey appear to deserve it : and a great use indeedit is. If I were not afraid that one orother of these vigilant creatures might snap atme, I would now begin to quarrel a little withyou. And yet I think I should have on myside some of the more sagacious, were I to reprehendyou for letting an ill-tempered manrender you supercilious and unjust. How doyou know, pray, that Hephsestion may not live ?and quite as long as he fancies he shall ; a century,or two, or three. Even in the iambicsthere is a compression and energy of thought,which the best poets sometimes want, and thereis in them as much poetry as was necessary onthe occasion. The poet has given us, at onestroke, the true impression of a feature in hischaracter; which few have done, and few cando, excepting those only which are nearly alikein the whole fraternity.o 3294 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.Doubtless we are pleased to take our dailywalk by streams that reflect the verdure and theflowers : but the waters of a gloomy cavern maybeas pellucid and pure, and more congenial toour graver thoughts and bolder imaginations.For any high or any wide operation, a poetmust be endued, not with passion indeed, butwith power and mastery over it ; with imagination,with reflection, with observation, and withdiscernment. There are however some thingsin poetry which admit few of these qualities.Comedy, for instance, would evaporate undertoo fervid a fancy : and the sounds of the Odewould be dulled and deadened by being tooclosely overarched with the fruitage of reflection.Homer in himself is subject to none of thepassions ; but he sends them all forth on hiserrands with as much precision and velocity asApollo his golden arrows. The hostile Gods,the very Fates themselves, must have wept withPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 295Priam in the tent before Achilles : Homerstands unmoved.Aspasia ! there is every reason why a good-naturedperson should make us goodnatured,but none whatever why an ill-natured oneshould make us ill-natured : neither of themought to make us unjust. You do not knowHephaestion, and you speak ill of him on thereport of others who perhaps know him as littleas you do. You would shudder if I ventured toshow you the position you have taken. Ill-temperedyou cannot be ; you would not be unfair: what if, in the opinion of all your friends,you should be a more shocking thing thaneither! what, in the name of the immortalGods ! if I should have found you, on this oneoccasion, a somnambulist on the verge of vulgarity!Take courage: nobody has seen it but myself.If there are bad people in the world,296 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.and may-be there are plenty, we ought never toletit be thought that we are near enough to beaware of it.Again to Hephsestion.It is better to be austere than ambitious:better to live out of society than to court theworst. How many of the powerful, even withinthe confines of their own household, will be rememberedless affectionately and lastingly thantame sparrows and talking days ! and, amongthe number of those who are destined to beknown hereafter, of how many will thememory be laden with contempt or with execrations! To the wealthy, proud, and arrogant,the Gods have allotted no longer an existence,than to the utensils in their kitchens orthe vermin in their sewers: while, to thosewhom such perishable would depress and vilify,the same Eternal Beings have decreed andratified their own calm consciousness of plasticPERICLES AND ASPASIA. 297power, of immovable superiority, with a portion(immeasurably great) of their wisdom, theirauthority, and their duration.CLEONE TO ASPASIA.We have kept your birth-day, Aspasia !On these occasions I am reluctant to writeany thing. Politeness, I think, and humanity,should always check the precipitancy of congratulation.Nobody is felicitated on losing. Eventhe loss of a bracelet or tiara is deemed no subjectfor merriment and alertness in our friendsand followers. Surely then the marked andregistered loss of an irreparable year, the loss ofa limb of life, ought to excite far other sensations.So long is it, O Aspasia ! since we had readany poetry together, I am quite uncertain whetheryou know the Ode to Asteroessa.^98 PERICLES AND ASPASIA.1.Asteroessa ! many bringThe vows of verse and blooms of springTo crown thy natal day.Lop my vow too amid the rest !'' Ne'er mayst thou sigh from that white breastO take them all away I2.For there are cares and there are wrongs,And withering eyes and venom'd tongues ;They now are far behind ;But come they must : and every yearSome flowers decay, some thorns appear.Whereof these gifts remind.3.Cease, raven, cease ! nor scare the doveWith croak around and swoop above ;Be peace, be joy, within !Of all that hail this happy tideMy verse alone be cast aside !Lyre ! cymbal ! dance ! begin !PERICLES AND ASPASIA. 299Although there must be some myriads of Odeswritten on the same occasion, yet, among thehundred or two on which I can lay my hand,none conveys my own sentiments so completely.Sweetest Aspasia, live on ! live on ! butrather, live back the past !END OF VOL. I.LONDON :IBOTSON AND PALMER, PRINTERS, SAVOY STREET, STRAND