TRAVELSINNORTHERN GREECEBYWILLIAM MARTIN LEAKE, F.R.S. &cIN POUR VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:J. Dwell, NEW BOND STREET.1835.LONDON :albert & RIVIKOTON, Printer.ST. JOHN'S SQUARE.OXFORDVCONTENTSOPVOLUME II.CHAPTER X-Eblis, iBNIANBa.PAGEZitdniy Lamia — View of Melis, Thermopylae, and Mount (Eta,from Sitting — Mount Katavdthra — Patratzlki or Ne6patra,Hypata — Rivers EU^ha, or Spercheius, and Vistritza, orInches — JEnianes — (E/«n — tribes of the Malienses — Phthi-oUb — Dolores — Dryopes — Franzii — River Gurgo, DyraS'^Mavran^na, Melts — Teaches — Heracleia — Rivers Karvunari&yor AsopHS and Ph^tnisf — AntheU'—TheTfnopyht — Alpeni — MeccaPnndonitza — Military events at ThprmopykB — Upper Pass ofMount CaUidromus, or Anop<Ba — Forts Tkhius, Rhodimtia,CaUubromum . • . • • 1CHAPTER XI.L0CRI8, PHOCIS, DORIS.Pundonitza — ^Temitza — Geography of Doris and the frontier ofPhocU — Rivers Apostolic and Kaienitza — River Cepkissw —Dbadhi, Amphicleia — Velitza, Thoreau, Neon — Leftaa, Ela-ilia — Paled Fiva, Ledon — Lilac — Source of the Cephissus —Charadra, Tithronium, DrymcBa — Tetrapolis of Doris — RiverErineus, or Pindus, or Acyphas — Erineus, Pindus, Cytinium,Boeum — Departure from Velitza — Bissik^ni — The Stend of theCephissus — Thalia — Rivers Platonic, Mavroner6 — Aulis,Inscription — Aio Vldsi — Mera — Kdpuma — Panopeus — Ch€B-roiMia— Mount Petrachus — Arrival at Livadhia 66IV CONTENTS.CHAPTER XII.Boeotia.Problivadhla, Mideia, Ldtadeia, river Hercyna, Grove of DrophoniusInscriptions of Livadhia — Conceit — Alalcomenm — Petra —Mountains Libethrium, Laphystium, T^thossium — Temple ofMinerva Itonia — Rivers Curtains, Phalarus, Isomantw — KrdpiScript, Orchomemu, Treaty of Minyas, Monastery ofScript, Terrene of the Graces, Inscriptions— Rivers Echinus,Meat — Lake CephissU — Tegyra 118CHAPTER XIII.Boeotia, Phocis L0CRI8.Departure from Script — Source of the Menu — ^IWnlUiy Ample*don — Exarkhd — Abm — Temple of Apollo — VogdMni — Hys— Toland — Atakmta — Opta — Cynua — Orobia —jEd^ftus — topography of Eastern Locrig-^Dcgphnus — Aiope,CnemideSt Tknmmn, river Boagrins, Searpheia, Nieaa, Pha-rygeg, or Tame, Angela, Bessaa, CaJUarw — amount Omit —Mount Khlomdf Cyrtone — Coruia — Return to Viiltesi — ,Naryxx — Sf&ka— Merali — Khdhavo — Faledkastro ofBliss, Parapotamii — River Cephistiu — Kipuma — Return toLivadhia — Ancient military transactions in the plain of Cht-roneia — Battle between Sylla and Archelaus — Mount PkUo'haotm — River Issue — Mount Thrive — Rivers Moriiu, MotuAnna — Departure for Thebes — Petra — OedUa — Mazi — Ha-virtue— Death of Lysander — River Lophis — Fountain CestusOrchalides — Movaxt Alopecum — Rivers Permesstu, Olmeius —Onchestue — Mount Pagi, PhcnUcium, or Phicium — the Thurieplain— Thebes 161CHAPTER XIV.B(B0TIA, BUBCEA.YpsiU Rakhi — General geography of Boeotia — Rivers and fountainsof Thebes — Cadmeia — Description of the cUy by Diem-ariusand Pausanias — Dimensions of the city — Seven GatesCONTENTS. VPAGEDeparture for 'Egripo — Tenesmus — Mount Siamati, Hys— CtUsas — River nermodon — Harmaa — Mycalessus —'Egripo, Chakis — £itrtpt»— Bridge — Mount Kalogheiitza —Ldtmtum — iliiljf*— Cape Emperesiiiim — Departure from 'Egripo^Akli&lift — SdlgwMW — ^^Ancient road — Anthem 218CHAPTER XV.Boeotia.From AiUhedtm to the Lake Paralimni — Cross Mount Frown —Pales Tingle of ApoOo Ptoius — K6kkino — Lake Copais —Chasms of the Cephisnu — Line of ancient Shafts above thesubterraneous River — Emissary — Valley of Larmes — ,upper and lower — Return to K6kkino — Kardhitza,AerephOMm — Inscriptions — Athamantwm — Copy — Katav6thraof Mount PJkicttim— Ancient Canal between the lakes Aerapkitand HyUee — Hyle — Spina— Lake Liv&dhi, HyUce — Returnto Thebes— 5cA(emi#—^letm 276CHAPTER XVI.Boeotia.From Thebes to KokUa — Potnia — River Asopus — Plasma —Fountain Vergutiini — Kriaktiki— Hynie — Bubdka — Katzdla,ErythrtB—Scoh^^-Eteonus — Fountain Gargtqfhia — Flat^ni —Moment qf Maronite — Ancient roads from PUUaa toAthens and Megara — Fountain qf Diana and rock of AettBonSpkragidium—BaUle of Platteaa — Heron of Androcrates —ArgiopiM — The Island — Siege of Platteaa in the PeloponnesianWar — Re-establishment of the was under Cassander — old and new — Description of Plataea by Pausanias —Aie qf EleuiherdB 323CHAPTER XVII.• Boeotia, ATTICA, Morris.Departure from Thebes — 7Wap«ii»— 8co&w — Plain of Si&lissi—Sanctum — St. Meletius — Derveno-khdria — Ghyft6-kastro,VI CONTENTS.PAGE.(Enoe^My^poh, Elmahera-^Fan of Sarand&poro or Cephissua—Plain of Eleusis and Tkria-^RheiH—Tempk qf Vemu PhUaDh&fni, Temple of Apollo on Mount PoBctliim— Arrival atAthens — Geography of the Mesfaris — Route from Eleusis toMegara — Description of Megara by Pausanias — Long WattsNisita — Minoa — jEgosthena-' Page — Erineia—Isus — MountKandili, Cerata — Mount Karydhi — The Oneia — Polichne —Theodosius —jEgeirusa — Geraneia — Cilia — Scire, rocksScironides 368CHAPTER XVIII.ATTICA, Boeotia.Mount Parties View from the summit — Departure from AthensKifisia — Grand — Plain of Marathon — Suli — TVicoryikus —Temple of Nemesis — Evredkastro, Rhamnus — Grammatical —Varna — Mount Mavrondro, Peleus — Kdlamo, Psaphis —Mavrodhilisi, temple of Amphiaraus — Apostles, Delphinium'Oropo, Oropus — Sykimino— Dhllissi, Delium — Battle ofDelium — Skimatdri — Grimiidha, Tanagra — Rivers Larii andAsopus — Battles <f Tanagra and (Enophyta — 'Inia, (EnophgtaAndritza, Pair*— Archaic inscriptions — Vlokh6 — MountsSoro, Sully — Return to Thebes — Chalia — CynoscephahB —GraaS'Stethus '. 416CHAPTER XIX.Boeotia.Departure from Thebes — Vale of the Kanav&ri — Rimdkastro—Lefka, Thespim—Leuctra — Battle of Leuctra — Paleopanaghia^Pyrgdki, Ascra — Fountain Aganippe — Grove of the Muses -^Hippocrene, Olmeius, Permessus — Nedkhori— Ceressus — — I'biiii/atii of Narcissus — Xeronomi — Pyrgo on MountKorombili— Port Alike — Kakdsia, Thisbe —Vtiihy, Port ofThisbe — Dobrend — Inscriptions at Kakdsia — Kh6sia — Monasteryof Saint Taziarches — Port Sar&ndi — Sopha — Dob6 —Z4Utza, BuliS'-Theba Cornet— Port Eutretus^Eutresis—Arrival at Kyri&ki • 477CONTENTS. VIICHAPTER XX.Phocis.PAGEKyniki^MouDt HeJuxm—Paleil-khora— Monastery of St. Lukeof Stiri8~5ltrif and its fountain—ilfiiftryrat— Met6khi StoIal6— Sidhiro-kafkhi6— Aspra Spitia-i^n/tcyro — amount Cir-pku — ^Dhesfina— Jftfedeon — Marathus —Cape Pkarygium — Nape— River Pieistus — Delphi — Its topography,antiquities, inscriptions, &c 526CHAPTER XXI.PHOCIS, L0CRI8, MTOLIJL,Departure from Delphi — Kri866, CrtMa— Xeropigadho — Cnrha —River PleittMi — S61ona, Ampkista — Latin inscription — Roadsfrom Stiona — ^Ath/mia, Myoftta— Lidhoriki — Stend— Veltik-hovo^Kvers M^ga, K6kkino, and Mom— Khan of Paleux&riMonastery of Vam&kova — Mag — Cross the Mom —Plain of K141a — Mount Rigani — 'Epakto, Naupactw — ^^Ancientgeography of JStoUa and Locrv — Athenian invasion — Marchof the Spartan Eurylochus through Locris — (Eneon — jEgiHumPoUdama — BupaJium - Erythema — CrocyUum — TUihium —Hyle — Tokphon—Phtuiwn — Apidoti — Oplwmeuee — £ofiw —Ca0Nm — Pro — Mount Corax^-Ewrytanei 582TRAVELSINNORTHERN GREECE,CHAPTER X.MELISy iENIANEB.Zituni, Lamia — View of Melissa Thermopylae and Mount (Etafrom Zituni — Mount Katavothra — Patratziki or Cleopatra,Hypata — rivers Elladha, or Spercheius, and Vistritza, orInackus — Assumes — (Eta — tribes of the Malienset — Phtki-oiise — Dolores — Types — Franzii — River Ourgo, Dyras —Mavian^ria, Menu — Trachis — Heraclea — Rivers Karvunarifi,or AsopuSf and Phoenix -^Antheie^^ThermopyUe — Alpeni —Niccea — Pundonitza — Military events at Thermopylae — UpperPass of Mount CaUidromut^ or Anopaa — Forts Tichku, ,CalUdramum.Nov. 25. — Zi?rouvcov IS a name remarkable from itsresemblance to the Arabic Zeitun, which means aplace of olive trees, and is repeatedly found incountries where that language is spoken , but asnone of the names of Greece are derived from theArabic unless through the Turkish, as the Turkshave corrupted Zeitun into Isdun, and as Znrovtovis found among the bishoprics of the province ofVOL. II. BX.] Melts. 3on the route which led from Thermopylse throughthe passes of Phthiotis to Thaumaci'.The only remains I can find of the ancient cityare some pieces of the walls of the Acropolis, forminga part of those of the modem castle ; and somesmall remains of the town walls constructed ofmasonry of the third species, at the foot of the hillbeyond the extreme modem houses to the eastward.On the opposite side of the town, a brisklittle river turns fourteen mills, situated one abovethe other, on the slope of the hill. The samemethod is practised at Dhomoko, but there withonly four mills.The ancient importance of Lamia is shown byits silver coins, and by the occurrence of its namein ancient history, on some important occasions,particularly in the year B.C. 323, when the Athenians,on the death of Alexander, were excitedby the " sibi mortimer facundia" of Demosthenesto renew their struggle with Macedonia. Antipaterwas at first unsuccessful, and retired intoLamia, where he was besieged by the Athenians,but their commander Demosthenes, having beenslain, and Antipater having received a reinforcementfrx)m Asia under Craters, the Macedonianswere again enabled to meet the enemy in the field,and terminated the war by a victory near Cannon*.In the year B.C. 191, Lamia was besieged byPhilip, son of Demetrius; Livy, in relating this^ Liv. 1. 32, c. 4. y. supra, Polyb. 1. 9, c. 29. Pausan.vol. i. p. 458. 1. 10, c. 3. Plutarch, in .1. 18, c. 9, et seq. most.Arran. ap. Phot. cod. 92.B 24 Melts. [chap.transaction, takes notice of the rocky soil of Lamia,which prevented the Macedonians from makingso rapid a progress in this siege as their comrades,who were similarly employed at Heracleia on theopposite side of the plaint In the following yearLamia was taken hy the Romans under ManusAcilius Glabrio*.The castle of Zituni commands a most beautifuland interesting prospect ; and being itself a remarkablepoint, is an excellent geographical station.There is no other of equal altitude which comprehendsso complete a view of the country adjacentto the head of the Maliac Gulf, or at least thata^brds so much assistance in understanding thehistory of the celebrated events which have occurredon this scene. Having the advantage todayof a most diaphanous atmosphere, I easily recognizethe places with which I was familiar in1802.The most striking part of the prospect is thevast CEtcean range of mountains extending fromCallidromus above Thermopylae as far westward asthe summit near Karpenisi named Velukhi, not farto the left of which is seen Patratziki or Cleopatra,below one of the highest summits of the range ;to the left of that town rise the stupendous precipicescalled Katavothra, which fall in a northeasterndirection to the plain of Zituni. In theopposite quarter, towards the entrance of the gulf,is seen Stylidha*, the port of Zituni ; and in a lineLiv. 1. 36, c. 26. ' SrvX/^a.= Idol. 37, c. 5.X.] Melts. 5with it the most westerly inlet of the sea, whichhere advances to within three miles of the town,Near the shore, on this side of Stylidha, appearsthe village Aghfa Marina ; and beyond Stylldhathe slope of Mount OthrySj as far as the entranceof the Evhoic Straits. The promontory of Lithddhain Euboea forms a lofty peninsula in the center ofthe gulf, to the right of which the view comprehendsa long reach in the JEuboic channel ; and atits entrance the islands anciently called Lichades, tothe right of which is Mount Chemist with the villageof Mola at its foot. From hence, to the beginningof the pass of Thermopylae a narrow plain aboundingwith wood extends along the shore, behindwhich are the hills below Pundonitza, which connectthe mountains Cnemis and Callidromtis, andat their foot a remarkable rock, upon which I observed,on my former visit to this country, someremains of ancient monuments. It is nearly in aline with the castle of Pundonitza, seven degreesto the left of which appears the peak of Homoabove Talanda. Considerably to the right of begins the precipitous termination of MountCaUidromtCs above the salt springs, which gavename to ThermapyUB ^This alone is the proper pass, for to the eastwardof it the hills, though now difficult to penetrateon account of the woods, form a very regularslope from the summit of Callidromus to the parthianplain, about Mola ; the above-mentioned rockSee the plans of the Pass, Thermopylae, at the end of thisand of the country around volume.6 Melts. [chap.with the ancient remains being at the foot of apart of this elope, is not very near the pass, andcannot therefore be the site of any of the places inthe pass mentioned by Herodotus ; it may indicateperhaps the position of Nic8ea^ Thereabout itmust have been that Hydames descended to therear of Leonidas. The eastern extremity of thepass was a little to the left or east of the derwent,or guard-house, from whence to the upper orwestern salt-springs, precipices overhang the pass,gradually increasing in height from the formerposition to the latter, immediately over whichthey are highest. Above these precipices thereis still an elevated country of varied surface, graduallyrising to the foot of the snowy and fir-cladsummit of the mountain ; and in this place, justunder the highest peak, stands the village ofDhrakospilia ^.Below the district of Dhrakospilia, to the westward,extends a regular and cultivated declivity,which belongs to another village named Dha-masts ', and reaches to the AsoptiSy and Thermopylaeterminating at the latter in a long stonyslope corresponding to the plain of Anthele ofHerodotus, which lies between the upper saltsource of ThermopyhB proper, and another passto the westward where the road is confined betweencliffs and a marsh, and where are also somesources of hot salt water. But this latter pass,lying between the plain of Anthele and the Aao-Polyb. 1. 10, c. 42 ; I. 17, ' ApoKo^iXca.c. I.7. Strabo, p. 428. ' Aa/ia^ra.X.] Melts. 7pian plain, may be turned through the slope ofDhamasta. So that supposing the sea and marshesto have occupied all that which now forms a plainin front of Thermopylae the real pass will be reducedto the space between the derveni and theold or upper sources, or in other words to thespace eastward of the plain of Anthers which isnow occupied by the course of the eastern saltsprings and their deposit. Dhamasta is situatedat the head of some cultivated declivities at thefoot of a precipice under the upper heights of themountain, and around it there is a considerabletract of vineyards. The cultivated slope immediatelybelow the village is separated by someshrubby steeps from the Caspian or Trachinianplain. To the right of Dhamasta is seen a littletable land on the mountain, upon which, amongthe woods, stands a monastery of the Panaghia,and near it to the right, is an acclivity reaching tothe crest of the Zygos, or connecting ridge, whichunites Mount Callidromus with the great (Etteansummits, and over which passes the modem roadfrom Zituni to Salona. This Zygos is cultivatedin patches quite to the top. The summit of Parnassusmakes its appearance above a shrubbyheight ; one of the lowest of those bordering theplain, and which to the westward is bounded bythe precipitous ravine of the Asopus, which riverhere traverses the mountain nearly in the sameoblique direction in which it crosses the plain.To the right of the Asopus for two miles are seenthe great precipices from which the city Trachisderived its name, and which about the middle8 Melts. [chap.advance considerably into the plain. Above themare seen some small villages, situated on cultivatedslopes, extending as far as the great summit whichis called Patriotic, or Patratzikiotiko, from itsbeing immediately above Neopatra, or Patratzik.This summit is covered with firs and othertrees. Between the clifFs of Trachis or Heraclitusto the westward and the still higherprecipices called Katavothra, where the valley isnarrowest, a cultivated declivity advances intothe Trachinian plain. Here on the edge of theplain are the villages Vardhatea, Alpospata, andFranzii. A remarkable chasm separates the southeasternmost summit of the Patriotiko from theKatavothra, and terminates to the left of theheights of Franzii in a ravine which descends intothe plain near Alpospata, half way between theend of the Trachinian Rocks and the point ofFranzii. Here and at the foot of the gorge of theAsopuSj the land of Trachis is highest, and fromthese two points it subsides gradually to the Speeches.This river is now known by the name ofEUadha ^ ; Mount Callidromus is called Sarmatia,the Asapus, Karvunaria.A pezodhromo well acquainted with all thiscountry, informs me that there is a road of notabove two hours along the upper region of themountain from Dhrakospilid to Pundonitza, whichhe has often traversed. It is undoubtedly by thesame route that Hydames crossed the mountain,and the p^zo may possibly be a descendant of hisX.] Melts. 9guide ; for neither the barbarians of the east norof the north seem to have colonized much in Me-useif we may judge by the names of places, whichare chiefly of Greek derivation.Livy thus describes the (Etsean barrier * : " Thesemountains which divide Greece in the middle, asItaly is divided by the ridge of the Apennine,extend in a continued line from Leucas and thewestern sea to that on the eastern side of Greece ;they are so uneven and rocky, that not onlyarmies, but even ordinary pedestrians find a difficultyin crossing them by the few paths whichthey afford. At the eastern extremity they arenamed (Eta, and their highest summit Callidro-mon, at the foot of which, towards the MaliacGulf, there is a pass only sixty paces in breadth.This is the only military road which affords themeans of transit to an army, when it meets withno impediment from an opponent. Hence theplace is denominated Pylee, and sometimes Thermopylae,the latter name being derived from somehot waters, which have their sources in the passitself."Strabo agrees with Livy in considering theproper CEta to have been^the eastern portion ofthe ridge which stretches across the continentfrom the Ambracic Gulf, as well as in describingthe summit nearest to Thermopylae as the highestpoint of CEta^ ; in which latter opinion, however,they were both mistaken. Mount Patriotiko beingLiv. 1. 36, c. 15. » raro Ik Kard tcLq OtpfionvXac,Tpa^v Koi vi^fjXov, in//ij\o- — Strabo, p. 428.10 Melts. [chap.considerably higher. Strabo further remarks, thatCEta was 200 stades in length, that it terminated towardsthe sea in precipices which left only a narrowpassage for the road from Thessaly into Locris, andthat the pass was called Pylee, or Stena, or Thermopylse,which last appellation was derived from somehot waters, sacred to Hercules. He adds that themountain which rises above the pass bore the name ofCallidromum, though some gave this denominationto the whole range, extending through iEtolia andAcarnania to the Ambracic Gulf ; and that nearThermopylae, within the Straits, were several fortresses,namely, Nicaea on the sea shore of Locris,higher up Teichius, and Heracleia, which wasfounded by the Lacedaemonians in a position sixstades distant from the ancient Trachis, and ,in a strong situation. The geographerthen subjoins some remarks borrowed from Herodotus,who, as his object was that of tracing theprogress of Xerxes and his host through the easternpart of Greece, confined himself to a descriptionof the eastern extremity of that belt of countrywhich is referred to by Livy and Strabo. Afterhaving described the march of the Persian armythrough Thessaly and the Achaean Phthiotis,Herodotus states that Xerxes then entered Melis,near a gulf where the sea ebbs and flows. ^' Here,"he continues, '^ is a plain, large in one part, andin another very narrow. High and inaccessiblemountains, called the Trachinian rocks, surroundthe land of Melis. The first city in the gulf,proceeding from Achaia, is Anticyra, near whichthe river Spercheius, flowing from the iEuianes,X.] Melts. 11falls into the sea. About 20 stades from it isanother river, named Dyras, which is reported tohave first made its appearance to relieve Herculeswhen he was burning. Twenty stades farther isa third river called Melts, five stades distant fromwhich is the city Trachis. Between the mountainswhere Trachis stands and the sea, the plainis widest ; its whole surface contains 22,000 urethra.In the mountain which encircles the Tramland, there is an opening ' to the southwardof Trachis, from which the river Asopusissues, and then flows along the foot of the mountains.To the south of the Asopus is a smallriver, named Phoenix, from whence to Thermopylaethe distance is 15 stades."A comparison of this passage with the topographicalsketches at the end of this volume, will, itis hoped, carry with it the conviction, that thenames mentioned by Herodotus are there correctlyplaced, notwithstanding the surprising changewhich appears to have taken place in consequenceof the accumulation of soil brought down from theupper country by the rivers, especially the Speeches.The Asopus is recognized by its Staoi^a^yor rocky gorge, through which it issues into theplain : between it and the Spercheius are foundthe two 8tream3 corresponding to the Melts andDyras, which now, instead of falling separatelyinto the sea, unite, and then discharge theirwaters, as does the Asopus itself, into the Speeches.The latter, instead of meeting the coast^ CtatFi/Ki^* ^ Herodot. 1. 7, c. 198.12 Melts. [chap.nearly opposite to Lamia, as it appears to havedone in the time of the Persian war, not only receivesthe Dyras, Melts, and Asopus, as tributarystreams, but continues its course on a line parallelto the pass of Thermopylae ^ at a distance of amile from the hot sources. It then forms a deltain that new plain which has been created beyondthe pass, and which has thus caused the head ofthe gulf to be removed three or four miles from itsancient position. The consequence is, that all thelower plain, although intersected with marshes atall seasons, and scarcely passable in the winter,affords in summer a road through it from Zitunito Mola, which leaves Thermopylae two or threemiles on the right, and renders it of little or noimportance as a pass in that season. This I hadparticularly occasion to remark on my former visitto Thermopylae and Zituni, which was in the monthof July,The inclination of the new course of the Speeches,in the direction of Thermopylae, and towardsthe south-western corner of the head of thegulf seems connected with the form of the highlandon either side of the plain. As the (Etaeanchain rises much more abruptly than the ridge onwhich Lamia stood, it is probable that when thegulf extended as far westward as the meridian ofLamia, the deepest water was towards the southernshore, whence the new plain formed itself morespeedily on the northern than dn the southernThe plan being intended the river have not been re-only to describe the pass of garden.Thermopylae, the windings ofX.] Melts. 13side, and the new stream had therefore a tendencytowards Thermopylae, So copious, however, isthe deposit from the salt springs, and so rapid theformation of new soil below them, that this causehas been sufficient, together with the alluvion ofMount Callidromus, aided perhaps by the Asopus,to prevent the Spercheius from approaching nearerthan a mile from the foot of the mountain. Theincrease of land at the head of the gulf is stillrapidly continuing; for I remember to have observed,on my former journey, some of thosebasins for making salt which are common on thecoast of Greece, so far removed from the shorethat they had been abandoned, and new salt-panshad been constructed nearer the sea.Nov. 26.— This day, at 12.45, leaving Zitunifor Neopatra, we traverse the plain to a bridge nearFranzii, crossing some rice-grounds, which, thoughthey have not been cultivated for some years, impedeus by the little mounds of earth which serveto divide the ground into small squares for irrigation: we afterwards follow the bed of a canal(otrXajcc) made for the same purpose, and at 1.23cross the Spercheius. The bridge consists of planksstrewn with earth and resting upon trunks of treessupported by the piers of a stone bridge, whichwas carried away by an inundation. From hencewe resume a winding course among corn-fields,and at 1.55, at the foot of the hills below the villageof Franzii, join the route from Salona to Neopatra.Here is a mill turned by a very considerablestream of water, which descends to the EUadha.Mount Callidromus is well seen from hence in ^NIANBS. [chap.file, giving a perfect idea of the track pursued bythe Persians after they had attained the part of themountain near Dhrakospili4 ; for this practicableground, which comparatively may be called aplain, occupies the entire face of the mountain betweenthe summit and the precipices, overhangingThermopyhB, and beyond this elevated region thereseems no longer any great difficulty in descendingto the positions of Niccea and Alpeni. We nowfollow the foot of the magnificent precipices namedKatavothra, and at 2.17 leave the small village ofKostalexi, a little above us on the left. At 2.35pass along the edge of another named Komo-ladies, below which there is a small wood ofplane-trees. Here the Turk, proprietor of thevillage, advances from his pyrgo, and invites usto lodge with him. The river is at a small distanceon the right, but leaves a broad plain on theopposite side ; the valley is narrowest opposite toFranzii. Our road now continues as far as Neopatra,along a stony slope formed by the torrentsdescending from the gorges of Mount Katavothra,which rises like an immense wall, shading theroad from the afternoon sun for several hours, likethe similar precipices at Mistra. But the are much higher than the abrupt terminationsof Mount Taygetum in the Spartan valley.We arrive in the town at 4.Neopatra, by the Turks called Badrajik, standspartly at the head of a long stony slope similar tothat below Mount Katavothra, and partly upon aridge which rises at the back of the slope, terminatingabove in a steep detached summit of aX.] iENIANES. 15peaked form. On this height are the ruins of asmall castle of Lower Greek construction, or perhapsa work of the Franks in the fourteenth century,when Ne6patra was conquered from theGreek despot of Western Greece by the Catalans,and became a part of the duchy of Athens underthe Spanish sovereigns of Sicily until Thessalywas overrun by the Turks. The ridge is protectedon either side by a ravine, in which flowsa torrent, (pcv^ia) ; that on the west has a widegravelly bed ; the eastern is shaded by plane trees,and waters numerous gardens around a suburbwhich stands below the ridge on that side. Thesestreams do not fail in summer, but after turningmany mills, irrigate plantations of tobacco in theplain. The Sperchmis^ or Elladha, is divertedfrom the general course in which it descends tothe sea from the westward by the long projectionof the hill of Neopatra, which forms a diminishingridge almost as far as the river's bank.The town is inhabited by about 500 Turkish and150 Greek families. Their proportion accounts forthe prevalence of the Turco-Greek name, Ilarpar-ISiKi, in preference to that of Neopatra. The latterhowever is well known to be the right appellation,and the bishop is styled lav Ncoiv Ilarpcjv. Almostall the power is in the hands of an Albanian Bey,placed here by Aljr Pasha. The district containsbetween 30 and 40 villages, all Greek ; not longago there were 70, so great have been the emigrationsof late from this part of the country. Themajor part of these villages are in the subjacentplain. The town contains one church besides the16 ^NIANES. [chap.metropolitan, and a third unfinished, which theGreeks have lately been permitted by Aiy Pashato rebuild. The streams and gardens of the town,and its lofty position are very agreeable, but theair is said to be unwholesome in the summer andautumn, which the natives ascribe to the exhalationsof the tobacco plant, though undoubtedlythe rice-grounds, as at Zituni, equally contribute,and probably the overhanging mountains, as wellas the want of a good Imbat in the Maliac Gulf,which is too narrow and too much excluded fromthe open sea by surrounding mountains to receivein perfection that great corrector of the air in themaritime parts of Greece.There is no direct road over the mountains fromNeopatra to Salona : the usual route falls intothat from Zituni to Salona at the ascent of theCEtcean pass. That from Neopatra into Thessalypasses the EUadha nearly opposite to the village ofGhenokladha\ and crosses the opposite hill at thedoivent of Karya, so called from a small villageof that name to the left of the road : it then descendsupon Taukli, near which it joins the roadfrom Zitdni to Dhomoko. The hills which boundthe valley of Neopatra to the north are included inits district, but immediately beyond them beginsthat of 'Agrafa. Not far above Neopatra the plainwidens to the breadth of five miles, and here theEUadha is joined by the Vistrltza, a large branchwhich descends with great rapidity through agorge dividing the Patriotiko from a peakedmountain lying between the former and MountX,] JENIANES. 17Velukhi. The Vistritza crosses the plain obliquelyin a wide gravelly bed, and joins the Elladha immediatelyopposite to Neopatra, at a distance ofthree or four miles. Its waters, like those of theElladha, serve to irrigate some rice-fields in thelowest part of the valley.About ten miles above Neopatra, the valley ofthe Speeches is reduced to narrow limits by theapproximation of the two ranges of hills. Karpe-nisi is reckoned nine hours from hence, its positionlying to the left of the summit of Velukhi, near thesources of a branch of the Aspropotamo which joinsthe main stream near the monastery of Tetarna.The sources of the Elladha are on the northern andeastern sides of the same mountain, which seemsclearly therefore to be the ancient Tymphrestus ;for Strabo states that the Spercheius had its originin Tymphrestus, and that Mount Othrys extendedfrom the Maliac Gulf to Tymphrestus and Dolopia^The two most distant tributaries of this river flowfrom Neokhorio of Kostriava in 'Agrafa, and fromMario in the district of Neopatra. These streamsare joined by other branches from the summit, intermediatebetween (Eta and Tymphrestus^ but bynone of any magnitude from the Othman range ofmountains. The Vistritza, which is almost as large• . • • r^c "Odpvoc, opovc Tov Zk 2ir£p)(£iov fitfivtifiiyocTpoc dptcroy Keifuvov rpf Miw- (Hotnenis scil.) iroWdKiQ, wqTiitf 6fi6fitnt ^€ rf Tv^^pij^r^ iiciyiapiov xorafxovt rac irtiyagrf opci Kol rdiQ Ai^Xot/^iv, cicei- ixovro^ iic Tv/i^pi}orov, ^pvo-*Oev ^c xapaTehoyrog elc ra ttikov opov^ iic^i^ovrogTXfieioy rov MaXioicotr icoXnov « ^e frXriaioy OepfiowvXuv fierafu. • • ahrtSy K€u Aafiiag. — Strabo,p. 433.VOL. II. C -«-18 iENlANES. [chap.as the Ellddha itself, originates in a ridge whichstretches in a south-easterly direction, uniting Velutiwith Vardhusi, and which, from its forestsof beach, is known by the name of Oxides.There are many large quadrangular blocks ofstone, and foundations of ancient walls, on theheights of Neopatra, as well as in the buildings ofthe town, particularly about the mosques and fountains: several of these remains are of white marble,of a species different from the Attic, and whichwas probably quarried in the adjacent mountains.I observed some shafts of columns of this material,but could not find a capital. In the metropolitanchurch, which is a wretched old building with a fallingroof, there is a handsome shaft of white marble,and on the outside of the wall an inscription in smallcharacters of the best times : of which I was unableto decipher any more than the three last words —air *Y7rarai(i>v Travrcov. Another stone, inscribed inasimilar character, is sufficiently legible to showthat it recorded grants of proxenia to foreign benefactors.As in one of these records the Hypattei,and in another the council, or magistrates of theiBnianes, conferred the favour', we may infer notThe following are some parts of it : — ^ 'Yfraraioiiiotrav frpo(e(Way (^kfrt)yofilay tyKni<ny iravriava{trf jca^ {iyydvoig) xal r aWa irctvra sera Koi roleaXXoi(c xpo^fVocc)*Apj(6vTiay ^Ayriyoov 'Apitmafy . . aiaeXdovtrpo^yia^ OaiWov« . Aiiay *AXe£ay(^pov . . »ru>K Alvidytity tBiaKe irpo{ev/av Hw^iorpar^ ^iXiov 'Adfiyai^(cyy)voc rag irpo(€f^(ioc ^i)icaiap^of *AKplwyoc, Uv/iplac KaXX .v. Inscription, No. 18.X.] iBNIAIfES. 19only that Neopatra is the site of Hypata, bat thatHypata was in the country of the ^nianes, andprobably their chief town : the grant in one casewas perhaps confined to Hypata, and in the otherextended to the whole district. The latter inscriptionis on a broken block of white marble, lyingunder a plane-tree near a fountain in the Jewishburying-ground, and not far above the westerntorrent ; on the opposite side of which an ancientsepulchre was lately excavated. It produced nothingbut bones ; but it serves to confirm the verynatural supposition that the city was bounded bythe two torrents. If Hypata was the chief town ofthe ^nianes, we have an obvious reason for thenon-existence of any coins of Hypata ; the moneycoined here having probably all had the inscriptionAiviavoiv*The length of 200 stades which Strabo assignsto the proper (Eta, seems to leave little doubt thatthe Mount Patriotic, which is the highest pointin this part of the country, is the proper summitof CEta ; and it is not improbable that the nameHypata may have been originally Poeta, ashaving been situated immediately under (Eta.But there was also a city (Eta, said to have beenfounded by Amphissus, son of Apollo and Dryope \where it is to be supposed that the beautiful coinswith the legend OiraiW were struck. As Herodotusand Thucydides distinguish the (Etsi from the Tramand as Stephens describes (Eta to have beena city of the Melienses, we have good reason for^ Antonio. Liberal, c. 32.c 220 iENIANES. [chap.believing that it stood at the foot of Mount Patriotic,towards the Trcxhinian plain. It was thesame place, perhaps, as the Upon a<rrv, to which,according to Callimachus, the Hyperborean offeringswere sent from Dodona in their way to De-lustand which gave name apparently to the Hie-senses,one of the three tribes of the Malienses ^.CEta may have been called the sacred city, fromthe worship of Hercules, and because near it, onthe mountain, was Pyra, where Hercules was saidto have died on the burning pile, — a place of suchsacred celebrity, that the Roman Consul, Acilius,ascended thither from Heracleia to offer sacrifice,continuing his route from thence across (Eta andCorax to Naupactus *.The two other tribes of the Malienses were theParalii and Trachinii, the former of whom evidentlyoccupied the maritime towns of Anticyra,Phalaena, and Echinus the latter the oppositemountains, with the adjacent part of the plainround Heracleia. As to Lamia, although oncea city of the Paralii, it would seem afterwardsto have been altogether separated from Melis;for we find coins both of the MaXdcuv andAa/ulcDv. Echinus preserves its name, slightlycorrupted into Akhino, Phalaena was probably themodern Stylidha, and Anticyray which stood atthe mouth of the Spercheius^ should now beAevrepov Upby &(rrv koI ovpta MriXiiog a 117c*Hymn, in Demum. v. 287.Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 92. » Herodot. 1. 7, c. 198.Liv. 1. 36, c. 30. Strabo, p. 428.• Scymn. Ch. v. 602.X.] iENlANES. 21sought for towards the middle of the plain belowZituni. There were some other towns of theMalienseSy the names of which only are preserved,without any indication of exact locality, such asGolaceia ', ^goneia *, and Iris, or Ira ^.With these particulars as to the position of theMalienses and iBnianes, there is little difficulty inadjusting the local distribution of the other smalldistricts, which were surrounded by Doris, Locris,Thessaly, and MuAib Their exact boundariescannot easily be defined, but their relative situationmay be inferred from that of their cities.Included between the south-eastern extremity ofthe Thessalian plains and Melis were the Phthi-ouse, whose towns have not been named by Homer.Their capital at that time was probably Pharsalus;in latter ages, when Phthiotis extended to thePagassean Gulf, and maritime commerce was in itsmeridian, Thebes Phthioticse rivalled Pharsalus.Westward of the Pharsalia was Colonia, amountainous country, which, falling to the greatThessalian plain, extended westward to Atha-mania, and bordered southward on italia andthe u£nianes. It corresponded to the northern andeastern part of the modern 'Agrafa ; its principaltown is not specified in ancient history.The situation of Dryopis is exactly indicated by apassage of Strabo already referred to, which showsit to have been adjacent to Mount Tymphrestus,Theopomp. ap. Athen. L in Alywyeia.6, c. 16* ' Schol. in Lycophr. ibid,Lycophr. V. 903. Stephan. Stephan. in'^Ipa, "Ipoc.£NIAN£9.[chap.now Veldkhi ; whence, on comparing this factwith other geographical data which have beenmentioned, the general inference may be drawn,that the Dryopes occupied the upper valleys of theSpercheius, and the ^nianes the lower, as far asthe entrance into the plains of MeUsy near themodem Franzii. The iBnianes derived their nameperhaps from Anas, which, as it often occurssimply, or in composition as a river's name, bothin Greece and Italy, would seem to have been ageneric word for river in the Elastic tongue. Thereis some reason to believe, from a story related byPlutarch, that the great branch of the Elladha,called Vistritza, was anciently named Inches.He states, that in the last migration of the £ni-ones,they removed from Crissa to the country ona river Inches, which was partly occupied byInachii and Achsei, and that the ^nianes acquiredthis portion when Hyperochus, king of dieInachii, had been slain by Phemius, king of the^nianes \Nov. 27. — At 1.30 P.M., setting out from Neopatrawe descend by a path which conducts alongthe side of the mountain above the lower suburb,where on the skirts of the upper town, the remainsPlutarch, Qu. Gr. 13.Phemius killed Hyperochus insingle combat with a sling ;for which reason a slinger isrepresented on some of thecoins of the iEnianes. Accordingto Plutarch, Phemiusprevailed over his adversary inthe same manner in which Me-xanthusof Attica slew Xanthus,king of Boeotia. Hyperochuswas followed by a dog. Phe«miss exclaimed against his comingto the encounter with anattendant ; and as he turnedround, in consequence of theexclamation, discharged thefatal bullet.X.] Melts. 23of a very massive Hellenic wall are observable onthe brow of the slope, showing that Hypata occupiedexactly the site of the present town. On arock close by a piece of ancient wall, on theside of the eastern torrent, are two niches ; one ofthese is in the form of a cockle-shell, the other,which is perpendicularly above it, is quadrilateral.On the descent of the hills, beyond the gardensof the lower Makhala, is a handsome wood of elms,chestnuts, and other trees, and many sources ofwater by the road side. We enter the valleythrough a wood of plane trees, at 2 join the roadby which we came, and .retrace it as far as the^t .«r Fr^zi. where we .give a. 4. Tr^thence an ascent of a quarter of an hour brings usto the village. On the edge of the plain a labourerwas sowing barley, and another behindhim, ploughing it in. In the lower level verylittle besides maize and rice is grown. Thecottage in which I am lodged is neat and comfortable.The owner of it asks my servant secretlywhether it is true, as reported in the village, thatall the plain belongs to me, and that I am cometo look at the state of it; but, adds he, ^^Whenwill he come with his palikaria and take possession?"Nov. 28. — Departing from Franzii this morningat 7.52, we descend the hill obliquely, and crossat 8.4, on the edge of the plain, a wide avlaki,or artificial channel, which conducts a deep andrapid stream towards the mill on our left which Imentioned on the 26th. From the mill the streamdescends directly to the Elladha, but the water is24 Melts. [chap.for the most part consumed in watering plantationsof cotton and maize. It is a derivationfrom the Gurgo-potamo, a torrent which descendsfrom the great chasm of Mount (Eta, between theKatavothra and Mount Patriotiko, described onthe 25th.We now enter the plain which below Franzii expandsto a breadth of six or eight miles, and proceedin the direction of the rocks of Trachisy bywhich I mean those near the site of that city, foras Herodotus states, that all the lofty mountainswhich surrounded this plain were called the Tramrocks \ it would seem that he meant toinclude among them the precipices of Mount ,which were four or five miles from thesite of Trachis. At 8.15 we cross the Burgosa clear, rapid, perennial stream, which,after passing through Moskokhori, joins the EUadhatwo miles below that village. The Trachinian plainis little cultivated, and much overgrown with agnus-castesand oleander. At 8.25 Alpospata, a smallvillage of fifteen or twenty houses, is a quarter of amile on the right. We here cross a small rivuletrunning down into the plain. At 8.32 we are atthe low point of hill which appears from Zitunito project into the plain to the right of the rocksof Trachis, It is commanded at the back by around hill, behind which a gentle slope ascends tothe foot of some great precipices, which are a continuationof the Katavothra. ' On the slope standsovpca vxj/riXd jcai Afiara y^K, TprixiPtai irerpac icaXc-vspiKkriUi vatray ri^y Mi|\/da 6fA€yai. — Herodot. I. 7» c. 198*X.J Melts. 26the village of Dhyo-vunia (two hills). The roundheight has much the appearance of the site of anancient Acropolis, but a man of Alpospata, of whomI inquire, knows of no remains of ancient wallsthere, nor cain I perceive any, though we make thesemi-tour of the hill at no great distance. It may,nevertheless, be the site of the city (Eta, or Upona<rrv of Callimachus, for it lies immediatelyat the foot of the great summit of (Eta, and isalso very near the borders of the plain of Melis.Alpospata occupies the lowest declivity of the hillon the north-eastern side. Proceeding in the samedirection, at 8.41 we have the small village ofVardhates half a mile on the right, at the foot ofthe hill, and at a few paces on the left of the roadan ancient tumulus, near the angle where therocks of Trachis begin to overhang the plain. At8.46 cross a streamlet running from right to leftin the direction of those precipices, and at 8.52arrive at the foot of the rocks, which rise to theheight of four or five hundred feet with great magnificenceand beauty, the bareness of the rock beingrelieved at intervals by patches of green shrubshanging over it Continuing along the foot of theprecipices, we arrived at 8.59 at their most projectingpoint, as observed from Zituni, on either sideof which are several sources, issuing from belowthe rocks, and collecting into two streams whichmeet below the projection. The united river flowsfrom thence across the plain in the direction ofMoskokhori, a little above which village it joinsthe Gurgo-potamo. The sources and river arecalled the Mavra-neria ; the streamlet, which we26 Melissa [chap.crossed at 8.46, is a branch of it. It seems clearthat the Gurgo is the Dyras, and the Mavra-neriathe Melts, of which word the modem name is asynonym. In the time of Herodotus these twostreams, which now unite and fall into the Spermdischarged themselves separately into thesea. A little before arriving at the projectingpoint, the road, in order to avoid the rivers andsprings, ascends a steep rocky slope, which at thisplace forms the base of the rocks. It continues thuspassing just above the springs till 9.3, when itagain enters the level at the foot of the rocks.From hence for half a mile onwards, towards thegorge of the Asopus^ there are many catacombsexcavated in the side of the perpendicular rocks.Some of these have narrow entrances, others aresquare and open, and one has a curved roof.Within they are (at least all those I entered) plainsepulchral chambers, small and low. These catacombsand their distance from the sources of theMavra-n^ria, agreeing with that of five stades,which Herodotus places between the river Meltsand Trachis, determine the position of this city ;the direction which the rocks take from the projectingpoint to the Asopus, equally justifies hisremark, that the Asopus was to the south ofTrachis.Fifty-four years after the events described byHerodotus, or in the year B.C. 426, which was thesixth of the Peloponnesian war, Trachis received acolony of Lacedaemonians, in consequence of acomplaint made by the Trachinii in conjunctionwith their neighbours of Doris-from whom theX.] Melts. 27Lacedsemonians were supposed to derive theirorigin, that they were harassed by the surrounding(Etaeiy and no longer able to defend themselves ^Thucydides, from whom we learn this fact, assertsthat Heracleia was situated at a distance of fortystades from Thermopylae, and of twenty from thesea, which latter number, if it be not below thetruth, shows that the sea still reached at that timeto the western extremity of the heights of Thermopylae.After the defeat of Antiochus at Thermopylae,B.C. 191, Heracleia was besieged and takenfrom the u£tolians by the Romans under Acilius,and the circumstances of this conquest, as extractedfrom Polybius by Livy, are well illustratedby the topography. The consul having dividedhis army into four bodies placed one of them onthe Asopus, near the gymnasium, another near thecitadel, a third at the temple of Diana, on thebanks of the Melts, and the fourth towards theMaliac gulf. The approach was most difficult inthe last direction, which is accounted for by anotherremark of the historian, namely, that the plain ofHeracleia was marshy, and abounded in lofty trees.These, however, were very useful to the Romans,who, finding moreover every other kind of buildingmaterials necessary for their works in the desertedhouses of the suburbs, speedily constructed towers,battering-rams, and other implements used by theancients in the attack of fortified places ^ The^ Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 92. alto et tindiqae precipice habetSita est Heraclea in radii Contemplates omnia (Consul)cibus CBtae montis: ipsa in quae noscenda grant, quatuorcampo, arcem imminent look simul lochs adored urbem con-melts.[chap.italians, nevertheless successfully maintainedtheir positions in all the four quarters of attackfor twenty-four days, when the consul, finding thatthe enemy's numbers and efforts were diminishing,resolved upon a general attack of the lower town,first deceiving the enemy by a feigned relaxationon his part, and then making a general assault inthe fourth watch of the night. The italians weresurprised, and retired into the citadel. The nextday the consul, after allowing his troops to plunderthe town for some hours, divided them into twobodies ; one of these he led by a circuitous routeround the foot of the mountain to a rocky summit ^which was equal to the citadel in height, and wasseparated from it only by a chasm so narrow, that thetwo summits were within the range of a missel e* . TheBtituit; a famine Asopo, quaet gymnasium est, L. Valerianoperis atque obpugnationiprseposuit : arcem extra muros,quae firequeniius prope quamurbs habitabatur, T. SempreLong obpugnandam dedit:a sin Malice, quae actumbaud facile pars babebat, M.Bsebium, ab alter amniculo,quern Melana vacant, adversusDiana templum, Ap. Claudiusobposuit : Honim magna certaineintra paucos dies terresgrotesque et alius omnis apparatusobpugnandarumurbiumpernicious. £t quum ager plaster omnis freeprocess arboribus,benign ad omne genus operamaterial subpeditabat, turnquia repugnant intra msenia^toli, deserta, quae in vestibuleurbis grant, tecta in varioususus non signa modo et tabulassed lateran quoque et clementet sara arise magnitudespraebebant. — Liv. 1. 36, c. 22.^ This summit appears in thereign of Justinian to bave beenoccupied by a fortress calledMycopolis. — Procop. de iESdif.1. 4, c. 2.Revocation inde a medioferme die milites, quum in anasdivisible partes, una radicalmontis drcumduci adrupee jussit, quae fiustigio alti-X.] Melts. 29occupation of this height was to be the signal to theRomans in the town to ascend against the citadelbut the italians were now disheartened, and thecitadel being crowded with women and children,and without any preparation for a further defence,they did not wait for the assault, but surrenderedat the consul's discretion.It seems quite clear from this account that thecity occupied the low ground between the riversKarvunaria and Mavra-neria, extending from theone to the other, as well as a considerable distanceinto the plain in a north-eastern direction. Thecitadel stood on the summit of the same precipicein the lower part of which are the catacombs. Itsdistance above the town justifies the words extramuros, which the historian applies to it, and mayexplain also the assertion of Strabo, that Heracleiawas six stades distant from the ancient Trachis ;for although the town of Heracleia seems to haveoccupied the same position as the Trachis of Herodotus,the citadel, which according to Livy wasbetter inhabited in the ^tolian war than the city,may very possibly have been the only inhabitedpart of Heracleia two centuries later. The Latinhistorian has not left us the means of judging ofthe route taken by the Roman division whichseized upon the summit near the citadel, — whethertidings par, media valle velut consul ab urbe censures inabrupt ab are erat ; sed adeo arcem, signum ab his qui ab tergopropegeminatacacuminaeorum in rape erasure sunt, expectsunt, ut ex verde tabat. Non there qui in arealter conic tela in arcem pos erat, ^toli, &c* — Liv. 1. 36,sint : cum numidia parte militum c. 24.30 Melts. [chap.by the ravine of the Asopus, or round the westernend of the rocks near Vardhates. I am informedthat some vestiges of the citadel of Heracleia stillremain, but they are not visible from below ; andas it would require a long detour on foot to reachthem, I was under the necessity of giving up theattempt.The marshy plain, which in the consulship ofAcilius, occupied the space between the northernwall of Heracleia and the shore of the MaliacGulf, we may suppose to have been narrowerand more difficult at an earlier period,when Heracleia consequently more completelycommanded the passes from Thessaly into SouthernGreece, as well along the shore by Thermopylaeinto Locris, as over Mount (Eta into Doris ; andthis consideration illustrates a passage in Xenophon,who informs us that when Jason of Persereturned from Boeotia into Thessaly after the battleof Leuctra, (B.C. 371,) he destroyed the walls ofHeracleia, in order that they might not be an impedimentto his own free passage into Greece \At a later period its possession by the italianswas a main cause of the power of that people whichbalanced that of Macedonia under the successorsof Alexander, especially when after the terminationof the Episode monarchy they obtained Ambracia,and thus extended their wings to eithershore of continental Greece. Had they been avirtuous and prudent people, or had they been^ alii river rijy 'HpoicXccay r^c 'EXXa^oc iropivarBat, — Xe-girl VTtv^ cZiray KaraKafioyrt^^ noah. Hellen. 1. 6, c. 4.tiptop avTOv et irov liovXotroX.] Melts. 31guided at the right time by such counsellors astheir praetor Agelas of Naupactus, they mighthave cemented such an alliance as would havesaved Greece from the Romans ; but all hope ofsuccessful resistance was lost when Heracleia felland two years afterwards Ambracia.Having quitted the catacombs, after a delay offive minutes we ride in a direction a little to theright of the point at which the pass of Thermopylaebegins. This part of the plain is quite uncultivated,and overgrown with shrubs. At 9.22 wecross the Karvunaria or Adopts, half a mile belowthe rocky opening from which it issues into theplain, and opposite to the ruins of the village ofMustafa Bey. Within the gorge there are perpendicularprecipices on either side, as far up thestream as the view admits : those on the left bankare intermixed with wood. The ravine after somedistance winds to the eastward, or exactly in thedirection which Hydarnes wished to follow in hismarch over the mountain. At 9.40 the part ofthe (EtiBan ridge, on which stands Nevropoli, andwhich I crossed in 1802 on the way from Zituniand the bridge of Alumina to Gravid, andSalona is on our right. A little farther a torrentissues from a small ravine and passes intothe plain in several rills, over a slope a quarterof a mile in breadth, which has been formed inprocess of time by the deposition of the torrent :a part of the stream terminates in a marshyspot at the foot of the slope ; another partserves to fill an avlaki used for irrigating somecotton-grounds on the left. As generally found32 Melts. [chapat the issue of torrents from the mountains, thesurface of the ground is gravelly, and shaded withplanes and other trees.At 9.48, half a mile to our right, the road toDhamasta begins to ascend the mountain : we haltthree minutes, and then proceed through cotton-fieldswatered by another small rill from the hillson the right. At 10.4 arrive at the point wherebegins the western pass, or false Thermopylae, asit may be called. At 10.8 cross the first streamof mineral water, which runs with rapidity towardsthe SpercheiuSi leaving a great quantity ofred deposit. This I take to be the Phoenix socalled, probably, from the colour of its sediment.Strabo, indeed, derives the name from a heroPhoenicians ; but the Greeks were fond of an heroicetymology for their names, and as Herodotusclearly describes the Phoenix to have been in anarrow pass westward of Anthele, and fifteenstades from the real Thermopylae, which is foundexactly to be true as applied to this red rivulet,there can be little or no doubt of the identity.The junction of the Asapus and Speeches is onour left, a little below the khan of Alemanni. Theground being still white and hard with frost underthe shade of the point, and the air very cold, thestream of the Phoenix is covered with vapour,though it is much cooler than that of ThermopyhB.Nor is it so much impregnated with salt. Thered deposit also, which may indicate the presenceiron, shows that the water differs from that ofThermopylae which leaves only a white crust.The plain between this place and the Spercheius\X.] Eblis. 33which is now covered with a fine grass, furnishingpasture to sheep and goats, appears to have beenformed by the deposit of the springs in the courseof ages. The soil, however, has not accumulatedso rapidly here as below the springs of Thermopylae.At 10.11 we arrive at a second salt springor source of the Phoenix issuing at an angle of thesteep bank or cliff*, and flowing to the former rivulet: here we join the road from Zituni, which nowpasses over the foot of the heights. Below on theleft are cotton-fields, and in one place some appearanceof the marsh, which in former ages wasimpassable in every part, and reached nearly tothe foot of the cliffs.At the entrance of the road over the heightsthere is a fountain of fresh water constructed in theusual manner with a low wall, a small basin, anda spout supplied by a pipe. These Turkish fountains,as they are usually called, are probablynothing more than the Greek Kpnvai continued tothe present day, with such changes only in thedecorations as the Turkish religion and mannershave required, arabesques with sentences from theKoran, or the name of the builder, being substitutedfor the elegant ornaments of architecture,or the sculptures allusive to their mythology, whichthe Greeks employed.At 10.20 the heights terminate, and in oneminute more we cross a stream of cold salt water,frozen at the edges, and then enter upon that whichHerodotus calls the plain of Anthele. This is along triangular slope, formed of a hard gravellysoil and covered with shrubs. It is bounded aboveVOL. II. D34 Melts. [chap.by a rocky ravine which separates the cliffs of thefalse from those of the real Thermopylae ; and itappears to have been formed in the process of timeby the alluvial matter brought from the mountainthrough the gorge. The plain is broadest wherethe road crosses it, narrowing from thence to apoint towards the Speeches where it terminates.The precipices at the head of the plain of Antheleprevent all approach on that side except throughthe gorge ; but this affords an easy though very defensibleaccess from the plain of the Adopts by passingabove the cliffs of the Phoenix or false ThermopylcB. In the middle of the plain of Anthele^ at10.30, we cross the deep bed of a torrent now dry,but flowing copiously in times of rain. On myformer visit I searched in vain, when passing thegreatest part of two days at Thermopylae, for anyremains of Anthele, or of the buildings mentioned byHerodotus which formed the place of meeting of theAmphictyonic council. At 10.40 we arrive at theend of the plain, and enter upon the white elevatedsoil formed by the deposit of the salt-springs of theproper Thermopylae. The upper source is in a comerretired within the line of termination of the plain ofAnthele, immediately at the foot of the highest partof the great cliffs. The soil appears to have beenvery much raised in the course of ages by the deposit.The water is inclosed within a receptacleof masonry, about two feet in depth, and is seenspringing from the earth below. Some smallsuperfluities from this basin run down the whiteslope, but the main stream formerly serving toturn a mill which is now in ruins, issues from theX.] Meus. 35foot of the slope, its previous course from thespring to the issue being below the calcareouscrust or deposit. Some of the veins of waterwhich contribute to it are visible through aperturesin the crust at a depth of a foot and a halfbelow the present surface. From the upper orwestern to the lower or eastern hot spring, thedistance is two hundred yards. Between thema path conducts to some vineyards on the tablesummit of a precipice which is advanced infront of the great cliffs, but ascends no farther ;the ordinary path from the pass to Drakospilialeading by a church which is situated on theheights above the western cliffs, to which there is anascent by the bed of the torrent of Anthele. Thesides of the mountain immediately over the pass(for the great precipices are some distance fartherback) are covered with a thick wood of wild olive,holly-oak, lentisk, and other common shrubs.From the lower source there is a distance of400 yards to a mill which is still in use, the roadleading along the avlaki or artificial canal, whichconducts the water to the mill. The water in theavlaki is deep, and runs with rapidity, emitting avapour which has a strong sulphureous smell. Thesides of the canal, both within and without, areclothed with a thick white fetid deposit, whichconsists chiefly of carbonate of lime, but seems toretain a considerable portion of sulphur. The depositionof this substance is so rapid that the twigsof the plants which hang into the water, and eventhe green leaves, are partly covered with it ; a factwhich easily accounts for some of the changes thatd236 Melts. [chap.have occurred in the elevation of the surface andthe strength of the pass in the course of twenty-threecenturies. The water throws out a greatvolume of smoke as it issues from the mill. Itappears that there was formerly another mill below,for the avlaki is continued, though in a ruinousstate, beyond the existing mill, along the foot ofthe two conical heights marked in the plan, theeasternmost of which is crowned with the guardhouseof the derveni. Beyond this height thecanal ceases, and the water is suffered to flow in anatural course down to the river. A lake of thesame water as the springs, but not hot, occupiesall the space between the mill and the westernconical height, a distance of 150 yards; the avlakiis there carried along the edge of the lake. There isanother smaller pond behind the derveni, or easternconical height, towards its western side. The waterof these pools, like that of the principal hot source,is very bright, and of a deep blue colour, thusillustrating in some measure the remark of Pausanias,that the bluest water he ever saw was in oneof the baths at Thermopylae ^ The coolness of thewater of the two lakes may be ascribed to the slownesswith which they are supplied by the subterraneousveins, for the water being of the same compositionas that of the hot springs, is probably hotalso at its issue from the ground. The differencein quality between the water of the Phoenix and^ yXavK^raroy fiey ossa Ij^iap ovofid^ovtny oi ifrvxjupioi ^V"Otatrdfieyoc to ky QtpfiowvXaitf rpovg yvyatxelovQ, — Pausan.ovTi nov Tciyf &XX* 6aoy Kareitny Messen. c. 35.ec rijv KoXvfifiiiBpaVf tfyriyaX.] Melts. 37that of Thermopylae, is practically shown by thecultivators of the cotton plantations, who carefullyexclude the water of Thermopylae from the cotton,whereas they use that of the Phoenix to irrigate it.Neither of the two heights just mentioned, thoughvery regular in form, has the smallest appearanceof being artificial, and in fact each of them isunited by means of a small ridge Mrith the mountain: from the western to the eastern there is adistance of 250 yards, and 400 more to the pointwhere the road, leaving the white soil formed bythe deposit of the thermal waters, begins to ascendthrough the wood. This is the eastern extremityof the real pass of Thermopylae, as the plain ofAnthele is the western.At a few minutes within the wood stands a millturned by a small torrent of fresh water from themountain, and belonging to a monastery of StGeorge, above Mola : three men of Dhrakospiliahad just arrived to take possession of the mill,having hired it of the convent, on condition ofpaying thirty-five kuvelia of flour of eighteen oneseach, to the convent yearly. They inform me,that though there are thirty houses at Dhrakospilia,there are no more than four families now residingthere, but that they have little reason to regret thereduction of their numbers, as they are now lesstormented by Turkish visitations, particularly thatof the Derwent Aga, a deputy of Velj^ Pasha, whohas four or five hundred men under his command,and travels continually in the neighbourhood ofthese passes, quartering and living upon the villages.We met some of his palikaria in the pass; the38 LOCRis. [chap.Aga himself was at Neopatra. There was a sharpfrost under the shade of the mountain in the pass,and the edges of the salt streams were frozen.Here in the sun, at the mill, it is warmer than isagreeable. Not £ar from this spot was probablysituated Alpeni, or Allons, the frontier town ofLocris.At 12.40 we continue to ascend through thewood, in which, among other shrubs, there is anabundance of large myrtles; at 1.35 cross thefoundations of a Hellenic wall, traceable for aconsiderable distance in an oblique directiontowards the cliffs, which are a continuation ofthose overhanging and forming the pass of Thermopylae,and which are here about half a mile onour right. Similar remains are observable betweenthe upper and lower cliffs immediately above Thermopylae,the remains of works by which the passhas at various times been fortified. The foundationsof the wall which we cross in the road arenearly opposite to the height on the left ; where, asI mentioned on the 25th, I found on my formervisit a tumulus, and the foundations of a circularmonument, just above a deep marsh near the rightbank of the Spercheius. It is very probable thatthe Hellenic wall was carried from the cliffs tothis point as an advanced defence to the pass onthe eastern side, and that there stood the town ofNicaea. Thus far I can see no place where thePersians could have descended. To our left onthe declivity are some small Kalj^via, and fields ofkalambokki. At 1.50 we arrive at a fountainimmediately below a rocky ravine, between two ofX.] Locris. 39the lower heights of CalUdramus. This ravine isstony and narrow, but is said to afford a route,though difficult, to Dhrakospilia and the summitof the mountain, passing by the monastery of Ailanni, which is situated an hour above the fountain.With the telescope I perceive some foundationsof ancient masonry on the round summit ofthe lower, which is the smaller and westernmost ofthe two heights bordering the ravine. These summitswhich are nearly a mUe distant from the fountain,are themselves very steep, but below them, aswell as around the fountain, there is a level pastureand an easy descent in every direction, both to themaritime plain and to the pass. Leaving the fountainat 2, we cross half an hour afterwards a deep ravinein which the torrents, descending from the summitof CaUidromuSy are collected into one bed. It is theeasiest and most direct passage to the summit ofthe mountain : no more than two hours being requiredto reach Dhrakospilia by this route, thoughan equal time is employed in proceeding to thesame place from Ai lanni, which is only half thedistance. It is probably, therefore, the route bywhich the Persians under Hydames descendedfrom the summit of the mountain ; for Herodotusremarks, that their descent was muchshorter and less circuitous than the route by whichthey ascended ^, which may be partly accounted forbythe facility of route afforded by the ravine, andpartly by the summit being nearer to this end ofthe ridge than to the Caspian plain, from whenceHydames began his march.Herodot. I. 7, c. 223.40 Melts. [Clap.At 3 we enter the town of Pundonitza.In referring the ancient descriptions of Thermopylae,or the allusions to it contained in history, tothe real topography, we are immediately sensibleof the great change which the place has undergonefrom natural causes in the intermediate time.The strength of Thermopylae as a pass now dependsupon the season of the year, for as the sea,instead of bordering the defile, is now at a distanceof three or four miles iron it, the difficulty of passingThermopylae depends on the dry or marshy state ofthe plain. At the Phoenix, or Western Pass, thereis still in winter only a narrow road at the foot ofthe hill, bordered by marshes ; but as these insummer afford intervals for cultivation, they wouldlikewise admit of the passe of troops into the plainof Anthele. In the Eastern Pass, or proper Thermopylae,there is in like manner a plain, more than halfa mile in breadth, between the pass and the Speeches,and this plain also, although marshy andsometimes impassable in winter, is partly cultivatedin summer, and presents no difficulties of passage.Between this level and the cliffs, moreover, thereis a slope formed of the calcareous depositions ofthe springs, dry at all seasons, and in some placesfour or five hundred yards in breadth.To show how different this state of the place isfrom that which it presented at the time of the Persianinvasion, it will be sufficient to extract thedescription of the pass by Herodotus, together withhis narrative of the circumstances which accompaniedthe death of Leonidas and his three hundredheroes. '' From the river Phoenix," he says.X.] Melts. 41*' to Thermopylae, there is a distance of fifteenstades. Between them stands the town namedAnthele, near which the Asopus falls into the sea:Here the country is open, and contains the templeof Ceres Amphictyonis, and the seats of the ,and the temple of Amphictyon. Xerxesthe king stationed his army in Trachinia of Melis,and the Greeks in the pass called hy the nativesPylsBjbut Thermopylae by the Greeks in general."The following passage is more particular : '^ Theentrance into Greece through Trachis is half aplethrum in breadth ^ where it is most confined.The narrowest part of all the country, however, isnot there, but before and behind Thermopylae :•—behind, near Alpeni, where the road admits onlyof one chariot ; and before, at the river Phoenix,near the city Anthele, where also the space is nomore than sufficient for a single carriage. To thewest of Thermopylae a mountain inaccessible, precipitous,and lofty, extends to (Eta. On the easternside of the defile, are the sea and marshes. In theStrait are the hot-baths called by the natives Chytri,where stands an altar of Hercules '. Anciently therewas a wall with a gate in the pass, which had beenerected by the Phocenses, when fearful of being invadedby the Thessaly, who had come from to inhabit the CEoIic land which they nowpossess. The Phocenses used every contrivance toshut the entrance of their land against the Thessaly,and among other things let loose the hot water uponHerodot. 1. 7» c. 200. importance, see p. 30.This is the pass, which ' The waters were sacred toafterwards made Heracleia of Hercules. — Strabo, p. 428.42 Melts. [chap.the pass to form a torrent. As the greater part ofthe wall lay in ruins, the Greeks thought right, uponthe present occasion, to repair it, and make use ofit as a defence against the barbarians. They resolvedalso, as the town Alpeni was very near, thatthe Greeks in the Strait should be supplied fromthence with provisions. In this pass the Greeks,having examined the places and found them convenient,resolved to await the attack, judging thathere the barbarians could neither derive advantagefrom their immense numbers, nor make use oftheir cavalry. Having departed therefore fromthe Isthmus as soon as they heard of the arrival ofthe enemy in Pieria, some went in ships to artemisia,and others by land to Thermopylae." Ofthe road over the upper part of Mount Callidro-mus the historian thus speaks : — ^' This path* wasdiscovered by the inhabitants of Melis, who madeuse of it to conduct the Thessalians against thePhocenses, when the latter shut the pass of Thermopylaewith a wall ; from that time the path hadbeen of no use to the people of Melis. It beganfrom the rocky opening of the Asopus, and wasnamed, as well as the mountain over which itleads, Anopeea. It passes over the crest of themountain, and terminates towards Alpeni, thefrontier town of Locris, and towards the rockcalled Melampygus, and the seats of the Cercopes,where the road is narrowest. By this path thePersians marched," &c.llerodot. 1, 7, c. 176. * ^caor^yoc*Arpairov* * Kara fid\iv rov ovptoc*X.] Melts. 43Three accidents concurred to frustrate the endeavoursof the Panhellenic council at the isthmusto defend Thermopylae. They sere ignorant ofthe path oyer Mount Anopasa, by which the positionnight be taken in reverse, Leonidas himselfhaving only been informed of it by the Trachiniion his arrival, when he sent 1000 Phocenses todefend that route ^ Secondly, there was no expectationwhen Leonidas marched from the isthmusthat the troops at Thermopylae would be soonattacked, the consequence of which was, that noneof the allied states dispatched more than a smallforce in the first instance. And lastly, a religiousceremony, as had happened in the former Persianinvasion, contributed to interpose a delay in themovements of the main body of the Spartans, whilethe Olympic games produced a similar effect in therest of Grreece. It appears, indeed, that the Spartanswould not have sent any of their forces sosoon, had it not been with a view to set an exampleto the allies, and thereby prevent themfrom embracing the interests of Persia '•The allies had only time to reach Thermopylaeand repair the Phocian wall, when the Persiansmade their appearance before the pass. On thepart of all the Peloponnesian, except the Spartans,there was a wish to reserve their efforts forthe defence of the isthmus of Corinth ; but as thisgave great offence to the men of Phocis and Locris,who were supported by Leonidas, it was atlast resolved to remain at Thermopylae, and toHerodot; 1. 7, c. 175. 212. » Ibid. c. 206.217.44 Melts. [chap.dispatch messengers to hasten the march of theremainder of the allied forces ^ Xerxes, meantime,had been informed that a small body of men, headedby the Lacedaemonians and their king Leonidas,occupied the pass ; but he could not believe thatthey really meant to defend it against his multitude,though such was the positive assurance ofDemaratus king of Sparta, who, in the samemanner as Pippins the king of Athens had guidedDatis in the invasion of Attica, accompanied thePersian monarch in the present expedition.Xerxes seems to have been ignorant of the realnumbers of the Greeks ; for the single horsemanwhom he sent for information, and who was allowedto approach unmolested, found only the three hundredSpartans on the outside of the wall, whichconcealed the remainder of the Greek forces. TheSpartans were engaged, some in their gymnasticexercises, and others in combing their hair, whichbeing their custom when they were on the point ofexposing their lives to imminent danger, provedto Demaratus that they were resolved upon defendingthe position to the last extremity. Xerxes,however, was still incredulous, and wasted fourdays in expectation of their retreat. On the fifthhe sent a detachment of Modes and Cissy againstthem. These, and others who succeeded them,having fought the whole day without making anyimpression upon the Greeks, Xerxes was at lengthconvinced that though he had many men he hadfew soldiers*. On the sixth day from that onHerodot. 1. 7, c. 176, 207.iroXXoc city liydpunroty oX/yoc ^6 types. c. 210.X.]Melts.which the Persian horseman reconnoitred theGreeks, they were attacked hy the Immortals ^ ;but these also soon found that their numbers wereof no advantage in such narrow ground, againstthe long spears and large shields of the Greeks.The Lacedaemonians, who were the men chieflyengaged in this day's action, retired several timesas if defeated, and then suddenly facing about,overthrew great numbers of their opponents *.On the following day the Greeks were not lesssuccessful in maintaining their post. All theallies were present except the Phocis, who wereguarding the passage over the mountain. Xerxes,convinced at length of the infinite superiority ofthe Greek soldier, was reduced to such a state ofembarrassment, as might have made Mount (Etathe term of his expedition, had the allied forcesof the Greeks arrived in time to defend the upperpassage of Mount Anopsea as well as Thermopylaehad already been defended. It seems to havebeen on the eighth day of the operations that thePersian king obtained from a Trachinian namedEphialtes, whose countrymen had joined the Persianarmy ', a knowledge of the path over theSo called because theywere always kept complete tothe number of 10,000; theircommander was Hydames. —Herodot. L 7» c. 83*Diodorus (1. 11, c. 7) remarks,that the small shieldsand short javelins of the Persiansrendered them agile, andwell suited for action in a plain,but unfit to contend with theLacedaemonians in the Pass,who, secure under the cover oftheir large shields, inflictedtheir blows with fatal certaintyupon the light-armed and ill-protectedPersians.Ces, Persia. 24.46 Melts. [chap.mountain, by which he might send a body of meninto the rear of the Greeks, and thus attack. theirposition on both sides ^ In the evening, Hydameswith the Immortals began his passage over themountain, by a circuitous path which at firstascended the ravine of the Asopus. He marchedall night, with the mountains of the CEtaei on theright, and those of the Trachinii on the left, andarrived at daybreak near the place where thePhocis were posted. As the enemy advanced,unseen, through a forest of oaks which coveredthe upper parts of the mountain, the Phociswould have been surprised had not the rustling ofthe dead leaves under the feet of the enemy,which the calmness of the morning rendered audible,advertised them of the approach of a largebody of men. They had only time to arm, whena shower of Persian arrows obliged them to retreatto a more defensible position upon the summit ofthe mountain ^, where imagining that the enemyhad come expressly to attack them, they preparedto resist to the last. This movement being preciselywhat the Persians wished, they took no furthernotice of the Phocis, but descended themountain. Meantime, the Greeks at Thermopylsehad heard of the movement of Hydames, and thewhole camp was informed of it before day-light.A council was immediately held; the result ofwhich was, that all the Greeks should retire totheir respective cities, except the Lacedaemonians,Herodot. 1. 7, c. 213.M rov ovpeo^ rots xdpvfifioi'.'^c. 218.X.] Melts. 47ThespienseSyandThebans. Ephialtes, having calculatedthat he should arrive at the eastern end ofThermopylae about the middle of the forenoon, hadrecommended . to Xerxes to attack the Greeks infront about that time. The Persians advancedaccordingly, and Leonidas met them in the widestpart of the pass, having advanced in front of thewall. Great numbers of the Persians were slain,many fell into the sea, and many were trodden todeath under the feet of their own comrades. TheGreeks, knowing that they could not avoid theirfate when the Persians should arrive in the rear,fought with all the energy of despair, and havingbroken their spears, came to action with theirswords alone. Here fell Leonidas, and two of thehalf brothers of Xerxes. The chief contest wasnow for the body of the Spartan king, which theGreeks at length gained possession of, after havingfour times obliged the enemy to retreat. Thuseach side had alternately the advantage, until thearrival of Hydames, when the Greeks, retreatingto the narrowest ground, retired behind the wall,and from thence gained the hill in the pass, uponwhich a stone lion was afterwards erected inhonour of Leonidas. Here, assailed on every side,they were all buried under the missile weapons ofthe enemy, with the exception of the Thebes,who had been retained by Leonidas solely becausetheir city was already suspected of medicine ; andwho, when the Greeks retreated to the hill, advancedto meet the Persians, when some wereslain as they approached ; the rest had quarter,48 Melts. [chap.but were afterwards branded with the royal markof Xerxes ".Diodorus, Plutarch, and Justin, give a very differentaccount of the death of the Spartans, representingthat they penetrated in the night into thecamp of Xerxes, and there fell, after slaughteringthe Persians for several hours. This improbabletale deserves not a moment's confidence, when opposedto the historian who was a cotemporary ofthe heroes of Thermopylae.According to an epitaph on the polyandrium atThermopylae, cited by Herodotus, " 4000 Peloponnesianfought there against 300 myriads." Hisenumeration, however, amounts only to 3100'.There is reason to believe, therefore, that Isocratesand Diodorus were right in supposing the 300Spartans to have been exclusive of the Lacedaemonian.From the cities of Greece northward ofHerodot. 1. 7. c. 233. and gives it as an instance ofPlutarch (de Malign. Herodot.) the malice of Herodot,denies the truth of this story,Mvpideriy irore t^Be rptiiKoeriaiQ ifid^oyrOf'Ejc HeXoiroyydtrov ^^iXcd^cc riropeg,Ap. Herodot. 1. 7, c. 228.300 Spartans. Total, 31001000 Tegeatse and Man Herodot. 1. 7, c. 202.tincnses. * Isocrates. pang. vol. i. p.120 of Orchomenus in 223. — in Arched. vol. ii. p. 78,Arcadia. ed. Auger.— Diodor. 1. 1 1, c. 4.1000 other Arcadian. In the former the number is400 Corinthians. 1000 altogether. In the latter,200 of Phlius. 1000 besides the 300 Sparsof Mycenae. tans.X.] Melts. 49the Isthmus there were about 3000 \ and as all the7000 were hoplitee, and were undoubtedly attendedby a proportion of light-armed, it is probable thatabout 10,000 Greeks were assembled, when theimpossibility of defending the pass having beenproved, the Spartans and Thespienses alone underLeonidas and Democritus, devoted themselves, byremaining, to certain destruction*.The Persian land forces assembled in Ameliaamounted, according to Herodotus, to 80,000Asiatic cavalry, and two millions of infantry, amongwhom, were included 300,000 Europeans fromThrace, Macedonia, Thessaly, and other states ofGreece, and the followers of the camp wereeven more numerous than the combatants'. Theonly proof which the historian has left to corroboratethis statement is the mural measurementof the Asiatic infantry in the plain ofPriscus in Thrace, where 10,000 men havingbeen set apart and made to stand close together, awall was built round them, and the inclosure wassuccessively filled until the whole army was thuscounted, and found to amount to 1,700,000^,Such a process, if carefully and fairly executed,could scarcely have failed to produce an approximationto the truth within 10,000. It is obvious,700 of Thespis. one at 6000 by Pausanias,400 of Thebes. but much more probably by1000 Phocis. Diodorus at 1000.• * To these Pausanias (Pho-2100, to whom are to be cic. c. 20) adds the Mycenae.added the Eastern Locris, ' Herodot. 1. 7, c. 184, 185.(Herodot. ubi sup.) who went * Herodot. 1. 7i c. 60.irayirTpnrirf, These are reck-vol.II. E60 Melts. [chap,however, that there may have been many personsinterested in producing a false muster. We mayreadily credit that the host of Xerxes was one ofthe largest which ever entered an enemy's country.Asiatic armies have always been greater in proportionthan those of other countries, in consequenceof the peculiar structure of society, whichpervades almost the whole of that continent Andin this instance we know the numbers assembledto have been the result of a four-years' preparation,to have been collected from the whole Persianempire, which then included Egypt as well as allWestern Asia, and to have been augmented by theforces of Europe, from the extremity of Thrace tothe foot of Mount (Eta. But some of the samecauses, which facilitate the collection of largearmies in the east, render it difficult to arrive atany certainty as to their exact numbers ; and theimpossibility of finding subsistence in an enemy'scountry for such a multitude, although attended asthey were by all the naval forces of the states whichsupplied the troops, is alone sufficient to justify adisbelief in the numbers of Herodotus.The silence of Persian history on the invasion ofGreece has been supposed to invalidate the truthof the whole transaction, or at least to show that itwas nothing more than an expedition of some provincialsatrap, magnified by Grecian vanity, andwhich being unsuccessful, the Persians took nogreat pains to record. But no person who has reflectedon the history of Greece, or has read Herodotuswith attention, will easily entertain such anopinion. With the sole exception of the amountX.] Melts. 51of the enemy's land forces, there is no reason toquestion the statements of Herodotus, who in hisnarrative of the Persian invasion has left us one ofthe most cautious and accurate narratives that everwas written, not even excepting those of Thucydidesand Polybius. The conquest of Egypt is no morerecorded in Persian history than the failure of theexpedition to Greece. The oblivion of both theseevents we may attribute to the same cause : namely,the total loss of the literature and history of ancientPersia, of which the arrow-headed character wasthe element. A few names only of the ancientmonarchs seem to have escaped that literarywreck.The following are a few reflexion occurring ona view of the scene of this celebrated event. Thermopylaeappears to have been the name generallyapplied to the whole road or passage at the foot ofMount Callidromus, from the plain of the A sop usto the woody slopes which commence a little beyondthe modem derv^ni. But it is distinctly divisibleinto three parts, the pass of the Phoenix, the plainof Anthele, and Thermopylae proper. The latterwas the only part very defensible against a greatdisparity of numbers ; for, as I have already remarked,it is not difficult to turn the pass of thePhoenix from the westward, and to descend uponthe plain of Anthele, which being more than halfa mile in breadth, leaves only for the real Stenaor pass, the part where are the hot springs,anciently called Chytri, and now Thermo', 8cp/ia.E 2Melts.[chap.ther with the two ponds of the same kind of water,and the two conical heights. Above all these riseimmediately steep woody slopes mixed with rockyprecipices, behind which are other precipices stillhigher, which impede all communication but alongthe foot of the hill by the hot sources, ponds, andconical heights. Herodotus gives reason to believethat the wall of the Phocis was built a littleeastward of the western salt spring, which issueson the eastern edge of the upper extremity of theplain of Anthele, so that the current from thisspring may have flowed along the exterior side ofthe wall. The koXoivoc cv ry €(roS<^, or heir in thepass, which was the last retreat of the Spartans,and where the stone lion was erected in honour ofLeonidas, I take to have been the western of thetwo small heights, this being nearest to the positionof the Phocian wall, and the narrowest part ofthe pass, which begins to widen near the hill of theDerwent. The latter moreover being rocky, whereasthe former is smooth and even, will better correspondto the rock Melampygus, upon which werethe KcpKotircov ISpaij or seats of the Cercopes^. Alittle beyond this hill eastward, the pass terminates: the woody heights, which rise steeply^ The word KoXtavoi is usedley Plutarch as well as Herodotus,and applies preciselyto such heights as the two inthe pass of Thermopylae.The Cercopes were robberswho infested the pass, and whowere subdued by Hercules.The rock Melampygus was socalled from a ridiculous /ivdoc>connected with this feat of Hercules,which forms the subjectof a very ancient sculpture ona metope of one of the templesof Serious in Sicily.X.] Melts. 53from the saline sources and ponds, diminish inheight, and at the same time recede to thesouthward, leaving at their feet a long practicableslope covered with wood, which reaches tothe marshes near the mouth of the Spercheius,and which I traversed on quitting Thermopylae forPundonitza.In regard to the route of Hydames from theplain of Trachis, over Mount Callidromus, otherwisenamed Anopaea, to Alpeni, there can be littledoubt from the words of Herodotus, that it beganby ascending the ravine of the Asopus ', which,having (as before remarked) a direction fromthe eastward, and being perfectly concealed, wasthus well adapted to the object of the movementof Hydarnes. After following the ravine forsome distance, a rugged and circuitous ascentwould conduct him to Dhamasta, from whence theroute was comparatively easy to Dhrakospilia, alittle beyond which probably was the position ofthe Phocis. After engaging with them untilthey retreated to the neighbouring summit of themountain now called Sarmatia, he descended bythe torrent, which I crossed at 2.30, and turningwestward on arriving at the modern route fromPundonitza to Thermopylae reached, without anyfurther difficulty, the position of Alpeni and theeastern end of the pass. As he quitted the campof Xerxes in the dusk of the evening, and arrived"Ext it &Zt ii &Tpairoc itaer^ayog pioyrog. — Herodot.aiVi}* apx^rai lev hifo ro 1. 7) c. 216.'A^tfirov frora^v rov ^cct TfJQ54 Melts. [CIIAP.at the Phocian position at day-break, he was abouteight hours on his march, the transaction hayingtaken place in the beginning of August. Even ifthe road had been as good as the ground couldpossibly admit, the distance could not have beenless than twelve miles : on considering, therefore,the steepness of the ascent from the vale of theAsopus, the varied surface of the mountain in theupper region, the necessary halts and other delaysincidental to the march of 10,000 men by sucha path as the historian has described, partlythrough a thick forest, and in the night, the timedoes not seem too much in proportion to the distanceto be performed. The descent was notmuch less than the ascent in actual distance butwas very different in other respects, being littleencumbered with rugged ground or forests;and the march* was performed by day. Thesecauses combined would produce a great diminutionin time ; so that Hydarnes probably wasnot more than five hours in the descent, includingthe delay occasioned by the skirmish withthe Phocis, and may have arrived at Alpeniabout nine o'clock in the forenoon. The only difficultyin the historian's narrative is, that he statesHydarnes, in commencing his march, to have leftthe mountains of the (Etaei on his right hand, andthose of the Trachinii on his left, which tends tothe belief that he began his ascent from the plainto the westward of the Trachinian rocks, about themodern Vardhates. But as this would have doubledthe distance, and the words of Herodotus decisivelyindicate the ravine of the Karvunaria asX.] Melts. 55the beginning of hiB route, we are to conclude thatall the summits above the city of Trachis and theTrachinian rocks, on one of which the citadel ofHeracleia was afterwards built, then belonged tothe CEtsei. The Trachinia^ it is easy to conceive,comprehended all the mountain Callidromus, asfar as the boundaries of Locris ; and thus, notwithstandingthe dty Trachis was on the right of Dames,the (Etsean mountains, during a great part ofhis march, may have been on the right, while theTrachinian were on his left. The stillness of thedawn, which saved the Phocis from being surprised,is very characteristic of the climate ofGreece in the season when the occurrence tookplace, and like many other trifling circumstancesoccurring in the history of the Persian invasion, isan interesting proof of the accuracy and veracityof the historian.A little more than two centuries after the Persianinvasion, in the year B.C. 279, the Gauls,whose appetite for plunder had been more excitedthan satisfied by that of Italy, lyra, Pannonia, andThrace, turned their steps towards Greece, whichthen offered a more tempting field for the plundererthan any country in the world. They firstmade their appearance in Macedonia, where intwo successive years they defeated Ptolemy Cefaunus and Sosthenes \ Elated with this success,they now advanced towards the southern provincesof Greece, having principally in view the pillage ofPolyb. 1. 9, c. 35. Pausan. Phocis. c. 19. Justin.1. 24, c. 5.56 Melts. [chap.the temples of Greece, and particularly that of Delphi.They were met at Thermopylae by an alliedarmy of Greeks, amounting to about 23,000 infantryand 2000 cavalry \ together with all the Atheniantriremes which could be collected. The chief managementof the war was entrusted to the Athenians,who were led by Callippus, son of Moerocles.The Greeks, having destroyed the bridges of theSpercheius, and stationed a body of troops to opposethe Gauls in crossing at the same point, Brennuseffected a passage with 10,000 men nearer tothe sea, where the river spreading over the lowgrounds formed a lake and marshes instead of thesingle and steady stream which it presented higherup. Loftiness of stature, says Pausanias, being ageneral characteristic of the Celtic race, some oftheir tallest men waded over the marshes, while^ The following is the enumeration of the several contingents,by Pausanias : —Foot, Hone,From Boeotia 10,000 500Phocis 3,000 500Locris Opontia 700Megaris ••• 400-ffitolia 7,090Athens 1,000 •••••• 500Antiochus, king of Syria . . 500Antigonus, king of Macedonia 50023,190 1,500Add for the horse of the Megarensesand^toli, whose numbers are notspecified, about 800Total, 23,190 2,300X.] Melts. 57some employed their shields as rafts, and otherspassed over by swimming. The Greeks then withdrewtheir forces from the river, and retired withinthe pass of Thermopylae. The next measure ofBrennus was that of obliging the people of Melisto construct bridges over the Spercheius, and hethen crossed with his whole army, which had consisted,when he first entered Greece, of upwardsof 200,000 men K After having laid waste thecountry, and murdered the inhabitants aroundHeracleia, which was then in the possession ofthe ^tolians^ he proceeded against the Greeksin Thermopylse. Being informed of their amountby some fugitives, and despising the smallness oftheir numbers, he attacked them at sun-rise onthe day after his arrival at the entrance of thepass. But neither the military skill nor the armourof the Gallic infantry, qualified them to contendwith Greeks. Their shields were a very insufficientcovering, and their swords were made to cutonly, having no point*. The cavalry, in consequenceof the narrowness of the ground and of therocks and torrents was of no use on either side.The Gauls attacked with their accustomed impetuosity', and fought with the utmost perseverance» Horse 20,400Two mounted attendants to each horseman • • 40,800Infantry 152,000213,200According to Justin, the Gauls entered Macedonia with120,000 infantry, and 15,000 cavaLry.» Polyb. 1. 2, c. 80. 33 ; ' Id. 1. 2, c. 33. 35.1. 3,0. 114.58 Melts. [chap.notwithstanding the wounds inflicted by the battle-axesand swords of the hoplitiB, as well as by thejavelins and arrows of the light-armed. Manyeven drew out the missiles of the Greeks fromtheir own bodies, to hurl them back upon theenemy. Unable, therefore, with all their effortsto obtain any advantage, they regained their camp,after considerable loss, by a retreat as tumultuousand confused as their attack had been, and inwhich those who were trodden to death by theirown comrades or who were lost in the marshes,were not less numerous than those who fell inthe engagement. The success of the day wasin great measure due to the Athenian galleys,which were conducted with great difficulty anddanger through the marshes, until their missileswere brought to bear upon the enemy.On the seventh day after the battle, a body ofGauls ascended Mount (Eta by a narrow pathnear the ruins of Trachis, not with a view of crossingthe mountain into the rear of the Greek position,but for the purpose of plundering a templeof Minerva, situated above the ruins of Trachis.They were met and beaten by the italians fromHeracleia, whose commander, Telemachus, fell inthe action. Brennus now attempted to detach thejEtolians from the confederate army, by undertakingan expedition into their country with theview of thus obliging them to march to its defence :40,000 Gallic infantry and 8000 horse havingcrossed the Spercheius, as if marching into Thessaly,suddenly entered iEtolia and attacked Gallium,which they took and treated with the mostX.] Melts. 59merciless cruelty ; but having been encounteredon their return by the iBtolians from Thermopylaereinforced from various parts of ^tolia, they werecompletely defeated, and not half their numberreturned to the camp of Brennus.An example of that selfishness and disunionwhich has been the bane of Greece in every agewas now destined to favour the invader. TheHeracleotSB and ^nianes, tired of the protractedstay of the enemy in their territory, and thinkingonly of the readiest means of ridding themselvesof the evil, undertook to guide the Gauls acrossMount Callidromus by the same path ' which thePersians had followed. Brennus resolved uponconducting the expedition in person. LeavingAcichorius, therefore, in charge of the main army,with orders to attack the Greeks in front, as soonas those who crossed the mountain should arrivein their rear, he ascended Callidromus at the headof 40, 000 men.A body of Phocis, for the defence of the road,had been stationed on the mountain, as in thetime of Xerxes, and to as little purpose. A densevapour covering the summit, the Phocis werenot apprized of the approach of the Gauls untilthey were attacked, when, after a short resistance,they retreated with all expedition to their comradesat Thermopylae. The whole army then embarkedin the Athenian galleys, and thus effected its retreatwithout further loss, Brennus, upon is the word ap from Herodotus to Procopius,pied to this road by all authors The modern word is fiovovdn.60 Melts; [chap:ing that Thermopylae was evacuated by the enemy ,without waiting for Acichorius marched forwardto Delphi, where he suffered a variety of disasterswhich the Greeks believed to have been caused byan immediate interposition of Apollo in defence ofhis sanctuary. If Pausanias was truly informed,the Greeks were assisted on this occasion both byan earthquake which detached some of the rocksof Parnassus and rolled them upon the enemy, andby a thunder-storm which was succeeded by snowand a supernatural degree of cold. The next daythey were attacked in the rear by the Phocis,when Brennus with difficulty escaped, and effecteda junction with Acichorius. A panic terror causedthe Gauls to kill one another; and the Greeks,assembling from all sides, harassed them to sucha degree that with difficulty they regained theSpercheius, when they were again so vigorouslyassailed by the Thessalians, that, if Pausanias isto be believed, not one returned from* Greece.Although there may be some superstitious exaggerationin the accounts which obtained creditin Greece of this defeat of the Gauls, none of thecircumstances are incredible in a country so subjectto earthquakes, and thunder-storms, and tosudden changes of temperature in the mountains.No place in Greece is more likely than Delphi tobe the scene of such a conflict of the elements, orisbetter suited, by its local peculiarities to producethe effect upon ignorant strangers whichPausanias has described. When terror had onceoverpowered the minds of the invaders their destructioneasily followed, exposed as they were toX.] Melts. 61an enemy well acquainted with all the natural resourcesof the country, and ready to harass themin their retreat through some of the most difficultpasses in Greece.In the year 207 B.C., when Eastern Greecewas the seat of war between Philip, king of Macedonia,son of Demetrius, and the italians, whowere then in alliance with the Romans, and withAttains, king of Pegasus, the pass of Thermopylaewas fortified by the JEtolians with a foss anddyke, which was soon afterwards taken by Philip \Sixteen years afterwards, Thermopylae was occupiedby Antiochus, king of SjTia, when at warwith the Romans, who were then in alliance withPhilip. Antiochus brought with him 10,000 infantry,500 horse, and six elephants'. The italianswere also opposed to the Romans, butafforded little assistance to Antiochus. The consulAcilius, commander of the Roman army, afterlaying waste the districts of Hypata and Heracleia,both which cities were then in the hands of theitalians, encamped in the pass near the fountainsof hot water, over against the king, who had fortifiedhis position with a wall, and a double ditchand rampart, and who, mindful of what had happenedto the Lacedaemonians in former time aswell as recently to Philip, had prevailed upon theliv. 1. 28, cc. 5. 7. mentions this fact, which, aller.1. 35, c. 43 ; 1. 36, though the word nuper seemscc. 15. 19. hardly applicable to such a£t nuper Philippi ah space of time, could hardlyiisdem Romans. It is thus have occurred but during theincidentally only that Livy campaign of 207, b. c.62 Melts. [chap.italians to occupy with 2000 men three castlesupon the mountain named Tichius, Rhoduntia, andCallidromum^ ; upon learning which the consuldetached Flaccid his legate against Tichius andRhoduntia, and Cato against Callidromum.On the morning after the arrival of the Romansat Thermopylae, both parties drew out their forces.Those of Antiochus were in two lines in front ofthe rampart, a part of his light-armed occupyingthe heights above the hot sources. The MacedonianSarissophori was in the centre : on theright, as far as the marshes, were the elephantswith their guards, and behind them the cavalry.The remainder of the army formed a secondline. The position, though we may supposeit to have been somewhat increased in breadthsince the time of the Persian, and even of theGallic invasion, by the gradual effect of the samecauses which have at length left a considerableplain between the pass and the Spercheius, wastoo narrow for such an order of battle as that ofAntiochus, against infantry which had now establishedits superiority over the phalanx. Hisline, therefore, was obliged to retreat behindthe first rampart, and was defending the secondwith some advantage, when the troops of Cato,who had surprised the italians in Callidromum,appeared on the summit of the heights above thepass, threatening the rear of the king's position,^ Appian (Syriac. c. 170 ^^^ ^^^ ^ ^^^ ^^ them,speaks only of two summits, Plutarch, in his life of Cato,Callidromum and Tichius, and says their number was 600.adds that the JEtolians sentX.] MfiLIS. 63and the destruction of his whole army. A precipitateretreat was the immediate consequence,which would have been still more disastrous to theGreeks than it proved, had not the narrowness ofthe pass rendered the advance of the Roman infantrydifficult, and that of the cavalry impossible,in face of the elephants, which the Romans atlength found it more easy to kill than to capture.The pursuit, however, was continued as far asScarpheia; scarcely any more than 500, whoformed the body-guard of Antiochus, escaped toChalcis, and the loss of the battle obliged Antiochusto retire into Asia.There are still the remains of three Hellenic fortresseson the side of Mount Callidromus aboveThermopylae : one of these is on the westernmostof the two rocky heights which include the ravineof the torrent of Anthele ; the second is above it,near Dhamasta; the third occupies the summitdescribed by me at 1.50, as lying on the rightof the road, about half way from Thermopylaeto Pundonltza. As the consul sent a single bodyof troops against Tichius and Rhoduntia, and anotheragainst Callidromum, it is natural to supposethat the two former were those not far distant fromone another on the western side of the mountain,and I am disposed to believe that Tichius was thehigher, as Appian gives the names of Tichius andCallidromum to two summits of the mountain. Itwill follow that Callidromum was the third fortress,the position of which accords with the circumstanceof Cato, soon after he had taken ,having made his appearance on the hills64 Hells. [chap.threatening the rear of the king's position, andconsequently towards the eastern end of the pass.Had these fortresses existed at the time of the Persianor Gallic invasions, or even when Philip occupiedThermopylae against the Romans and italians,they would probably have been brought intonotice on those occasions. They would seem,therefore, to have been constructed during the sixteenyears which elapsed between the last-mentionedperiod and the Antiochus campaign ; probablyby the italians, who had then extended theirdominion from the borders of ^tolia proper, tothose of Locris. The want of such an addition tothe natural defences of this entrance into the southeyprovinces of Greece, had then been repeatedlyproved, and the road over the mountain had thricefrustrated the hopes of the defenders of Thermopylae,founded on the strength of the pass itself.The three fortresses were well placed for the objectin view. Tichius defended the ascent of themountain on the road by which Hydarnes crossedit. Rhoduntia protected the route by which thepass of the Phoenix may be turned through theravine of Anthele^ and Callidromum was equallywell placed as a defence of the upper pass on theeastern side.We are told by Procopius \ that among otherworks which Justinian constructed for the defenceof the empire, he restored the fortifications of Thermopylae,and of some neighbouring towns. Scarcelyany illustration of topography, however, is to be Procop. de iEdif. 1. 4, c. 2.CHAP. X.] Melts. 65gained from the Byzantine historian, who had evidentlyno personal knowledge of the place, andwhose inflated account exaggerates the power andperformances of Justinian in the same degree as inhis Secret History he studies to vilify his imperialmaster. The buildings of Justinian were probablyof a very different composition from the solid constructionsof the ancient Greeks, for while remainsstill exist, more or less considerable, of all theprincipal Hellenic cities round the Maliac Gulf,not a trace is to be found, as far as I can learn,either of the works which Justinian is said to haveconstructed at Thermopylae, Heracleia, and Hysor of the towns of Saccus, Annus, Oration,Bales, or Leontarium, all which Procopius statesto have been situated near Thermopylae.VOL. II.CHAPTER XLLOCRIS, PHOCIS, DORIS.Pundonitza — Temitza — Geography of Doris and the frontier ofPhocis — Rivers Apostolia and Kaienitza — River Cepkusus —Dhadhi, Amplncleia — ^Velitza, TUkorea^ Neon — Leftaa, Ela^(eta-Palea Fiva, Ledon — LiU^a — Source of the Cephissus —Charadroy Tithroniunif Drymcea — Metropolis of Doris — RiverErineuSf or Pindus or Acyphas — Erineus, Pindus Cytiniutn,Bcewn — Departure from Velitza — ^Bissikeni^The Steni ofthe Cephissus — ^Dhavlia — Rivers Plataiu£» Mavronero— JDow-list Inscription — Aio Vlasi — Mera — Kapuma — Panopeui —Cfujeroneta — Mount Petrachus — Arrival at Livadhia.Pundonitza, or Bundonltza, according to the vulgarenunciation of the initial P, is a bishopric ofthe province of Athens, under the name of Medhi-nitza^, and the chief place of a Turkish districtcomprehending 30 villages. The town, whichcontains 115 Greek families and 50 Turkish,stands at the foot of a steep rock, occupied by acastle of the middle ages, in the walls of whichare some portions of Hellenic masonry, showingthat it was the acropolis of one of the towns ofthe Epicnemidii. The hill rises from an elevatedplain, stretching along the foot of a ridge whichconnects the summits anciently named Callidromusand Cnemis. The latter mountain, which commencesCHAP. XI.] Locris. 67at the end of this plain and extends to that of Toland,is woody and uncultivated, and is heregenerally known by the name of Karya, from thenearest village. Half-way towards it from the pass of Fondana leads over the ridge toTorkokhorioy or Esse, in the plain of the .Bv this road I came to Pundonitza onmy former visitThe castle commands a fine view of the MediaeGolf, and of the Straits on either side of JEubasa^together with a large portion of the northern partof that great island, particularly the peninsula now called Lithadha \ Beyond the straits,the gulf, and the plain of Zitnni, is seen the wholerange of Mount Othrys. A little to the right ofthe southern mouth of the Spereheiusy that of alarge torrent is a conspicuous object. It is formedfrom the ravines mentioned at 1.50 and 2.30,added to the water-courses round Pundonitza.Its ancient name is not, I believe, to be found inhistory. The BoagriuSj which is a similar butmuch larger torrent, enters the sea two or threemiles farther to the east. It collects all the watersfrom the elevated plain and adjacent mountainsto the eastward of Pundonitza. If the relativesituations of the two divisions of Eastern Locriswere not perfectly clear, the modern name might mislead the geographer, and inducehim to suppose that Opus was here situated',Pundonitza being formed apparently from one ofthe oblique cases of ^Oirovcy by the omission of theAsia. ' Meletius has fallen into this error.f268 LocRis. [chap.initial o, which is a common Romaic corruption ,and by the addition of the Greco-illyria diminutiveita. But the Epicnemidii were certainlyinterposed between Thermopylae and the Opontii ;Pundonltza, therefore, can only be regarded as aninstance among many in Greece of the preservationof an ancient name in a different site, arisingprobably from one of those colonization or movementsof the inhabitants, which appear in all agesto have been common in this country. Ne6-petra, or New Patra, is a neighbouring example,greatly resembling that of Little Opus, at .The upper Mpicnemidian plain, as that of may be called, in contradistinction to themaritime level which contained some other townsof the Epicnemidii, may be considered as a continuationof the upper region of Mount CallidrO"must already so often mentioned, in which Dha-masts and Dhrakospilia are situated. All thiselevated country, although unproductive comparedwith the rich Spercheian plain, is a most usefulneighbour to it, by supplying the timber and fuel,in which the plains are deficient, and by affordinga salubrious retreat from their pernicious exhalationsin the summer. Callidromus in particular,which is well described by its name, consists entirelyin its middle region, of a most agreeablydiversified scene of pasture and corn land, intermixedwith forests, rocks, and streams ; and commandingby its elevation a variety of prospects ofthe most sublime and interesting character. Thewhole district of Melisj in short, is a completeXI.] PHocis. 69example of the great variety and resources of theclimate and soil of Greece.Nov. 29. — sat a mile to the south of Pundonitza,we leave to the right a road to Dhrakospilia, whichfollows the foot of the steep ridge, connecting Cal-domuswith Chemist and enter a narrow rockyopening in it, between two summits, of which thaton the left is very lofty, and clothed with large fir-trees.The pass is a mile in lengths In eightminutes beyond its extremity, mounting a risingground, we suddenly open a magnificent view ofthe great mountains of PhodSy Bceoiia^ and Atticafrom the western end of Parnassus as far as MountPanes together with a great part of the lowercountry within these barriers. Below us extends thegreat valley of Doris and Phocis contained betweenthe Ocean and the Parnassian ranges ; and immediatelyopposite is the town of Dhadhi, or Dhadhia ',on the side of Parnassus considerably increasedsince I was there between three and four years ago.I recognize also the other places on the oppositeside of the valley, which I then visited, namely,the villages of Velitza and Suvala, on the side ofMount Par9uz«9t£^,— higher in that mountain Aguein the road which leads across it to Delphi —at its foot the sources of the CephissuSy called Keg— the ruins at Paleokastro, and the passand khan of Gravia, by which we proceeded toS41ona. The plain to the westward surrounded byCalUdromus^ CEta, and Parnassus and watered byseveral streams, which unite and fall into theCepkissiLSj is well seen also from these hills.70 PHOCis. [chap.The position of the several objects, particularlythat of the mountains, perfectly illustrates Strnfoo^and proves that the farther part of this great valleytowards the west is a part of the ancient Doris ;th . ruins, therefore!, which we then saw near Ma-violatesand at Gravia, are those of two of dieDorian towns gained by Uie geographer. It mayberemarked ako from hence, that the territory ofDhadhi foi:ilis a natural separation between theDorian and the Phocian valley of the Cephissus ;for here the hills on either side approaching,leave only a narrow passage for the river. Theroot of PamoAsua^ which forms the northwesternpoint of the strait, meets the Cephiasas abouttwo miles to the north-west of Dhadfai, wherethe road from Zituni passes the river by a bridgenear some mills.To the westward of this point are some copioussprings at the foot of the hills, which form amarshy space for a quarter of a mile, and thenjoin the river. These springs are usually calledthe /ueyaXacc /SpvffEic, or great sources ; but thoughthey bear this name from their forming a largemarsh or inundation around them in winter, theyare not so permanent or so considerable in summeras the other great sources three miles farther tothe south-west at the foot of Parnassus, and whichshow by their name, jct^oXo/Spvoftc, that they arenow considered the fountain-head of the Cephissus.Near the Regales Vr jrses, to the south-west, beginsa long slope, similar to that of Dhadhi, at the headof which is Suvala, where in my former tour I remarkedancient foundations, which probably markthe site of Charadra. The foot of the mountainXI.] PHOCIS. 71afterwards takes a turn, for a short distance, to thenorthward to the Kefalo-vrj^ses, which issue fromunder a platform supported by the remains of anancient wall near a large rained church. Thecoarse of the Cephtssus is north-easterly from thesources to the extremity of the slope of Dhadhl,which it surrounds ; it then gradually assumes thesouth-easterly course, which it follows to the Stena,leading into the plain of CJuBroneia. A little tothe right of the Kefalo-vrj^ses is seen the ravine ofa torrent generally dry, which descends from AgueOn its left bank, on the edge of the plain,are the ruins called Paleokastro, one of the bestpreserved of Hellenic fortresses, and which a varietyof authorities from Homer to Pausanias show tohave been ZHtBa^ by their testimony that thesources of the Cephissus were at that town ^ ; thenearest point of these remains is in fact less thanhalf a mile from the Kefalovrj^ses '. To the rightOi r' spa Trap iroraiioy Kij^iffffov ^ov tvaiov01 re AlXaiay €;^ov Tnyy^c girl Kritpitraoio.Horn. II. B. V. 522.Kfi^iaaoy S* ap itruTa Ki\Tiaao KoWifiiBBpop"Om-e AiKatTfSey Trpoxiu KoWll^ooy viu>p,Horn. Hymn, in ApoU. ▼• 240. •propeUentemque LilaeamCephissi glaciale caput.Stat. The. L 7, v. 848.Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 3. 7. its, partly founded on theStrabo, pp. 407. 424. steep descent of a rooky hi,Canaan. Boeot. c. 24. Clothe remainder encompassing acic. c. 8. 33. level space at its foot, whereAt Paleokastro the entire the ground is covered wiAcircuit of the fortification ex ruins. The walls are of the72 Phocis. [chap.of Paleokastro occur the lower heights of Parnassus,much intersected with torrents running intothe branch of the Cephtsms^ called the Kaienftza,or river of Gravida In a recess at the foot ofParnassus from which one of these tributaries ofthe Kaenltza proceeds, and about midway betweenPale6kastro and Gravia are the ruins of an ancienttown at the village of Mariolates '. The Kaienitza,which had no water in it when I passed along itsbank in the month of July, but is now a stream ofsome magnitude, flows parallel to and at a smalldistance from the foot of Parnassus, until near theRegales Verses it unites with another and largerstream called Apostolia, and then joins the Cephis^sus. The Apostolia rises in Mount CEta, entersthe plain towards its north-western comer, andcrosses it obliquely. On, or not far from its leftbank, is Kardhiki, situated on the right of theroad from Zitdni to Salona, in a forest of oaks,which not only covers that side of Mount Caldronbut extends over all the neighbouring part ofthe plain . Below the forest the plain is well cultivated.On the Apostolic, above Kardhiki, is Pavlianf,and on this side of the road from Zituni to Sdlona,on the slope of the mountain, are Bravos, Palesorder: some parts, both deity, of Athenian workmanthe towers and curtains are ship, and of Pentelic marble. —almost entire. Pausanias ob Pausan. Phocis. c. 38.served at Lilsea a theatre, an ' KaVcWrfa, or KaycWr^a,agora, and baths, with temples rpafiid.of Apollo, and of Diana, each of ' MapioXarecwhich contained a statue of theXI.] Phocis. 73khori, Kames, Glunista, and then Temitza, towhich latter village I descend in forty minutes andthen proceed to the ruins of a Hellenic fortress,situated about midway between Damages and Glu-vista,which I observed from Dhadhi on my formervisit. It is distant forty minutes from Temitza,and occupied a rocky point of the mountain on theedge of the plain. Some of the towers remainnearly entire. The masonry is generally of thethird order, but contains some pieces of the polygonalkind; the space enclosed is a triangle, ofwhich none of the sides is more than 250 yards.At the sunlit is a circular Acropolis of about twoacres, preserving the remains of an opening intothe town. These are probably the ruins of Dry-musor Drymaea, where Pausanias noticed an ancienttemple of Ceres, containing ah upright statueof the goddess in stone, and in whose honour afestival was celebrated named the Thesmophoria.From the Paleokastro, I proceed, in thirty-fiveminutes, directly across the plain to the bridgenear the mills already mentioned. This space isone continued corn-field, with an excellent soil.It b not yet ploughed for sowing. From thebridge we ascend, in forty minutes, to Dhadhi.At a third of the distance is the Kal^^via of Dhadhi,consisting of upwards of one hundred huts for theuse of the labourers and cattle of the Dhadhiotes.The space between Dhadhi and the river is a triangularslope, of which the village forms the vertex: at the river side or base the triangle is aboutthree miles long ; to the eastward it is bounded bya ridge which descends from Parnassus and forms74 Phocis. [chap.a projection at the river ; and cm the third sidethe triangle terminates in the point near the nulla.Dhadhi, which is in the district of Livadhia, nowcontains five hundred fEcmilieSy having been muchincreased by emigrants flying from Turkish extortionsin districts less protected at Constantinoplethan Livadhia has the good fortune to be, from itsbeing a Vakuf of Mecca. It will probably not belong,however, before Dhadhi and Livadhia itselfwill . suffer from the encroachment of A\f Pasha.Two handsome churches and a school have latelybeen built, and there is a large monastery of thePanaghla on the side of die mountain above thetown. The houses are generally upon the sameplan, consisting of two small rooms and a galleryin front of them. The galleries, for the most part,face the south-east, so that the gable ends of thehouses, in which there is generally one small window,look down the slope. The people appear industriousand civil. The lands on the declivitybelow the village, although stony, yield a tolerablereturn in wheat and barley. In the valley below,where the soil is excellent, the return is eight toone, and would undoubtedly be much greater witha better mode of agriculture. The cotton-groundswhich are below the narrow part of the valley,consume all the water of the Cephissus in summer,and leave it dry as far as the junction of theMavronero in the plain below Aulis.A height which rises from the western side ofthe village of Dhadhi and is named the Palesfrom some remains of Hellenic walls encirclingthe summit, was evidently the Acropolis of aXI.] Phocis. 75town which occupied the side of the same rockyheight, as far as the edge of the cultivated slopeof DhadhLAn inscription in :a church on the summit of thehill shows this city to have been Amphicleia : aact very nsefiil in arranging the rovc/Bwia of thePhocian tO¥ms» Amphicleia^ indeed is not namedin the inscription; but as the monument waserected in the sacred inclosure of Bacchus, inhonour of one of his high-priests, and as Amphicleiawas noted for the worship and orgies of thatdeity, there can be little doubt of the identity;especially as Pausanias has not described any othertown of this valley as having contained a templeof Bacchus. The. orgies were celebrated in asecret cell, into which Pausanias was not permittedto enter. The inscription appears to be nearly ofhis time, for the titles of the priest are exactly re-terrible to the political state in which he foundGrreece. Marcus Ulpius Damascus, therefore,in whose honour the monument was raised, wasone of those priests who enounced the oracles ofBacchus when under the influence of the GreatGod, as he is termed in the inscription, and whointerpreted the dreams of suppliants for the cureof their diseases. The monument was erected byQuintilian Plutarch, the wife of Damascus, byauthority of the council and people ^A papas of Dhadhi, who has succeeded to theinfluence of the high-priest of Bacchus in thisThe Inscription, when written in the cursive character, is asfollows : —Phocis.[chap.place, and who has lately purchased a part of thefertile valley on the banks of the Cephisgas, nearthe bridge, points out to me from the churchin the Paleokastro the remains of another Hellenicruin on the left bank of a deeply incasedrema, at a tjiftlik called Mulki, immediately belowthe ruined mosque and village of Verzana, whichis said to have been formerly the chief town of thisdistrict.Nov. 30.— Quitting Dhadhi at 9.30 for Velitza,we continue to follow the foot of the great summitsoi Parnassus nearly on the same level with Dhadhi ;the Cephissus remaining at a distance of two orthree miles to the left. Having arrived at 9.52at an opening between the acclivities of Parnassus,where the ridge of Dhadbi terminates tothe eastward, we begin to descend, though stillToy iLp^itpia rov fuydXov 0cov Aioi^ffov, rov Bouirap)(i|K» irarpocBotiardpxoVf ^taKdpxqyf *A/A^cjrrvova, Gc/|icoXov, HayiXKfiya^ "Kal rac ^XXac irdffac ey rj Trarpt^i reXiaayra Xirovpy/aciKiyrvXia IlXovrap^)} 4 yvy^ rov i^iov ay^pa cvvotac rat aper^cSvEKey £iu)yvtrov ty rcfccvei. — See Inscription, No. 20.The following is the passageof Pausanias, which illustratesthis document. It is imperfect,but the parts bearing upon theinscription are not doubtful,and the deficient words maybesupplied by those betweenthe brackets: — 6c dc ^e tidy (k<my dBvroy^ iy^) Acovvcry ^p&9iy ^yia* lao^ ic TO dBvroyf ohio iy ^a-yepf a^iuiy dyaXfia, ovk tarXcyerac Be vwo 'A/i^irXeciwvfidyriy ri trt^iai roy Boy TovroyKol fiorfioy yoffwy raOeffn/revac"ra fiiy Bil yoe^fuira airroic 'A/t«<^iKX$uvirt Koi Tota TrpoaoiKovaiyIdrai iC oyeipdrtay* Trp6fjiayricBe 6 fcpcvc €0Tc* \pj. Be Ik tovBeov KdTo\oQ» — Pausan. Pho-cjc. c. 33.XI.] PHocis. 77having the steep sides of tie upper heights of Par-^nassus close on the right. At 10.15 a road to theleft conducts to Turkokhorio and Talanda, and onthe opposite side of the Cepkisstis is seen the villageof Modhi, on the side of Mount Fondana, which,except around that village, is uncultivated andcovered with shrubs. Towards Velitza, where wearrive at 11.15, the Parnassian slope also becomesvery stony and uncultivated : this village, whichcontains sixty or seventy families, is situated exactlyat the foot of the great heights the mountain, wherea torrent, issuing from them, flows in a broad gravellybed at the foot of precipices which defend theeastern side of Velitza. A gentle slope about fourmiles in length falls from the village to the Cephismis.The higher lands produce wheat and barley, thelower cotton and maize, which are watered by derivationsfrom the torrent.Velitza occupies the exact site of an ancientpolis, the ruined walls of which inclose the modemhouses to the west and south, and are continued onthe former side so as to include also a triangularspace of nearly the same superficial extent as thevillage, on the face of a rocky peak which overhangsit, and immediately above which rises oneof the highest of the snowy summits of Parnassus.On some parts of the height the walls occupy situationsto which it would be difficult to climb.Along the edge of the clifis on the eastern side ofthe Acropolis and modem village no walls aretraceable. Some of the towers are extant to morethan half their original height, with masonry in78 ^ Phocis. [chap.regular courses about eighteen inches high. Thematerial is the same as that of the rocky peakbehind the village, giving, together with thatpeak, a white appearance to the place at a distance,which probably suggested the modemname. The church of Velitza is large and ancient,in the form of a Greek cross, with a dome in themiddle ; among many spoils of Hellenic buildingsin the walls and pavement, is an inscribed stone ofa concave form, inserted in the usual semi-circularrecess behind the altar, from which we learn thatthe ruins are those of Tithorea'. The torrent wasnamed Cachales, according to Pausanias, whoseremark, that the inhabitants descended to it forthe purpose of obtaining water*, accords with theheight of the village above the torrent. The townhad declined for a generation before the time ofthe Greek traveller, who noticed, however, a theatre,the inclosure of an ancient agora, an also andtemple of Minerva containing a statue of the godsAhroKpdropa NcpjSav Ka/(rapa, &(y)(upia fuyiffroVf ^iiptp^uc^ciipvtriac, vTTurov to ^, waripa irarp/^oc, h TcJXtc Tidopiwy koIT. ^\a/3toc XwKkapOQ jcal T. ^Xa/3toc Airatr RaiT. *Xa/3ioc TLtjXXiavog'* Apicrroc,The fourth consulship of x'^^VC* — Pausan. Phocis. c. 32.Nerva was in A.D, 98, which The name was derived fromis therefore the date of the in- xax^diiaf which expresses thescripta. sound of water flowing overHoratio £e irapa r&y Ti icaxXif^eC) or pebbles. ThusOopiiay T^y ir6\iy vordp tn^itn Theocritus descries the sea:y/verai, Karofialyovai re tjcl rana tcvfiara Ao'v^a ira^Xa-ri^y oj(driy Kai iLpvofiiyoic to (ora iir' alytaXolo, — Idyll. 6,^Smp* oyofta Bi eariv ovr^i Ra v. IS.XI.] PHocis. 79dess^ and a monument in memory of Phocis andhis wife Antelope.In the time of Herodotus, Tithorea was knownby the name of Neon ; it was one of the towns occupiedby the Persians in their progress throughPhocis, after they had forced the defile of Thermopylae,when many of the Phocis took refuge in Amphibia,and others in the highest parts of Parnassus,particularly on Mount Tithorea, near Neon, becauseit was spacious, and capable of containing great numbersof them ^ As this description is scarcely applicableto the peak immediately above Velitza, whichis not very spacious, was included within the wallsof Tithorea, and could hardly have been excludedfrom those of Neon, unless that city occupied amuch lower site, it might be supposed that theMount Tithorea of Herodotus was the great summitof Parnassus above the peak of Velitza, which seemsthe more likely, as Pausanias affirms that Tithoreawas the name anciently applied to the district', andthat it was not until the population of the neighbouringvillages was collected within the city whichsubsisted until his time that the name of Tithoreawas given to it. Plutarch, however, in the life ofSylla, favours the opposite opinion. He relates, thatwhen Hortensius marched from Thessaly to effecta junction with Sylla on the frontiers of Phocis andBoeotia, Capias a Phocian led him round through•^^'EoTiBiKaliirirriiiri ^i^atrOai Herodot. ]. 8. c. 32. Pausan.ofiiKov rov Tlapvritrffov ^ Kopw^rf Phocis. c. 32.icttrd Neva ir6\ty Keifiivri tie ' r^ hirdwff X^P9'Itinniii' TiBopia ovvofia airy* —80 PHocis. [chap,Parnassus for the purpose of avoiding Thermopylae,which was in the hands of the army of Mithridates,and that on this occasion the circuitous routeissued below Tithorea : — '^ a place," adds Plutarch,^* not such as the present city, but only a fortressupon a precipitous rock, where the Phocis of oldtook refuge from Xerxes." Whence it is evidentthat he supposed the peak of Velitza to have been theMount Tithorea of Herodotus. However this mayhave been, we learn at least from the same passage ofthe biographer, that the city destroyed by the Persianswas not yet revived in the Mithridates war, andas Greece was in the lowest state of misery betweenthat time and the beginning of the Roman Empire,it was not probably until the latter period that theTithorea was built, which Plutarch, Pausanias, andthe inscription of Velitza, demonstrate to have existedin the time of Nerva and the Antonines. Theextant walls, by the regularity of their masonry,exactly accord with that degree of antiquity.If the numbers of Pausanias are correct, thedistrict of Tithe was extensive, for he describes asacred adytum of Isis belonging to it distant fortystades, and a temple of aesculapius Archagetes ata distance of seventy stades. At the former therewas a festival twice a year, and a fair for the saleof slaves and cattle. Some of the sacred rites wereborrowed from the Egyptians. At the Asclepieiumthere were habitations for the servants and suppliantsof aesculapius, and a temple which containeda bearded statue of the god in stone. Pausanias has.not left us any means of judging of the direction ofeither of these places from the city of Tithorea.XI.] Phocis, 81The district in his time was celebrated for the excellenceof its olive oil.Titharea is one x)f those situations abounding inGreece, which were so well adapted to influencethe manners and character of the people, and toproduce the picturesque and poetical in every thingrelating to them. The distant prospect in thenorthern and eastern quarters of the horizon is noless beautiful than the nearer view of the great summitsof Parnassus appearing through the rocky ravineof the Cachales, and which being now coveredwith snow, add a brilliant contrast to the woody precipicesof the mountain. The modem houses interspersedwith gardens, and the ruined walls of theancient city, complete the embellishments of thisinteresting scene. There is no road in commonuse from Velitza across the mountain, either toArakhova or Kastri, and the inhabitants penetrateno farther than a woody slope at a small distance,where they cut fire wood. In the time of Pausaniasthere were two roads from Tithorea across themountain to Delphi, one direct the other longer,but practicable to wheel carriages. The two routesprobably coincided as far as the extremity of theravine of the Cachales, after which the carriageroad may have crossed the plain anciently belongingto Lycoreia, and now to Arakhova, and belowthe latter may have joined the road to Delphi fromthe Schiste, thus diverging to the left of the directAnanias (Phodc. c. 32.) number cannot be correct, asassigns 80 stadia as the length the direct distance is hardlyof the shorter road, but this less than 12 G. M.VOL. II. G82 PHOCis. [chap.route from Tithorea, which probably joined thatfrom Lilaea, just above the Delphic clifis, whereremains of the ancient way still exist. It is notimpossible that the carriage road might still betraced by the marks of the wheels in the rocks.The Priests of Velitza, an old man whom Ifind winding cotton in his gallery, shows me, onthe opposite side of the Cephissian valley, the smallvillage of Leftaa, which he has often visited, andout of respect to its Hellenic remains calls Lefit6-poli. It lies a little to the right of the pass ofFondana, on the modem route from Pundonitza toTurkokhorio, the position of which may be recognizedat a great distance by a remarkable rockypeak, near one of the highest summits of the ridgesof Cnemis.Meletius reports the following inscription as existingat Leftaa in his time :AhroKpdropa Kaltrapa MdpKov AvpZ/Xcoi^ £{ranE/3i| £€/3«<n^r M^-This inscription, therefore, as well as the modemname, leave not a doubt of Leftaa having been thesite of Elateia^ and the fact is confirmed by everymention of it in ancient history. Leftaa, like Eliza,stands at the head of a long slope reachingto the river, from which it is a mile more distantthan Velitza. Placed about the middle of thegreat fertile basin which extends near twenty milesfrom the narrows of the Cephisms below to those which are at the entrance intoBoBOtiUj it was admirably situated for commandingthe passes leading into Southern Greece from theTranscetcean provinces. Hence it may have been,XI.]PHOCIS.that Elateiaia, which was unknown to Homer, becameunder a different state of society and general politics,the greatest city in Phocis, and about the time whenGreece was threatened with subjection to Macedonia,was more important than Delphi itself. Elateiaiawas then the key of Southern Greece, as Demosthenesand aeschines show, as well as the consternationof the Athenians, when Philip seized theplace, not long before the battle of ChaeroneaA little below Leftaa stands the large village ofDragoman, or Dragoman, to the left of whichis seen Ess^d, or Turkokh6rio, not far from theriver side. Near the road from Velitza to Turkson the right bank of the Cephis9USy are thevestiges of a Hellenic town. The ruins are nowPausanias (Phocis. c. 34.)describes Elateiaia as the largesttown in Fbocis except Delphi,and aa situated over againstAmphicleia, the road thitherleading, for the greater part,through the plain of the Ce-prisons,and gently rising tothe walls of Elateiaia, which isexactly conformable to thereality. — Strabo, p. 424.Pausanias admired the agoraof Elateiaia, in which was thestele of Latus and a temple of.Sscnlapias, containing beardlessstatue of the god, made bytwo Athenian artists, Timoclesand Timarchides. The Elatehad also a theatre ; an ancientbrazen image of Minerva ;Gand on the summit of a steepmountain, 20 stades above thedty, a temple of Minerva Crania,cOQtaaniiig manned statueof the goddess, by the son ofPolicies of Athens, who hadrepresented on the shield ofthe goddess the same subjectswhich adorned that of Minervaitt the Parthenon, namely, thebattle of the Amazons and theGrigantomachia. There weresto and habitations for theservants of the temple, andparticularly for the priest, whowas a boy constantly residingthere for five years and thenchanged for another. Someremains of the temple still existon the mountain above Lefta«84 PHOcis. [chap.called Palea Fiva. Meletius writes the nine IlaXafacQri(iaif but 4>^j3a is the vulgar pronunciation in thispart of the country.Having now visited either in this or my formerjourney, the principal ancient positions in thevalleys of the Upper Cq>kissiLS and its branches,and having ascertained the situation of somewhich I have not visited, I shall endeavour toapply the ancient names to the several sites whichstill bear evidences of antiquity, taking for grantedfrom what has already been stated, that thoseof Amphicleia, Tithorea, and Elateiaia, are indisputablydetermined. It seems almost equallycertain, that the Paleokastro or Hellenic ruins,half a mile westward of the Kefalovrj^ses, orsources of the CephissuSy which I visited on myformer journey, having crossed thither from Delphiby Aguriani, are the remains of Lima ; that routebeing the most direct and easy passage across themountain, could not have been any other than theroad alluded to by Pausanias, when he says thatthe distance from Delphi to Lilsea was 180 stades ^,with which our time distance of six hours and ahalf sufficiently accorded. As to the remark ofPausanias, that the source of the Cephissus veryoften issues from the earth, especially towardsnoon, with a noise resembling the roaring of abull, I was not surprised to find that the presentnatives had never made any such observation atKefalovrj^ses, though they admit that the waterPausan. Phocis. c. 33.XI.]PHOCIS.often rises suddenly from the ground in largerquantities than usual, which cannot but be accompaniedwith some noise. The Regales Verses, onthe other hand, do not intermit, and are surroundedwith marshy ground.I am thus particular in showing that the ruinsat Paleokastro are those of LiUeaj because the descriptionwhich Pausanias has given of Charadra,as situated on a lofty rock', screes in this particularwith the ruins. But there are some insurmountableobjections to the site being that of Charade.Upon an examination of them, it is foundthat all the principal part of the city stood in theplain at the foot of the rocks, that the precipitouspart was the citadel only, that the whole was amuch larger place than one can imagine Charadrato have been; and that exactly at the Kefalo-vrj^ses, where we should in that case be inclinedto look for Lileea, there are no remains exceptthose of a single building, probably a temple,which may have been sacred to the river-godhimself, as Pausanias states, that sacred rites inhonour of Cephissus were celebrated at the sourcesof the river*. When to these considerations isawtaripia iarlv vwep V1//17X0VKUfjiivri Kprjftyov ical viaroc oliyravOa mrayi^ovtriy myopia"iron TTOTOV hi ffi^iffi irorofC($cioTi XapahpoQ KaTtpypfiiyoiQScorn r(Ua hr* ahoy ord^ia'MiZmviy Zk €Q roy Ktf^ffffSy.'—'Pauaan. Phocis. c. 83.An absurd idea prevailed,and which had been sanctionedby Alcaeus in a hymn to Apollo,that the Castalia at Delphiwas derived from the sourcesof the Cephissus, although infact the former is in a muchhigher situation. To showtheir belief in the fable, or86 PHOcis. [chap.added the testimony of the same ancient travellerthat the Charades suffered from a want of water,whereas there are some abundant springs close tothe ancient walls at Paleokastro, with the Kefalo-vrj^ses at a very short distance; and when it isfurther remarked that Pausanias describes the torrentof Charadra as being three stades distantfrom the town, whereas that of Paleokastro isclose to the ruined walls, we can have no hesitationin rejecting the opinion that Paleokastro wasCharadra, and cannot but conclude that it wasLileea.It then becomes a question whether Charadra,which Pausanias places at twenty stades beyondLilsea, coming from Delphi, stood at Suvala tothe eastward, or at Mariolates to the westward ofPaleokastro, at both which places there are remainsof a small fortified town. Two reasons supportthe former opinion : 1 . The distance of twentystades is nearly that of Suvala from Paleokastro,whereas Mariolates is more distant; and 2. Thetorrent at the latter does not join the Cephissus^but is a branch of the river of Gravia, which itselfjoins the Apostolia before the latter is united withthe Cephissus.Placing Amphicleia at Dhadhi, there can hardlyremain a doubt that the ruins opposite to it atMulki, below Verzana, where a torrent unites withtheir veneration for it, the 6Xka lnc60a vofklCovaiv^ intoLilasenaes on certain stated the source of the Cephissus*days* threw cakes and other which were said to reappear inthings, regulated hy ancient the Castalia. — Pausan. Hoc.custom I (ire/i/Liara cirix^p^a xal c. 8,XI.]PHOCIS.the Ephesus, are those of Tithronium ; for Pausaniasdescribes that place as being in the plain,(meaning the valley,) fifteen stades beyond Am*phicleia ' — that is to say beyond Amphicleia, accordingto the direction which he had been pursuingfrom Delphi by Lilsea ; and the distance ofthose ruins from Dhadhi, although I think underratedat fifteen stades, is not far from the truth.The ruins near Klunista, which I visited fromTemitza, accord equally with those of Drymaea,those ruins being about twenty stades ft*om theformer, which is the distance stated by the ancienttraveller between Tithronium and Drymeea, thoughin this instance also the interval assigned by Pausaniasappears to me to be below the reality. Thethree places were so situated that we may easily0ra2iO4c wtmKalivcd iari iv xthL^ Ktifi€VoV irap-i\erai Bi oh^ly kg firiifiriy. 'firTiOp^ytov it. eiKoiriy €q Apv-fiaiay «rr«/^cot' KaO^i ii a^rrf1l oitfc Kal h «c Apv/io/ov c£'Afi^'Xeiac 4 ei/Osia vtpl rovKff^tTffoy wfifiitryovaiy^ itrrty*Air6\ktifyog TtOpwytvaiy dXvoc rt koI fiiafwt' dc Kol ya6f' dyaXfui Siove iariy* iLirij(ii Si. 'Afu^ucXniac^ ^vfAala arailovQ oySoiiKoyradTorpawiyri cc iipKmpay, [Apv-/ioc KaXovfAiyrf] Kara 'Hpo^orov\6y€vc*f NavjSoXcIc Si ra dp*Xacc^repa* jcac oiKurrijy [Xeyov-(Tck] 01 iyravOa yeyitrdai (Xi^i<n^iaKoy vasa rov Aidicov, ArifirfTpog Si QttffMo^opov ApVfiaiotQicp($v party iipx^^'foy ral dyaXfiaopdoy XiOov ireKoifiraC Kal aifrjQ€9fioi^6pia kopr^y dyovoiy kwE^reioy, — Pausan. Phocis. c. 33.Nautilus, from whom theNaubolenses took their name,was an ancient Phocian hero,the either of Iphitus : 'IfirovHavlioXiSdo, — Horn. II. B. v.518, and one of the Argonauts,ApoUod. I. 1. c. 9.Herodot. 1. 8. e. 33.88 PHOCis. [chap.imagine Pausanias to have been correct in his subsequentremark, that the road from Amphicleia toDrymaea joined that from Tithronium to Drymaeanear the Cephissus ; since it might be more convenientto follow the river from Tithronium toDrymaea, than to make a more direct course overthe heights. As Pausanias adds that, at the junctionof the roads, there was a grove containingaltars and a temple of Apollo without a statue,within the limits of the Tithronenses ; and that theturning to the left led to Drymsea, it seems evidentthat the grove of Apollo stood on the left bank ofthe Cephissus, and that the direct road from Amphicleiacrossed the Cephissus near the temple,where a turning to the right led to Tithronium andon the left to Drymaea.The words of Pausanias, therefore, so perfectlyaccord, in their general purport, with the threepositions of Dhadhl, and the two ancient sites belowVerzana and Temltza, that we may be assured ofthe identity of the two latter with Tithronium andDrymaea respectively, although the number ofstades stated in the text of the ancient travellermay not be correct. The error, indeed, in the wordeighty, which he assigns as the number of stadesbetween Amphicleia and Drymaea, is self-evident,if the two other distances, which amount only tothirty-five stades, are correct.As Pausanias has not noticed any of the places,of which remains are still found in or around thevalley lying westward of the sites of Drymaea andLilaea, it may be inferred that no part of that valleyXI.] PHOCis. 89belonged, at least in his time, to the Phocis community,but was all included in Doris, the positionof which district on this frontier of Phocis is clearlyshown by Lileea, Drymeea and Tithronium havingbeen sometimes attributed to Doris \ Herodotusdescribes Doris as lying between Trachinia andPhocis, and as occupying a breadth of only thirtystades. The Persians marched through it fromTrachinia, but spared it because the Dorian hadjoined them, after which 'following the Cephissus,they destroyed every thing ; and burnt the citiesDrymus, Charadra, Trochus, Testimonium, Amphi-sea.Neon, the cities of the Pedes, and Tritaeeis,Elateiaia, Hyampolis, Parapotamii, and Abae'."Trochus and Trite not being even named byPausanias, their site was perhaps unknown in histime, and it is a mere conjecture, deduced fromthe order of the enumeration of Herodotus, and thegeneral distribution of the other ancient sites, that Ihave placed those names on the map. The city ofthe Pedienses we might presume, from the sameindication added to that of the name, to have stoodnear the Cephissus, in some part of the plain betweenTithorea and Elateiaia. It is precisely in thissituation, that the ruins at Paled Fiva are found.As Herodotus has not named Ledon, it is not improbablethat the city of the Pedienses may be thesame place as Ledon, which, in the time of Pauses1. 8. c. 15. Philip Elation, &c.— Liv. 1. 28. c. 7.pas Tritons [lege Tithronium] Schol. Pindar, Pith. 1. v. 121.et Diymas Derides, para atque Schol. Aiiatoph. Pint. v. 385.ignobilia oppida cepit : inde * Herodot. 1. 8. c. 31, 33.90 DORIS. [chap.nias had been abandoned, and the name transferredto a few habitations on the river's bank, forty stadesbelow the former position \lilsea not being comprehended by Herodotusamong the towns which were destroyed by thePersians, would seem at that time to have belongedto the Dorienses, who, having seized, were sparedby the invaders *. Whence, probably, some laterauthors have ascribed it to Doris, though in generalit was considered a Phocis city. But it was evidently,therefore, on the frontier, and the ruins,consequently, at Mariolates and Gravia are certainlythose of two of the Dorian towns. Thebreadth of thirty stades, which Herodotus assignsto Doris, agrees nearly with the extent of the valleyof the Apostolia from the foot of Mount Parnassuswhere Mandates and Gravid are situated, to thatof Mount CEta^ where the road from Zituni to Salonaa,after crossing that mountain by the pass ofNevropoli, enters the valley of the Apostolia. Itcannot be doubted, therefore, that all this valley wasa part of Doris. From Strabo, likewise, notwithstandingthe imperfection of his text, the extent andposition of Doris may be understood, and even somedetails of its topography'. He observes that theWestern Locris was separated from the Eastern byMount Parnassus, which extended northward fromthe neighbourhood of Delphi to the junction of theCEtffian with the italian mountains, and to theDorian which lay between them ; — that Phocis wasPausan. Phocis. c. 33. ' Strabo, pp. 417. 427.Herodot. 1. 8. c. 31.XI.]DORIS.thus conterminouB with both divisions of Locris, —that on the western side of Parnassus dwelt the LocrisOzolfle, some of the Dorian and the italians ofMount Corax, and on the eastern side of the samemountain the Phocis and the Dorian of Tetra-policywho formed the larger portion of that nation,and who extended from Parnassus towards theeast ^ The latter passage of the Geographer explainsthose authorities which ascribe to Doris agreater number of towns than four, and showsexactly the position both of the Tetrapolis and ofthe remaining portion of Doris. The latter, whichlay between the Locris Ozolee and Mount Corax,comprehended the mountains on the right, orwestern side, of the pass leading from Gravia toSalona. The towns of this portion of Doris wouldseem to have been Alphonse and Metropolis, forStephens describes these as places in Doris ^.According to Strabo, the four towns of the Tetra-poles,were Erineus, Boeum, Pindus and Cytinium,some of which names are confirmed by severalother authors '. He adds, that Pindus stood aboveErineus, that it was sometimes called Acyphas,and that a river of the same name as the town.^ TO Be iFpoc cy ifVKeig KolAkfpuig oi xXc/ovcy c^ovrcc n)vTcrpc{iroXcy irapaKHfiiytir irtfQIf Uapramrf irktovdCovvay BeHMC irp^c ^f luptair, — ^p. 417.Some correction must here beallowed in the bearing : a particularin which the ancientswere often inaccurate. TheTetrapolis confined upon thenorthern, not the eastern sideof Parnassus.Stephan. in 'A/i^^i^ac, AveM^rpc^Xic*• Ptolem. 1. 8, c. 15. Pliny.4. c. 7. Scylax. — Scymn.Ch. V. 592. Diodor. 1. 4. c. 67.1. 11. c. 79.92 DORIS. [chap*flowed by the walls \ and joined the Cephissusnear Lileea.It is evident, upon comparing this passage withmy former remark, as to the junction of the rivernow called Apostolic with the Cephissus^ not farbelow the sources of the latter, that the Apostoliawas the ancient Acyphas or Pindus, and consequently,that upon its banks we should search forErineus and Pindus. Of these the latter, as wellfrom its name, which is a word belonging to a loftysituation, as from a remark of Strabo, that thetown of Acyphas was considered to belong to the(Etsean cantons, was probably towards the sourcesof the river in the mountain, which is connectednorthward with the Patriotiko or (Eta proper;and which to the south gives rise to the riverMomus, which joins the sea near 'Epakto. Theother two towns of the Tetrapolis were in thesituations already noticed, at Maronites and atGravia.Of these, there can be little doubt that Graviawas the ancient Cytinium, Thucydides having describedthe position of Cytinium in a manner notto be mistaken, in his account of the expedition ofDemosthenes from Naupactus, in the sixth year ofthe Peloponnesian war ' ; when Demosthenes intended,if he had been successful over the italians,to have then passed through the Locris Ozolae,leaving Parnassus on his right, to Cytinium ofDoris, and from thence to descend into Phocis,Strabo, p. 427. — Stephen four towns, on the authority ofnus (in 'Aicv^ac) confirms the Theophilus.name of Acyphas as one of the ' Thucyd. 1. 3. c. 95.XI.] BORIS. 93the people of which were to have assisted himagainst Boeotia.Gravia stands exactly at the northern entranceof the pass leading from the valley of Doris to theplain of Amphissaf in the middle of the isthmus includedbetween the Maliac and CrisscBan gulfs.The defile is formed by the ravines of two torrentsflowing in opposite directions ; namely, that ofGravia, which, as I have already remarked, joinsthe Apostolia near the union of the latter with theCephissuSj and that of another stream which crossesthe plain of Amphibia into the CrisscBan Bay : thetwo ravines form a complete separation of thehighlands of this part of Greece, dividing Parnassusfrom the mountains which are connected with the^tolian and (Etaean summits, and which thusexactly correspond to the country of the ava fiiaovAwpcfcc, or intermediate Dorian of Strabo.It is obvious that a fortified town at the entranceof such a defile, was of great military importance,and of this we find two examples in history,besides that which has already been alluded to.Soon after that unsuccessful expedition of Demosthenesagainst iEtolia, Eurylochus, at thehead of 2500 Spartans and 500 Heraclitus, preparedto march from Delphi through the westernLocris to assist the italians against Naupactus,and made choice on this occasion of Cytinium, asthe place in which he secured the hostages whomhe had received from the Locris. But the mostremarkable instance is, the occupation of Cytiniumby Philip of Macedonia, when he took possessionalso of Elateiaia, not long before the battle of Chae-94 PHOCis. [chap.roneia ^ It was on hearing that the Athenianshad decreed to support the resistance of the to the Amphictyonic council, that Philiptook this step, of which the object and consequencewere, the capture of Amphibia, the approach tothat place from the northward having been completelycommanded by Cytinium. If Cytiniumwas at Gravia, it will follow that the ruins nearMaronites are those of Boeum.Herodotus relates that Doris was anciently namedDryopis*, but in later times they were distinguished,and Dryopis like Doris was a metropolis \ In thetime of Strabo it was comprehended as well as theParasols, and a town named (Eniadse, in the(EtsBa, which even included Acyphas of Doris tothe S.W., and Anticyra of Melis to the Nee*. Itis evident, from these testimonies regarding Dryopis,together with another fact stated by Strabo,namely, that Tymphrestus, at the sources of theSpercheius, now Velukhi, was a Tropic mountain,that Dryopis occupied the mountainous countryextending from the head of the valley of the Apostolictowards Mount Velukhi and Karpenisi.At 12.55 we quit Velitza, and continue to followthe foot of the great steeps of Amass at the headof a long slope, stony and quite uncultivated, whichdescends from our road to the river, until at 1.32,having a monastery of the Panaghia half an houron the right, on the side of the mountain, we turn\vviiia\llriQ* AxapvtvQ' iv * Herodot. 1. 8. c. 31.TovTOv <tfi\lfnrov KaToXafiSyroc * Strabo, p. 434.'EXarciav Kal KvTtvioy. — Phi * Ibid,lochor. ap. Dionys. p. 742.XI.] PHOCis. 95to the left of the upper road leading to the Zimenopass, and descend towards the Sten (ra l^tva), asthe narrow Valley is now called, through which theCephissus enters the Boeotian plains. Having passedthe Dhrakopl^mata \ as two large natural basinsin the ground are called, one of which is 150 yardsin diameter, forming a perfect circle with a veryregular hollow within, we leave, a quarter of anhour farther, the village of Aghia Marina a littleon the riot, and descend exactly in the directionof the peaked summit of Mount Khlomo, passingbetween the lower heights otPamassuSj and an insulatedrocky hill which here terminates the upperor Phodan valley of the Cephissus. This hill, whichstands exactly on the foot of the great slope ofPamassuSy is very steep on every side except thesouth-east, where it throws out a low termination,between which and another low height quite insulated,there is a narrow plain. At the foot of thelatter height, to the south, stands a village calledKrevasara, and along its eastern side flows the beyond which is another small insulatedheight near the foot of a rocky mountain, whichrises from thence and takes a north-eastern directiontowards Talanda. The approaches, therefore,to the straits leading into Boeotia from the plain ofJElateiay are on either side of the hill of Krevasara.To the left of the Cephissus are the small villagesof Sfaka, Merali, Khubavo, and Bliss vulgarly^paKoirXvfiaTa : the word or terrible. The analogous^pvrwv, properly a serpent t» sig name in English to BpaxoirXv-niches, when thus used in com- clara, would be, the Devil'sposition, any thing monstrous wash-tubs.96 PHocis. [chap.called Relish ^ Sfaka and Khubavo are on oppositesides of the extremity of the mountain justmentioned ; Merali stands on a small insulatedheight between them, and Belissi is opposite toKhubavo, at the foot of a mountain similar andparallel to the former, and separated from it by avalley a mile in width. Between Merali and Khu-bravo, the river Kineta issues from a small lakewhich extends northward round the extreme pointof the mountain as far as Sfaka, and having receiveda torrent which rises in Mount Homo, joins theCepkissuSj near the khan of the Kadj^ which I visitedin my former journey, and which stands on theright bank of the latter river, two miles belowKrevasara, where is a bridge over the river in thenarrowest part of the Stena or Straits. Though thelake which feeds the Kineta is supplied from subterraneoussprings, these are not always sufficientto afford a running stream in summer. At 2.23we arrive at Bissikeni ', vulgarly Bishk^n, whichstands in a narrow plain between the heights ofParnassus and the larger and more western of thetwo insulated rocky heights before mentioned.The priests and inhabitants know of no ancientremains in this vicinity, except at a height on theleft bank of the Kineta, and a tower at the southeasternextremity of the heights in proceeding fromBissikeni to the bridge near the Kadi's Khan. Thelatter is described by the priests as a /uaoropiKovTrpay/ua, meaning such as modem masons construct.XI.]PHOCIS.but the remains near B^Iissi, he states to be of largewrought masses of stone. Their position in theStena seems to correspond exactly with that ofParapotamii as indicated by Theopompus, who, inapassage preserved by Strabo, states that stood at a distance of forty stades fromChaeronea in the entrance from Boeotia into Phocis,on a height of moderate elevation, situated betweenParnassus and Mount Edylium, — that these twomountains were separated from each other by aninterval of five stades, through which the Cephissusflowed ; and that Mount Edylium extended fromthence sixty stades as far as Hyphanteium, onwhich Orchomenus was built '.Having remained half an hour at Bissikeni, weproceed, in one hour precisely, to Thalia. Theroad follows an opening which separates the higherAp. Strabo, n. p. 424.According to the text of Strabo,Theopompus added the remarkthat Parapotamii servedas a boundary to the people ofPanopeus, Daulis and Ambrose(^Afifipvffiac), but this lastword is obviously erroneous,AmbryssuB having been nearthe Corinthian Gulf: perhapswe ought to read *Ave/iiiif)cac,for the verse of Homer Otr»*Av£fAafp€iay Kal 'Ya/ixoXcv a/x-^yifwyrOf by coupling Anemo-rea with Hyampolis, appearsto place the former on this frontierof Phocis. If we comparethis indication with the remarkVOL. II. Hof Strabo, that Anemoreia stoodon a part of Mount Parnassuswhich served as a boundary betweenthe Delphi and the otherPhocis, when the Lacedaemonianhad separated the formerfrom the rest of the Phodccommunity, there seems no si->tuition that wel conform to theseveral data so well as that advancedsubmit of the Parnassianridge which lies to thesouth of Bissikeni, and whichforms with the opposite mountain,Edylivm^ the pass of ,or Stena of theCephissus,98 PHocis. [chap.Parnassian ridges from the advanced mountainwhich forms the western side of the Stena of theCephissus. The pass is a narrow valley, cultivatedonly in the parts towards Thalia. The road ismuch shorter than by the Stena, and in winter hasthe further advantage of avoiding the marshy ormuddy valley near that river. It is probably theroute by which Hortensius eluded the enemy in theElastic Plain, and effected a junction with Sylla atPatronis '. The issue of the pass is at the upperextremity of a vale branching from the plain ofCiceronian and terminating at the foot of the greatsummits of Parnassus. Many streams water thisvalley, turn several mills, and then uniting takea northerly course, close to the foot of the heightsby the village Khasnesi, below which the streamenters the plain and joins the Mavronero or Mavro-neri, a copious perennial stream, which issues fromthe foot of the same mountain a mile beyond Khas-nest. On the southern face of the height whichbounds the vale to the south, stands the villageof Thalia, separated by a hollow from anotherheight, on which are some remains of the Acropolisof the ancient Daulis. The name had assumedthe form AavXna as early as the time of Strabo,but is now by the vulgar more commonly accentedon the last syllable, Thalia. The modem villagebelongs to Hassan Bey of Livadhia, now residingin 'Egripo, and whose father was pasha of the latterplace. It contains forty houses. The inhabitantscultivate vineyards in the upper valleys and on the> Plutarch, in Scylla.XI.] PHOcis. 99sides of the hills, and com in the plain below, andexercise the trade of agitates nth their mules.Dec. 1. — The vale between Thalia and thesite of the ancient Daulis is covered with vineyards,and refreshed by many springs and rivulets,which, in the plain below, join a branch of theC^busus called Platania, which receives all thetorrents from the adjacent slopes of Parnassus Cir-his and Hdicon^ and has its extreme sources atDhistomo, but is nevertheless dry in summer. ThePlatania unites with the Mavroneri very near thejunction of the latter with the Cephissius. It is tothe Mavroneri that the Cqfphissius owes its water insummer, for I found it dry in July above the junctionof the Mavroneri, even as high up as a little belowDhadhi, where its waters were consumed by theplantations cotton and kalambokki, whereas it containedwater below the junction of the Mavroneri,and even as far as Skripu. Hence, below thejunction, the Cephmus is now called Mavroneri orMavnmero, and above it the river of Dhadhi, orsimply TO wiyrafu. Below the Kin^ta, which it receivesin the narrowest part of the Stena, it turnsto the eastward, and continues, all the way to to flow at a small distance from the foot ofthe mountain which extends from the Stena toSkripu in a high stony ridge, subdivided into twonearly equal parts by a small branch of the river.This mountain, the same which I before describedas parallel to that of Khubavo, and which Theophilusso clearly indicates under the name of Edylium,was sometimes called Acontium in its whole extent,for Strabo remarks that Mount Acontium extendedh2Phocis.[chap.from Orchomenus lo Parapotamii \ and attributesto it the same length as Theopompus *. Properly,however, it would seem that Hyphanteium was theeastern extremity of the ridge, Acontium its highestpoint, and Edylium the division of it westward ofthe small branch of the Cepkissus above mentioned ;for Plutarch mentions a place called Assia assituated between Edylium and Acontium '.The entire circuit of the walls of the acropolisof Daulis, which seems to have been nearly circular,and formed of masonry almost regular, maybetraced on the summit of the height which risesopposite to the modem village to the south. Withinthe inclosure. is an old church of St. Theodore,containing a marble inscribed with small and veryancient characters, so nearly obliterated that Ihave not attempted to copy them ; there is also aninscription of jameson a block of variegated marble.Three or four years ago, in the vineyards at the footof the height on the north, a more interesting monumentwas found, which having been conveyed toThalia, now stands before the door of the church.It is a quadrangular stele, four feet six inches long,one foot three inches broad, and ten inches thick,adorned only with a simple moulding at the top.nporepoy fxty holy oitceloBaiT^y *Op\6fi€y6y ^atriy Itt Trc^cfi.ktrnroXaidyTuty ii riot vidruyayoiicitrBiiyai vpog to *AJc6yTtovopoc ^apariiyoy vi klrfKoyTanra^iovQ ftcxP^ U.apairorafj.iiayT&y ky rj ^utKth, — Strabo, p.416.TO ^€ AavXcoK (^HBvXioy)iraparelyeiy c^' c^^jcovra araliafitxpi rov 'Y^aiTciov c^* ^ iceirai6 *Op\6fi€yo£, — Theopomp. ap.Strab. p. 424.ey fJiEff^ Tov 'AroJTtov Kal rov'llBvXiov, wpoc Toto Xeyofiii'Oii*A9vioic, — Plutarch, in Syllfi.XI.] PHOCIS. 101One of the broad sides is inscribed with forty sevenlines, and one of the narrow sides with forty-ninelines. The monument records an arbitration concerningthe property and boundaries of certainlands in the district of Daulis, made at Chaeroneaon the 24th of October, in the year of our sera 118'.The following is a translation of the inscription onthe broad dimension of the stone.With good fortune to the consuls, the emperorTrajan Adrian Caesar Augustus, the second time,and Cneius Pedants Fuscus Salvator, on the 9thof the Calends of November, in Chaeronea. Papyrus,son of Variation, and Parmenon, son ofZopyrus, acting on behalf of the city of Daulis,have witnessed the following as a faithful copy ofthe underwritten decision of Titus Flavour Eubulus :I, T. F. Eubulus, having been appointed judgeand arbiter by the proconsul Cassius Maximus,and having acted under the inspection of the proconsulValerian Severus, between Zopyrus son ofVariation and Parmenon son of Zopyrus andMemoirs Antiochus, concerning the land in dispute,have, after hearing each side as long as theywished, and after an actual inspection of the place,and upon receiving an order from the excellentproconsul Claudius Granianus * to declare my decision,adjudge as is underwritten. Four hundred andSee the Cheek text at the vela in the East, vol. i. p. 459,end of this volume. Copies of vol. ii. p. 513.the inscriptions in Greek capi- ' Thus it appears, that dur-talkmay be seen in the Rev. ing the process there were threeR. Walpole's collection of Indifferent proconsuls.102 PHOcis, [chap.thirty-five Phocis plethra of the land called Dryp-pius, which appear from the writings exhibited tometo have been purchased by Memoirs Antiochusfrom the heirs of Cleon, belong toAntiochus; whatever exceeds this quantity (inDryppius) is the property of the city of dieAudiences. In like manner, in the land Euxyleiafour hundred and thirty plethra I judge to belongto Antiochus, and the remainder to the city. Thebeginning of the measurements in the lands Dryp-pius and Euxyleia shall be commenced wherever Antiochusmay think proper ; but in Platanus and the measure for both parties shall beginin the same place, and from thence the remainderof the measurement shall proceed ; and in all thesemeasurements no account shall be taken of torrentsor ru^ed places, or such as cannot be cultivatedif they exceed the dimensions of ten sphere ^The following persons were present : I, Titus FlavinsEubulus, have declared my determination andaffixed my seal. Lucius Vestries Soclarus ; Clements,son of Clements ; Neicon, son of Sym-chorus; Lampreys, son of Neicon ; Zopyrus, sonof Antipathies ; Sosibius, son of Deacon ; Nicolsonof Alexandria ; Leon, son of Theodosius ;Gallon, son of Phylax ; Cassius, son of Martins.By a decree of the city."On the narrow side of the stele is the following :This is evidently a super patches than ten spins werefilial measure, probably a divi not to be accounted for.sion of the plethrum. SmallerXI.]PHOCIS.^^ The road to the Archagetes shall be two calami ^in breadth. They shall jointly engrave the landmarksand boundaries of the measurements withinthe twentieth day of the twelfth month, we examiningthem when they shall be engraved. Concerningthe land Dryppius, we adjudge, from aview of the writing exhibited by Serapis, son ofOperas the agent ', and by the Archons Philo,son of Socrates, and Damon, son of Zopyrus,that if any thing should be wanting to the fourhundred and thirty-five plethra assigned by thedecision of Eubulus, Serapis shall have a right todemand it from the city of the Audiences. Thesewere present : I, Curious Autobulus, adjudged, andsealed the first seal. I, Nicephorus, son of Lyco-modes, adjudged ; I, Ananias, son of Timon, adjudged; I, Public alius Damoxenus, sealed thefourth seal ; £isid(otus) thei fifth ; Metropolis, son ofApollodotus of Anticyra ; Nectareous, son of Pistusof Tithorea ; I, Tyrants, son of Tyrannous, sealed ;Acind}mus, son of Callicrates of Tithorea ; SixtusCornelius Antiochus ; Eurus, son of Epaphras ; I,Callings, son of Clericus of Tithorea, sealed'The rofXa/ioc waa a linearmeasure; if it was nearly equalto the modem Italian caria,the road was about fifteen feetin breadth.Tov iy^lKov. Zopyrus wasthe colleague of Parmenon onbehalf of Daulis in the formeraffiur, to which this judgmentwas probably long posterior;for it would seem that Zopyruswas now absent or dead, thatone of his sons had obtainedthe interest of Antiochus inthe land Dr^pius^ and thatanother was one of the Archonsof Daulis.104 PHocis. [chap.Pausanias, who visited Daulis about fifty yearsafter the date of this inscription, remarks, thatthere was a place in the Daulia named Trois,where stood the heroic monument of a hero calledthe Archagetes, whom some supposed to be Xan-phipps, a warrior ; others Phocis, son of Omy-tion^ It is evidently to this place that the beginningof the second inscription refers, where it issaid that '^ the road to the Archagetes shall havea breadth of two calami." It is not impossible thatTrois is an erroneous reading for Patronis, thename, according to Plutarch, of the place whereSylla was encamped before he was joined by Hortensius,who, as I have already remarked, probablyarrived through the same pass which I traversedfrom Bissikeni into the valley northward of Thalia.The biographer, indeed, describes Patronis asbeing in the plain of Chaeronea, but the wholeplain, as far as the pass of the Cephissus, was undoubtedlyoften designated as the plain of Chaeronea.In. Platanus, the name of one of theportions of land mentioned in the award of Eu-bolus,we have the origin apparently of the modemappellation of the river Platania.While I was copying the inscription, which wasmy first employment this morning, a funeral tookplace. The corpse was carried into the church, theservice read over with wonderful haste, and at acertain point a howling was set up by three women,1 ■'1'EoTi Si rfjs AavX/ac ^(upa woy oitK d^avif rii ec ir($Xe/iOv,KoKovfiiyri TpwvlQ* iyravOa ol it. ^wicov elyai rov 'Opw-ijpfov ijpfo ^Apyriyirov iriiroiri^ riiovoi: row JUirv^v ^cLaiy, —roi' Tov Se iipta rovroy SBSdydm^ Pausan. Phocis. c. 4.Xf.] Phocis. 105relations of the deceased, after which the corpsewas put into the ground, and small loaves ofwheaten bread, boiled maize, and wine, were distributedto the company, who assembled after theservice in great numbers, and seated themselvesround the wall of the church-yard.Pausanias remarks of Daulis, that the inhabitantswere few in number, but the tallest andstoutest of all the Phocis. The name of theplace he supposed to be derived from SavXoc,because the position had formerly been a forest ^The only building described by him is a temple ofMinerva, containing an ancient statue, and anotherstill more ancient made of wood, said to havebeen dedicated by Procne, for Daulis was supposedto have been the scene of the well-known story ofTereus, Procne, and Philomela.Immediately above Thalia, on the site of MountLiakura, stands the monastery of Aghia Arsali, andbelow it a metokhi, where the monks retire whenthe snow covers their upper habitation. About fivemiles to the south-west of Thalia is the entranceof the Zimeno Derwent, or opening between themountains Cirphis and Parnassus, which leads toDelphi. It is the ^yiarn ^oq, or rpnrkri iccXcu&oc,the cleft or triple way celebrated among theancients for being the place where Laius fell bythe hands of his son Oedipus. I searched in vainthere, in my former journey, for any traces of thetomb of Laius and his servant, which Pausaniasdescribes as covered with a heap of stones. ThePaean. Phocis. c. 4.106 PHOcis. [chap.road, as he justly observes, becomes more steep andrugged, from that point towards Delphi, and difficulteven to a man on foot. Between Daulis andthe Schiste, but at what distance from either Pausaniasdoes not specify, stood the Phocicum, orplace of meeting of the deputies of the cities ofPhocis; it was a large building divided withinlengthwise by columns, between which and thewall there were seats for the deputies. At one end,in an open space, was a Jupiter seated on his throne,Minerva and Juno standing on either side of himThe ascent from Daulis to the summit of Parnassuswas less rugged than that from Delphi, butlonger '. This route probably led by the modemconvent of Aghia Arsali. The road from Daulisto Ambrosius now Dhistomo, follows up the valeof the Platania in nearly a straight course, havingMount Cirphis on the right hand, and on the othera part of the Helicon which is so distinct from ,or the proper Helicon that it had undoubtedlysome specific name among the ancients,though it has not been preserved by history. It isitself subdivided into two summits, that to the eastcalled the mountain of Surbi, that to the west themountain of Sara, or Tara, from villages of thosenames.Having crossed the Platania in twenty-fiveminutes from the foot of the hill of ZkadiSf weleave, in fifteen minutes more, the village of Maltaon the right side of the road, and then in eightminutes arrive at 'Aio Vlasi. In the course of lliis^ Pausan. Phocis. c. 5. ' Ibid. c. 4.XI.] PHOCIS. 107route the Stena of the CephismSy or Baoto-PhocicStrait, opens £rom the foot of the hills of Khas-n^i, and 'Aio Vlasi admits a view through theStena : the hill of Krevasard being then nearlyhid by the heights of Khans, and that of thePaleokastro, near Bliss, appearing to advancehalf across the pass. In the course of our morning'sride many opvca, (vultures,) were in sight, and agreat number of lapwings, which the Greeks callacaXir^vii. At 'Aio Vlasi the woman of the cottagewhere I dine wears a low bonnet or hat, made atDhadhl, which is completely covered on the outsidewith a coat of mail made of paras. Just overthe ears, instead of parts, the covering is made ofSpanish or Austrian dollars and Turkish pieces of100 paras. The owner is of Dhadhl, and in replyto my inquiries says, ^ ^ this is the fashion of ourtown ; here they have other fashions."On this side of Mount (Eta it may be remarked,that itinerant salesmen, and even saleswomen areto be met travelling singly, which is hardly everto be seen beyond Thermopylae. During thelast two days we have met several persons fromAspraspitia selling fresh selfish ; and at 'AioVlasi have found a caravan of asses laden withcom and kalambokki, and conducted by an Agra-footewoman. To be able to do this, or to wearsuch caps as that just mentioned, without riskimplies a greater degree of security than theChristians enjoy to the northward of Mount GEJta,where the resistance of the mountaineers to A\</Pasha, his continual attempts to reduce them, themarch of his Albanians through the country.108 PHOCis. [chap.the incursions of the clefts, and the poverty,idleness, and rapacity of the Turks, particularlythose of Clarissa, lead to the unceasing oppressionof the Christians, and have made their conditionmore miserable than in this part of Greece,where the protection enjoyed by the districts ofLivadhia and Athens, the one as a vakuf, theother as a royal appanage, is not without somebeneficial effects upon the Christians ; the administratorstaking care to send proper personsto reside as Voivodas, and readily attending tothe complaints of the Greeks, so that the Turkishgovernor finds it difficult to enrich himself by oppression.Another cause is the smaller proportionof Turks, the effect of whose bigotry, insolence,idleness, profligacy, and greediness of gain, hasevery where a tendency in proportion to theirnumbers, to degrade the condition and characterof the rajah, and at length to drive him into thedistricts where the Turks are not so numerous,and which are better protected by the Porte. Asto the circumstance of a large proportion of thelands to the southward of CEta being held byGreeks, I fear it makes very little difference tothe working farmer, in his profits or his enjoymentof the fruits of the earth ; his terms of cultivationare the same, whether with the agas of'Egripo and Thebes, or with the archons ofLivadhia and Athens, all of whom take care thathe shall never be out of their debt, nor enabled toobtain from the soil more than a subsistence ofthe scantiest kind.In proceeding from 'Aio Vlasi to Kapurna, wcXI.] PHOCIS. 109leave, at eight minutes beyond 'Aio Vlasi, a villagecalled Mera to the right of the road, in theentrance of a valley leading into that which iswatered by the western branch of the river ofLivadhia, and along which leads the road fromLivadhia to the Zimeno Pass, branching to theleft to Dhistomo ; these were anciently the routesfrom Lebadeia to Delphi and Ambrosius. Ka-punastands at the foot of the same ridge as 'AioVlasi, in a hollow between a steep summit and along even height, which advances from the ridgeinto the valley in a north-easterly direction, andhides Kapuma from all the great plain towardsthe Lake Cephissis. A projection of the heightson the other side towards the vale of Mera concealsit in like manner from the upper part of theplain of Aulis but the hill of Kervasara is seenfrom Kapuma, through the Stena of the Cephissus.The rocky heights which overhang the villagesof 'Aio Vlasi and K&puma have preserved considerableruins of Panoply and CJusroneia. Pausaniassays, that Panopeus ^ was distant 20 stadesfrom Chseroneia, and 7 from Daulis : but thelatter number is obviously erroneous. I was 48minutes in walking my horse from the foot of thehill of Daulis to 'Aio Vlasi, and 35 from thence toKapuma. The latter space of time corresponds tolerablywell to the 20 stades of Pausanias, accordingto the average rate of 30 stades to the hour ; itPausan. Phocis. c. 4. Ac 76. 89.) names the districtcording to Strabo (p. 423.) it Phanotis ; but Panopeus is thewas called Phanoteus in his form employed by Homer, andtime, and Thucydides (1. 4, c. by Pausanias.no PHOCis. [chap.is probable, therefore, that the number of stades betweenDaulis and Panopeus was 27 instead of 7, andthat the word ukwti has been lost by the copiers ofPausanias. The 7 stades which he assigns to thecircumference of the walls of Panopeus is exactlyconfirmed by the present remains.Panopeus partook of the ruin of the other citiesof Phocian at the end of the Phocian war, but likethem also was re-established by the Athenians andThebans a little before the battle of Chseroneia ^In the time of Pausanias, although it had neitheragora, nor theatre, nor gymnasium, nor fountain ',nor public building for the use of the magistrates,and consisted only of huts on the side of a torrent,it was still called a city, and sent deputies to thePhocis council. The only antiquities besides itswalls were the tumulus of Titus on the side ofthe torrent ^, and a building of crude bricks, containinga statue of Pentelic marble, but whetherintended for aesculapius or for Prometheus, Pausaniascould not ascertain. Panopeus having beenplaced between two cities, which were themselvesnot 5 miles asunder, seems to have derived itsimportance from being the frontier fortress ofPhocis, towards Boeotia. We find, accordingly,considerable remains of the ancient walls ; theirgeneral form is a triangle, of which the southernside follows a course parallel to the torrent ofMera, and the two others inclose the northern facePausan. Phocis. c. 3. ' ipx^'a*vBwp Kar$fr)(6fuyov ec Kp^' * girl rfj x^P^^P?*yijy. — Ibid. c. 4.XI.] PHOCIS. Illof the hill, forming an angle, somewhat greaterthan a right angle, at the south-west They includeda small portion of the plain at the northwesternend of the site. Here the walls are builtin lines nearly straight, and were, flanked withtowers at the usual intervals. On the height thesides are broken into re-entering and salient angles,in the manner best suited to defend theascent of the rocks, with towers at the mostprominent angles, projecting 20 feet from thewalls, and in some places still 30 feet high.The masonry is of the third or intermediate order,between the polygonal, in which there were noregular courses, and that in which the courseswere equal and horizontal. Each of the two summitsinto which the hill is divided had its interiorinclosure. That to the south-west retains threegates: one leading to the lower town, and twoopening to the country. In all the three, theentrance is oblique to the wall, as in the annexedplan of one of the latter gates.The torrent of Mera is evidently the yapaipawhich Pausanias mentions, and was probably theBceoto Phocis boundary. Some large masses ofstone on this side, which appear to have fallen fromthe hill, may answer to those sandy coloured rocksfrom which Prometheus made the human race, butI can neither perceive the smell of human flesh in112 Boeotia. [chap,them, which Pausanias recognised, nor any remainsof the tumulus of Titus, although, according tothe same traveller, it was not less than a stade incircumference.At Kapuma, scarcely any vestiges of the townwall of Chaeronea are traceable in the plain, butinthe Acropolis, which incloses an extremelyrugged height, there is a lai^e piece of wall, ofmasonry of the third order, in excellent preservation,and well calculated to give an idea of thebeautiful and imposing effect of this fine mode ofbuilding when complete. The hill correspondsexactly to the " precipitous height above the city,called Petrachus \" though Pausanias, who thusdescribes Petrachus, has not mentioned it as theAcropolis of Chseroneia, which the existing fortificationsprove the hill in question to have been.The other remains at Kapurna are a theatre, ofwhich all the middle part was excavated in therock of Mount Petrachus, and the ends consisted ofa mass of earth faced with masonry, of which theruins still remain. Several rows of the lowerseats are evidently buried below the earth, accumulatedat the foot of the height; but thereare two diazomata, or predictions, above ground,and consequently three divisions of seats. Inthe lowest division three or four seats only arenow visible above the surface ; the middle containstwelve rows, and the upper four, above whichthere is a high perpendicular excavation in thePausan. Boeot. c, 41*XI.]Boeotia.rock and the remains of two or three rows of seatsabove it.On the face of the same rock is inscribed, inletters of the best times, with the omicron smallerthan the other letters, the words 'AiroAXoivoc Sa^-va^ptWy 'AprafiiSoc ffooiScvac ^ In some inscriptionsreported by Meletius as existing at Chaeronea inhis time', we find the same Boeotia dialect employed,and the same Diana mentioned, but withthe more common epithet of Eilethuia, or in theBoeotia dialect, ElAnOtii. The worship of the samedeity, but without the epithet is recorded onanother monument, erected in honour of one ofher priestesses by the council and people of theChffironenses ^.A stone in the wall of a church near a fountainbelow the theatre, is inscribed with a dedication tothe Emperor Marinus, by the council and peopleof the Chseronenses. It is difficult to decipher thesecond name of the emperor, but it certainly is notFilius, as usually written in Latin authors. Tomeit appears to be ON^AAIOS, i. e. Omphalius^.y. Inscription, No. 24.(1) 'Evyofiat 'AfJL<^l\vro^,KptroXaa, nov0/ac, *Apra^c^c(2) RpiroXaoC) *Ap(9r/ci»v,KaXXtCf KaXXiir/dac, *Apr&fJuii(3) 'ErxiSirfyoc . • • •ttpxovroCf fiiivoQ QiiXovBiov trtV"rccac2ccdri|, IlaXXac Kp/riavocavaTiBudty nev ihiav Ocpairai-vav KaXXci» cepcly rj| *Aprc/i(^i.VOL. II.Melet. Vol. ii.p. 335. 8vo. Yen.'H /3ovX^ jca) o dfjfiog X«i(-pwvitay rijy itpeiav *Aprc/n^ocXaporelvaVf Tc/3ep/ov KXav^iovAc^v/iov OvyarcpOydpcr^c c vereKol rijc irfpi ri^v dial BpriffKilat,. . . . ica\ d€i6ra (or)avroKpdro^pa) MapKop *Ov^'-Xtov ScjSffpoK MoKpsiyoy if flovXi^ica\ 6 ^ijfioc Xaiptoviwv* — V.Inscription, No. 25.Boeotia.[chap.Another inscription on a stone at the same fountainwas engraved in honour of Demetrius Auto-bolus,a Platonic philosopher, by his maternalgrandson Flavins Autobulus\ An ancient churchof the Panaghla, in the village, preserves manyremains of ancient art, particularly an inscribedmarble, upon which are several records of thededication of certain slaves, both male and female,to Sarapis, by which process they obtained theirliberty, or at least became upoSovXoi, or slaves onlyto the god. In some instances the manumissionwas immediate, but more frequently after the lifeof the owners, and with a reserve of the childrenborn of them in the meantime. The names of theBoeotian months Homilies, Alalcomeneius, Thelu-thus, Prostaterius, and Bucatius, occur in thesedocuments '. It appears from the inscriptions re-The following is a Latin inscriptionin honour of the sameemperor, the shortness of whosereign has rendered such monumentsrare: — Hercules victor.Pro Salute Imp. Cases. M. OpeliiAureli Severe Machine Aug. L.Juhentius L. F. Ter. SeverusAug. N. dispensatory. — Gruter.p. 50.As Macrintts reigned onlyone year, A.D. 217i 218, wehave the exact date of the inscriptionof Chsroneia.AafiaTpwy AvrdfiovKoy^i\6(ro^y UXanayiKoy ^XafiiOQAifrdjiovKoQ top irpoc f*^pocramrod. — V. Inscript. No. 26.The Antobuli appear fromthe following inscription whichMeletius found at the samefountain, to have been descendantsof the celebrated Plutarch.^^Toy KkaifBtoy Ahrofiov^Xoj/, ofiwyvfwy Tf irarpl^ eicroyCato UXovrdp'XpVfiLpi'niy Trayly (if Not \6yoiQ Itci^ei^dfieyoy«" »^ P'f ^ *"P^C finrpoifidfAfAfi KoXXcjcXcca Kal olyoyeiQ koI ai ABtki^lMelet. vol. ii p. 334.See the text of several ofthese inscriptions at the end ofthis volume.ZI.] Boeotia. 115ported by Meletius, that slaves, both male andfemale, were dedicated in the same manner toDiana, 'AprapSt EcXuOtp. The other remains ofantiquity in the church, of the Panaghia are anantique chair of marble, called by the learnedo ^povoc Tov UXovrap^ov * (Plutarch's chair),-^twocolumns of dark grey granite, two Ionic capitals,and many ancient fragments in the walls. A largepedestal without any inscription forms the altar orholy table *.Pausanias has neither noticed the theatre ofChaeronea, nor the temples of Diana and Sarapis,which the inscriptions prove to have existed here,and which stood, perhaps, upon the very sites ofthe churches where the inscriptions are found.According to him, the principal object of venerationat that time was the sceptre, or, as they calledit, the spear' of Jupiter, made by Vulcan, and theonly one of the reputed works of Vulcan whichPausanias considered genuine. It was kept in thehouse of a priest annually appointed, and was saidto have been found between Chaeronea and Pano-pens, whither it had been brought by Electra,daughter of Agamemnon, to whom it devolvedthrough Hermes and Pelops. Daily sacrificeswere ?made to the sceptre, and a table stood constantlybefore it, covered with meat and cakes,which accords so exactly with some of the representationson the temples of Egypt, that one cannot<^p6voQ for dpoyo^f like ' hyla rpdire(a,0///3a for Oijfiai. Pindar, a * ^6pv. — Pausan. Bceot. c.Boeotian, in like manner used 40.9^p for drip,1 2116 Boeotia, [Chapbut suspect that the worship was derived fromthence, together with that of Sarapis, and that thelocal myths was a posterior invention.On the summit of Mount Petrachus stood asmall statue of Jupiter, and in some part of theterritory * were two trophies erected by Sy Ua andthe Romans for their victory over Tales. Of themore celebrated victory of Philip, son of Amyntas,on the same scene of action, there was not anysuch monument, because the erecting of trophieswas contrary to the Macedonian custom. Butthere was a polyandrium of the Thebans who wereslain in that battle, surmounted by a lion, not farfrom Chaeronea, on the road to Lebadeia, and itwould seem from Strabo, that here stood also monuments,erected at the public expense, in honourof all who had fallen on the same occasion*. Asthese memorials were probably on the field of thefirst battle of Chseroneia, the situation of whichno ancient author has exactly described, we maypresume that a large tumulus, which rises conspicuouslyfrom the plain near the right bank of theCephissus, is not a monument of the victory ofPhilip, but the place of sepulture of those who fellin the contest of the Romans with the Mithridatesarmy, for that tumulus, instead of being in the roadfrom Chaeronea to Lebadeia, is about midway toOrchomenus, and it seems evident from Plutarch,that the Roman battle occurred in the middle ofthe plain.In the time of Pausanias, Chaeronea was notedX«P«*ra^^ Tritroyruiv €v rjf f^fixP ^»7f<5(ria. — Strabo, p. 414.XI.] Boeotia. 117for the manufacture of oils extracted from odoriferousflowers.Quitting Kapuma at seven in the evening forLivadhla, we follow the foot of the hills for aquarter of an hour, then ascend them, and at thesummit enter upon a plain of a rich soil, now verymuddy, which we cross in a quarter of an hour bya paved road, then descend and enter the plain ofLivadhia, fifty-five minutes from Kapurna. Tenminutes farther cross a stream flowing to the left,the same already mentioned as the western branchof the river of Livadhia, then passing throughfields of rice and kalambokki, by a muddy roadand bad pavement, at the end of one hour andtwenty minutes from Kapurna, enter Livadhia.CHAPTER NilBoeotia.Liyadlua, Mideia, Lehadcia^ river Hercyna^ Prove of Trop/umnuInscriptions of LiTadhia — Coroneia — Alalcomefue — Petra —Mountains Libethrium^ Laphystwm Tilphosswm — Temple ofMinerva Itonia — Rivers Curalius^ Phalarust Isomantus —Krupi — Skripu, Orchomenusy Treasury of Minytu, Monasteryof Skripu, Temple of the Graces, Inscriptions — Rivers Cephis-tis, Melts — Lake Cephissis — Tegyra,Dec. 2. — The town of Livadhia has an imposingappearance from the northward, and forms a sceneno less singular than beautiful. Its houses aresurrounded for the most part with gardens, andthus occupy a large space of ground on some steepacclivities at the foot of a precipitous height whichis crowned with a ruined castle, said to have beenbuilt by the Catalans. This height is an abruptnortherly termination of Mount Helicon and isseparated eastward from similar hills by a torrentissuing from the mountain between lofty precipices,and falling with great rapidity over a rocky bedas it passes through the middle of the town. Itis the ancient Hercyna. Above the Kastro, orcastle hill, it is generally dry, the principalcontribution of water being from some sourcesat the southern extremity of the town, underthe eastern side of the Kastro. Derivations areCHAP. XII.] Boeotia. 119made from it to every part of the town, and intothe gardens which surround the houses. Thereare springs also in many parts of the site ; so thatby the effect of this abundance of water, combinedwith the shelter of the overhanging mountains, theair in the summer, in the upper part of the town,during an hour or two in the morning and evening,has a most agreeable coolness, as I experiencedwhen I was last at Livadhia : the same mountains,however, by excluding the regular breezes, causethe general temperature to be excessively hot, andin winter create humidity, by depriving the townof the sun's rays, which at present no longerfall even upon the lowest quarter of the town aftertwo o'clock. From these causes the climate is notconsidered either agreeable or healthy, and it issaid that in summer, in consequence of the wantof ventilation, the noxious exhalations of the irrigatedfields of cotton and rice, although near twomiles distant from the upper quarter of the town,are felt in every part of it. Velitza, having a similarposition and aspect, is affected in the same mannerby the adjacent mountain ; and there the village wasin shade even before one o'clock. In fact, all theancient cities of Doris, Phocis, and Boeotia, whichoccupied the strong and otherwise advantageoussituations under the northern sides of Parnassus andHelicon, experienced more or less the same inconvenience,and had a similar climate in winter, as Pausaniashas remarked in particular respecting Lilsea\^ cxct ^€ h AlXaia Kal irpo( rov ie xeifi&va fxri ofioitae l^-Kiovrac Tov irovt wpac fiertax&pov yiveadaif jcwXvcc to spot 6 Hap-raciy Oipii koI pos ciririidciwc* vatrao^, — Pau8an.Phocic«c.33f120 Boeotia. [chap.Livadhia has a greater air of opulence than anyplace in Northern Greece, not even exceptingloannina. This is partly real in consequence of thesmall number of Turks who generally are not onlypoor themselves but the cause of poverty in others,and is partly the effect of the construction of thelarger Greek houses, which having spacious cham-hersand galleries in the Turkish manner, areshown to advantage on the steep declivity of thehill. It may be observed, however, that this styleof building, the effect of Greek vanity alwaysready to ape Turkish grandeur, although agreeablein summer is in general little suited to a placewhere the winter is both long and severe. Thereare about 1500 houses in the town, of which 130only are Turkish. The most conspicuous objectis a tower with a clock in it. The district containsseventy villages, of which the largest are Dhadhiand Arakhova. Xerokhori, Fla, and severalothers in JSubcBa^ are inscribed in the vilayeti, aswell as Kalamo and some others in Attica.The Homeric Mideia was situated, according toPausanias, on a height ', from whence the inhabitantsunder the conduct of Leads, an Athenianremoved to the lower ground *, and there built thetown to which they gave the name of Lebadeia*It would seem, therefore, that Mideia stood on thesite of the Kastro, and of the western division ofthe modem town, having its eastern side defendedby the Hercyna, and that Lebadeia occupied thei^KetTo M funifpov* — Pau * cc ro x6dfia\ov.Ban. BcBot. c. 39.XII.]Boeotia.lowest part of the present town. It is difficult tobelieve, however, that the Kastro was not at alltimes a part of the ancient city, being so essentialto its safely. The only remains of antiquity aresome Hellenic squared stones in the walls of theruined castle, with a few inscriptions and architecturalfragments dispersed in the town. Thisstrong and well-watered position having alwaysbeen occupied by a considerable population, theancient materials have so long been applied to repairsthat nothing is now left in its original position.Lebadeia was chiefly celebrated for the oracle ofTrophonius, son of Erginus, king of Orchomenus,who, at a time when the Greeks were chiefly indebtedto Phoenicia for artists \ obtained with theaid of his brother Agamedes, such celebrity as aconstructor of temples, treasuries, palaces, andother works ', that by a consequence natural in asuperstitious age of the admiration in which his^ ThatPhcenicia was lookedup to by the Greeks as a schoolof art before the Trojan war,may be feared from some passagesin Homer. The pilasterswhich adorned the entranceof the treasury of Atreus atMycensBy some fragments ofwhich are in the British museumresemble the Persianstyle, which we may supposeto have been allied to thePhoenician. It is not uncommonto find Tery ancient engravedgems in the Morea,of a similar style of art. Themasonry of some Phoenicianruins in the island of Goo,which laye only recently beenexcavated, greatly resemblesthat of the great entrance intoMycenae.rovrovc i^erlyf A( rfi^iidTi^(raff ytvitrdai ieiyovQ i^ioiQ t€led KaratrKevdtratrBat koX /Ja-ffiXtM dySphnroie. — Pausan.Boeot. c. 37*122 Boeotia. [chap.talents were held) he iras' believed after his deathto predict futurity, and to have been the son not ofErginus but of Apollo ^ The extensive reputationwhich his orate had acquired at a remote period,is pined by its having been consulted by Croesusand Mardonius^^'and more than six centuriesafterwards, its administrators were still successfulin maintaining the popular delusion. Pausanias,who himself consulted the oracle, has left us anaccurate description of the process, omitting onlywhat he saw or heard in the sacred adytum, whichit was not lawful to reveal ^ He describes thegrove of Trophonius as situated at a small distancefrom Lebadeia, or as separated from Lebadeia bythe river Hercyna, for the defective text leaves hismeaning doubtful *. The source of the river wasin a cavern which contained upright statues holdingsceptres with serpents entwined on them. Itwas uncertain whether these were statues of aesculapiusand Hygeia, or of Trophonius and Hercyna*On the river's bank there was a temple of Her-cana,containing the statue of a virgin bearing agoose in her hand. It represented the nymphHercyna, from whom, when playing with Proserpine,a goose escaped, flew into the cavern, andconcealed itself under a stone : Proserpine, havingThis, adds Pausanias, I dw await (sciL jet xoXewc) tobelieve, as-will every one who &Kaoc rov TpoifMvlov, whichconsults the oracle. can hardly be complete ; henceHerodot. 1. 1, c. 46, 1. 8, it has been proposed to insertc. 134. the words "E^Kvya 6 .orora/iocPausan. Bceot. c. 39. after Tpo^viov.The words are Buipyu BeXII.] Boeotia. 123drawn forth the goose and removed the stone,water followed, and became the source of theriver Hercyna. Upon the bank of* the river therewas also a' xnonum^t of Armenians.The grove of Trophoiiius contained his temple,in which was his statue by Praxiteles,, resemblinga statue' ci Aesculapius,— «a temple of Ceres,named Europe, who was the nurse of Trophy*ninus, and a statue in the open air of Jupiter Hye-thus(Plutus). Above this place was the oracle ^and farther on in the mountain ' the hunting-placeof Proserpine ^ ; bubo a large unfinished temple ofJupiter the King, a temple of Apollo, and anothertemple containing statues of Cronus, Juno andJupiter. He who had resolved to consult theOracle, first passed a certain number of days in abuilding sacred to the good daemon and to goodfortune *y where, among other expiations, he wasenjoined to abstain from ablution in hot water, andto bathe in the Hercyna ; he sacrificed to theAeiiiea worshipped in the grove, and a priest ^ declaredfrom the entrails of the victims whetherTrophonius was favourable to the sacrificer. Onthe night of consultation he again sacrificed a ramin the trench ® of Agamades, at the pillar ' of thesame person, whom he invoked. At this trenchthe ground was said to have opened and receiveddyafiaai he. Iwl ro fiavrtloymK6priQ d{ipa»t^TTi oe TO fiayriioy vwep toAalfioyoc 'AyaOov Kal M Tov opovc.XVQ 'Aya6^c.dyaPdtn he enl to /layTtioyfiaiTic*Koi ahroOey iovaiv £c to irpofru• ig fi6epoy.TOV opovff.OT^Xl?-124 Boeotia. [chap.Trophonius when he quitted the earth. The appearanceof the victim was here considered as ofmore importance than at the former place. If theywere still found to he favourable, the consulter ofthe Oracle was conducted to the Hercyna, wherehe was washed and anointed by two young citizensof Lebadeia called the Hermae. He was then ledto the two fountains of the Hercyna *, which wereclose to one another, and drank of them ; first ofthe fountain of oblivion, to obtain forgetfulness ofpreceding events ; and then of the fountain ofmemory, to strengthen his remembrance of whathe was about to behold. He next addressed hisprayers to a wooden statue of Trophonius, madeby Daedalus, which none but those who consultedthe Oracle were allowed to see, after which, clothedin a linen garment', girded with sashes, andwearing sandals peculiar to the place ^, he was conductedto the Oracle '. The first object whichpresented itself was a circular barrier, equal insize to a threshing-floor of very small dimensions ^,it was formed by a basement of white marble abouttwo and a half feet high ^, upon which stood spits *of brass connected together by bands ' of the samematerial. Within the circumference '® was a hollow*^, not natural, but constructed artificially in thej^iTwva \iyovy, ' ofieXoLraiviaiQ, ' (wvai,ifciyjiapia^ tcpiyvl^ac* " iripifioKov,vpog TO fiayruoy^ ** \d<rfjia y^cXII.] Boeotia. 125most finished manner ^ and in form resembling anoven (or kiln) *, the diameter was about four peeks(six feet), and the depth not more than eightpeeks (twelve feet). There was no constructeddescent, but a light narrow ladder was broughtfor the use of him who descended, and whofound at the bottom a small opening betweenthe bottom and the masonry' two spans (a footand a half) wide, and of which the height appearedto be one span (nine inches) *. LjHlngon his back, and holding honey-cakes in hishands, he introduced his legs into the hole, andthen his knees, when on a sudden the rest ofhis body was carried forward with rapidity, as ifinvolved in the current of a rapid and mighty river.The future was then revealed to him ; not to allpersons in the same manner, but to some by thesight, and to others by the hearing. He returnedby the same opening by which he entered, andagain with the legs foremost. The priests thenconducted him to the throne of memory, whichwas not far from the Adytum, where they questionedhim as to what he had seen, and then deliveredhim to his friends, who led him back to thesanctuary of Agathodaemon. At first he was soterrified, that he appeared to have no recollectioneither of himself or others, but at length recoveredhis mind and the power of laughing, and was boundto inscribe on a tablet' what he had seen or heard.^ ohK avr6fiaroyf dXKa crvv ' oir^ /icra^v rov rt kld^vQTi\Kg Roi hpfioviq. irpoc to dKpi" Kal tov oiKohtufifiaroQ*fiiararov tfKohifirifiiyoy, ffnidafi&y to capo£ ^vOf to ^erpi^avy. v\j/0Q i^iyiTo Aval (nriBafifj^.i Ity iriyaKit126 B(EOTIA. [chap.Such is the account of Pausanias from his ownexperience. Pisistratus, the only other authorwho has entered into particulars of the same kind,has added little or nothing to Pausanias, and differsfrom him only in describing as made of iron therailing of the circular barrier which Pausaniasstates to have been brazen.I have already remarked, that the river whichtraverses Livadhia is the continuation of an occasionaltorrent from Mount UeUcouy which is joinedby some copious sources at the southern extremityof the town, on the eastern side of the Castle hill.It is evident that these were the reputed springs ofthe river Hercyna, adjoining to which was theGrove of Trophonius. They issue on either sideof the torrent, those on the left bank from the rock,through several small spouts, which are sometimesdry in summer, as I witnessed in the month of July.Those on the right bank of the torrent form themain body of the river at all times, and flow perpetuallyfrom under the rocks in many large streams,the subterraneous course of which is, apparently,from near a cavern in the rocks on the right sideof the ravine, which is now almost choked up bythe rubbish of the town, of which that situationhappens to be a common place of deposit. Thegreat sources are called ra yXv^a vcpa, or the waterunfit for drinking, in contradistinction to the othersprings, which are named ra Kpca, or the cold waters ;in fact, the former are of a higher temperature, andnot so agreeable to the taste. Immediately abovethe Tria on the side of the Castle hill, is the cavernwhich the learned of Livadhia point out as theCave of Trophonius. It is not very deep, does notXII.] Boeotia. 127reach down to the soil of the valley, nor has it anyappearance of an interior opening, though there aresome traces of artificial excavations in it, and ofniches and inscriptions near it ^Such being the present appearance of the sourcesof the Hercyna and adjoining places, it becomesimpossible to apply the description of Pausaniaswith any certainty, there being, instead of onesource in a cavern, two sources, and a cavern oppositeto each, and neither source having its originin its corresponding cavern. As to the latter discrepancy,nothing is more likely than that duringthe ages which have elapsed since the sacred groveand its buildings were first ruined, and their site leftto the effects of natural causes, the torrent, or eventhe ordinary rains, should have obstructed thecaverns with alluvial soil, and should have causedone or both the springs to emerge on the bank ofthe torrent below the cavern, instead of issuing inthe cave itself. But admitting this supposition,there still remains the question, which of thecaverns contained the reputed source of the Her-cana?I think the eastern ; first, because the permanentand larger sources of the river are on thatside; secondly, because that situation will suiteither of the two interpretations given to the wordsof Pausanias descriptive of the position of the groverelatively to that of the city, while the westerncavern is not well adapted to either; thirdly,because the wider and more sloping ground wasthere better suited to contain the grove and itsbuildings, which required a considerable space,V. Inscription, No. 34.128 Boeotia. [chap.than that on the western side, where the spacebetween the Tria nere and the perpendicular rocksof the Castle hill is not only narrow, but almostentirely exposed to inundation from the torrent.It seems more probable, therefore, that the sacredinclosure and its various structures occupied theground around the Glyfa and the cavern on thatside. It is clear from the narrative of Pausanias,that the /uavrccov, or place where the oracle wasenounced, was quite distinct from the cavern ofthe sources, though it appears to have been situatedalso at the foot of the hill, since he describes it as€irc rov opovc. The description which he has givenof the well constructed of masonry, with an elevatedborder, surmounted by a railing of brass, isperfectly intelligible ; but the viri), or cavity, at thebottom of the wall within, was so small, that unlesswe suppose all that followed the introduction of thelegs of the consulter of the oracle into this aperture,to have been the effect of his own imagination \ itis necessary to conclude, that the priests had someconcealed mode of enlarging the opening, which isthe more probable, as a circumstance mentioned byPausanias favours the opinion, that there was notonly a cavern or subterraneous chamber, but a secondopening. He states, that a soldier of Demetrius(Poliorcetes), who had entered the adytum withoutperforming the previous rites, and with the hope offinding something there worth stealing, was deprivedof life in consequence of his impiety ; andPlutarch introduces, in his nights and a day in the caverndialogue on the genius of So of Trophonius, and as havingcrates, a man who describes seen an abundance of strangehimself as having been two visions in that time.XII.] B(EOTIA. 129his body was found cast out, not near the sacredentrance \ but in another place. However thismay be, it is evident that nothing but an extensiveexcavation can lead to the discovery of the adytum ,since the owrij or aperture, was twelve feet belowthe circular Kpn^lg of white marble, and there hasprobably been a considerable accumulation of soilabove that which was the surface in the time ofPausanias. I am informed that the torrent,although now dry, sometimes pours a potentstream into the Hercyrui; its origin is in an elevatedplain, situated between the summit of Heliconnearest to livadhia, and the heights of whichthe Castle hill and opposite rocks form the termination.This plain is cultivated in some parts by thepeople of Surbi.The three inscriptions which have been publishedby Upon and Wheler, are still in existence.That which is in the mosque, formerly a church onthe hill near the castle, is in excellent preservation.The stone forms the lintel of the door of theminaret of the mosque. The two other inscriptionsare lying in the yard of another mosque, at theBazar, and seem to have suffered some erasuresince the time of the two travellers. A third inscriptionin the same inclosure, not noticed bythem, but published by Pococke, with his usualinaccuracy, still remains, but very much damaged.Of these four ancient documents the first mentionedis a dedication to Juno Basilis by a priest, at theKara oro/ia to itp6v,VOL. II. KBoeotia.[chap.termination of his quinquenniial administration;during which his wife also had been priestess ^The epithet Basilis corresponds to that of theJupiter Basileus whose large unfinished templestood in the grove of Trophonius. And the wordmvratTfifuQ is illustrated by a fifth inscription, whichI found in a private house in the town. It is inthe Boeotia dialect, in characters beautifully formed,and evidently of a much earlier period than thededication to Juno Basis. It testifies that Neonthe son of Aston, after having held the office ofAgonothetes in the Basileia, dedicated a vase, foranointing with oil, to Jupiter the king, and to thecity*. It can hardly be questioned, therefore, thatthe quinquennium mentioned in the dedication toJuno Basilis, related to the Basileia, which recurred,like the Olympic festival and many others, at theend of four complete years. The Basileia was probablythe same institution named at a later periodTrophonia, which we find noticed by two Greekauthors % as well as in an inscription of Megara,AefiaSiiay. MevovSpoc Xpii^i-fjLoVf upfirevaac weyratrvipiSa IkT&v liltaviLyiOtiKey^ Uprirevovmicr^C yvyaiKoc aWov UapyitriaQrfic *Oyatftfifip6rov, — V. Inscr.No. 29.dyu>yoQ€Tii{<raf-)rd Bao'/Xeittro iXTioxpta(riiptoyf or toy)dyidtiKE Toi (Ac)^V. Inscr. No. 33.^coT^pctt ^c first Jy ky(ployTOol c€pe?c TonaKai6y,Suit. in Xplafia,To anoint with oil was onof the ceremonies of the groveof Trophonius : iXcuf-xpiovvt,hvo Trained* &c. — Pausan. Boeot.c. 39.• J. Poll. 1. 1, c. 1, § 37.XII.]Boeotiapublished by Upon and Wheler; for it appearsthat the oracular predictions were ascribed toJupiter, and that the deity worshipped here wasoften called Jupiter Trophonius\ The great unfinishedtemple of Jupiter mentioned by Pausaniaswas probably commenced not long after the battleof Leuctra, for we are informed by Diodorus thatEpaminondas, with a view to encourage the Boeotian,when preparing for the battle, procured aperson to pretend that, having consulted the oracleof Trophonius, he was ordered to communicate tothe army, that when they had obtained the victory,they were to institute a periodical festival at Leba-dea in honour of Jupiter the king*. The Basileiawas established accordingly, and was accompaniedby a stephanites agon or contest, in which thevictor was rewarded with a crown '.The three inscriptions at the mosque in theSchol. Find. 01. 7, v. 154.Archer, Hist. d'Herodote,I. 8, note 195, cites Philemonin the Lexicon of Apologies,to show that the games werealso called "Ep^reca jSao'/Xeca :the name Eioteia appears tohave had its origin in a tragicallove story told by Plutarch(in narrate. Amatory),of one Stratton of Orchomenus,who became enamoured of aristotelianof Haliartas, as he sawher bathing in the fountainHercyna, previously to hercarrying the sacred basket inthe rites of Jupiter the kingr^ Aa rf Bao'tXci Kayriipopeiv,Liv. 1. 45, c. 28. Strabo,p. 414.Another of the devices ofthe Theban commander was tocause the arms, which weresuspended in the temple ofHercules at Thebes, to be suddenlyremoved, which the priestsinterpreted to mean that Herculeswas about to make use ofhis arms to assist the Boeotian.• Diodor. 1. 15, c. 53.K 2Boeotia.[chap.Bazar are all in the Boeotia dialect. The first is aconscription of the young men of twenty years ofage, in the year when Carolinas was archon ofthe Boeotian, and magistrate of Lebadeia.The names I did not copy, because many of theletters are doubtful, and accuracy is the more necessaryin consequence of the singularity of thedialect. The second inscription at the mosque ismore complete, and contains a dedication to Trophies(here written Trephonius), by the horsemenof Lebadeia, for a victory in the Pambceotianfestival*. These two inscriptions were publishedby Upon and Wheler. The third, of which thereis a copy in the Inscriptions Antique of Pococke,has the remains of the words cSo^c rp iroXi Ac/Sa-Sctnoiv in the first line, and seems to have containeda catalogue of dedications or deposits in the templeof Trophonius '•From Dec. 3 to Dec. 8. — In the course of thesedays I made several excursions from Livadhla,particularly one in search of Coroneia and Alalco-menes, in company with Mr. Gell, whom I foundat Livadhla. The former of these ancient placesis supposed by the Greeks to have stood at Grateletters as I copiedthem were IKATirETIES, hutthe middle letter was doubtlessnot a y, hut a digamma ; andthe word FiKariFtTuct the Boeotiaform of icicoo'ccrccc — menof twenty years of age. — V.Inscr. No. SO.Tol IwirdTri AtfiaSeiiiwyavidity Tpeffnayi^f viKatrayretoyroi Ac^iTTTOi 2<avjcparc/w,PiKap\i6yriity Mvrwyoc Opal'ETTir/^iii Zavicparccw. —V. Inscr. No. 31.The Pamhoeotia were celebratedperiodically at the templeof Minerva Itonia, nearCoroneia. — Strabo, p. 411.V. Inscr. No. 32.XII.] Boeotia. 133nitza, on the mountain to the eastward of Livadhla,because the Bishop of Coroneia resides there. Butthat situation does not agree with the ancientauthorities. Following the road from Livadhia toThebes, along the foot of the Granitza mountain,we arrive in forty-seven minutes at a J^al^^via ofGranitza, on the foot of the mountain : here standsa single Hellenic tower, about half of which remains.On the opposite side of the plain are seenthe walls of OrchomenuSy inclosing the extremityof the mountain above Skripu. We then followthe foot of the mountain for seven minutes, passsome large perennial springs, and in forty-sevenminutes more, opening upon a valley which extendsseveral miles in a southerly direction towards Helixarrive at a fountain where are two or threesepulchral inscriptions, with nothing but the namein the nominative and xal^i. This was a commonkind of epitaph in Boeotia. Another, often employedboth here and in Phocis, was the name inthe dative preceded by the preposition EXIT. Inneither mode the father's name occurs. The firstis precisely the Sicyonian fashion, as described byPausanias. The Athenians invariably inscribedthe name both of the man's father and of his deus.We have now directly before us a precipitous height,standing at the entrance of the valley, watered oneither side by a rivulet stretching southward towardsHelicon, in a direction parallel to the adjacentmountains, and thus dividing the valley intotwo branches ; this height is undoubtedly the positionof Cornea. Both the streams rise in Helicon;the eastern flows from Mount Zagara; theBoeotia.[chap.western, which is considerably the larger, is composedof branches from Steveniko and Mount Palesand from St. George and the mountain ofGdiiiitza\ This river is crossed by a bridge on thedirect road from Livadhia to Thebes. In five minutesfrom the fountain we ford it, and in eighteen morearrive at the summit of the Acropolis of Gorgonia,which seems to have been of a circular form andlarge extent. There remain a fine piece of polygonalwall on the eastern, another on the southernside of the Acropolis, some large masses of Romantile-work on the very summit, and a piece of thetown wall at the bottom of the hill, on the southeasternside. Fragments of ancient pottery areobservable in the fields on every side, but moreparticularly toward the south-east, where the townseems chiefly to have been situated and where agreat part of it must have been hid from the viewof Orchomenus and the plain. There are severalsources of water on the same side of the hill, manypieces of ancient squared stones in two ruinedchurches, and at a third church, just below aruined tower of lower Greek or Frank construction,two inscriptions, one only of which is in a copylearn from Mr. Finlay,who in the spring of 1829crossed from Khosia by Kukoraand Steveniko to St. George,that the chief sources of thisriver are at a chapel betweenSteveniko and St. George,where are many remains ofantiquity, and the followinginscriptions: — 1. 9cok *A^pca-/jLtXovyroc H, AiXlov Acwyv/iou.2. 'Earl *Apltrrf 'Apffn-wvoc,*ApiOTovtlt:a \c (35) XP^^Xaip€» 3* 'Ap/^miy, 'Ajd^eXoo,'ApurroyelKa, 4. "Ivw^y —5. ^oifflac. No. 4. is in charactersof the best times. No. 5.in very ancient ; the f is thus,A ; the 2 thus, ^.XII.] Boeotia. 135able state of preservation. It is in honor of oneParamonos, who had held the office of strategic ;like many similar inscriptions, it does not containthe name of the city ^ Here also is a sculpture inlow relief, almost buried in the ground, togetherwith some fragments of sepulchral and otherwrought stones. At a Turkish fountain close byare two or three other mnemata inscribed onlywith names.Having crossed the stream on the eastern sideof the hill of Coroneia, which, after following thefoot of the heights for a short distance, crosses theplain, and joins the marshes below A. Dhimitri, weproceed eastward along the foot of the mountain,which here ends in a little low cliff and projectingpoint under the village of Koran, or Dorian*.This point, . as well as the slope of the hill has afertile soil, and is now ploughed. Containingalong the extremity of the. heights, we passunder the villas of Culinary, from whence flowtwo or three rivulets ; beyond the last, on a rockyend of the slope, are some polygonal foundations,apparently those of a single building, such as atemple. They are remains perhaps of the perilousof the temple of Minerva Alalcomeneis, alreadycelebrated in the time of Homer ' ; for the situationcorresponds perfectly to that of Alalcomense,*H /3ovX^ Kol b ^fjfJiOQ IIo- voiag reft tie rf^y vokiy, — V.pdfioroy A trrpaTtiyif' Inscr. No. 28.Local fuv McKeXa^ dpriyovie eliri Qtawv"'Hpif r* 'Apyeci^ ra * AkdXxofuytfie 'AO^ny.II. A. V. 7.136 Boeotia. [chap.as indicated by Strabo and Pausanias Theneighbouring stream therefore is the Triton, uponthe banks of which, near the lake, stood the townsAthensee and Eleusis, which were destroyed by aninundation '. About midway between the Tritonand the projecting precipitous hill called Petra,are some squared stones and fragments of ancientpottery at a ruined church. The road from Culinaryto Rastamyti' crosses a connecting ridge,which unites the Petra with the other mountains.Instead of following this road as far as the lattervillage, we turn to the left on the crest of the ridge,and proceed to the extreme summit of the Petra,where we find some remains of a small ancienttower, or fortress, having a wall of polygonalmasonry, together with the foundations of a triangularcastle of later date.This height commands an extensive and interestingview of all the western division of Boeotia,comprehending its vast plain, with the surroundingheights from the neighbourhood of Thebes toParnassus. Assisted by the recollections of myformer journey, I easily recognize all the positionswhich Strabo and Pausanias have described aroundthe Cepkissian lake. The inner, or north-easternbay of the lake lies before us, as far down as thekatavothra, together with Top61ia and the adjacentislands, about half-way between which andthe mountain of the Sphinx, now called Fags,is a remarkable aperture in the hills on the borders^ Strabo, p. 401, 411, 413. ' Strabo, p. 407. Pausan. ib.Pausan, Boeot. c. 33. * *Pa9ra/Avn|.XII.] B(EOTIA. 137of the lake, near which stands the village of Karlprobably on the site of AcrcBphium. It iseasy to distinguish the several summits in themountainous region between the Euripus and thelake Copais, to which the ancients gave the namesof Ptoum, Messapium, and Hypatus. Fames risesbehind the position of Thebes.The marshy region around the lake leaves abroad plain opposite to Coroneia^ but at Petraadvances so far as to touch this point of the mountains.Near the position of HaliartuSy which stoodon a low but conspicuous eminence, close to thefoot of the hills below Mazi, the marsh againapproaches very near the hills, and beyond it isseen the plain of HaUartuSj extending from MountFaga to the lower acclivities of HeUcoUj and terminatingeastward in the ridge of Onchestus, whichconnects those two mountains. Petra is very rockyon the northern side, and the descent is only practicableon foot. From the extreme point of thehi issue the copious sources which cause themarshes of the lake Cq)hissis to encroach so farupon this part of the plain, as to leave only roomat the sources for the main route from Livadhia toThebes, and thus to make the Petra a pass ofsome strength. The consequence is, that the roadfrom Livadhia to Thebes is not unfrequently interruptedby robbers who establish themselves on thePetra. Some foundations of a Hellenic wall whichare observable stretching into the plain, belongedprobably to a work for the defence of the pass.Returning to Livadhia, we cross, in 37 minutesfrom Petra, the bridge over the river which flows138 Boeotia. [chaponthe north-wester side of the hill of Cornea.The rocky extremity under Culinary, where are theancient vestige, is somewhat less than half waybetween Petra and the bridge. From the bridgethere is an interval of 30 minutes to Kalamaki,where are several mills on the last slope of themountain, turned by the copious springs which Ipassed in the morning by an upper road. Rakhi,a Kaljrvia of Granitza, is half a mile to the rightof Kalamaki, and beyond it, Karya, near the bordersof the marsh.A short examination of the description whichPausanias has given of the places, comprehendedin this day's excursion, will, I think, suffice tojustify the ancient names which I have alreadyassigned, as well as to identify the river Phaedrusand the mountains Libethrium, Laphystium,and Tilphusium \ He states, that Mount Tilphu-sum and the fountain Tilphusa were about fiftystades distant from Haliartus. Here it was said,that Teiresias, proceeding towards Delphi fromThebes, died on drinking the water. His tomb wasat the fountain '. Alalcomense was a small town ^,situated on the extreme declivity of a mountain notvery high. In the plain below it ^ stood the templeof Minerva Alalcomeneis, which, having been deprivedof its ancient statue of ivory by Sylla, wasin consequence neglected ; its ruin had been acceleratedby an ivy tree, which had placed thePausan. Boeot. cc 33 , 34* * dirtaripta rfic Kwfirft Iv rf^vyj' c. 33. \dafjLaXf.KWfJtri oh fuydXtf,XII.] BCBOTIA. 139Stones. A small torrent ^ flowed near, called Triton.Between Alalcomenee and Coroneia, and not farfrom the latter stood the temple of Minerva Itonia,where the common council of the Boeotian assembled.The temple contained brazen statues of MinervaItonia, and of Jupiter, by Agoracritus, thedisciple of Phidias, to which those of the Graces hadrecently been added. In Coroneia, the most remarkableobjects were the altars of Hermes, Epicand of the winds, and a little below thema temple of Juno, containing an ancient statuemade by Pythagoras of Thebes, in which thegoddess was represented, bearing in one hand theSirens'. Mount libethrium was about ^ 40 stadesfrom Coroneia ; here were statues of the Muses,and of the nymphs Libethrides, and two fountains,named tiberias and Petra, resembling the breastsof a woman, and producing water like milk. FromCoroneia to Mount Laphystium and the sanctuary ^of Jupiter Laphystius, the distance was about 20stades : the statue was of stone. Above it therewas an image of Hercules Charles. BetweenMount Laphystium and the temple of MinervaItonia, the river Phalarus crossed the road, flowingto the Lake Cephissis. Over against ^ MountLaphystium was the city Orchomenus.^ voro/ioc dv fiiyoc x^tifMa^ latter having obtained the vie*po. tory, fanned crowns for ec Kopwvccav il 'AXaX- selves from the feathers of theKQiuywv d^ixiaOau c. 34. wings of the Sirens.The Sirens had been per- * &^,shaded by Juno to contend with ' Tifierog.the Muses in singing, and the * wipay.140 Boeotia. [Chap,This last remark of Pausanias seems alone sufficientto identify Mount LaphystiumYfith the mountainof Granitzay which is separated from MountHelicon hy a pass leading from St. George to Livad-hia and advances near Kalamdki, north-eastward,into the plain exactly opposite to the hill of ScriptorOrnaments. The exact situation of the tenensof Jupiter Laphystius cannot easily be ascertainedbut by the discovery of some remains of the temple,as the distance of twenty stades from Coroneia willcorrespond with many points on the mountain ofGranitza. The temple of Minerva Itonia was at thefoot of the mountain in the plain on the easternside of Coroneia, and as it would appear fromStrabo, on the bank of the torrent which flowsthere, for he observes of this temple, that it wasfounded after the Trojan war by the Boeotia of theThessalian Arne, who having been expelled fromThessaly by the Pirates *, occupied Coroneia, andbuilt the temple in the plain before the city '.He adds, that the river which flowed by the temple,received its name Curious, written Cornelius by Alcseusin some verses relating to Coroneia, from aThessalian stream ', and that at the temple ofMinerva Itonia, the Pamboeotian festival was celebrated.If, as seems evident from the varioustestimonies just cited, the river on the easternside of Coroneia was the Curious, it follows thatthe river of St. George, on the western side, is theThucyd. 1. 1> c. 12. Thessalian river is named r^ xpo ain-ris 9red/y. — radius. Alcaeus being of Mity-Strabo, p. 411. line, and writing in .colic,In p. 438 of Strabo, the used w for ov.XII.]Boeotia.Phalarus. According to Plutarch, a branch ofthe Phalarus, which joined it near Coroneia, wasnamed Isomantus, and more anciently Oplias ^This seems to be the rivulet from Steveniko, whichjoins that of St. George a little above the ancientsite.In like manner as the pass of St George, separatingthe mountain of Grdnitza from the mainbody of Helicon renders probable the suppositionthat the former mountain had a separate name,and was the ancient Laphystium, so a similar reasonleads to the opinion, that the mountain of Zagarawas the ancient Libethrium ; that remarkable summitbeing completely separated from the greatheights of Helicon by an elevated valley, in whichare two villages named Zagara, and above them,on the rugged mountain, a monastery '. The distanceof forty stades, which Pausanias places betweenCoroneia and Mount Libethrium, will correspondto some place in the vale or on the mountainof Zagara : and it is not impossible thatthe monastery may occupy the exact position of thesanctuary of the Muses.^p6^yoy irapa ri^v ir^Xii") tywdXai juy 'OirXiav vvv Zi^IffOjiayroy irpofrayoptvovaiy, —Plutarch, in Lysand.Zayapa, or more commonlyZayopOf is a name found inmany parts of Greece, and appearsto have been introducedhy the Servant or Bulgariansalthough no people of thoseraces may now he found in theplaces so called. We learnfrom the Byzantine history,that the kingdom of Bulgaria,when its capital was Chris,was known at Constantinoplehy the name of Zagor&, whichsome of the Byzantines supposedto have been formedfrom a Greek word, i^ayopd, —Niceties in Alex. Conn. — .Chregor. 1. 5, c. 1.142 Boeotia. [chap.If Zagara was Libethrium, TQphusium, Tilphos-sum or Tilphossseum was evidently confined to theheight now called Petra. It is justly described byCorporation as a mountain near the lake Copais ^The fortress on the summit, probably bore the samename, which was derived from the source Tilphusaor Tilphossa, at the foot of the hill '. In the hymnto Apollo, commonly ascribed to Homer, the wordis written Delphusa ', and seems in that ancientpoem, which contains many geographical inconsistencies,to have been confounded with Delphi, aword of the same etymological origin S and derivedalso from its remarkable fountain. At Tilphusa,besides a tomb of Teiresias there was a sanctuaryof Apollo Tilphosius *.Dec. 8. — At 10.5, quitting my lodging in thelower part of the town of Livadhia, I descend alongthe right side o{ the Hercyna into the valley, throughgardens and a rich cultivated tract ; and at 10.25,leaving the road to Kapuma to the left cross alittle below the junction of its two branches, theriver which is formed by the union of the Itercana with that already mentioned as flowing froma valley to the westward. The Hercyna is the moreconsiderable stream of the two, is permanent insummer, and abounds in trout, which are not producedin the western branch ; the course of theunited river, nevertheless, is a continuation of thatof the western branch, and appears from Theophrastusto have been called, at its junction withHarpocrat. in TCK^ovaijop. ' Hymn, in ApoU. v. 244.Pindar, ap. Athen. 1. 2, c. 4. « r^XXw.Strabo, p. 411. Pausan. B<eot. ' Strabo, ibid,c. 33.XII.] BCBOTIA. 143the lake, not Hercyna, Int Probatia \ which wasprobably the name of the western branch. Thevalley which it waters, is the territory, perhaps,of a town near Lebadeia, named Train ^. Ihave already observed, that the road from Livad-hia to Kastri and Salona by ^^ the triple way'as well as that to Dhistomo or AmhryssuSj ledalong this valley. Proceeding, we soon arriveunder some rocky hills on the northern sideof the vale of JLebadeiaj — and having passed, at10.45, through the little hamlet of Krupi at thefoot of these hills, soon begin to open the vale ofChwroneia. At 11.15, we are at the eastern extremityof the heights which separate the valleysof CJuBToneia and Lebadeia^ and which terminatenorthward in a projection immediately opposite tothe high precipitous summit of Mount Acontium;midway in the plain, rises the barrow near theright bank of the Cephissus, which I suppose to beamonument of the battle between Sylla and theforces of Mithridates ; near the tumulus, the riverturns from its previous course along the foot of theAcontium, towards the middle of the plain, butnear Orchomenus again approaches the mountain,and then "winds like a serpent*" round Orchome-nus into the marshes.^ Theophr. de plant. 1. 4, c. 12.Strabo, p. 423.• . . • *0£ irapa HayovlBa TXriKutrd r* epv/n^vKai re ^4* *Opxo/Acvov eWiyfiivos eltri, BpaKuy wq.Hesiod. ap. Strabo. p. 424.It would seem, from these verses, that Glecon was anothername for Chaeronea. *■144 Boeotia, [chap.The direct road from livadhia to Talanda nowbranches to the left, and after crossing the plain ofChtBToneia enters the vale which separates Acontiumfrom MdyUum, from whence it proceeds, over theconnecting ridge, to Vogdh&ni. Before we begin tocross the plain in a direct line to the extremity ofMount Acontium, upon which Orchomenus was built,we pass an insulated hill near the extremity of theCluBroneian ridges, on the summit of which standsone of a system of towers, resembling those whichare observable in the Morea. They seem to havebeen intended for communication by signal, andmay all be attributed to the Frank princes whopossessed Greece in the thirteenth and fourteenthcenturies. Some of the most remarkable in Boeotiaare — near Bissikeni, at Neokhorio in the district ofThespuBj at Megalomulki on the site of HaUartus,at Xeropyrgo on a point of the hill which projectsinto the marshes two miles E.N.E. of Orchomenus^and there is another beyond the latter, not far fromTopolia. We now cross the opening of the vale ofC/uBToneia direct to Skripu, cross the C^hissiu bya bridge, and arrive at Skripu exactly at noon. Thisvillage consists of about one hundred houses, standingpartly on the rocky base of the mountain, andpartly on the river side in the plain, just where, afterhaving flowed along the southern side of Acontiumyit turns from an eastern to a north-eastern course,and thence north into the marshes. Passing throughthe village, we proceed to the monastery of theOcoroicoc, situated a little beyond it to the northward.Orchomenus, like many other Greek cities, occupiedthe triangular face of a steep mountain, atXII.] Boeotia. 145its rise iron the plain ; and possessed in perfectionthose advantages of position, which the Greek engineersgenerally sought for, being defended onevery side by precipices, rivers, and marshes. Thesummit is naturally separated from the ridge ofGentium, which accounts for the distinctive appellationHyphanteium mentioned by Theopompus.But the upper part of the hill forming a veryacute angle, was fortified differently from the customarymodes.gttAaaiivB tjt146 Boeotia. [chap.loBtead of a considerable portion of it having beeninclosed to form an acropolis, there is only a smallcastle on the summit, haying a long narrow approachto it from the body of the town, betweenwalls which, for the last two hundred yards, arealmost parallel, and not more than twenty or thirtyyards asunder. Below this approach to the citadelthe breadth of the hill gradually widens, and inthe lowest . part of the town the inclosed space isnearly square. It is defended on the lowest sideby a wall, which crossed the slope of the hill alongthe crest of a ledge of rock, which there forms adivision in the slope. In this wall, which is at threefourths of the distance from the castle to the monastery,there are some foundations of the gate whichformed the lower entrance into the city ; and onthe outside of it are many large masses of wroughtstone, the remains, apparently, of some temple orother public building. The southern wall of thecity, which follows a line parallel to the CephissuSj istraceable, with scarcely any intermission, througha distance of three quarters of a mile ; and in manyplaces several courses of masonry are still extant.The wall derives its flank defence from squaretowers, placed for the most part at long intervals,with an intermediate short flank, or break, in the lineof wall. In a few places, the masonry is of a veryearly age, but in general it is of the third kind, oralmost regular. The former dates from the earlierand more celebrated Orchomenus, the latter isprobably posterior to the battle of Chaeronea, whenthe Orchomenii were restored to their possessions byPhilip, son of Amyntas, and when their city, whichXII.] Boeotia 147had been destroyed near thirty years before by theThebans, was re-established.Towards the middle of the northern side the hillof Ornaments is most precipitous, and here thewalls are not traceable. The circumference ofthe whole was about two miles. The citadeloccupies a rock, about forty yards in diameter,and seems to have been an irregular hexagon;but three sides only remain, no foundations beingvisible on the eastern half of the rock. At thenorthern angle are the ruins of a tower, and parallelto the north-western side there is a ditch cut inthe rock, beyond which are some traces of an outwork.The hill is commanded by the neighbouringpart of Mount Acontiumy but not at such a distanceas to have been of importance in ancient warfare.The access to the castle from the city was first byan oblique flight of forty-four steps, six feet wide,and cut out of the rock ; and then by a direct flightof fifty steps of the same kind.The monuments which Pausanias remarked atOrchomenus were temples of Bacchus and of theGraces, the treasury of Minyas, a fountain \ towhich there was a descent, tombs of Minyas andof Hesiod, and a brazen figure bound by a chainof iron to a rock, supposed to represent a spectrewhich had haunted this rock, and which the oracleof Delphi, on being consulted, pronounced to betheghost of Actseon. The Oracle ordained thatthe remains of Actseon should be buried, and thestatue erected which Pausanias saw. The templeof the Graces was extremely ancient ; they wereKpiivfi, — Pausan. Boeot. c. dS.1.2148 Boeotia. [chap.worshipped under the figure of rade stones, saidto have fallen from heaven in the time of Eteocles,the founder of the temple, who lived several generationsbefore the Trojan war. It was not untilthe time of Pausanias that statues of the goddesses,in stone, were added. The treasury of Minyaswas a circular building rising to a summit notvery pointed, but terminating in a stone which wassaid to hold together the entire building ^Some remains, which have every appearance ofhaving belonged to the last-mentioned building,are found to the eastward of the lower wall, wherethe height terminates in a low projection which isseparated from the river by a level only a few hundredyards in breadth. The artists employed byLord Elgin attempted to excavate the ruins of thebuilding, but were deterred from making muchprogress by the large masses of stone which presentedthemselves, and which they had not themeans of removing. As all the lower parts of theconstruction are buried in the ruins of the upper,they will probably be found in situ whenever acomplete excavation shall be made. Some detailsmay then be obtained of this curious edifice,which was supposed to be a century moreancient than the similar building at Mycenae, andthe first of the kind that was ever erected '•The door-way, of which there are considerable\ldov fikv lipyatrrai, fryrjiia * ^rftmvpdy rt dvBpufTriav, iv2e frcpif £pcc iffTiv ahr^' jco- "ttr^eVf Miyvag irpfiroc. cc i^iro-/icVi)* Toy ^i. dywrdrfa rwy \t- — Pausan. Bceot. c. 86.d(oy ijiaaly hpjioyiav vayrl ttvaiXII.]B(EOTIA.remains, closely resembled that of the treasury ofAtreus. In both, the sides of the door inclined so asto make it eider below than above ; nor are thedimensions of the corresponding parts very differentin the two doors. The width is the same within a fewinches : here I measured eight feet three inches immediatelybelow the soffit, at Mycenae eight feet sixinches. There were probably two great slabs in thearchitrave, as at Mycenae, though one only is nowleft, which is of white marble, of six unequal sides,sixteen feet in its greatest length, eight in itsgreatest breadth, and three feet two inches and ahalf in thickness. It is consequently much smallerthan the larger of the two slabs above the door ofthe treasury of Atreus, which is twenty-eight feetlong and nineteen broad on its upper surface, andthree feet nine inches in thickness. As at Mycenae,the edge of the stone, which formed a partof the interior surface of the building, was curvedboth horizontally and vertically. The versed sineof the arch on the upper surface is one foot threeinches and seven-eighths, and the chord fourteenfeet nine inches, which will give a diameter ofabout forty-one feet.Steiiom.3.2 1■The corresponding dimension of the treasury ofAtreus, or its diameter at the top of the door, is about150 Boeotia. [chap.thirty-been feet. From this comparison therefore,it would seem that the treasury of Minyas was largerthan that of Atreus, though there could hardlyhave been such a difference between the two monumentsas the reader might infer from the admirationof Pausanias in the one instance, and his silencein the other. Of the Orchomenian building heasserts that there was nothing more wonderfuleitherin Greece or in any other country, and he comparesit to the walls of Tiryns and the pyramids ofEgypt. But the extravagance of the latter comparisonis brought down to a reasonable level bythe former ; and was probably suggested to Pausaniasby a peculiarity in the Orchomenian treasury,in which it appears to have differed fromthat of Mycenae ^ namely, that the former was notsubterraneous like the latter, and consequentlythat its exterior form resembled, in some measure,that of the Egyptian pyramids. A subterraneousconstruction of this kind, when formed on the sideof a hill as at Mycenae, presented from withoutlittle more than an entrance into the hill betweenwalls ending in a door-way ; whereas the descriptionof the treasury of Minyas as rising to a summitnot very pointed, seems evidently to imply that itwas not hidden in the earth. The situation of theruins of the treasury of Minyas confirms in somemeasure this supposition, the ground being rockyand almost level, and therefore in neither particularadapted to a building like that of Mycenae,which required a sloping hill of friable materials.Perhaps the assertion of the Orchomenii as to theSee Travels in the Morea c. 20.XII.] Boeotia. 151upper stone of their building, which suggests adifference of construction between their treasuryand that of Atreus, may also be explained by theformer having been exposed to view, and not subterraneous; since it is probable that in that casethe upper stone was not simply super-imposed, asat Mycenae, but was connected with the surroundingmasonry. It might even be inferred from themeaning which Pausanias on all other occasionsgives to the word apjLu>vca, that the upper part ofthe building at Orchomenus was a dome constructedwith stones shaped to a center; thoughit ought also to be remarked that Pausanias, bythe addition of the word ^aai, seems not to havebeen himself quite convinced that the assertion ofthe Orchomenii was correct.Strabo observes, that the Orchomenus of his timewas supposed to stand on a different site from themore ancient city, the inundations of the lake havingforced the inhabitants to retire from the plain towardsMount Acontium^ This seems to accord withthe position of the treasury on the outside of the existingwalls, since it cannot be conceived that Minyaswould have so placed it. It is probable, therefore,that the city, in the height of its power, extendedto the extreme point of the hill below thetreasury, and perhaps even to the bank of theCephissus.The monastery of Skripu stands about midwaybetween the treasury and the river, below thelowest slope of the hill, on a level with the river'sStrabo, p. 416.152 BjCEOTiiU [chap.bank. It contains a large church, consisting of adome and three aisles, which was built, as someinscriptions coeval with the walls of the church indicate,at the end of the ninth century, by Leo,who held the dignity of Protospatharius under theemperors Basil, Leo, and Constantine the seventh.The monastery probably occupies the exact site ofthe temple of the Graces ; for it is in the memoryof the present occupants that the pedestal of atripod dedicated to the Graces, which is now in thechurch, was found in an excavation made on thespot. Of the other inscriptions which the conventcontains, two have been removed by the persons employedby the Earl of Elgin since I was last here ;the rest I have transcribed. They are all, exceptone, in the Boeoto-^olic dialect, which employedthe digamma, and are consequently very importantto philology. Among them are three epitaphs of avery remote antiquity. All the other documentsin which the digamma is employed are in charactersof a good time of art, and appear to be allnearly of the same date. That one of them, havingno appearance of being more recent than theothers, is not so old as Alexander, is proved fromits being a decree of Proxenia in favour of ^^ an malianfrom Alexandria," or native of AlexandriaTroas, the name of which city was not changed fromAntigone to Alexandria until after the death of^ The two removed are now to Orchomenus, and partlyin the British Museum : one of liquidated. As interest for thethese, which is the longest of remainder he was to enjoy aall, relates to a loan which had limited right of pasture in thebeen made by a man of Eilateia Orchomenian land.XII.] Boeotia. 153Alexander ^ It is probable, therefore, that theyare all of the third or of the latter end of theforth century B.C., as after that time the citiesof Greece were rapidly impoverished, in consequenceof the wars between the Romans andtheir adversaries, of which Greece became thescene. The document in which the digamma andother dialectic forms are not used, we may supposeto have been posterior to the distinction ofdialects ; but not long afterwards, as it contains,like one of the dialectic inscriptions, a catalogueof victors in the games, with many of the sametitles, and is engraved in characters indicative ofno great difference of date. In the inscriptions inwhich the digamma is employed, the people arecalled 'Ep^ofuvfoc, and the town 'Ep^o^voc^ &northography clearly showing that the coins bearingthe types of a Boeotian shield, of an ear of wheat,a grain of wheat, and a garland of olive, with thelegend EPXO, EPX, EP, or E, were all the moneyof this celebrated and wealthy republic.One of the inscriptions which is inserted in theexterior wall of the monastery, is a dedication toBacchus by two victorious chorea ; probably thestone supported a tripod ', as certainly did anotherin the church, which records the dedication of atripod to the Graces by the BcBOtians by commandof the oracle of Apollo. This oracle was probablythat of Terra, a place noted for its temple of ApolloStrabo, p. 593. cation to Bacchus. The worthysecond inscription ship of Bacchus at OrchisOrchomenus in the Bri menus is alluded to by Pan-wishMuseum is a similar dedi sanias.Boeotia.[chap.and oracular responses, and at that period of time,a dependency of Orchomenus ^Of the three sepulchral inscriptions of remoteantiquity to which I before alluded, one is that of awoman named Caille, in the nominative ; the twoothers, which are on one stone, are those of and Demon in the dative, preceded by iwLKvScXXif is written KvStXXc. Baceuas is BajcctiFacwith the digamma, as in the more modem Scepticinscriptions, and Demon is Ac)^(rov, when neither Hnor Q were in the alphabet. The A, B, A, A, N,2, Y, X, are all of very antique forms, and mostof them resemble the same letters in the Latinalphabet ^Exactly at the foot of the precipitous rocks whichformed the limit of the northern side of the city,are the sources of the river anciently called Melts,and now Mavropotami, synonyms derived apparentlyfrom the dark colour of its deep transparentwaters. Among several sources there are twomuch larger than the others, and both considerablerivers. One flows north-eastward, and ata distance of little more than half a mile meets theCephisstiSj which a little beyond the junction becomesso enveloped among the marshes extendingfrom thence to the heights to the north-east, on'Plutarch in Pelopid. Id.dedefect, ora. — Nemus et Callingap. Stephan. in T^yvpa.As the greater part of theinscriptions of Orchomenushave now been repeatedly publishedand commented uponI have lit hog raved only theabove-mentioned and one otherunpublished (V. Inscript. Nos.35, 36, 37), but have placedall the most interesting at theend of this volume, in the cursivecharacter.XII.] Boeotia. 155which stands a tower called Xeropyrgo, as to bescarcely traceable ; but it re-appears in a single bodyabout three miles to the eastward of Skripu, andafter flowing for some distance in the direction ofKardhitza turns towards Topolia, where it entersthe lake, which in the present season fills thewhole of the north-eastern bay of the Cephissianbasin.The other large source or branch of the Melasjwhich is to the westward of the former, follows foraconsiderable distance the foot of the clifis of and is then lost in the marshes. Thisillustrates Plutarch, who, after having remarkedthat ^'the plain of Orchomenus is the largest andfinest in Boeotia, but naked of trees and plants,except towards the Melts," observes, that ^'thisriver rises below the city of Orchomenus, and isthe only river in Greece which is navigable atits sources, though it has not a long course, thegreater part being lost in impervious and muddymarshes', and the remainder uniting with the Ce*hisses near the place where the lake producesthe auletic reed." According to the same author,the Melts augmented about the summer solstice,like the Nile, and produced plants of the samekind as those of the Nile, but not so large, andbearing no fruit ^Although I cannot obtain a confirmation of theperiodical swelling of the Melts from the presentinhabitants, such a negative testimony will hardlyPlutarch in SyllL Some by the biographer in the life ofof these remarks are repeated Pelopidas.156 Boeotia. [chap.invalidate the observation of the more enlightenednative of the neighbouring Chseroneia, especiallyas such an increase of waters about midsummerseems no more than natural, the subterraneousriver, which here emerges from its limestone cavities,being probably fed by the melting of thesnows on Helicon or Parnassus, and its water,therefore, being naturally most abundant in theseason when the snows melt with the greatestrapidity. The marshes still produce in abundancethe reeds for which Orchomenus was ancientlynoted. The auletic or flute-greed is described byPliny as very long, and without knots \ Plutarchobserves, that the best were produced near thejunction of the Cephissus and Melts. But thelatter river was not generally favourable to them,according to Theophrastus, who mentions as thebest situations some deep pools called the Chytri,in a place named Pelican, between the Melts andCephissus' ; the confluence of the Probatia and thatof the Cephissus with the lake, a place to the northwardof the latter junction, named Boedrias, andgenerally wherever the water was deep and the bottommuddy'. Hence the growth and quality dependedupon the depth of water in the lake, whichvaried annually, and was said to be greatest everyninth year. Distinct from the auletic reed were thePlin. H. N. 1. 16, c. 35. ' Theorist. de plant . 1. 4,The place where the Ce-> c. 12. Strabo (p. 407) noticeshisses joined was named (Sepia the auletic reeds of the marshesjca/iir^, or the sharp turning: of Haliartus.near it was a fertile plain namedPippins.XII.] Boeotia. 157Characeiaa, or reed serving to make fences andpalisades, which was very thick and strong, andgrew on the banks of the lake ; and the Plotia,so called as growing on the irXoo&c, or floatingislands, which, like those of the Lake of loan-nina,are formed of decayed reeds, rushes, androots of grass, furnishing a soil for fresh plants, andwhich, detaching themselves from the edge of largetracts of the same materials, are launched into thelake by the wind.These and other peculiarities of the Cephissis itwould be interesting to examine more minutely, butnot a single monoxylo is possessed by any of the villageson this side of the plain. Hence the inhabitantsderive little or no benefit from either the vegetableor animal productions of the lake and itssurrounding marshes, though the monks of Skripudescribe all the watery parts as being covered attimes with water-fowl, and are fully aware of theexcellence of those eels so renowned among theancient Athenians, and which the monks describeas large, white, of delicate flavour, and light ofdigestion. They are taken in considerable numbersby the people of Topolia in the permanentpart of the lake near that town, from whence, eitherfresh or salted, they are carried for sale throughoutthe surrounding country, especially in the time ofLent. When both Attica and Boeotia were richand populous, the Cephissis and other lakes ofBoeotia furnished the people of this province withthe means of a constant and advantageous trafficwith Attica, which possesses not a single troutstream, nor a lake except that of Marathon, which158 Boeotia. [chap.in the summer is reduced to such small dimensions,that a Boeotian eel could hardly exist in it.Although the ancients employed the words Ce-plessisand Copais without any clear discrimination,a very convenient distinction may be madebetween the Copais or lake of Copse, which wasthe north-eastern extremity of the basin, whereeven in summer some water always remains,and the Cephissis, which comprehends the wholetract of occasional lakes and marshes, impassablelimited by a range of heights on the northern andeastern sides, but blended with the plain in theopposite quarter, and in all directions enlargingor diminishing its boundaries according to theseason. At present the plain is dry half way fromSkripu to Xeropyrgo, the rest is a marsh; theedge of which follows a line drawn from Xeropyrgoto Petra ; but the level of the waters is now muchlower than it is expected to be in the spring. Southerlygales, as Pausanias has observed, are apt toinundate the levels near Orchomenvs.The fertility of this plain is shown by its maize :I counted 900 grains in one cob; the reed is verystrong and large, and, plastered with mud, it formsthe most common material of the cottages near theCephissic marshes. The stem contains a considerablequantity of saccharine matter : I have oftenseen the Egyptians eat it like a sugar cane, buthere it is too valuable to be much used in its immaturestate.The citadel of Orchomenus, besides the unlimitedview which it commands of the great western basinof Boeotia, and its renowned barriers, looks downXII.] Boeotia. 159to the north-east upon a country of considerableextent, lying between the mountains of Talandaand the northern shore of the lake. It is cultivatedaround a few villages, but in general furnishes pastureonly, the soil being, in most parts, of no greatfertility. The principal villages are Lutzi, Radiiand Paulo, lying in that order from hence, and allbelonging to the district of Thebes. Beyond themin the mountains towards the Euhoic frith, are and Malesina in the Vilayeti of Talanda, andMartinoo in that of Livadhia.Xeropyrgo, situated three miles E.N.E.of Skiptonthe heights which bound the marshes, is probablythe site of Tegyra, for Plutarch says that Tegyrastood not far from Orchomenus, above the marshesof the Melts, and that the road from the one to theother led through a pass caused by those marshes.This pass was the scene of an important victorygained by Pelopidas over the Spartans, and whichwas soon followed by that of Leuctra Tegyra notbeing named in the Homeric catalogue of the Boeotiancities, and having been so near to the powerfulOrchomenus, was probably never of any great importance,except from its temple of Apollo, and anOracle which had ceased before the battle of Tegyra,In the time of Plutarch all the part of Boeotia to thenorthward of the lake Copais, seems to have beenno better inhabited than it is at present, for in oneof his Dialogues he introduces an assertion, thatabout Tegyra and Mount Ptoum, two places formerlyso much famed for their oracles, hardly a^ Plutarch, in Pelops.160 Boeotia. [chap. XII.herdsman or shepherd was to be met with m aday's journey. All Greece, he adds, could hardlyfurnish 3000 hoplitse, or the number which theState of Megara alone sent against the Persiansat Plataea It is not to be supposed, however,that the best parts of Greece were as much depopulatedas these unproductive districts ; or that thepopulation of Greece had diminished, in the sameproportion as the number of regular troops maintainedby it. The Roman conquest had put anend to the maintenance of native soldiers, and tothe military art in Greece, and although as earlyas the time of Polybius, the population and wealthof the country had been grievously diminished, andhad not improved in the reign of Augustus, therecan be little doubt, that between this time and thatof Hadrian, Greece had somewhat recovered, inconsequenceof the peace and protection which thecountry enjoyed in common with the other provincesof the Roman Empire, and to a greater degreethan many of them.^ Plutarch, de defect. Ora.CHAPTER XIII.Boeotia, PHOCIS, LOCRIS.Departure from Skripu — Source of the Menu — Tzamali, AspU^don — Exarkho — Ab<ff — Temple of Apollo — Vogdhani — Hys— Galatia — Aialania — Opus — Cynus — Orohue —Dessus — Topography of Eastern Locris — Daphnus — Alone,Enemies, Throniam^ river Boagrius, Scarpheia, Nicaea, Pha-rygce or Tare, Augeuje^ Bessaa, CalUartu — Mount Cents —Mount Khlomo, Cyrtone — Cor seta — Return to Valtesi — Naryxx — Sfaka — Merali — Khubavo — Paleokastro ofBelied, Parapotamii — River Cephissus — Kapuma — Return toLivadhia — Ancient military transactions in the plain of Chaeronea— battle between Sylla and Archelaus — Mount Philo-scotus— River Assus — Mount Thurium — Riversilforttw, MolesAsia — Departure for Thebes — Petra — Ocalea — ^Mazi — Ha-hiatus— Death lysander — River Lopkis — Fountain Missus,Orchalides — Mount Alopecum — Rivers Permessus, Olmeius —Onchestus — Mount Faga, Phcenicium or Phicium — The Genericplain — Thebes.Dec. 9. — This forenoon, having quitted the monasteryof Skripu, 1 cross the north-eastern angle ofthe ancient city, and at 10.58 begin to pass by anarrow paved road, between the foot of the uppercliffs which formed the northern boundary of thecity and the summit of the lower, which immediatelyoverhang the principal source of the Melasyor that which joins the Cephissus. It is difficult tounderstand where the Temple of Hercules couldhave been, which Pausanias places at the springsVOL. II. M162 Boeotia. [chap.of the Melts, seven stades from Orchomenus ^ forthe rock rises so abruptly from them, that there isno position for a temple, and the sources are notseven stades from Orchomenus, but immediatelyunder its northern side. At 11.9, we quit thelower range of cliffs, the higher still overhangingthe road, and soon afterwards begin to descend therugged side of the mountain, by a most perilouspath. At 11.33, having arrived at the foot ofthe hill, we enter a plain on the north-easternside of Mount Acontium, bounded eastward bythe marshes of the Melts, and pursue the bordersof the marsh to Tzamali, a small collection of hutson the brink, where we arrive at 11.45. Thisseems to be the site of Aspledon, a Boeotian city inthe time of the Trojan war, but in that of the RomanEmpire an abandoned site of the Orchomenia.Strabo states, that its distance from Orchomenuswas twenty stades, which is sufficiently correct, andthat the Melts flowed between them *, which is trueas to the northern Melts, though it is not crossedin the road. It is not easy, however, to understandthe western exposure," by which Strabo endeavoursto account for Eudeielus, the name ofAspledon in later times, Tzamali being open to theeastward, and surrounded by heights in a westerndirection. Nor is the abandonment of the placeby its inhabitants in consequence of the scarcity of^ Pausanias, Boeot c. 38. rXt/iaroc oIkuov edit Karouoo^i. . . . n)v *A<nr\ij^6va Kal fidXtora ro eif-^eijupoy,Heir* £v^£/cXoc fUTWvofidtrOri Kal A(€)^ci ^e tov *Opj(pfi€yovavrij Kal // x^P^ ^^X° ^* Wwfxa aralia iiKotn fAiTa^v S* 6 MeXacvpotrfepofiiyri kt: rov huXiPov irora/bioc***-Strabo, p. 415.XIII.] PHocis. 163water, as reported by Pausanias \ compatible withthe vicinity of such a river as the Melts. Uponexamining, however the words of the two authors,we find that neither of them guarantees the factwhich he alludes to, from his personal knowledge.The word r&ya^ employed by Strabo, and the i^atrlof Pausanias, leave the origin of the name, ,and the cause of the abandonment of thesite of Aspledon, equally doubtful.At Tzamali we quit the Top61ia road and turnto the left to the head of the plain ; at 11. 55 leaveto the right that which conducts to the placeslying between the northern shore of the Cephissisand the JEuboic frith, and at 12.11, arriving atdie western extremity of the plain of Appletonascend some rugged hills which connect MountIconium with the peak now called Khlomo. At12.35, at the head of the ascent, we enter upon aplain which, interrupted by some small heights,reaches to the northern side of Mount Acontium^and is connected in the opposite direction with ahollow which slopes to Khubavo, Belissi, and theStena of the Cephisms. At 12.45 we halt till 1.24at a fountain to dine ; and after a rugged descent,arrive at 1.40 at Exarkho', a village of SO houses,in a spot where two narrow valleys meet, whichrise from hence towards two summits of the ridgeof Khlom6. The northern is the largest, and is ingreat part cultivated.On a peaked hill above Exarkho, to the west,'A(nr\7i^6ya 5e hXnreiy rove foiroc. — Pausan. Boeot. c. 38.oir^ropac ^fft»', vBaroc oiravl' ' 'E^ap^oc.M 21 64 PHocis. [chap.are the ruins of a small polls, probably Ba. Thehill being, like all the others of this range, a barerugged rock of white lime-stone, and the wallsbeing built of the same stone, the ruins mighteasily be passed without notice at a short distance,although nearly half the height of the wall is insome places extant. No remains are now to beseen on the summit of the peak ; but on its southwesternside two parallel walls are traceable atthe distance of about 100 yards asunder, whichformed apparently an interior inclosure of thecitadel. These walls in most part are a perfectspecimen of the second order of Hellenic masonry,having, as it were, but one course in the wholework. Some of the polygonal masses are verylarge. As usual in Greek fortresses of the highestantiquity, there were very few towers, the crossdefence being chiefly procured by simple flanks atintervals. There is one tower, however, near the^ principal gate. This gate, which is now buried towithin six feet of the top, is of a singular form, theupper part, which is three feet high, diminishingfrom ten feet in breadth to seven and a half. Thisseems to have been merely an opening to admitlight, for immediately below it there are projectionsfrom the wall on each side, which were evidentlypivots for the suspension of folding doors. There arethe vestiges of two other gates immediately oppositeto each other in the parallel walls before noticed.The hill is quite insulated, and is very difficult ofascent on the north-eastern and eastern sides,where no walls are now traceable. I cannot recognizeany remains of the theatre which Pau-xiii.]phocis. 166sanias remarked, and which, as well as theAgora, was of an antique construction. Havingdescended the hill on the west, passed through aravine, and entered the plain at a point which ishalf way on the road from Exarkho to Vogdhani,we arrive a little farther at a small eminenceadvancing into the valley, upon which are someremains of a square building of regular Hellenicmasonry, but built of stones smaller than usual.The lower part of the wall of one side of the inclosureis extant, together with a portion of one ofthe adjoining sides. Within the inclosed space liesa large square stone, with a simple moulding, togetherwith another, circular and pierced in themiddle, probably the peritoneum of a cistern orgranary. I have little doubt that these are remainsof the temple of Apollo of Able, whoseoracle was of such ancient and extensive celebrity,that it was consulted, together with thatof Trophonitts, by Croesus, and again by Mardonius^ It was twice destroyed by fire ; the firsttime by the Persians, in their march throughPhocis, after they had taken Hyampolis'; andagain, in the Phocis war, b. c. 346. The Boeotianwere posted at the temple, while the Phociswere erecting a fortress at or near Able ', when a fireHerodot. 1. 1, c. 46; 1. S, ahrovQ ol Bouarol. — Diodor. 1.c. 134. 16, c. 5S. Pausan. Phocis. c.Id. 1. 8, c. 33. 35. The Phocis were ^tMsiwy ohoBofAovyrtay bably repairing the citadel of^povpioy well tclq orofial^ofiiyag Abae itself on the summit of"A/Jac KaB" tic ttrTiy 'AttoWwkoc the hill.» »aytoy iipoy, lorparivtray trr166 PHOcis. [chap.having occurred, accidentally according to diodorus,but which Pausanias attributes with moreprobability to the Thebaid, the temple was destroyed,as well as some Phocian refugees within it.Hence it is evident that the temple was not withinthe city, which agrees with the existing ruinsThe most ancient and celebrated temples of Greecewere generally so detached* The grove of Trophiesfurnishes a neighbouring example, andperhaps that of the Graces at Orchomenus wasanother. The practice was closely connected withthe peculiar character of the people, whose senseof the inviolability of the sacred places, was onlyexceeded by their jealous mistrust of one another.After the second misfortune the temple of Agesremained a ruin until the reign of Hadrian, whenthat emperor caused a smaller to be erected adjacentto the ancient building; and of this, orrather of its peribolus, the existing walls are probablythe remains. In the new temple, Pausaniasfound three ancient upright statues, in brass, ofApollo, Latona, and Diana, which were dedicationsof the AbsBi, and had perhaps been. savedfrom the former temple.From hence it takes me 10 minutes to ride toVogdhdni' a village smaller than Exarkho, andsituated just at the upper extremity of a valley,which slopes to Belissi and Khubavo, and wherethe torrents from Mount Khlomo and the adjoiningridges unite, and descend through the middle ofthe aforesaid valley to the Cephisstis. The prin-xiii.]Phocis. 167cipal branch comes from the north, along a valewhich is inclosed between Mount Khlomo and aparallel ridge which has already been describedas having its south-western termination at Khu«baYO, Merali, and Sfaka^ at the northern entranceof the Stend of the Cephissus.At 6 minutes northward of Vogdhanii a pointor tongue, advancing from the western mountaininto the valley, is crowned with the ruins of asmall ancient town, which Pausanias shows tohave been Hyampolis ; for he states that the roadfrom Orchomenus to Opus led by Able and Ham*polis, but that Able was a little on the left of theroute '. Mount Khlomo being exactly interposedbetween Skripu and Toland, near which latterOpus was situated, the road from Orchomenusto Opus naturally followed the easy valleys. to thewestward of that mountain, instead of making adirect course over it, and traversed consequentlythe site of £xarkh6, leaving the hill of Ab on thelefifc, from whence it passed under the walls ofHyampolis, which advance into the middle of thevalley. The road from Hyampolis to Elateiaia is expresslydescribed by Pausanias as a mountain-road ;and we find accordingly, that a mountain occupiesall the space between Leftaa and Vogdhani.1 ■!cc 'YdfjLirokiy tori fair e( *£Xa- "AjSacTiiac optiyi^v door kv Stiff rov • « • •*£Aarcwy &<rrewc* 4 2e Girl 'Eiray€\B6yra Si (ah AhiB tdl.)'Orovrra X^kf^opos 4 «{ *Opx<»" ^C ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^ 'Owovyrafuror cai cc ravrag ^epei roc etr0e<aK, 'Xd/iToXiQ to two rove«'dX€<c* *Ism nZy ec ^Oirovyra rov vi tKiiiirau — Pausan.€{ *Op>)(pfuyov Kol eicrpaircFrc ov Pboclc. c, 35*168 PHocis. [chap.Hyampolis having been situated at the entranceof a narrow vale, leading to the Opontia and seacoastof the Spicnemiduy and which formed a conveniententrance from Locris both into Phocisand into Boeotia : its name occurs on severaloccasions in ancient history. Herodotus hasrelated some remarkable circumstances attendinga victory gained at Hyampolis by the Phocisover the Thessalians ^ and Diodorus informs us,that a contest took place here on a somewhatsimilar occasion, between the people of Boeotiaand of Phocis*, in the year B. C. 347. Beforethat time, Jason of Pierce, returning out of Boeotiaafter the battle of Leuctra, and passing byHyampolis in his way to Heracleia Trachinia,had taken the vpoaaruovj or outer city, probablyfrom the same motive which prompted him todestroy the walls of Heracleia, namely, that theyshould not be any impediment to his free passageinto Greece ^ It was undoubtedly for a similarreason that the walls of Hyampolis were demolishedby Philip son of Amyntas *.The entire circuit of the fortifications is traceable,but they are most complete on the westernside. The masonry is of the third, nearly approachingto the most regular kind. The circumferenceis about three quarters of a mile. TheHerodot. 1. 8, c. 28. cent agora, council-house, andDlodor. 1. 16, c. 56. theatre, still remained, it wasXenoph. Hellen. 1. 6, c. 4. evidently against the fortifiesKaracKciylfavroc, tons that Philip directed hisPausan. Phocis. c. 35. As politic vengeance on this occa-Pausanias adds, that the an sion.XIII.] Phocis. 169direct distance to this ruin from the summit ofAbs is not more than a mile and a half in anorth-west direction. Below Vogdhani, on theside of a steep bank which falls to the valley ofKhubayOy a fountain issuing from the rock is dischargedthrough two spouts into a stone reservoirof ancient construction, which stands probably inits original place.Dec. 10. — Ten minutes from Vogdh4ni southwestward,is another source of water, which issuesfrom therockson the side of the road leading from Ta-landto Livadhia, near three small ruined churchesstanding in a grove of trees : the stream from therocks having joined that which flows from the fountainof Vogdhani, falls into the united torrent fromthe valleys oi AhtB Bend Hyampolisj and from thenceflows to the Cephissus near Belissi. One of theruined churches contains an inscribed stone, but illpreserved, and in so dark a situation that I wasunable to copy it, though I could distinguish thewords ap-yvpjov ^vac rptaKOvra, and at the endfiaprvpsg oc Coi. Having returned to Vogdhani, andset out for Talanda, I again visit the ruins of HysOn a small level in the centre of theancient site lie some architectural fragments of considerabledimensions, adorned with mouldings, anda large cistern faced at the top with wrought stones,but below hollowed out of the rock, which is herecovered only with a thin layer of earth. The openingof the cistern is 9 feet 10 inches long, and 4 feetbroad, and spreads below into the usual spheroidalform ; it is now filed with rubbish. There are manyother smaller cisterns of the same kind, some of170 Locris. [chap.which are lined with stucco. The ground withinthe fortress is partly cultivated. The valley of JETy-ampoUsj like most of the similar sites in Boeotia, hasalight fertile soil, but is marshy in winter.Pausanias says of Hyampolis, that though it hadbeen burnt by Xerxes, and again destroyed byPhilip, there remained an ancient Agora, a smallcouncil-house ^ a theatre not far from the gates, astoa built by Hadrian, and a temple of Diana, ofwhich he did not see the statue, as it was shownonly twice a year. He adds, that with the exceptionof a single well, the inhabitants had no otherwater than that which fell from heaven. The largerreceptacle, therefore, was probably a public cistern,and the smaller excavations may have been privaterepositories for the same purpose. Alas was nobetter supplied with water than Hyampolis, butboth of them had a good resource at no great distancein the fountains which I have described.Leaving the ruins at 10.13, we follow the valleyWhich conducts to Talanda, and which at thewidest part is half a mile broad, bounded on eitherside by the lower heights of the two includingridges. To the left leads the road to Kalapodhi,Geli', and a monastery of St. Elias; a part, probably,of the ancient opuvti soc, from Hyampolis toElateiaia. On our right are the steeps of Mount Khlo-mos, or Khlom6^ At 10.43 the village of Valtesi isa quarter of a mile on the left; above which the valenarrows rapidly : instead of following it we ascendfiovXevriipioy, — Pausan. ' KaXanoit, FccXc.Phocis. c. 35. ' XXofi6^.XIII.] LOCRIS, 171the lower heights of Khlomo, when Kalapodhi soonappeare in a cultivated slope of the opposite hills,two miles in direct distance from us, and threemiles distant Geli in a higher situation, to thenorthward of the former. .St;. Liaison the otherside of the ridge of Geli. We now pass over barrenhills covered with the pumo-kokki oak : at 11.18,Pumari, which derives its^name from those shrubs,is a mile on the left, at the head of the little valleyof V41tesi, which has now dwindled to a mereravine. Soon afterwards crossing a brook whichflows into the plain of Talanda, we descend themountain, and at 12^20, after a halt of 15 minutesarrive in the plain, at the entrance of which aresome mills turned by the same stream. We thendiverse to the right under Mount Khlomo, and at12.38 enter Talanda, or Taldndi i.This town contains about 300 houses, of whichone-third are Turkish ; some of these are lai^e, andeach having its garden, they look well at a distance; but the greater part are said to be desolate,and vei^ng to ruin, partly in consequence of aplague, which carried off entire families not manyyears ago. The governor is Issued Bey, a son ofthe Kapijil4r Kidyassy of Aljr Pasha. The Greekquarter is separated from the Turkish. The bishoprov TaXavriwy who is a sufih^an of the metropolitanof Athens, is at the head of the community, andhas a tolerable house at the Episcopi, standing inagarden of oranges,' lemons, and other fruit trees,which, although a mere wilderness, is the best in the^ TaXavTOf TaXdvTiov,172 LOCRis. [chap.place, and is considered as something extraordinaryin this country. The plain is very fertile, but littlecultivated for want of hands. The marshy parts towardsthe sea yield kalambokki, the rest of the plainexcellent wheat, vines, from which a tolerable wineis made, and a few olive trees, which succeed perfectly.The mero-kamato, or price of daily labour,is the same as at Athens, Livadhia, &c. ; namely,forty paras a-day, with an oke of wine. The districtcontains between thirty and forty villages, thegreater part of which are very small, and but halfinhabited, many of the people having migratedto the districts of Livadhia and Athens since AljrPasha has possessed the place. The mukatd isnow in the hands of his son Velj^, who is endeavouringto induce the emigrants to return, by promisingto remit a part of the impositions. The townstands entirely in the plain, but immediately atthe foot of a steep and lofty mountain called Rodha,which is connected with Khlomo, and a branch ofwhich intercepts the view of the south eastern extremityof the gulf, while an advanced ridge of themountain called Xerovuni obstructs it to the northward,leaving the plain only, which is included betweenthem, visible from the town, and beyond it theGulf of Talanda, the Euhoic channel, and the cultivatedregion round Rovies in Euboea on either sideof which, but particularly to the southward, that coastconsists of steep high cliffs. The island of Atlanta ^ ,^ 'H ^AroKLvrri Zk v^^oc Work Peloponnesian war, Atlanta,^OTovyrq, Upbraid ofiwyvfio^ r^ then a desert island, was Tfjc 'Amicnc* — Strabo, p. ratified by the Athenians as a425. In the first year of the place of offence against Loans,XIII.] LOCRIS. 173now called Talandonlsi, which is separated by anarrow frith from the Boeotian shore, and extendsinto the centre of the gulf, shelters the Scala, orport of Talanda, which is an hour distant from thetown to the east ; there are at present two three-mastervessels lying in the harbour.It is evident that the modem town has derivedits appellation from the island, for the loss of theinitial vowel is common in the transition of ancientnames into modem, and thus Talanda affords oneamong many instances in Greece of a preservationof name with a change of position.Many fragments of Hellenic buildings are dispersedabout the town. Among them I remarkeda fnze of Ionic lentils at the fountain in the Greekquarter, and some Ionic capitals in two ruinedchurches ; a marble chair in a church on the outsideof the town : in that of St. Panteleemon abroken inscription, which has been published byMeletius, and in that of St. Theodore another,which, as well as the former, contains the name ofOpus. But notwithstanding these remains, andthat Talanda occupies an advantageous and agreeablesituation, abounding in water, it is certainthat Opus was not exactly in this spot. The distanceof Talanda is much too great from the sea tocorrespond with the testimony of Strabo and Livy,the former of whom places Opus at a distance ofand of defence for Euboea a great inundation of the sea,(Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 32. Diodor. caused by the same earthquakes1. 12, c. 44.) In the sixth year which prevented the Lacedaemonthe war, a part of the Athenians from invading Attica,nan works were destroyed by — Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 89.174 LocRis. [chap.fifteen stades from the shore, the latter only a mile.The mountain, moreover, which rises immediatelybehind Talanda, steep and unbroken, affords nosite for an Acropolis, nor are there any traces ofancient walls to be found at Talanda.At Kardhenitza, on the other hand, a villagesituated an hour to the south-eastward of Talanda,on the side of the hill which rises from that comerof the plain, and just above the inner extremity ofthe Oxonian gulf, there exist the remains of anancient city in a position more elevated thanTalanda, and at a distance from the sea correspondingto the fifteen stades of Strabo. Onthe ridge above Kardhenitza stands a single tower,partly Hellenic, and conspicuous from all the plainof Toland as well as from other parts of theadjacent country. It was well placed for commandingthe road leading from the Opontia intoBoeotia round the eastern side of Mount Khlomo.The inner' extremity of the Oxonian Gulf belowKardhenitza is a shallow bay bounded by a highpeninsula on the north-western side ; and on itsopposite shore, joined by a river, which flows froma village called Proskyna, and which, as it correspondsto the Platanus of Pausanias, may guide usto the positions of Corseiaia, Cyrtones, and False.Strabo confirms the position of Opus at Kardhe-nitza, by remarking that Cynus, the imvHov oremporium of Opus, was sixty stades distant fromthat city, on the cape which terminated the OxonianGulf; and that a fertile plain lay between'O ^ *Oiro5c ffiyc irtfA TivrtKai^iKa araBlovCtairi\u r^c OaXda- tov ^e ifriytiov Kal i^fiKoyra*XIII.] LOCRIS. 175the tm) places, tins leaving little doubt that Cynusoccupied the north-western cape of the gulf, whereatthe distance of about a mile to the north of thevillage of livanates, is a tower called Paleopyrgo,and some Hellenic remains, distant about eightmiles, in a direct line from Kardhenitza. On theheights above Litanies inland are the ruins of aHellenic fortress, which seems to have been intendedfor the protection of Cynus towards Elate,in the same manner as the tower before-mentionedprotected Opus towards Orchomenus. Suchhaving been the positions of Cynus and Opus, itis evident that Livy has given an incorrect ideaof that of Cynus, in his narrative of the campaignof the year B.C. 207, when the Romans andAttains king of Pegasus, were engaged in assistingthe italians against Philip. He relates, thatwhen Attains occupied Opus, Suspicious, with theRoman fleet, anchored at Cynus, on his return froman unsuccessful attempt upon Chalcis, and his wordsare, '' Romans celerity abstitit inception, classesinde ad Cynum Locris (emporium id est urbisOpuntiorum mille passuumamari sitae) trajecit',"giving the idea that Cjnuus was on the shore immediatelybelow Opus, instead of being sixty stadesdistant. He had probably misapprehended Polybius,whose narrative he followed.KvFOc S* cffrl TO Mveuov, &Kpa E2p]|3oiac» Smv rk Oepfia rovrepfiiTi^ovtm tov 'Oirovvrwy 'HpcucXiwc, iropdfLf hitpydfit-KoXxoy araZitav ora ircpi tete vos aralifav cj^icovra koX iKa-TttpoKorra, Mcrti^v ^£ 'Ottowv- rov, — Strabo, p. 425.roc jcai Kvvov xt^iov tvZaifiov' ^ Liv. 1. 28, c C, 7«Thai Zt Kara Alhi^ov lijc176 LocRis. [chap.Roves, which is on the coast of EubcBa^ nearlyopposite to CynuSy is a small town partly inhabitedby Turks, but chiefly by Greeks. Here are someremains of the walls of OrobicBy of which Rovies isthe modem form by the usual changes. Lips indicates,by a similar corruption, the site of dessus,and its hot baths, which were sacred to Hercules,are said to be still called ra septa. The distancefrom Cynus seems correctly stated by Strabo.The eastern Locris, the only Locris mentionedby Homer, and who were all under the commandof Ajax, son of Oileus, are described by the poetas *' the Locris who dwelt opposite to Euboea' :"at a later period they were divided into two partsby a narrow branch of Phocis, containing the districtof Daphnus, which thus caused Phocis toextend from the Corinthian to the Maliac Gulf.Daphnus, however, falling to ruin, and its landshaving been assigned to the Opontii, the Locristhen occupied the whole shore from Thermopylae toHalse in Boeotia. If Strabo is correct, Daphnusmight be exactly recognized by its distance ofninety stades from C3rnus, and of one hundredand twenty from Elateiaia, as well as by its harbour*. Between it and Cynus was Alope *. Cne-^ AoKpwv, 01 vaiovffi icipriv Upfjc "Ehfiolris0« KvvcJv r' kvifiovr' 'Oirotyra re KaXKiapov re"Biifradp re 2icap^i}»^ rt koI Ahytta^ epareivac,Tapi^flP T€ Qp6pi6y Ti, "Boaypiov itfji^l pupa'Tf ^ fia revaapdicoyra fUKatyai v^ec eworro,U. B. V, 535.Strabo, pp. 416, 424, 426. and citadel on an insulated hillFain. H. N. 1. 4, c. 7- near the shore were found byThe ruins of a small town Sir William Gell at a time dis-xiii.]LOCRIS.mites was a fortress, the situation of which mayberecognized near the modern Nikoraki by itsposition on a projection of the coast opposite to theislands anciently named Lichades, and the Euboeapromontory Ceneeum^ The site of Chromiumtance beyond the Cape of Cynic,which, according to hisrate of travelling, agrees withfifty stades. There can belittledoubt, therefore, of itsbeing, as he supposed, the siteof Alope.^ Mera H ^ai^yovyra Ki'ii-filSec xupioy ipvfiroVf coop crra-'ilo¥c clco<Ft Tkevcayn' Raff oKol TO K^yocov IK T^Q Eir^o/acimripav acai roy Monica koX-Toy iropdfAf iuipyofiiyri vx'"hoy cico9«0ra2/y, Tara B*Hill rAy *B^ucyiifAiiivy icrrlAoKpHy. TS,yrav6a xal at KaXovfuyai rpc ic viiiroifirp6K€iyTaif iiiro A/^a Tovyofiat^QvoaC KoX AXXac 2* tltrXy ivTf Xrjfiiyri vap<iirX^, ac eroy-rec vopaXcivofiei'. Mera hktian arahlovQ 6.ir6 KyiifiiBiayXifii^y, tnrcp oS Kiirai to Gp<$-toy iy crra^ioic toIq "ivoiq kotqTtjy fitcSyaiay, ElO* 6 BodypiociroTafioQ tKSiB^^aiy 6 wapa^piktyTO Op6yu)y' Mdytiy S* etroyo^/ji6.(ov<ny affT6y' core Bi ^ei/Lio/S-^ovc, Air' kfip6rj(pi^ efufialyeiytoIq TOffiy* &XXoT€ Bi koI BitrXe-dpoy la^iiy nXarog, Mera SeTara Zcap^cca, irrailoie vxcp-KEifuyii Trie OaXdrrriQ hiKa^ Bii-')(pvca ii Opoylov TptaKoyTa,iX^TTOci ii fiiKpf • • • ♦* * excira N/caca ac atOepfi6irvXai* — Strabo, p. 426.From a fragment of aeschylus,cited by Strabo in anotherplace,, (p. 4479) it would seemthat on one of the islands therewas a monument of Nicias,who was fabled to have beenhurled into the sea by Hercules,when suffering from theeffects of the poisoned garment.The following are thelines of aeschylus : —Ehfiotia ica|iih)y Sifji^l Kriyaiov Aioc'Arr^v, car' avroy Tv/A^oy hdXIov A/^a.Strabo here asserts, that inthe word Euboea the poetalludes to a city Euboea, destroyedby one of the earth-vol.It.quakes to which the island andadjacent coast of Bceoda arevery subject. The word orrii,(peninsula,) is well illustratedN178 LocRis. [chap.was ascertained by MeletiuB, who found above thevillage Romani, at a place named Paleokastro,where some remains of the city still exist, a dedicatoryinscription of the council and demus of theThronienses \ The situation is at the distancefrom the sea which Strabo mentions, on the bankof a broad torrent perfectly corresponding to theBoagrius, which flowed by Thronium ', and whichis described by Strabo as sometimes dry and sometimesflowing with a stream two plethra in width.Thronium was the chief town of the Epicnemidii,where the coins with the legend AOK.EIIIK. orAOKP. EniKNA. were probably struck.Thirty stades from Thronium, towards Nicaeaand Thermopylae, stood another Locrian town,Scarpheia, ten stades from the sea, and somethingless than thirty from another place of which thename is lost. It appears from Pausanias thatScarpheia was in the ordinary route from Elateiaiato Thermopylae by Thronium', and equally so fromLivy, who states that Quintus, before the battleof Cynoscephalae, marched from Elateiaia by Thro-numand Scarpheia to Heracleia *. By this circumstance,therefore, and by the numbers ofStrabo, the exact position of Scarpheia is ascertainedto have been between the villages 'Anteaby a view of the promontory, "AXxivda Afifitfrpiov . • .which is much more nearly — Melet. Geog. vol. ii. p. 325.an island than the maps have Svo. Yen.hitherto made it. * II. B. v. 533. Plin. H."Aya6^ Tvx^. "Apxovroc N. L 4, c. 7. Psasan. Elias.*AXc£/ov, TpafifiarioQ £{r^p<&w>- pr. c. 22.pony Ta/x/a *Apiffr£vovc, e^o£e r^ ' Partisan. Archaic. c. 15.^v\^ ical Tf BafAf Qpoyiioiv * Liv* 1. 33, c. 3.XIII.] LOCRIS. 179and Mole, which being fixed, it will follow that thedeficient name in the text of Strabo is either Nicsea,of which the probable position has already been indicated,or the town which stood at Pundonitza ;for to either of them the something less than thirtystades would be applicable. If the latter place wasintended, the deficient word may have been Tarphe,or Pharisee, the former of which was the Homericname, and the latter that attached in the time ofStrabo to a town which then possessed a temple ofAnno Pharygsea, and was supposed to be a colonyof Argos. Tarphe was the only Homeric town inLocris then inhabited ; and Pundonitza, from itsstrength, its fertile plain, and the relative importanceand convenience of its position, is more likelythan any other to have preserved its inhabitantsthen, as it does to this day. Its territory perfectlycorresponds to the well-wooded and productive districtwhich Strabo ascribes to Tarphe ^ ; and theword Pharygse ' is well adapted to a situation likethat of Pundonitza, in the midst of the passes leadingover Mount Cenis into Plods. Although theother Homeric towns of the Locris were no longerin existence, their sites were known '. Augite was'H Tcip^i} Kiirai 1^' tyl/ovc, * From ^cipvy{ — guHuTf^tij^ovtra • • • . • ora fauces,BiovQ tiKOffiy j((ktpav S* ttfttagnroy ' iy ht. "Ofirfpoc fitfiyrirai,Kal Mey^pov cx^t* 4^1 7^ '^^^^ KaXKiapoQ fiiy ohKtri otjcctratavrri diro rov iaaovQ ityofiatrrai' . . ri icfSloy' xaXovtriyKaXflrai Se yvv ^apuyai ; tBpv- ovrut^ diro rov avfjtfiipriKdTog r^rat S* aWSdi "Hac ifapvyala^ rdirf t\ff\poToq yap Itrri, OhS*Upoy, &irb r^c ^y ^apvyai^ 4 divi ^^ 'Bfjtrira tori ^pVfiu}Brigr^C 'Apyciac* Kal ^^ Kal airotKoi tiq tottoq* oh^e ai Airyeioi Jf^aiv elyai 'Apyc/wv. — Strabo, r^v X^P^^ ex®"^' ^Kap^ulc —p. 426. Strabo, p. 426.n2180 Locris [chap.near Scarpheia, and Bessaa and Halliards werenames descriptive of the places to which they wereattached : the former among the woods of MountCnemis, the latter in a district well suited to theplough ^ and hence, probably, in some part of theelevated plain which lies between Pundonitza andMount Cnemis. Halliards was perhaps the placetwenty stades from Tarphe, of which the name iswanting in Strabo.The most difficult question in the geography ofthis part of the country, is that of the ancientappellation of the peak, now called Khlomo, themost conspicuous of the secondary summits ofthis part of Greece, and presenting itself on allsides as a mountain which could not have failed tohave had some celebrity among the ancients.Was it the proper Cnemis, and were the ridgeswhich lie between it and Callidromus, consideredonly subordinate portions of the same mountain 1some of the best authorities support this opinion.Anciently there was no distinction of Opontii andEpicnemidii, nor are the latter mentioned by Homeror Herodotus or Thucydides or Polybius, whenspeaking of the Eastern Locris, of whom Opuswas considered the metropolis '. Even Strabo,s KXvraF AocpwF • . • fiarip' iiyXaSBty^poy,Pindar. Olymp. 9, v. 31.'O a 'Oirovc ital fArfrpowoXis XQv rwv T€pl Ocp/40irvXac chrisKol to Mypafifjia ^lyXo? yiypa/jifiiyoy vpoc rf xoXvav-TO M Tp irpiiTjf T&v icivrt mus' iplf*TovflT^e iroTi ^BifiirovQ trip 'EXXo^c dvTia M^^wvMi;rp<iiroXcc AoKp&v ih&vySfuay *Ox<$eicKivBu Strabo, p. 425.XIII.] LOCRIS* 181from whom the distinction is chiefly derived, in oneplace describes Opus as the metropolis of the Epic*numidia \ and the same is confirmed by Pliny andStephens '. If Pliny is incorrect in adding thatthe river Cephissus flowed through the Epicnemidiito the sea, he shews at least that he protracted theirboundaries quite to Boeotia, which accords withMount Khlom6, and not with any mountain to thenorth-westward of it. Pausanias, though he hasnot employed the word Epicnemidii on any occasion,but has applied to all the Eastern Locristhe name Hypocnemidii, or Locris under MountCnemis, includes among them the Opontii, as heshows in alluding to the mention of the Opontii byHerodotus, but more particularly in his descriptionof the bounds of Phocis *. " The Phocis," hesays, at the beginning of his Phocis, * ' extend tothe sea opposite to the Peloponnesus and towardsBoeotia, from Cirrha, the port of Delphi, to thecity Anticyra. But towards the Maliac Gulf theyare prevented from being a maritime people by theHypocnemidii, who border on Phocis in that direction; these are the Scarphenses beyond Elateiaia,and above Hyampolis and Abae, those who possessOpus and its port Cynus." It is probable thatPausanias here specifies Scarpheia, because it wasthe only town in that part of Locris subsisting in histime. From these several testimonies the inferencewould not be unreasonable, that the whole mountainousridge of Eastern Locris was called Cnemis,'Oirovc 4 rwy AoKp&v fiti^ ' Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 7. —Tp6iro\iQ rStv *^TriKyrifAtiiii>y. — Stephan. in *0Tr6eiQ»Strabo, p. 416. ' Pausan. Phocis. c. 1,8,20. — Herodot. 1. 7, c. 203.182 LocRis. [chap.and consequently that Khlozno, the highest, andby far the most remarkable summit, was the properCnemis. Upon examining the places themselves,however, there is great difficulty in agreeing tosuch an opinion. Mount Khlomo is so completelyseparated from the ridges of Fond4na and Grades bythe valley leading from SyampoUs into the Oxonianplain, that it cannot be conceived that the two mountainswere ever considered identical, or that theyhad not some separate denomination. Strabo morethan once informs us, that the district of Daphnus,on the shore of the Euboic strait which was afterwardsascribed to the Opontii, belonged in moreancient times to Phocis ^ and thus separated dieOpontii bordering on Phocb and Boeotia, from theEpicnemidii bordering on the QBtsei and Malienses.Now it is impossible to suppose that the properCnemis should at any time have been excludedfrom the Epicnemidii as distinguished from theOpontii, which it would have been when Daphnusbelonged to Phocis, if we identify Cnemis withKhlomo. The position of the fortress of CnemideSfmoreover, exactly at the foot of the central partof the mountains, which extend from the plainof Pundonitza to that of Toland, is a strongproof that this was the real Mount Cnemis, whichwe may easily believe to have been sometimesconsidered as comprehending the district of Opuswithin its denomination, because it stretches intothe plain of Opus, and because Cynus, the navaldependency of Opus, was in fact situated on itseastern extremity. On the other hand, it wouldbe very difficult to believe that Mount Khlomo wasStrabo, p. 416, 425.XIII. ] Boeotia. 183ever entirely included within the boundaries ofLocris, as it is surrounded on every side, except thenorth, by Phocis and Boeotian districts. Little Canbe adduced on either side of this question from theremark of Strabo, (p. 425), that Mount Cnemis wasfifty stades distant from Cynus, since we are atliberty to make the measurement from the site ofCynus either to the nearest part of Mount Khlomo,or to the mountain of Grades, and in either caseit will not be found very incorrect. So doubtful,however, is the text of Strabo in this place, that hemay very possibly have meant by fifty stades, thedistance, not to Mount Cnemis, but to Alope.Upon the whole, I have little hesitation in concludingthat the maritime summits lying betweenPundonitza and Cynus^ together perhaps with thatmore inland, named Fondana, were the properCnemis. Khlomo perhaps bore the same appellationas a Boeotian town described by Pausaniasas built upon a lofty mountain, which from thetenor of his narrative could hardly have been anyother than Khlomo. After having informed usthat Holmones and Hyettus were villages ' of theancient Orchomenia, the former twelve stades fromCopse, the latter seven stades from Holmones, andthat Hyettus still contained a temple, in which thesick sought remedies for their diseases, and wherethe Deity was worshipped under the shape of a rudestone, — she proceeds to remark, that about twentystades beyond Hyettus stood Cyrtones ', moreanciently called Cyrtone '. 'ait is built," he adds,icAfUu, Pausan. Boeot. ' Kv^iayi^.c. 24. * Kvprtjyri.184 BCBOTIA. [chap.^' upon a lofty mountain *, and contains a grove,and temple of Apollo, with upright statues of Apolloand Diana, a source of cold water issuing from arock, a temple of Nymphs at the source, and asmall grove of planted trees. ' ' After having crossedthe mountain from Cyrtones, occurred the smalltown Corseiaia, half a stade below which there wasa grove of wild trees, chiefly the holly-oak % anda small statue of Hermes in the open air. In theplain below, the river Platanus joined the sea, onthe right of which was the small maritime city Halse,the last of those belonging to the Boeotian on thesea which separated Locris from Euboea. Consideringthe position of the Orchomenia in general withrelation to that of Copse, now Top61ia, and of theriver Platanus near the maritime frontier of Boeotiaat Halse, we cannot but infer that Holmones, Hymettusand Cyrtone, lay in a north-western directionfrom Copse, that the road to Corseiaia crossed MountKhlomo not far to the eastward of the peak, andthat as this summit is the only mountain in thispart of Boeotia meriting the description of an opocv^nXov, the city Cyrtone was very near it on theeastern side. Whether any ruins still exist to confirmthis opinion, remains to be explored. Corseiaiais noticed by Demosthenes and Diodorus as animportant fortress of Boeotia ' ; in the Phocis warit fell into the hands of the Phocis, together withOrchomcnus and Coroneia. I am informed thatruins corresponding in situation to the descriptionof Pausanias still exist near Proskynd, from thefKimai ie girl o(Htve vif^iyXov. * Demosth. de Leg. False. —wpiyoi. Diodor. 1. 16, c. 58.XIII.] Boeotia. 185heights around which is collected the river, whichI suppose to have been the Platanus.Between the mouth of this river, and the shorebelow Opus a large stream issues from the mountain,and joins the bay of Armyra to the eastwardof the salt sources, from which that harbourtakes its name. In a country where subterraneousrivers so often occur, we may readily suspectthis stream to originate in the Cepkissic basin,which has no discharge for its superfluous watersbut through the mountains which separate it fromthe Suhaic frith. Now it is remarkable, thatStrabo notices a chasm near Orchomenus, whichabsorbed the waters of the Melts \ and that inillustration of these words of the geographer, thereis, to the northward of Orchomenus^ ' between Tza-mali and Xeropyrgo, a bay similar to that at thenorth-eastern end of the lake, where the Cephismsbegins its subterraneous course. I have alreadystated, that the northern Melas^ instead of flowinglike the southern to the Cephusus^ takes from itsvery sources a direction entirely different, andwhich, although I could not trace it through themarshes, tends exactly towards the bay above mentioned; there is a great probability therefore thatthe stream finds its way through the marshes, andflowing to the end of the bay, there enters a ,of which the emissory is the river whichissues between Opus and the mouth of the P&i-TtvisBai Bi ^vi icai Kara ivravQa to cXoc to fvov tov*Of»X!^fuyov x^^f^^ '^^ Bi^afrdai ahXriTiKov Ka\afji6y. — Strabo,Tor MiXava worafiov tov piovra p. 407»^a r^c 'AXcapr/ac Kal wowvyra186 ix>cRi8. [chap.tones ; for this point is exactly at the end of theshortest line through the mountains, from the extremityof the bay of the Cephissis near Tzamali.In summer, the question might perhaps be resolved,even by a distant view from the heights ofOrclumentiSj without descending into the unhealthymarshes. An actual inspection is the more necessary,as the testimony of Strabo regarding thechasm of the Melts is not free from suspicion : forhe describes the Melts as flowing through the Ha*linaria, which being at the opposite end of theCephissic basin, either shows Strabo to have beenvery ignorant of the locality, or his text to be here,as in so many other places, very much corrupted.Dec. ll.-After employing the morning in atour around Talanda, I proceed at 1.30, on myreturn to livadhia, by the way of Parapotamujand the Bceoto-Phocic straits. At 2.20 leave theroad to Vogdhani on the left, and cross into thelittle vale of Pumari, which is connected withthat of Valtesi, though a low ridge immediatelyabove the latter village separates the course of thewaters, flowing respectively to the Opantian bayand to the CepMssus, At 3, leaving Valtesi alittle on the left, we ascend a cultivated champaign,which is separated from the valley ofKhubavo and Belissi by the rocky mountain onthe western side of the pass of Hyampolis; andon the other side is bounded by the ru^edheights extending to Elateiay and in the directionof Cfiemis. In the midst of this elevated valleystands the small village of Kalapodhi, where wearrive at 3.25, having stopt a few minutes at aXIII.] Locris. 187ruined church on the side of the road, composedalmost entirely of wrought stones and other Hellenicremains, among which are some portions ofprizes and architraves ; a little farther two piecesof a large Doric column, 4 feet 2 inches in diameter,lie nearly buried in the ground. Thesedimensions indicate the former existence of somelarge building in this place, for it is not easy tobelieve that such masses could have been broughthillier from the temple of Abs, which is 4 milesdistant, still less from that of Minerva Crane,near Elateiaia, which is at a much greater distanceand separated by ru^ed hills.In the churchyard at Kalapodhi lies a sepulchralstone, bearing the common ornament of acockle-shell between two roses, and inscribed withthe word 'A^uvvovSpoc in beautiful characters. Possiblythe district around Kalapodhi was that ofthe Locrian town Naryxx, noted for having beenthe birth-place of Ajax, son of the Oileus ; for it isevident, iron the description of the coast of Locrisby Strabo, that Naryxx was not near the sea ^ ; andthere are two historical occurrences recorded byDiodorus, in which the reference to Naryxx is wellsuited to this position. In the year b. c. 395, thesame in which Lysander was slain at Haliartus,Ismenias, commander of the Boeotian, undertookan expedition against Phocis, and defeated thePhocis near Naryxx of Locris ; whence it appearsthat Naryxx was near the frontier of Phocis. In theyear 352, Phayllus, who commanded the Phocis,and their allies, and who not long before had beenStrabo, p. 425. Stephan. in Nape£ aad.'O^oXai.188 Phocis. [chap.defeated by the Bceotians near Orchomenus, againon the CephissuSy and a third time near Coroneia,invaded the Epicnemidii, took several towns, occupiedand lost Naryxx, and advanced to Abae, wherehe was surprized by the Boeotian, who, elated bythis success, entered and laid waste Phocis, — butinattempting to relieve Naryxx, which was againbesieged by Phayllus, were defeated by him. Thetown was in consequence taken by Phayllus, whosoon afterwards died The Doric column mayhave belonged to the principal temple of theNarycii,where Ajax doubtless received heroic honours.Having lost 10 minutes at Kalap6dhi, we proceedalong the valley, and arrive at 3.47 at arugged ridge, where begins the descent into theplain of Elateiaia. Dragoman and Leftaa are notseen, on account of a projection of the mountainson the right, but Turkokhorio is visible. At 4.15we arrive at Sfaka, a small hamlet on the descent,and from thence, after having halted 10 minutes,descend into the plain at the point of the rockymountain, which beginning from hence, stretcheseastward to Vogdhdni, where it forms the westernside of the pass of HyampoUs; many copioussprings issue from the mountain, and not onlyform a long lake at the foot of it, but make thiswhole comer of the Elastic plain marshy duringthe greater part of the year. A paved causewayleading to Leftaa and Turkokhorio passes abovethe springs along the foot of the mountain, whichto the very summit is a mere rock. The marshyedges of the lake begin a little below Sfaka, andDiodor. L 14. c. S2 ; 1. 16, c. 37, 88.XIII.] PHOcis. 189the lake is prolonged round the point of themountain as far as opposite Merali ^ where astream issues from it, which, as I before remarked,joins the CepMssus^ in the Stena ; a part of thewater is conducted by a canal to some mills betweenMerali and Khubavo.We arrive opposite Merali at 5.5, but are obligedto make a detour in order to cross the canal andriver, the latter by a bridge. The best lodgingwhich the village affords, is a long cottage of theusual kind, but in this instance so filled withoxen, horses, asses, bags of wheat, and baskets ofkalambokki, that with difficulty I find space sufficientin it. The wheat is the produce of thei^pojco/ioro *, or day-labourers' share of the harvest,which is a kuv^li of 22 ones per diem, now sellingat Livadhia for &|> piastres; to this is added anoke of wine. The wages in the cultivation of vinesand cotton are a piastre a day and an oke of wine,the ordinary price of day-labour in Greece. Inkalambokki it is customary for the labourers totake a tenth of the produce. Merali stands onthe side of a round low hill, which, though nowin pasture, consists of a very fertile and cultivablesoil, without any rock. It is separated from theheight of Krevasara, which is lofty and rocky, bya level of about three fourths of a mile, throughwhich flows the Cephistus. The river approachesthe south-eastern comer of the latter height, whereit is crossed by a bridge in the main road fromZituni by Turkokhorio to Livadhia. In a lineMcpoX4. * Vulgarly, fupoKafwro.190 PHOCis. [chap.with the hill of Krevasara, and separated from itby a narrow plain, rises the lofty insulated conicalheight, which I have already remarked (Nov. 30)as being in face of Bissikeni, towards Krevasara ;this height ends in a low summit, crowned withone of those towers of which I before remarked,that there appears to have been a system of thempervading Boeotia and Phocis. A castle of the middleages, or perhaps of the same date as the towers,crowned the extreme point of the Elysian ridge,from whence to the opposite advanced heights ofParnassus the distance is about half a mile. Thisis the strongest part of the Bteto-Phodc pass. Inthe narrow level stands the khan of the Kadj^ onthe right bank of the Cephissus, opposite to whichthe Kineta, or river which issues from the lake ofSfaka, joins the Cephissus just under the extremityof the aforesaid rocky point, upon which standsthe ruined castle.Dec. 12. — Leaving Merall at 9, and re-passingthe bridge and canal, I ride up in 15 minutes toKhubavo, which stands on the foot of the rockymountain, in the opening of the valley rising toVogdh&ni, immediately opposite to B^lissi^ onthe foot of Mount Edylhim. These are all smallhamlets of about 20 houses, each with a pjnrgofor the Spahi, who is generally an Albanian.While inquiring at Khubavo concerning a treasureof ancient medals, said to have been foundby one of the inhabitants of that place, the suddenappearance of one of these Spahis, with hanjarXltl.] Phocis. 191and pistols in his girdle, puts an end to the enquiry,as none of the villagers dare answer suchquestions in his presence. Two or three of them,however, follow me in crossing the plain to thePaleo-kastro, and show me a large quantity ofsmall gilt copper coins, of the lower empire, whichwere a part of the treasure.The Pale6-kastro consists of the remains of acastle of lower times, inclosing a small table summitto the westward of Bliss. This height isconnected with the foot of the extremity of MountJEdylium by a low ridge of rock, over which passesthe road from Vogdhini to the bridge of the near the khan of the Kadjr. The hill isrocky all around, but the level summit is ploughedand cultivated. Among the remains of the modemcastle are a few pieces of a Hellenic wall of thepolygonal kind. There can be little doubt thatthese are remains of the city of the Parapotamii,the position, as I before remarked, agreeing inevery respect with its description by TheopompusMid Strabo ^Leaving the Pale6-kastro at 11, and passingover the ridge which joins it to the mountain, Idescend to a ford of the Ephesus a little belowthe khan, and having crossed the river, follow itsright bank : at 11.30 cross by a wooden bridge acanal derived from the Mavro-nero, and threeminutes farther the united stream of the Mavro-nero and Platania by a stone bridge ; the Cephis-SUB being then only a few paces on the left. Soon^ Ap. Strabo. p. 424. V. sup. p. 97. 99.192 BCBOTIA. [chap.afterwards the road quits the river, and crossesthe plain in the direction of Kapuma, where Iarrive at 12.8, and in the afternoon return toLivadhia.Placed, as the valley of Chseroneia is, at theentrance of the extensive and fertile plains ofBoeotia, and most conveniently situated for observingall the entrances into them from the sideof Phocis, it often became the scene of militaryoperations, though, unfortunately for history, themost remarkable of them did not occur until afterthe time of the best historians. In the year B.C.447, Chseroneia was taken by Tolmides the Athenian,just before his defeat and death at Coroneia^During the Sacred or Phocis war it was attemptedby Onomarchus the Phocian without success, wastaken by Phalsecus his son, who succeeded to thecommand of the Phocis on the death of Phayllus,and was speedily retaken by the Boeotian*. But noparticulars are related on these occasions which canbe illustrated by a view of the locality. Nor is thatcelebrated battle, which extended the Macedonianpower over all Greece, and influenced the destiniesof the civilized world for the ensuing two centuries,described in a manner more satisfactory either byDiodorus or by Plutarch, probably from the wantof contemporary accounts of an event which wasalready ancient in the time of those authors, especiallythe latter, who might otherwise have had agood opportunity of enlarging on the details of theThucyd. I. 1, c. 113. ' Diodor. I. 16, c. 33. 39.Diodor. 1. 12, c. 6.XIII.] Boeotia. 193action, and of illustrating them by his knowledgeof the topography of his native place. Of the battlebetween the Roman forces and the army of Mithridates,which occurred 250 years later, Plutarchhad the means of leaving us a much fuller description\ Sylla had taken Athens when Taille,entering Greece from the northward with a numerousarmy, and encamping in the plains of Elateiaia,left his opponent only a choice of difficulties. Onthe one hand the chariots of the enemy and thesuperiority of his cavalry, rendered it hazardousto meet him in the plains of Boeotia : on the other,Attica was unable long to afford supplies, especiallywhen Archelaus, occupying Munychia withhis fleet, had prevented their arrival by sea. Themore powerful motive prevailing, Sylla moved intoBoeotia, and encamped at a place in the plain ofChaeronea, called Patronis. Here he was joined byHortensius, who made his way from Thessaly bya circuitous route through Mount Parnassus toTithorea, where he came into contact with theenemy's forces, but having resisted their attacksduring the day, succeeded in the following nightin descending through difficult passes to the placewhere Sylla was expecting him. I have alreadyshown the probability that the bye road by whichHortensius avoided the Asiatic army in the Mlaticplains, was that which I followed from Velitza byBissikeni into the northern valley of Thalia, andnot far below which, near Khasnesi, are the sourcesof the Mavronero. Here being copiously suppliedPlutarch, in Sell. ' rats ^vtrxttfplait Karaf^as.VOL. II. O194 Boeotia. [chap.with water, and defended towards the enemy hythe pass o{ Parapotcmaiy Sylla found a safe andconvenient place of encampment, until he was reinforcedby Hortensius. He then advanced towardsthe enemy, and took a position on a fertile woodyhill, in the midst of the Miotic plains named ,at the foot of which there was water *, —a description which seems to agree with the remarkableinsulated conical height between Missisand the Cephissus. The Romans probablyoccupied both that height and the hill of Kreva-sara, as in that position they were not only mastersof any sources of water there may be at the foot ofthose heights, but were near the Cephissus, theirproximity to which is evident from what follows.As the Roman army consisted only of 15000 infantryand 1500 cavalry, while the enemy amountedto six or eight times that number, the former keptclose within their intrench ments, when the Asiaticsdrew out their forces to display their strength ; butwhen they proceeded to straggle over the country,destroying Panopeus, and pillaging Lebadeia andthe oracular temple of Trophonius, Sylla becamevery desirous of engaging. In order to inspirehis troops with an inclination to fight, he firstimposed some severe labours upon them, such ascutting canals in the plain, and turning the channelof the Cephissus ; and when they began to be tiredof this employment, pointed out to them a position^ ^ovvov Ik fiifftay itrrwra highly praised the beauty ofTuv *£Xarcj(a»v neSliay cvyeiuK this hill in his Memoirs. Pluralafi^iXa^ff koI irapd Tviy march. ibid.pi (ay vBkfp ixovTa, SyllaXIII.] BCBOTIA. 195which he wished to occupy. It was a hill on whichformerly stood *' the Acropolis of the abandonedcity of the Parapotamii — a stony height surroundedwith a precipice, and separated only from MountEdylium by the river Assus, which at the foot ofthe hill fell into the Cephissus, and rendered theposition very strong ^" In this passage there is adifficulty. I have already remarked that the testimonyof Theopompus, of Strabo, and of Plutarchhimself, shows that Paleokastro is the ancient ,and the rocky summit above it Edylium ;in which case there is no stream which can correspondwith the Assus but that named Kineta, whichflows from the marsh of Sfaka, and is joined by thetorrent of the vale of Khubavo. This river, however,does not divide the hill of Paleokastro fromMount JEdyliumy as Plutarch leads us to expect,but leaves it on the left, and joins the Cephissus alittle below the hill of Paleokastro, which is in factalow extremity of the mountain itself TheRomans drove away a body of Chalcaspidae, whowere moving to the defence of the hill of Parapetand took possession of it. Archelaus thenmoved against Chseroneia, but the city was savedby the timely arrival of one of the Roman legionsaccompanied by the Cheeronenses in Sylla's army ;and Sylla having crossed the Assus, proceededfiiv yevofuyriv aKp&tro\iv t£>v irlmrtay Wo r^v pi(ay airily rfnapaTOTafjUiayf r6rt B* dvfipfi' Kij^kt^^, jcal avyeicrpaxvyofJie-'^iyvcrfitir6\€iac\6^o^iX£liC£TO vo^f 6\vpdy c V(rrparoire3c vraiirerptitirig koI wepUptifiyott tov rey &Kpay irouh'H^vXcov BiiitpifffUyo^ opovQ ovoyo2196 Boeotia. [chap.along the foot of Edylium until he arrived over-againstArchelaus, who was encamped behind astrong entrenchment at a place called Assia, betweenEdylium and Acontiam^ The place in thetime of Plutarch was called from the circumstanceArchelaus. It was probably situated in that bayof the plain between Edylium and Acontium,which is watered by a small branch of the Cephis-sus and where now stands the village of Kara-musa.Having remained a day in this position,Sylla left Mursena there in the command of alegion and two cohorts, and having sacrificed atthe Cephissus, moved to Chaeronea for the purposeof joining the troops who had occupied that place,as well as to examine the position of a body of theenemy which, after the unsuccessful movementupon Chaeronea, had taken a position on MountThurium. This height, in the time of Plutarch,was called Orthopagium, and is described by himas a rugged pine-shaped mountain'. Below itwere the torrent Morus and the temple of ApolloTaurus, who received that epithet from Thurn, themother of Charon, who was the founder of Chaeronea.Two men of Chaeronea having proposedto lead a detachment to the summit of Thurium bya road unknown to the Asiatics, Sylla ordered uponthis service a body of Romans under Hirtius, andthen drew out his army, placing the cavalry on*Eirei H Btifiri rbv^Avvov o kqX rent 'Hdv\/ov, Tpb^ role2vXXac, iraptKditv wire to *H5v- Xeyofiivoic 'Avffiot^,Toy, Tf *Afyxe\df wapetrrparo^ ■ Kopvf^ rpaxtia rac irrpo'iriltv(T€v fiifiXfifiiyf ydpaxa /3<Xa»^cc ^po^*Kaprepov kv fiitrf rov *AkovtIovXIII.] Boeotia. 197either flank, himself on the right, Mursena on theleft, and Hortensius, ¥^ith a reserve of five cohorts,on the hills in the rear, in order to prevent theenemy from circumventing the Romans by meansof their numerous cavalry and light troops.The road indicated to Hirtius by the two Chae-condenses led from Mount Petrachus, by a templeof the Muses. As soon as he had obtained possessionof the summit of the mountain, the Asiaticswere immediately thrown into confusion by the unexpectedattack of the Romans from above ; 3000were slain on the hills, others fell into the handsof Mur^na, and the remainder arrived in suchconfusion at their own camp, as to create a generaldisorder. Sylla, on perceiving it, moved forwardhis right so promptly, that the chariots of theAsiatics, which required a certain space to beeffectual, were unable to act to advantage. Thecombat now became general : the Romans threwaside their piles and fought with swords' only,but could not make any impression upon the longpikes' and combined shields of the Asiatics, orupon the dense order of 15000 slaves, whom theAsiatic commanders had liberated from the Greekcities : these, however, were at length broken bythe javelins and sling-shot of the adverse light-armed.As Archelaus was extending his rightwing in order to encompass the enemy, Hortensiusadvanced rapidly to meet him, but was obliged toretreat before the Asiatic cavalry to the hills, wherevtroovc*ifvyatnrifffi^lia\alpat^.dtpdfroyTa^,ffapttraac ^axpa^'198 Boeotia. [chap.he was in so much danger of being cut off, thatSylla advanced from the right to his succour.Archelaus perceiving Sylla's intention by the dust,quitted Hortensius and turned against the enemy'sright, while Taille, with the Chalcaspidse, attackedMursena, so that a shout arising on bothsides, and the hills around repeating it, Sylla wasfor a moment in suspense which way to move ; buthaving resolved to return to his own post on theright, he took one of the cohorts of Hortensius withhim, and sent the other four to the support of .On his arrival he found the right hardpressed by Archelaus, but his men receiving a newimpulse from the presence of their commander, inone great effort routed the enemy, and drove himto 'the Cephissus and Mount Acontium. Syllathen moved to the assistance of Mursena, but foundhim already victorious over Taille, and joinedhim in the pursuit. Ten thousand only of the vanquishedAsiatics arrived in safety at Chalcis('Egripo), while Sylla, according to his own assertionin his commentaries, had only twelve menmissing. He erected two trophies, one in theplain where the troops of Archelaus first gaveway and fled to the river Moles ; the other on thetop of Mount Thurium. The latter was inscribedwith the names of the two Chaeronenses, who hadled thither the Romans under Hirtius.The narrative of which the preceding contains thesubstance, is rendered the more interesting by itsbeing of a different kind from those which are usuallygiven of military occurrences by Plutarch, towhom we generally look in vain for any accurate ortopographical details of such events. It is indeed soXIII.] Boeotia. 199well told, that I cannot but consider it as almost aliteral extract from the commentaries of Sylla. I wasthe more anxious, therefore, to compare it with thescene of action. One of the points desirable to beidentified is the summit named Thurium. Theonly remarkable peak in the range of heights which,branching eastward from the foot of Parnassus,border the plain of Chaeronea on the south, issituated about three miles west of Petrachus, orthe Acropolis of Chaeronea, and two south-east ofAulis ; it rises from the right bank of the rivernow called Platanini, which I have before describedas crossing the plain of Daulis to the Cephisstis.But this point is too distant from Chaeronea, andthere can scarcely be a doubt that it was withinthe Phocis boundary, and in the district of Pano-pens, whereas Thurium, as well from the transactionson the day of battle, as from the local traditionconcerning Thurn, mother of Charon, wasevidently in the district of Chaeronea, and notvery far from Petrachus. I conclude, therefore,that Thurium was the highest point of the hillsbehind Chaeronea, not far from the right bank ofthe rivulet, above the left bank of which, lowerdown, are the ruined walls of Panopeus. Thename Mera, attached to a village in the valley,may be a corruption of Morus. The torrent calledMoles would seem to be that which joins the leftbank of the Cephissus, and which separates Edyliumfrom Acontium. Here, therefore, was Assia, andthe placed called Archelaus, where the commanderof the Asiatics formed his entrenched camp afterSylla had taken Parapotamii. It is to be supposed,200 BOEOTIA. [chap.that although this was the position of Archelaushimself, his immense army extended quite acrossthe plain to Chseroneia and Mount Thurium. Thehills in the rear, on which Hortensius was posted,and where he was attacked by a movement of theright of the Asiatics round the left of the Romans,seem to have been not far from Daulis. Althoughthese are the conclusions to which I have come uponexamining the scene of action, I am aware that thedifficulty which I have already mentioned, mayseem to throw some doubt upon the whole explanation.Supposing the narrative to have been writtenoriginally by Sylla, and that either the Romangeneral himself, or the copiers of his memoirs, mayhave been in error as to the course of the Assusnear Parapotamii, it still seems unaccountable thatthe biographer who adopted the account, and whowas describing places near his own door, shouldnot have discovered and corrected the mistake.It may be thought, perhaps, that the citadel of theParapotamii may not have been at the Paleo-kastroof Belissi, but on the hill of Merall, which beingreally separated from the adjacent mountain bythe stream which joins the Cephissus below thePale6-kastro, so far corresponds with the words ofPlutarch. But the consequence would be that themountain of Khubavo, and not that of Belissi, wasthe ancient Edylium, and that the entrenched campof Archelaus was not near Karamusa, as I havesupposed, but in the valley between Khdbavo andBelissi, which is quite irreconcilable with the dataof Theopompus and Strabo, as to Parapotamii,Edylium, and Acontium. The situation of Para-xiii.]Boeotia. 201potamii, in the pass of five stades between Parnassusand the western end of the line of mountains,which terminated at the other extremity inOrchomenus, as well as the length of that ridgeand the distance of Parapotamii from Chseroneia,are all too near the accurate truth when applied tothe site near Belissi, to admit of any doubt of theidentity.Perhaps it may be supposed that the hill whichSylla pointed out to his troops, and which theyafterwards took, was the more conspicuous westernextremity of the summit of Edylium, upon whichare the ruins of a modem castle, that those ruinsoccupy the site of the citadel of the Parapotamii,that the Hellenic remains at the Paleokastro ofBelissi belonged to the town only, and that theAssus was the small stream near Karamusa, whichmay seem the more likely, as there is every reasonto believe that Assia was in that position. Butthis would not remove the difficulty, for notwithstandingthe identity of name, it is impossible tosuppose the river Assus and the village or placeAssia to have been very near to each other, theformer having flowed below the western extremityof Edylium, and the latter having been situatedbetween Edylium and Acontium ^^ Soon after his victory at victory over Archelaus, whichChaeronea, Sylla was called was so destructive that twoupon to oppose a new army of hundred years afterwards, inAsiatics which had landed at the time of Plutarch, armsChalcis, and after some skirt were still found in great furnishingat Tilphossium, gain titles in the marshes.ed, near Orchomenus, a second202 Boeotia. [chap.Dec. 14. — Since I have left loannina, theweather, with the exception of two days of southerlywind and rain at Dhomoko and Zituni hasbeen constantly calm and clear, with a slightnorth-easter : yesterday it began to threaten, andthe change this day declared itself in a tremens*dons storm of wind, accompanied ¥rith intermittingshowers. Livadhia, among its other inconveniencesof climate, is particularly subject in winter to thesesudden and violent gales, which descend fromHelicon with such fury as often to carry awaytiles and chimneys, as occurred to-day in severalinstances. The gale when of this extreme violenceis denominated a mega.Livadhia being a vakuf is governed by a voiswho farms the revenue from the administrationof the royal mosques ; or more commonly bya veil, or deputy, for whom the farmer is answerable.The Turk now residing at Livadhiais in the latter capacity, but is himself farmer andcollector of the customs.The municipal power is divided among threeprincipal Greek families, of which the first is thatof John Khondrodhlma, commonly called theLogotheti, from his office in the church. All theaffairs of the town pass through the hands of agrammatical, appointed by these archons. Neitherthe Turkish voivoda nor the kadjr interfere,unless when a Turk is concerned, and the formerin particular abstains from it, as he dreads theloss of his usual presents from the Greeks, andthe effects of their complaints at Constantinople.His chief business is to receive the imperial taxes,XIII.J Boeotia. 203which are let at present to the three persons abovementioned,for 2500 purses a year. These taxesare the mire, or dhekatia, the avaresi, or tax onpersonal property, and the khar&tj, or capitation.The first is underlet in portions every year.Those who farm it visit the villages at the timeof threshing, and receive their share, which inlands belonging to Greeks is about an eighth.The remainder is generally divided in the proportionof two thirds to the proprietor, he owningthe stock, and supplying the seed com. Theharvested are generally paid in kind, either astipulated quantity by the day, or a tenth of thecrop : the remainder is the metayer's portion, andis shared generally among several persons. Inmany instances the dhekatia is farmed by the Greekproprietor, in which case his share of the harvestbecomes seventeen twenty-fourths nearly. Someof the lands of Livadhla are Spahiliks, and havebeen held on the feudal tenure of military serviceever since the conquest. These pay a much smallerdhekatia to the Spahi, than the Greek lands to thefarmer of the vakuf ; they are generally hired byGreeks of Livadhla, and are cultivated like theothers. Sometimes the Spahillk also is included,and it happens occasionally that the Greek residesin the village as Spahi, but the Spahis is morecommonly in the hands of Albanian soldiers,who find it a good mode of laying out theirsavings, as the Spahis, besides the tithe, haveby custom established a title to a fee of a piastreper annum from every man, and half a piastrefrom every boy in the village, besides a certain204 Boeotia. [chap.allowance of provision when he resides, whichthe Albanian always does, for the sake of thismaintenance, and other advantages which his stationas a Musulman soldier gives him. It sometimeshappens that the resident Spahl has notthe tithe — only the fee, and what else he canextort.The poor Greek peasant, as I before remarked,derives but little advantage from the land being heldby his fellow-christians. Though he can seldomobtain a fair market for his share of the produce,he generally has to furnish from it the exorbitantinterest of some money which the Greek landholderor the Spahl has tempted him to borrow,after having forced him to the necessity of it : inshort, he finds himself in no better condition thanif he were a labourer on a Turkish tjiftlik. Tocomplete his misery, the upper class of Greeks atLivadhia are as insolent and unfeeling to theirinferiors, as they are malignantly jealous of oneanother ; though it cannot be denied at the sametime, that they have all the hospitality, wit, andsociable disposition of the nation, and, unlike thethesaurizing Jews and Armenians, generally live tothe full extent of their means.A15^ Pasha is now more feared than the Porte atLivadhia ; and it is found expedient to send everyspring a deputation of ^Arkhondes to loannina witha present of about 100 purses. Not along ago heendeavoured to obtain possession of Dhadhl, butby the management of the chiefs of Livadhia, theruin of that rising community was for the presentavoided. His advances, however, threaten to in-XIII.] Boeotia. 205crease in this direction, his son Velj^ having latelyobtained the mukata of Talanda.Dec. 17. — From Livadhla to Mazi. In crossingthe opening of the vale of Coroneia^ the principalsummit of Helicon presents itself very majesticallyat the head of the valley. It is a round mountainstanding rather separate from the rest of the rangeof HeUcoUy well clothed with firs, and now cappedwith snow. The modem name is Paleovuni, orPaleovuna. Half-way thither, hidden from sightin a ravine, is Kukora, from which village there isa road across the Heliconian ridge to Khosia, andKakosia.In two hours we arrive at the fountain Tilphossa,issuing from the foot of the rocky height nowcalled Petra. The fortress Tilphossseum, whichstood on the summit, appears to have beenamong the most important in Boeotia ^ Proceedingiron thence at 3.5, we cross, in sevenminutes, a brook from Rastamyti, a small villagehalf a mile on the right in an angle of the hills,where a ridge connects TUphossium with IJibe-tkrium: and in ten minutes more cross a stream,the largest we have passed this day except thePhalarus. It rises in the eastern part of MountlAbethriumy and issues through a precipitous gorgelying between the eastern end of TUphossium anda rocky peak which rises immediately behind thevillage of Mazi. On the right bank of this river,among a great quantity of loose stones, brokenpottery, and other appearances of an ancient site,are several squared blocks, sufficient to indicateDemosth. de fid. leg. 1. 4, c. 67 ; 1. 19, c. 53. — opocp. 385, 387. Reiske. — Diodor. ipvfiyvy, Strabo, p. 413.206 Boeotia. [chap.the position of Ocalea, a Homeric city, not mentionedby Pausanias, but well described by Strabo,as situated on the bank of a rivulet of the samename, midway between Alalcomense and Haliar-tus His distance, however, of thirty stades fromeach, though it accords with the fifty stades whichPausanias places between Haliartus and Tilphusa,appears to be too great by more than a third.Leaving now the direct road to Thebes, weascend obliquely to Mazi, a small village on thefoot of a remarkable peaked hill. From Mazi theroad continues southward to Mavromati and .The Maziotes chiefly cultivate kalam-bokki in the plain, and vineyards on the hills around(he village.Dec. 18. — I revisit this morning the remains ofHaliartuSj which are found on a low hill separatedfrom the extremity of the height of Mazi by a narrowbranch of the plain, and about a mile distantfrom the village. Towards the lake the hill ofHaliartus terminates in rocky cliffs, but on theother sides has a gradual acclivity. Some remainsof the walls of the Acropolis, chiefly of polygonalmasonry, are found on the summit of the hill, andthere are several sepulchral crypts in the clifis,below which, to the north, issues a copious sourceof water, flowing to the marsh, like all the otherstreams near the site of Haliartus. Although thewalls of the exterior town are scarcely anywheretraceable, its extent is naturally marked to the eastand west by two small rivers, of which that to the^ 4 ^ *0<:aX^i| /i€0'f| *KKiipTOv irapa^pil S* oim|v Tordfuoykal *A\a\KOfuyiov, tKarepov ofi^yvfiov. — Sti^bo, p. 410.TpiaKoyra araSiovt^ dirixov^a'XIII.] Boeotia. 207west issues from the foot of the hill of Mazi ; theeastern, called the Kefalari, has its origin in MountHelicon. Near the left bank of this stream, at adistance of 500 yards from the Acropolis, are aruined mosque and two ruined churches, on thesite of a village which, though long since abandoned,is shown by these remains to have beenonce inhabited by both Turks and Greeks. Hereare many fragments of architecture and of inscribedstones, collected formerly from the ruins of HaUar-tus. From this spot there is a distance of aboutthree quarters of a mile to a tumulus westward ofthe Acropolis, where are several sarcophagi andancient foundations near some sources of water,marking probably the site of the western entranceof the city.The tumulus covers perhaps the bones of themen who fell with Lysander in the celebratedbattle fought here in the year B. C. 395 ^ ; for thecircumstances of the event point exactly to thissituation. Lysander had been sent by the Ephoriwith a small body of Spartans into Phocis, to collectthe forces of that nation, together with thoseof the contiguous people of (Eta, Heracleia, Melis,and the ^nianes, and had been directed to marchto Haliartus, where Pausanias, with 6000 Peloponnesian,was to meet him. Lysander not only succeededin his mission, but induced Orchomenusto revolt from Thebes, and took Lebadeia by assault,from whence he wrote to Pausanias, informinghim that he should arrive at Haliartus dn aXenoph. Hellen. 1. 3, c. 5. in Lysand. Pausan. Boeot.Diodor. 1. 14, c. 81. Plutarch c. 32.208 Boeotia. [chap.certain morning at break of day. But the Thebansintercepted his letter, and thus obtained the meansof anticipating him at Haliartus while Pausaniaswas left in ignorance of his motions. LeavingThebes to the care of their Athenian allies, theymarched in the night, introduced a part of theirforces into the city, and with the remainder placedthemselves in ambuscade, ready to fall on theenemy's rear, at the fountain Cissusa \ near which,adds Plutarch, were monuments of Rhadamanthusand Alcmena, and a place noted for producing theplants from which Cretan javelins were madeLysander, on his arrival, thought at first of waitingfor Pausanias on " the height;" but becomingimpatient as the day advanced, he placed himselfat the head of his troops, and moved forwardwith the phalanx in column along the road leadingto the city ^. As soon as he arrived near thewall, the Thebans and Haliartii, rushing suddenlyfrom the gate, slew him and his augur', with afew others, upon which the phalanx retreated tothe hills. One thousand of them were slain inthe pursuit ; but it was fatal also to more than twohundred Thebans, who had rashly followed theminto narrow and difficult places.The king of Sparta was on his march from Platseato Thespis when the news reached him. The^ r&y ie 8i|j3a/«v oi /Jiir i^iu ' Oi ie Kpiivtrtoi ardpiucet ohfi€fuyiiic6r€Cf iv hpurrtpq. n)y wp6ew wipiw€fvKaviv.woXjv \afi6yr€it €fi6di(oy ewl * Wi X<^v.rove itr)(aTOvc rev woKEfiitay * 6p6l^ rp ^oXayyi irapauir6 rriy Kpiivriy ri^y Kltrtrovffay rfjy oioy }yc irpoc ro rcixoc-TTpoffayoptvofiiyriy, — Plutarch * ahr6y re sura rov fiayriufiin Lysand. KarifiaXoy.XIII.] Boeotia. 209next day he arrived at Haliartus ; but finding thatthe Phocis and other allies had inarched ofF inthe night, and Thrasybulus on the following daybringing a body of Athenians to the assistance ofthe Bceotians, all he could do was to enter intoterms for the body of Lysander, which it wouldhave been difficult to have obtained in any othermode, as it lay near the walls. Retreating out ofBoeotia, he buried Lysander in the district of thePanopsei, in the road which Plutarch, being himselfof Chseroneia, very naturally describes as thatleading from Chseroneia to Delphi. It appearsfrom the same author, that the rivulet which flowedalong the western wall of Haliartus, where Lysanderfell, was named Hoplites ; the same probablyas the Lophis of Pausanias, to whose fable concerningit the situation of the sources near the tumulus' is well adapted. Cissusa was evidently thefountain below the cliffs of the hill of Haliartus^ ;for the existence near that fountain, of plants fromwhich javelins were made, indicates the proximityof the marsh, and that position accords with theremark of Plutarch, that the Thebans marched toCissusa with the city on their left. They would^ The Haliardiy suffering bis blood fell the water issuedfrom drought, sent to inquire forth. — Pausan. Bceot. c. 33.of the Oracle of Delphi bow ' Plutarch relates that Bac-theywere to obtain water, cous was washed in Cissusawhen the messenger was di after bis birth, and that theerected to kill the first person water was of the colour ofbe should meet on returning, wine. This peculiarity I can •This happened to be a boy not confirm,named Lophis, and whereverVOL. II. P210 Boeotia. [chap,naturally avoid its southern side, lest Lysandershould be in possession of the heights, and thenorthern extremity ytHS well suited to their intentionin placing themselves there, if we suppose theentrance of the city where Lysander was slain, tohave been near the tumulus.The rocky gorges to the westward of the hill ofMaid agree exactly with the rugged places ' wherethe Thebans suffered, and as Plutarch adds that theirloss had been predicted by an oracle which warnedthem to beware of Orchalides and the hill offoxes which latter was in the district of Haliar-tus, towards Helicon, and in his time was calledAlopecum, we cannot but infer that Alopecumwas the peak of Mazi, and Orchalides a villagewhich may have occupied the site of Mazi itself.Although the hill of Haliartus is not fifty feet higherthan the lake, its rocky point projecting into themarsh is remarkable from every part of the plain.Possessing a fertile district, acid commanding apass in the center of Boeotia, which is well describedby Strabo as a strait between a mountainand the lake Copais ' : Haliartus was one of the^ tmvo\tapia ri KaX ^vtnro' Tpa\ia Ktu iraprcpa. — Pius— Xenoph, tare.*^itr)(aTiay ire^v\a{o \vkovq KaptAKiom ^oKivtiivKa \6^y 'Op\aXi^TiVf hy 6XtjTrfl oiwon Xc/irec.The first line relates to the battle of Delium.• »i'£keiro ie ty ortyf X^'V "^^^ ^^ cXovc rov ^ifoyro^ royfieri hrepKtifUyov opovc koL ahXifriKoy KoXa/iOF* — Strabor^C Kiinraf doc XlfiytiCt rXtioioy p. 411.Tov Iltp/Ariffffov Kol Tov *OX/iecovXIII.] BG50TIA. 21 1most important of the cities of this province, as thecircumstances of the Boeotia war ^ just mentionedprove. Having, unhappily, on two great occasions,sided with the weaker of two contendingparties, it was twice exposed to the vengeance ofpower ; first in the Persian invasion, when its conductformed an honourable exception to that of therest of Boeotia, and again in the last struggle ofthe Macedonians under Perseus against the Romans; the consequence of which latter imprudencewas that Haliartus no longer existed in the time ofStrabo. The praetor Lucretius, who took it aftera spirited resistance, destroyed the town, sold itsinhabitants for slaves, and embarked its pictures statues,and other valuable property in his ships. Theterritory was afterwards given to the Athenians ^.Nor does it appear that Haliartus had recovered,like some other Greek towns, any portion of itsformer prosperity in the time of Pausanias, for hefound here only scn?ie temples without roof orstatue, which had been destroyed by the Persians,and had been purposely left in that state, like someothers at Athens' ; it was not even known to whatdeities they had been 'dedicated. A monument inhonour of Lysander still remained, and a heronof Cecrops, son of Pandibn. The Haliartia extendedwestward to Mount Tilphossium, as appearsby the remark of Pausanias, that the Hali-1 'i'O iro\£/ioc ovroc c<:\^0i| 1. 30, c. 18. Liv. 1. 42, c. 63.Botwud^. — Diodor. ubi supra. ' Pausan. Boeot. c. 33.• Strabo, p. 411. Polyb. Phocis. c. 35.VOL. II. P 2212 Scotia. [chap.artis had an open sanctuary of the goddesses calledPraxidicse, which was very near that mountain\The Kefalari, which is as large as the Phalarus,but does not like that river fail in summer, as Iremarked on my former journey in this country,originates near Dusia and Mavromati, and receivesthe river of Zagara. At its entrance into the plainoi HaliartuSj the greater part of its water is turnedeastward along the foot of the heights to somemills ; but its natural course is by the village ofMegalo Mulki into the marsh not far to the northeastwardof Haliartus. The two branches of theriver from M avrom&ti and Zagara seems to accordexactly with the Permessus and OlmeiuSj which,according to Strabo, flowed from Helicon, andafter uniting entered the lake Copais near Haliar-tus '. Herodotus, whom Strabo quotes in referenceto Ascra, and from whom he seems to havederived his information as to the Permessus andOlraeius, stated the former to have had its sourcesin the Thespian, and described the latter as astream towards the summit of Mount Heliconabout three hundred stades from Thebes'. Thesources of the Kefalari being about midway betweenthe sites of Haliartus and TfiespuB^ agree^ iffTi irpoc Tf opt Tf TcX- ifiriiTTovm \ifiviiv ri^vKttwathL^vffif TO Upoy, — Paasan. rov *AXiaprav irXif^'^oy.^Stn-Boeot. c. 3d. bo, p. 407, V. et 411, ubi sup.icon 6 Uepfificiroc teal 6 'Ox * Apud Schol. Hesiod./lecoc c«c rov 'EXiicfivoc cvfifiaX^ Theol. v. 5.Xoyrtt dXKiiXotc eJc rijv airilyXIII.] Boeotia. 213perfectly with those of the PermessuSy and the riverof Zagara so far accords with the OlmeitiSj that itflows from a valley which separates Libethriumfrom Helicon. The distance of three hundredstades from Thebes, however, is too great for anypart of the Heliconian mountains.Having crossed the Kefalari at the ruinedmosque, and passed Mulki half a mile on the left,we proceed along the foot of the hills, and in fourteenminutes from the Kefalari arrive at a copiousfountain at the foot of a low rock similar to thecliffs of HaUarttis, and about half a mile from theedge of the marsh. Above it stands a squaretower half ruined, and of the same construction asthose at Xeropyrgo and other places in Scotia.To the north-eastward of this point the slope of themountain now called Faga meets the marsh in aprojecting point ; between which and another extremitytowards Kardhitza the marsh forms a bay.At 10.17 we begin to ascend the low ridge whichseparates the two great Boeotian basins, thoseof the Sophism and of Thebes, and which connectsMount Faga with the roots of Helicon; at10.21, on its summit, we arrive at a small pieceof Hellenic wall, consisting only of three or fourstones in their places, on the right hand side ofthe road. The direction of this foundation isoblique to the road, running north and south,while the direction of the road in this spot issouth-east. On the height on either side aremany stones in the ploughed land, not natural tothe soil, as well as other usual indications of anancient site. .214 Boeotia. [chap.Pausanias moving in the direction of this pointfrom the Neitides gate of Thebes, arrives at aboutforty stades from thence, at a temple of the Cabeiri,to the right of vrhich was theTeneric plain, and to theleft a road branching to Thespiae, distant fifty stades.On the other side of the Teneric plain rose themountain where the Sphinx was said to have lainin wait for passengers, putting them to death, ifthey were unable to interpret her enigma; Theruins of Onchestus, where still remained the templeand statue of Neptune Onchestius, in an aX<roc, orsacred grove, were fifteen stades distant from themountain. Pausanias does not mention the distanceon the direct road from the Cabeirium toOnchestus, nor does he continue his route fromOnchestus to Haliartus; but turning from theCabeirium to Thespiee, describes the places inthat part of Boeotia before he proceeds to treat ofHaliartus, thus leaving no information as to thedistance and direction of Onchestus, either fromThebes or from Haliartus ^ But Strabohas suppliedthis deficiency ; for after censuring Alcseusfor placing Onchestus at the footof Helicon, whereasit was at a considerable distance from that mountain,he states that it was in the Haliartia,on a naked hill near the Teneric plain, and theCopaic Lake. He farther remarks, that Meteor,another Homeric town of the Haliartia, was afterwardscalled Pho&nieis, from its position at the footof Mount Phcenicium, that Medeon was very nearOnchestus, and that Mount Phcenicium was in thePausan. Boeot. c. 25, 26.XIII.] Rosetta. 215district of Thebes ^ Upon comparing these authoritieswith the places, it is evident that Faga wasthe mountain of the Sphinx, which the Greeks ingeneral called Sphingium, but the Bceotians ^//ciov,or ^ucuovj from 4>cS', the Boeotia form of 2^17^, andit seems also that the same mountain, or at least apart of it, near the Haliartia, was named Phcenicium.The modem name ^ayac may be a corruption of^iKiovy or it may be a vestige of the fable of thedevouring Sphinx. It further appears from the sameauthors, that the Teneric plain was the north-westernportion of the plain of Thebes, or that part of itwhich lies at the foot of Mount Faga to the southeast; and that Onchestus, having been within theHaliartia, fifteen stades distant from the mountain,and near the Copaic lake as well as the Tenericplain, could hardly have occupied any other positionthan the low ridge which separates the plains,and where the Hellenic vestiges still subsist Me-donhaving also been in the Haliartia, would seemto have stood near the lake in the bay on the northwesternside of Mount Faga, between the site ofHaUartuB and Kardhitza.At 1 1 . 10, having halted till that time, I leave thesupposed site of Onchestus and begin to descendfrom the pass into the plain, which at first is not somuch as a mile in breadth, bordered on the rightby gently-rising cultivated heights, and on the leftby the rugged sides of Mount Fag. At 1 L24 we> . . .Stnibo, p. 41Q. 4X2. Schol.— Plutar9h.inGryllo8iveHesiod. Sc. Hercul. y. 33, de Animi. ration. — Stephan. inet Schol. — Id. Theogn. v. 326, ^ikiwv.etSchol. — ^Lycophr. v. t465, ct216 Boeotia. [chap.have the foot of this hill near us on the left, andat 1 1.27 the highest peak. As we proceed, the plainbetween us and the mountain becomes broader,and is now inundated. In summer it produceskalambokki. Before us, as far as Thebes, thegreat level, as well as the long slopes of the hillsto the right of it, is for the most part a continuedcorn-field, without a single fence. A part of thearable is lying fallow, and some part of the landisin pasture, but upon the whole it is as wellcultivated a district as any in Europe. At11.46, Vain and Khasnesi, two considerable villages,separated only by a small ravine, are twomiles on the right. Vdiais the lower. At 12.5 wecross the road leading from Via to Mazeraki, whichlatter is two or three miles on the left, in the Tenericplain near the foot of the lower declivities of MountFag, where are some sources of water, and abovethem on the heights a monastery.' At 12.15 wepass TzoSnno, and a few minutes further Morokamoat the foot of the slopes on the right. These, likeMazeraki and the others, are small villages. At12.40 the most projecting point of Mount Fag ison the left, a low stony rise, which we may supposeto have formed the separation between the Tenericplain and that of Thebes. From thence the lowerridges of that mountain trend to the northwardtowards the heights connecting the mountainsPhidum and Ptoum^ and below which is an inundatedKoKiroQy or bay of the Teneric plain. At 12.50we cross the Kanavdri, or Kandvri\ a small streamXIII.] Boeotia. 217dry in Bummer, ivhich rises at Erimokastro, andjoins the Lake of Senzina near its southern extremity— halt five minutes. At about a quarter ofan hour from Thebes we begin to ascend obliquelythe heights on which that town is situated, and at1.30 cross a rivulet called Platziotissa, which risesa little above Thebes, and flows in a ravine alongthe western side of the town. In ascending thebank of this ravine to the town, a fountain occursnamed Parap<5rti.CHAPTER XIV,Boeotia.Ypsili Raklu — General geography of Boeotia — Rivers and form"pains of Thebes — Cadmeia — Description of the city by Dies-archesand Pausanias — Dimensions of the city — Seven GatesDeparture for 'Egripo — Teutnesstu — Mount Siamata, /Ty-pati — (y^wfl*— River Thermodon — Harmaa — Mycalesstu^-^'Egripo, Chalets — Euripus — Bridge— Mount Kalogheritza —Lelantum — Aulis — Cape Empyrean — Departure from 'EgripoThalia — Salganetu — ^^Ancient road — Pantheon.The hills immediately around Thebes are for themost part uncultivated, and, being intersected withlarge white charades or furrows, have rather adismal appearance. They are capable of producinggood wine, but the Thebans seem to think only ofthe culture of com. The irtliov wpvi^opov ^ is stillnoted for its fertility, and produced last year148,000 kuvelia of wheat of excellent quality,while in almost every other part of Greece thecrop was indifferent : 500 kuvelia of flour are sentG///3f7c ^ elaaf^iKavec c&>c Karatipivov vk^'Oh yap irw nt elate fiporiiy iepj M Qii(ififOvS' Papa irw t6t€ ^<ray drapwoi ovdt KeXevBoiOifiji^ ap wesley xvpiy^opoi', aXX* tx^*^ ^^^'Hymn, in Apoll. v. 228.CHAP. XIV.] Boeotia. 219weekly to 'Egripo, there being no mills at thelatter place. The greater part of the land in thedistrict of Thebes is owned by three men of 'Egripo,AhmM Pasha, mouselllm of that place; Bekir,now Pasha of Bosnia, and Rashfd Bey : the landlordand the <Treek cultivator share the produce ofgrain equally, the former finding the seed and halfthe oxen ; but there is a tribe of kiayds and grammaticalwho superintend the landlords' concernson the spot, and contrive to diminish very largelythe receipts of both parties.To the observer from Thebes, Moist Pagi, theincipit Phicium, or Phoenician, presents a singlebare and rugged peak, which to the right is separatedfrom a long even ridge equally bare, andnearly of the same height, by the opening in whichstands the village of Kardhitza. The latter mountainis the ancient Ptoum, now known in differentparts by the names of Paled, Strutting, and Skro-poneri, and extending from Kardhitza northeastuntil it is blended with Messapium, nowcalled Khtypa. Midway between Thebes andMessapium, and hiding the highest part of thelatter is the mountain named Samatd, or Siamatd,vulgarly pronounced Samara, from a village ofthat name behind it. It is bold and rocky, witha flat summit; and being the nearest, is the mostconspicuous of all the mountains around Thebes.It seems clearly to be the ancient Hypatus.Dec. 19. — 'Pass the forenoon on a height calledPsilirakhi, that is to say, J\ "Y^ijXii *Vayriy or thehigh ridge, which is distant two miles direct fromThebes to the east-south-east. It is the nearest220 Boeotia. [chap.point affording a good view of the southern JBcBoHanbasin, or that which is bounded on the south bythe BceotO'Attic range of Citharan and Panes tothe west by HeUcony and to the north by PhiciuniyHypatus^ and MesBapium^ and which, as I beforeobserved, is separated only from the great northernvalley otBceoiia by the ridge of Onchesttis. On observinghow completely distinct the two great valleysare, each of them being surrounded by mountainsexcept at that ridge, one is not surprised that Boeotiashould have been for a long time divided intotwo great political leagues, of which Thebes andOrchomenus were deservedly the chief places, northat Thebes, surrounded by a larger extent of moreuniformly fertile country, and happily situated ata moderate distance from three outlets of maritimecommerce, should have acquired a preponderanceover its rival, which would have raised Thebes tomuch higher destinies than it ever attained, hadthe Bceotians been more favourable to letters and instruction.To this cause alone a historian of the ageof Alexander attributes the fact, that their powerwas never durable, notwithstanding their threeseas \ their ports on the Corinthian Gulf, communicatingwith Italy, Sicily, and Libya, andthose on the Euboic frith, which conducted on oneside of the Euripus to Egypt and Cyprus, and onthe other to Macedonia and the Propontis *•** ftoyri Tpt0d\arT6c core— barons, with whom force is metaphor.ap. Strabo. p. 400. ter than logic (Sita \6yov rpc/r-Strabo (p. 401) observes, twv Itrri), and that the Ko-thatthe remark of Epirus will mans, having first prevailed byapply to Greeks, but not to bar force over nations more .]Boeotia. 221The Psilirakhl, although not high, is the mostcentral summit in the southern basin, and stands inthe middle of a low range of hills, which, branchingfrom the eastern end of Mount Helicon, extendsto the Euhoic frith, and divides the basin into twoparts, of which the Parasapia, or vale of the Asopus,is the most remarkable plain in the southern division: and that of Thebes in the northern. Theposition of Thebes was determined by its being theonly spot in the separating ridge where water is plentiful.Towards Helicon, in the vicinity of These,the ridge becomes lower and rounder, and is wellcultivated in many parts ; to the eastward of Thebesit is not so fertile, and the villages are consequentlyless numerous than to the westward, but the hillsare covered with a fine pasture, and abound in wildthyme, and other odoriferous herbs. Eastward ofPsilirakhi the ridge rises to its highest peak, nowcalled Soro, the falls of which approach so near tothe foot of Mount PameSy that there is only a narrowrocky ravine between them, through which theAsopus finds its way from the Parisian valleyinto the Tano^man plain, and from thence by anothersimilar ravine into the Oropia.Thebes is now called ra Qtifia, or more commonlyin Boeotia, ra fia, by that easy substitutionof the one aspirate for the other, of whichthere are many examples in the ancient language.barons than themselves, were thus became lords of all (insensibleof the importance of Two koX Tavrfi rj dyiayf consciencewhen they had to deal Karitrrrivav Kayruty kvpioi,)with more civilized people, and222 fiCEOTiA. [chap.The Turks say Stiff. The town stands on a hill,separated on every side from the adjacent heights,rising about 150 feet above the plain, and situatedtwo miles to the northward of the highest part of theridge. It is bounded to the east and west by theravines of two small rivers, and is surrounded by aruinous wall, composed of materials and repairs ofvarious ages, among which are seen, in many places,Roman tiles-work, and large squared blocks in theGreek style. A low projection at the northern extremitywas occupied by a keep or tower, which, aswell as another tower at the north-eastern angle,with its adjoining gateway, are of more solid constructionthan the rest of the work, and are chieflycomposed of ancient materials. The circuit isabout a mile and a half, and is said to contain 700families, of which about 260 are Turkish. Thestreets are narrow, and the houses stand closetogether, with few gardens. To the southward,between the town and the ridge, the hollow whichwas anciently occupied by lower Thebes, is nowcrossed by a ruined aqueduct upon arches, whichstill conveys water into the town from the westernrivulet. The district contains 64 villages, most ofwhich are small.At Thebes, as in most of the towns of Greece,which continue to occupy their ancient sites, theremains of antiquity chiefly consist of fragmentsof architecture and sculpture, or of inscribed marbles,dispersed among the houses, mosques, baths,and fountains, in the walls, stairs, streets, andpavements. Not one of the ancient buildingsXIV.] Boeotia. 223can be traced; though it is very possible thatsome remains of them may be mixed with themodem structures or buried by them, and thaton the site of Lower Thebes to the southward ofthe town, where they are more accessible, manyother valuable remains may still subsist below thesurface of the soil.The village of Tabakidhes, on the eastern sideof Thebes, mentioned by Upon and Wheler, is nolonger in existence, but the church of St. Lukestill remains there, and contains the sorus, or greatstone coffin, vulgarly called the tomb of St. Luke.The ten hexameter on one side of it, which havebeen published by those travellers have sufferedan injury since their time, so that five or sixletters towards the middle of each line are nolonger legible. On the opposite side of the monumentare two other inscriptions which they did notnotice, one in hexameter, the other in trimeteriambics. The three are all of different dates, butrelate to the sanie family. From that which wascopied by Wheler and Upon, it appears that themonument was made by order of one Zosimus, tocontain the body of his son Nedymus, whose motherwas an Italian, named Adam '. , The secondTeifiQyriQ KXaU^Kov ityai&OiiTf Tepid rv/ifitf*^vx^ ^ eg TO Bixawr e/Siy* ^y f ovyofm r* ab^oyOirc 4/LI17V tfiwpoaOi irony XP^^^^^ ^'^^' ^y^^V^yETc 6\iyiay iriiay iyapid^io^, Atrraro^ amityOhK ayihpaaroy t^iay i^cof Bpdfioy^ iv ikaxiy neMoiptig ravrriv crreXiffcc, koI yap /Sa^cXfcc*Tar'224 Boeotia. [chap,inscription in hexameter was in honour of thesame Nedymus, and was placed upon the sorusby his son Zosimus, who reserved a place in thereceptacle for himself, and declared that any onewho should put any other body into it, should pay tothe treasury ten thousand denarii The third epitaphwas not inscribed until the death of the secondZosimus, the bo<ly of whose son Nedymus had inthe mean time been deposited in it The greatgrandfather, Zosimus the first, seems to have hada different sepulchre. In the third inscription thetomb declares itself to be full, and closed, anddenounces the usual imprecation upon any onewho should open it The second inscription is*A£ifiyriaToy ixwr ylnr)(iic wdBoy &dayaroio»Mapfiapiri \idoQ tifjilf ^ipw ^ kv yaaripi ^cSraN//^v/ioy vvyoy exoyra, koI iy Quilt irapoyra.*0y ^fjfjLot XP^^f are^yfBovX^ ravrov twpaieKeirat ffw/xa XioyrocZtiffifAOQ vic €ypa\p€"E/LiTvovv i^Oeyyofiiyfiy dSewg"Orig S' hy ToXfif Oi^ai yiicvy tig efu rri^vyXtaplg Tov vaiSog ira rip oct oy e^of Kara yaorpoctA^ffec rjf re wdXei koI rf rafidf [diyvdpca] fivpta*ISXiipriQ o ^prog iari loi, koKSq €\€i^Keirac yap vrilvy tig ifAijy 6 "Slfhvfwg^Kai TOV re irtuidg whig yeyiifc ^ fiiiSvfMog^Tpiroc de waiSog vvy warijp 6 Zitvifiog,Mvffcv Oeuiy rig /loc dona koI <rv/i^vffcy,"Hv^ itpiiyjll Tig tig AyottiLy n)v lfiiiy$Mer* iXirliuy 6yaiT0f /ii) Tixy^y 9T6pag^*AXX* cyyeyiSc o\oiTo KXtfpiiibty yiyog,V. Inscription No. 40.XIV.] B(EOTIA. 225imperfect at the end of several of the lines ; thethird is nearly complete. The monument is ofwhite marble with a highly ornamented operculum,the surface of which represents a covering ofleaves. But neither the letters nor the poetryadmit of a date anterior to A.D. 300.The inscriptions in the town are neither numerousnor well preserved. Two of them relateto Bacchus and his artists, that is to say, to thepersons employed in his service in the theatre \A third is the sepulchral monument of a ladynamed Secunda, styled a female hero. Belowthis inscription is another in smaller character,and apparently of a less ancient date. In this apriestess of Isis, named Nicest, daughter of prison,dedicates the Anthedouian coffin, (on whichthe inscription is engraved,) declares it to besacred, that it shall not be used by her heirs, andthat any one who shall force it open, or pollute it,shall pay 700 denaria to the goddess. It wouldseem from this document, that Anthedon wasnoted for producing stone, fitted for Xijvoi^ or stonecoffins, more commonly denominated aopoL Of theother inscriptions which I find here, the most remarkableare a fragment of names in the Sceptic^ T^ KOivoy T&y xepi rov Ac ' *E,iri^KovvS^iipwiBi. *Icpa-cyvaov nxytr&y r&y ky OfifiatQ <p6pOQ Nccra/oi 'Aploroivoc (offaAcocX^y Ti/Aotrrpdrov Acovv^fv. Kal fpoyovtra fly *Ay6fidoylayV. Inscription, No. 41 • \jiy6y xXfipoydfioit kfioig fii^AtoFVffyy dptTiic vpo<riiKeiy jiri^e &XXf firiiiyciviKiy Kal tifyoiag fjy t\wy dca- lay Si nc /diaaa/Lievoc dyol^^ rjrtXel tic re tovq Te\ylTaQ Kal fJ^iav^ fJLOv rd Upd, dworelvei rjr^C e«C Toy Boy thfftfitlac* — Etsi ^riydpia £irraif<J«a.— V.y. Inscription, No. 42. Inscription, No. 43.VOL. II. Q ^r-226 Boeotia. [chap.dialect ^ and the sepulchral monument of oneCharles, qualified as an arch-physician and hero ^The only undoubted relic which I can discoverof the walls of Hellenic Thebes, now forms thelowest part of the northern tower just above theplain. About thirty yards of the ancient work arestill traceable, and four or five courses are visible,if courses they can be called, the masonry ofwhich, like that of Tiryns, is formed of veryroughly hewn masses of stone, originally fitted inthe intervals with smaller stones, which havemostly fallen out. This wall is not straight, butforms a curve. Its masonry, its curved form, butabove all its thickness, which is more than twenty-eightfeet, seem to prove that in antiquity it mayvie with Mycenae, or even with that of the Tipi/vOiovirXivOcv/ua', which it most resembles. Anothermonument, apparently of remote times, is foundto the eastward of the town, not far to the southwardof the church of St. Luke.It is a barrow of a form, which,though rare, is not unexampled —in Greece, having a double slopethus.In the absence of remains of art, it is only bymeans of the land-marks of nature that we canhope to trace the ancient topography of this city \Besides the hill of the Cadmeia, which is welldefined on every side, the only natural featuresV. Inscription, No. 45. * See a sketch of Thebes at'EttI \apia dpx^O'Tpf ifp^. the end of Vol. IV.^V. Inscription, No. 47.£ quondam poet ap.Hesych. in voce.XIV.] BCBOTIA. 227that can be recognized are those celebrated riversand fountains which first attracted inhabitants tothe site, and which contributed with other advantagesto make Thebes the chief city of Boeotia.Three torrents traverse the site, and flow northwardinto the plain of Thebes, one on either side of theCadmeian hill, having their origin in the low ridge,which, two miles to the southward of the town,begins to fall in that direction to the Asopus. Thethird is a beautifully clear and copious pool ofwater, in an artificial basin, situated at less than amile to the S.S.E. of the modern town. Itsstream flows to the plain through a ravine wherederivations are made from it at different levels, toturn mills, and irrigate gardens, so that littlewater remains in ordinary seasons at its entranceinto the plain. The small church of St. John \from which the river is named, stands exactly atthe fountain-head. The western river, namedPlatziotissa ^ has a more constant course in theplain, though, being considered the purest of theTheban waters, no small quantity of its water isdiverted to supply the fountains of the town.Several sources on, or adjacent to the ancientsite, yield their contributions to this stream, someof which, in a country so subject as Greece is toearthquakes, may not now issue from the earth inthe same positions as the fountains of ancientThebes. The two most remarkable are that ofParaporti, which has already been noticed, andanother situated five or six hundred yards higher'AVtif^KifC, t. e. "Ay IOC 'Iwavviyc* * UXarf iwrcc^o.q2 .Boeotia.[chap.up the river, and, like Parapet, near, its rightbank. To the eastward of the ravine of the Ailanni, distant a third of a mile from the town, isthe most copious of the Theban sources, a modern^wStKaKpowoQj issuing from the side of thehill through twelve spouts. The place is calledSt. Theodore \ and was described by Upon, in 1676,as the handsomest of the suburbs of Thebes, butof which three or four cottages only now remain.The superfluous waters of these rivers and sourcesserve to irrigate gardens, and plantations of cotton,tobacco, and kalambokki, in the plain to thenorthward, and in summer are entirely consumedin that manner : in winter they render the plainmarshy.Thebes had been thrice subverted when twentyyears after its last destruction by Alexander, orinthe year 315 B.C. Cassander, assisted by theAthenians and by the people of Messene andMegalopolis, in gratitude to their founder Epaminondas,restored the whole circuit of the walls,and laid out new streets'. Dicsearchus, whowrote not long afterwards, thus describes the city**• The site is level, the form circular', with a cir-AiOo^bipoC) t. e. "AycocDicsearch. /3/oc 'EXXa^oc,p. 14. Strabo, p. 401. Dio-dor.1. 19, c. 54. Pausan.Messen. c. 27. Boeot. c. 7.The three subversions ofThebes, alluded to by Dicsear-chus, were by the Epigoni orsecond Peloponnesian allianceunder some of the sons of theseven chiefs who had beendefeated before the walls ofThebes ; secondly, by theThracian and Pelasgi, duringthe Trojan war; and thirdly,by Alexander.XIV.] Boeotia. 229cu inference of seventy stades. It is plentifullyprovided with watery and abounds in green pasturesand fertile hills, and in gardens beyond any cityin Greece. Two rivers flow through the town, andirrigate all the subjacent plain ; there is also a subterraneousstream issuing from the Cadmeia throughconduits which are said to have been constructedby Cadmus \ The abundance and coolness of thewater, the agreeable breezes, the verdant aspect ofthe place, its gardens, fruits, and other productionsof the season, render Thebes a most agreeableresidence in the summer*. In the winter, onthe contrary, it is very unpleasant, being destituteof fuel, and constantly exposed to floods and winds.It is then often covered with snow, and is verymuddy' Although seventy stades is the circuithere ascribed to Thebes by Dicaearchus, he assignsin his verses a much smaller extent, namely, forty-three' ; and this number being in metre, andconsequently more free from suspicion of inaccuracy,was probably the reputed perimeter of thewalls, as Pausanias still traced them with theirseven gates, near 500 years afterwards. This circuitwas very nearly equal to that of the Hasty, orThis may perhaps be the the adjacent country for itsfountain of Paraporti. The gardens; and even suppliesconduits of Cadmus were pro Athens with some of their probablya fable. duce, particularly melons.Thebes is still noted in. . . Keirai h* kv fjieaoyelif, wdyv AraXi)n^Xcc, fuydXai G^/3aC) wraBlufy ro vepifAErpov"Exovaa TerrapaKoyra koI irpoain rpi&v.Dicaearch. v. 93.230 Boeotia. [chap.upper town of Athens. In the seventy stades, Dies-archesmay have intended perhaps to include thesuburbs and the gardens, to which he particularlyalludes \ After the time of Cassander, Thebessuffered in common with the rest of Greece fromthe contests of which it became the scene, especiallythose between Rome and Macedonia ; its particularcalamities recommenced with the Mithridateswar, when Sylla punished Thebes for taking ^part against him, by presenting half its territoryto the Gods, as an atonement for his having plunderedtheir treasuries at Olympus Epidaurus andDelphi. Although the Romans afterwards restoredtheir land to the Thebans, the city never recoveredfrom that calamity ' ; but having largely shared, aswell as Chalcis, in the chastisement inflicted uponthe friends of Achaia by Mummies, after the captureof Corinth ', it was reduced to such a miserablestate in the time of Augustus, that it scarcelydeserved, according to Strabo, to be called a townNear two centuries later, when Greece had a littlerecovered under the Roman emperors, Pausaniasfound Thebes occupying, as it now does, the Cad-mea.In the decline of the empire, as the maritimetowns of Boeotia became exposed to hostilityor piracy, the population of this province was probablyin great measure concentrated in the advanceIt may be observed, how yow 7rpoiix^<fo,y» — Paasan.ever, that none of the distances Bceot. c. 7.of Dicsearchus, as they stand ' £pit Liv. 1. 52.m the text of his prose work, * obSi Kw/<iyc o*{coX6yov rvrorwill bear examination. adtf^oiwi. — Strabo, p. 403.cc ro dfr6€y6TaToy aV* iircc-XIV.] BCBOTIA. 231gaseous internal positions of Thebes and Livadhia,and the walls may then have been constructed,which, with a succession of repairs, have subsistedto the present time. In the fourth century Thebeswas in so respectable a state of defence, thatAlaric, impatient to reach Athens, would not ,lose the time that a siege of Thebes would haverequired ; and in the 12th century, it was of suchmagnitude, that, according to Benjamin of Tela,the Jews alone amounted to 2000, who were ^' skilfulworkers in purple and scarlet." Under theTurks, like all their towns, it has gradually declined.Although inhabited Thebes was confined to theCadmeia, when Pausanias visited the place, all theprincipal monuments connected with Theban .mythologyand history were still in existence, moreor less preserved. The following is an abstract oftheir description by that traveller \ The roadfrom Plataea entered at the gates Electrse; theother gates were the Proetides, the Neitse or Deities,the Creases, the Hypsistee, the Ogygise, andthe Homilies. Not far from the gates (Electric) *was a Polyandrium of the Thebans, who fell infighting against Alexander, and a little beyond itthe place* where Cadmus produced men, by sowingthe teeth of the dragon which he slew at the fountainof Mars. To the right of the same gate wasthe hill sacred to Apollo, who was surnamed Isme-Panran. Boeot. 8, 10, 11, other objects described were12, 16, 17. all within the walls of LowerIt seems evident from the Thebes,narrative, that this and the ' x"^?^^^' — ^* ^^*Boeotia .[chapninus, from the river flowing by it, which was moreanciently called Ladon. Before the entrance ofthe temple was a rock, named the chair ^ of theprophetess Santo, daughter of Tiresias; and tothe right of it were statues in stone, supposed to• represent Enoch and Pyrrha, daughters of Creon.At the entrance of the temple were statues inmarble of Minerva and Mercury, sumamed fromtheir situation Pronai ; the former was said to bethework of Scopas, the latter of Phidias. Thetemple contained a statue of the god by Canachus,exactly resembling that made by the same artistat Franchise, except that it was of cedar insteadof brass. Among the tripods in the temple wasthat dedicated by Amphitryon for his son Hercules,when the latter officiated as Daphnephorus :a young man remarkable for beauty and strengthwas still chosen every year to fill this office.Above (or beyond ') the Ingenium was the fountainsacred to Mars, who placed it under theguardianship of the dragon which was slain byCadmus ^ ; near the fountain was the tomb ofCantus.dpwripw.This differs from Euripides,who describes thedragon as the guardian ofDirce, ^paKuy 6 yiyyevi^c A/p-IC1JC yafAartay iwiffKOKOQ, — Phoenix.V. 938. In the course ofsix centuries some differencemay have arisen on this questionamong the antiquaries ofThebes; and Pausanias mayhave adopted the opinion opposedto that received in thetime of Euripides. The guidesof Thebes found Pausanias agood recipient of their stories.They showed him the cindersof the funeral pile of the childrenof Amphion, and somestones at the base of his tumulus,which had been charmedXIV,]Boeotia.To the left of the gate Electrse were the ruins ofthe house of Amphitryon, and the temple of Hercules.The house of Amphitryon contained thebed-chamber of Alcmena, said to have been thework of Trophonius and Agamedes. Here, also,was a monument of the children of Hercules byMegara, a stone called Sophronister, said to havebeen thrown at Hercules by Minerva, to preventhim from slaying Amphitryon, the figures ofwomen named Pharmacidse in low relief \ andabove the Sophronister an altar of Jupiter Potiusmade of the cinders of victims.The temple of Hercules contained his image inwood, which was supposed to be the work anddedication of Daedalus, with another in white marble,which was surnamed Promachus, and wasmade by two Theban artists, Xenocrates and Eu-sins.The anti of the temple were adorned withfigures by Praxiteles, representing all the twelvelabours of Hercules, except the destruction of thebirds of Stymphalus, and the cleansing of the Eleianland, instead of which there was the wrestling ofHercules with Antaeus. Within the building werecolossal figures of Minerva and Hercules in relief,into that place by his singing(y^). He resisted, however,the tale of the dragon's teethconverted into men, and boldlydeclares his disbelief that certainsucking-pigs, which wereplaced as sacrifices in the Megaraat PotnisB, made their appearancethe next year at Dodona.— (Boeot. c. 8,). Amongother contrivances of the €$17-yfiraX of Thebes, we have reasonto believe that they alteredor forged some of the inscriptionson the monuments.^ cri 7W0V yvyaiK&y ihc6vest11.Kokoaaoifc iii riirov.Boeotia.[chap.made of Pentelic marble by Alcamenes and dedicatedby Thrasybulus and his comrades, when,having proceeded from Thebes to Athens, theythere put an end to the tyranny of the Thirty.Adjoining to the Heraclea were the gymnasiumand the stadium of Hercules. There was an altarat Thebes of Apollo Potius ; and an altar in theopen air, with a statue of Minerva bearing thePhoenician epithet of Tonga, and said to have beendedicated by Cadmus K This statue had formerlystood in a temple, which appears from aeschylusto have been without the city, near one of thegates '.As the ancient Acropolis was the only inhabitedpart of Thebes when it was visited by Pausanias,the Agora of that time contained some ofthe most ancient monuments of the Cadmeia ; apart of it was supposed to occupy the exact site ofthe habitation of Cadmus '. Here were shownIt appears from Sophocles(wpog IlaXXa^c 3firXoTc vooic,CEdip. Tyr. v. 20), that therewere two temples of Minervaat Thebes, in one of which,according to the scholiast, shewas sumamed Oncaea, in theother Armenia. See also for thetemple of Once, Schol. in Eu-rip.Phoen. v. 1069.• Avaaff* "Oyico irp6 7r6\£v^.frisch. Sept. adv. Th. v. 170.V. Schol. ibid. ytlrovaQ irvXacl^tav" Oy Ka 'A6ovac. — ^v. 492."Oyjca IlaXXac ^' dyxirrroKiqTLvkaiVL yilrwy, — 7. 607. Stephan.in 'Oyicacai. Hesych. in"Oyya. This name shows, addsPausanias, that Cadmus wasnot from Egypt but Phoenicia ;a fact still more strongly supportedby his introduction ofthe alphabet.It was doubtless not here,but in the more ancient Agorain Lower Thebes, that a magnificentstoa was erected afterthe battle of Delium, as relatedby Diodorus (1. 2, c. 70.)XIV.] Boeotia. 236rains of the bedchamber of Harmonia and Semele ;the place where the Muses sang at the wedding ofHarmonia, and a piece of wood adorned with brassby Polydorus, said to have fallen from heavenwhen Semele was stricken with lightning, andnamed Bacchus Admetus : also three statues ;one of Bacchus in solid brass, by Onassimedes ;with an altar wrought by the sons of Praxiteles ;the second of Pronouns, a celebrated improver ofthe flute, and composer of music for that instrument; and the third of Epaminondas. Near thelatter was the temple of Ammon, containing astatue by Calamis, dedicated by Pindar ; also atriangular pillar, upon which was engraved anodeof Pindar, addressed to the Ammonia, andnear it an altar dedicated by Ptolemy, son ofTagus. Near this temple was the place of augury,where Teiresias observed the flight of birds, anda temple of Fortune, whose statue, bearing thechild Plutus, was the work of Callistonicus ofThebes, except the face and hands, which weremade by Xenophon of Athens, There were alsothree wooden statues of Venus with the surnamesof Urania, Pandarus, and Apostrophe,said to have been formed from the beaks ofthe ships of Cadmus, and to have been dedicatedby Harmonia. There had formerly beena temple of Ceres Thesmophorus, and a houseof the descendants of Cadmus, but a bust onlyof Ceres remained, and some brazen shieldssaid to be those of Lacedaemonian officers whohad fallen at Leuctra. Near the gates Proem[chap*tides was the theatre*, and adjoining to it atemple of Bacchus Lysias, which contained statuesof Bacchus and of Semele. Here were alsothe ruins of the house of Locus, monuments ofSemele, of the sons of Amphion and of thedaughters of Amphion, and a temple of DianaEcclesia, whose statue was by Scopas. Withinthe sanctuary were interred the two daughters ofAntigonus, who had devoted themselves to deathfor the public benefit in the war between Thebesand Orchomenus ; and before the temple was thefigure of a lion, dedicated by Hercules, when hehad defeated the Orchomenii under their kingErginus ; near it were statues of Apollo Boed-romius and of Mercury Agorseus, the latter presentedby Pindar. Half a stade distant from thetombs of the children of Amphion was their funeralpile*. Near (the heroum) of Amphitryon*were two statues in stone of Minerva Hysteria, socalled because Amphitryon here armed himselfwhen he was proceeding against Chalcodon andThat the theatre waswithin the walls, appears fromLivy, in his narrative of sometransactions which occurred atThebes in the Macedonian war,B.C. 196 : though it is evidentat the same time from Pausanias,that according to theusual practice in Greece, it wasnot fair from the gymnasiumand stadium, which were justwithout (irpo) the gate Poets.Plutarch (in Sylla) states thatSylla built a dvfiiXri near thefountain CEdipodium, for thespectacles which he exhibited ;but it was probably only atemporary construction.■ irvpd. — c. 17.TrXriaiov Si 'AfifirpiwrotivOf &c.XIV.]Boeotia.the Euboeenses. The monument of Zethus andAmphion was a small barrow \The funeral pile, as well as the objects subsequentlymentioned, were, probably, without thewalls. The tomb of Amphion certainly was, asappears by a fact related by Pausanias', andstill more from aeschylus'. From a comparisonof these authorities it seems to have stood in theplain between the site of the gate Prcetis and thenorthern extremity of the Cadmeia.As the torrent, which forms the ditch of modemThebes to the eastward, and which marks theextent of the Cadmeia in that direction, is muchthe least considerable of the three rivulets ofThebes, there can hardly be a doubt that the twoothers were the two rivers of the ScTrora/uoc tonic,named ZHrce and Ismenus ^. That the IsmenusThe Thebans were in thehabit of keeping watch over thismonument when the sun wasin Taurus, because an oracleof Basis had declared that theTheban land would lose itsfertility if the people of Tithesshould at that season transfersome of the earth from thetomb of Amphion and Zethusto their own monument ofPhocis and Antelope.In the *' Seven againstThebes," he describes the fifthchief as stationed before thenorthern gate, at the tomb ofAmphion.wpoaraxBiyra fiofi^laic irvXaccTvfifior car* ahoy ^loyerovQ 'A/<^/ovoc.— v. 532.Supp. V. 621.AMfAwy TTOTafiwv irdpoy dfjifpl fjiiaovA/pcacy "xXocporpd^y & ireSioyllpofrap *lafiiiyov icaradcvec. Phoen. v. 832.y. et Accuse, ▼• 5 Here. Fur. v. 572.238 Boeotia. [chap.was the eastern is manifest from Euripides, whorepresents Theseus as directing his herald in proceedingfrom Eleusis to Thebes to cross the Aso-pusand then the Ismenus ^ But Pausanias isstill more conclusive, by describing the Ismenusas situated to the right of the gate Electrse, enteringThebes from Platsea, and the Dirce ascrossed in the road which led from the gatesNeitides towards the mountain of the Sphinx'.The Ismenus, therefore, was the river now calledAi lanniy and the Dirce the Platziotissa or westernstream. The middle torrent may have been theCnopus, for this was the name of a river, and of avillage, (called also Copia,) through which theriver flowed, and which was near Thebes on itssouthern side, exactly in the position of the torrenttowards its sources '.In approaching Thebes from the south, ancientfoundations are first seen at about a mile in directdistance from the modem town. Here I observed^ 'Exotic 9 Inrip r* 'Atrunroy *IfffArivov ff v^tapJte/xvf rvpdrvf fpd(€ Ka^/iciWK die,Supp. V. 883.Pausan. Boeot. c 25, 26. much greater, in supposing theCompare Strabo, p. 404. river to flow to the lake Copais.Pausan. Boeot. c. 9. Schol. The Ismenus had, indeed, .Theriac. v. 889. The cording to Pausanias, anotherlast author supposes the Isme- name, but it was Ladon, notnus and Cnopus to have been Cnopus. See in the Additionalthe same river ; but in regard Notes at the end of Vol. lY.to two torrents so near to each some remarks on the suburbsother, he may easily have made of Thebes, in reference to pagea slight mistake, as he is guilty 323 of this Volume,in common with his poet of aNit.] Boeotia. 239some remains of Hellenic walls, and an oblongquadrangular well or pit excavated in the rock.According to the data of DicsBarchus and Pausanias,this was nearly the situation of the Electricor gate entering lower Thebes from the southward,for this point being a mile and a half distant fromthe northern extremity of the Cadmeiaj and thecity having been nearly circular, the circumferencewould thus have been 4*7 miles, which, measuredalong the ramparts, would be not very differentfrom the 43 stades of Dicsearchus \ As the sourceof the Ismenus was no more than three quarters ofa mile from the Cadmeia, and not so much fromthe river Dirce, it is evident that both that source,and a part of the course of the Dirce must have beenincluded within the walls, if we comply with theconditions of Dicflearch us', which will require a diameterfrom east to west of at least a mile and a half;a distance confirmed by the remark of the same author,that two rivers flowed through the city *. Onthe other hand, it appears from aeschylus that theIsmenus at its entrance into the plain was withoutthe walls, for he describes Tydeus, when presentinghimself opposite the gate Proetides, which ledto Chalcis, as halting on the bank of the Ismenus,and forbearing to cross, because the sacrifices wereIt would still be some length of the ramparts couldthing less at the rate of 8 have been, at that valuation ofstades to a mile ; but at Athens, the stade, so great as Thucy-in like manner, on examining dictes asserts,the site, there is difficulty in ' irorafwl ^iovai it ahrflQconceiving that the aggregate ivo, — p. 15.240 Boeotia. [chap.unpropitious ^ The same may be inferred fromEuripides, who, in describing the military positionof Theseus, when after the return of his messengerhe marched in person at the head of theAthenians to recover from Creon the unburiedbodies of the Argives, represents the infantry asdrawn up on the heights along the Ismenus, thecavalry as occupying the extremity of the linenear the fountain of Mars, (meaning one of thefountains of ZHrcey) and the chariots on the rightnear the tomb of Amphion Thus the armyinvested Thebes on every side, except to the northwest.The infantry was well protected in frontby the ravine of the Ismenus, and the chariotswere very properly stationed in the plain, wherealone they could act. Even the messenger whodescribes the battle seems to have been well placedon a tower near the gate Electors, which was towardthe centre of the line and on ground commandinga view of the greater part of the site of Thebes.The seven gates of Thebes are alluded to by^ TvBevt fay H^ij irpoc vvXaiai UpoiTltnhpifuij wdpop 2* *lfffAriy6y ohio iq, wepfv'O fidyrit* oh yap tr^dyia ylvtrai K€iKi,• • • •B09 trap 6)(0aiQ irora/i/atc fta)(i|c iptliv.Sept. adv. Th. 7. SSS.'Opw Se ^vXa ria rpi&y erpaTevixdrtav^Teu)(t€f<^6poy city Xaoy kKTtivoyr* data'iafjiiiyioy wap* o^doyf• • • •Kp^vi^v wap" airily "ApeoQ lirvdrrfv 6')(\oyUpon Kpaavidottn (rrparovi^ov rtrayfxiyoy"love dpiOfioyf hpfidnity S' oyfiiiaTa"EycpBi vtfiywy /jLyfinaTuy 'AfJi^ioyo^, — Supp. V. 653.XIV.]BCBOTIA.Homer and Hesiod and frequently by Pindarand the Athenian poets : six of them are namedby .£schylas and Euripides', and all the sevenby Apollodorus and Stations ', as well as by Pausanias.But none of these five authors are in exactagreement as to the names, or have observed anyregular order in naming them : of three gates, however,we have nearly the situation by knowing theplaces to which they conducted. These are, theElectress PrcBtis, and Neitis ; of which the first ledto Platsea, the second to Chalcis, the third toOnchestus. The Neitis seems to have been not farto the westward of the northern extremity of theHomer. Od. A. v. 262.Hesiod. Op. v. 161..£8chyl. Sept. adv. Th. v.3B1, et seq. Eurip. Pboen.T. 1111, et seq. The six gatesof aeschylus are as follow, andin that order : Presides, Electric,Neitides, Oncaides, Bo^-lac irv\ai,Homoloides. Thoseof Euripides are Neitides, Petites,Ogygiae, Homilies,Crease, Electrse* Both poetsallude to the remaining gate asthe efidofiai irvXai, withoutnaming it; but if Hesychius(in'OyMic 'AOiyrac) is right inidentifying the Oncais with theOgygia, it would seem that theCrease was the seventh gateof aeschylus, and the northernthe seventh gate of Euripides.In this ease, too. Hip*poseidon and Polynices attackthe same gates in both tra-^VOL. 11. Rgedies ; though it must be confessedthat not much stress canbe laid on this coincidence, aswith the exception of Capa-news at the Electric, the twopoets differ as to the otherchiefs. And thus also the gatesof the two Athenians will agreewith those of the traveller andaifrdwrriCf (these being the threeauthorities most worthy of attentionon this question) ; providedwe suppose the Hypsis-tss of Pausanias to be identifiedwith the Borreiae, or northerngate. Indeed, it is highlyprobable that the temple ofJupiter Hypsistus, which gavename to the gate, was in theCadmeia, as the northern gatemust have been.ApoUod. 1. 3, c. 6. Stat.The. 1. 8, v. 355.242 fiCEOTiA. [chap*Cadmeia, for Pausanias describes three monumentsin succession between it and the crossing ofthe river Dirce, thereby indicating a considerableinterval between the gate and that crossing, whichagrees with the actual course of. the river at itsentrance into the plain, whereas farther up thevalley the river flows immediately at the foot ofthe Cadmeian hill.The Amoris may be placed on the same sideof Thebes, having been the gate through whichthe Thebans re-entered the city, when they wererecalled by Thesaurus from Honore in Thessaly,whither they had fled after the victory of theEpigoni at Glisas.Without the gate Prcetis, on the road to Chalcis,were the monuments of Melampus and Ty-deus \ then the tomb of the sons of (Edipus, andfifteen stades beyond them a cenotaph of Tiresias'. Pausanias then observes, that the Thebanspossessed a tomb of Hector, at the fountain (Editwhich was so called because (Edipus therewashed himself after the murder of his father, andthat they "brought thither from Troy the bones ofHector by command of the Oracle, which directedthem also to honour him as a hero. Near thesame fountain was the tomb of Asphodicus, whowas said by the Thebans to hav slain Parthenonone of the seven chiefs. Although themention of these monuments by Pausanias fol*lots that of the cenotaph of Teiresias, there isgreat reason to believe that they were much lessthan 15 stades distant from the city; as wellTv^ioc, hv 9///3f}fn x*""^ Kara yoio icaXwirrct.— II. S, v. 114.Pausan. Boeot. c. 18.XIV.] Boeotia. 243from the words of the oracle as from the harl6t|/3afOfc with which Pausanias introduces the mentionof the tomb of Hector, and equally so from thestory attached both to the tomb and the fountain.On this supposition the fountain of St. Theodoreagrees in situation with that of the CEdipodta. Thesource, according to Upon, was supplied from thehead of the Mentis * ; but even this would not beinconsistent with the words of Pausanias, who describesthe (Edipodia as a icp^v)?, or constructedfountain. I am more disposed, however, to believethat the fountain of St. Theodore is, in part at least,a vein of water separate from the IsmeniLSj and whichstill flows perhaps in the ancient conduits. Thatthe (Edipodia was, like the fountain of St. Theodore,to the right of the road to Ckcdcisy is supportedby the observation of Pausanias as to theGymnasium, Stadium, and Hippodrome. ^^ Beforethe gates Proetides," he says, " the Thebans have agymnasium called the Gymnasium of lolaus, anda stadium which resembles those of Olympia andEpidaurus, being a heap of earth. There also isthe heroum of lolaus. Beyond the stadium to theright is the Hippodrome, which contains the monumentof Pindar. From thence there is a road toAcrsephium, for the most part plain *," &c. Thethree constructions here mentioned must haveoccupied a large space of ground , and seem tohave filled up all the space between the roads toChalcis and to Acraephium, the direct route towhich latter town, as well as to Hyle and Appleton,led probably through the northern gate.Voyage, Vol. II. p. 55. ' Boeot c. 28.r2244 Boeotia. [chap.The remaining objects described by Pausaniasin the vicinity of Thebes were on the northwesternside. Very near the gate Neitides wasthe tomb of Menceceus, son of Creon, and alittle farther a monument of stone representinga shield upon a column, which marked the placewhere the two sons of (Edipus slew each other,and then the Syria of Antigone, so called becauseAntigone being unable to carry, here draggedthe dead body of Polynices to the funeral pileof Eteocles. On the opposite side of the riverDirce were ruins of the house of Pindar, anda temple of Dindymene, containing a seated statueof the goddess, of Pentelic marble, dedicatedby Pindar, and the joint work of Aristides andSocrates, artists of Thebes. In the road whichissued at the gate Neitides was a temple of Themis,with a statue in white marble, then templesof the Fates and of Jupiter Agorseus ; the formerwithout any statue, the latter containing the deityin stone. A little farther was a Hercules, sumamedRhinocolustes, because he (here) cut the noses ofthe heralds of the Orchomenii. Twenty-five stadesbeyond it was the grove of Ceres Cabeiria andProserpine, into which the initiated only wereallowed to enter, and seven stades farther a templeof the Cabeiri, to the right of which was theTeneric plain, and to the left a road, which, atthe end of fifty stades, conducted to Thespiee ^Dec. 21.— From Thebes to 'Egripo. — At 10.27,quitting the eastern extremity of Thebes, I leave,at 10.33, the fountain of St. Theodore on theBceot. c. 25, 26.XIV.]Boeotia.right, and at 10.50 the road to Brats, a branch ofwhich leads to Syk&mino. At 11.15 an ancientfoundation, called by the modem Thebans *^ theGates," crosses the road. A mile before arrivingat this place, we begin to descend a low root ofthe Psilirakhi, advancing into the plain in thedirection of the heights of Mofitzi, which latter areconnected eastward with the mountain of Siamata.At 11. 21, the nearest point of a low rocky hill,small but conspicuous from its insulated position inthe plain, is three or four hundred yards on the left ;its termination at the opposite end is more abrupt,and is there separated only by a narrow continuationof the plain of Thebes from the foot of Hypatusor the mountain of Siamata. This low hill seemsto correspond exactly to that Teumessus^ whichwas on the road from Thebes to Chalets ', in sightfrom the walls of the Cadmeia^y and which wasirralc r<$pra<c«Pausan. Boeot. c. 19.Tlepyafnay r' Wilt opOltay\€VKainn¥ tltropStyLtv *Apytiiav vrparovTivfiiiaeoy cicXcrovra' koI ra^pov ireXaciEurip. Phoen. v. 1105.The scholiast here assertsthat Teumessus was more than100 stades distant from Thebes,and not in sight: and contends,therefore, that Euripides meantnot Tenesmus itself, but a partof its territory ; but the scholiastwas probably misinformed.The Greeks of his time wereseldom correct in their comparativegeography. The nameof Teumessus existed only inthe ancient authors : and antiquarieshad probably applied itto the ruins of some other place,perhaps those at Andritza, orthose on the Platanaki, at thefoot of Mount Siamata, witheither of which the distance of100 stades will nearly agree.246 Boeotia. [chap.described by the poet Antiochus as an iivc/iocccoXiyog Xo^ocy or little windy height ^ ; for its situationbetween the two mountains cannot fail to renderit subject to the full force of the gales, bothfrom the east and the west. The rich surroundingplain may also justify the epithet of Xsx^volriy orgrassy, which the poet bestows upon Teumessus inthe Hymn to Apollo *. Nor are the words of Pausanias,which place it exactly upon the route',adverse to the same conclusion, for our track isnot the most direct way to 'Egripo, but a winterroad, following the foot of the heights to the rightof the direct route. In the time of Pausanias thereremained at Teumessus only a temple of MinervaTelchinia, without any statue.At 11.30, after crossing a small cultivated hot*tom surrounded by low shrubby terminations ofMount Soro, the road ascends a low ridge whichforms a junction between that mountain and theotherwise insulated hill, the supposed Teumessus.At 11.41 we begin to descend, and at 11.44 arrivein the plain which forms a continuation of that ofThebes, by means of the opening already noticed,between the hill of Teumessus and Mount Hypatus^where the plain is not more than half a mile inbreadth. At 11.50 Serges is a mile and a halfon the left, on the slope of the mountain; at11.58 we are just below the centre of its summitand near its lowest falls. At 12.10 Spakeis half a mile on the right. At 12.35, twoAp. Strabo p. 409. ' earl raimf rp \tuH^6f>f %**•Hymn, in Apoll. v. 228, ploy Ital Tevftiyorfft^c-V. supra, p. 218.XIV.] Boeotia. 247or three miles od the right, a ruined tower of modemconstruction appears on the top of a rockyheight, which hides from view the village of ,where are some Hellenic remains, and acopious source of water. The ridge connectingPomes with CitJuBron appears between the heightof Andritza and that of Soro.We now ascend a low root of Mount HypatuSywhich is steep and rocky, or clothed only withwild shrubs; and after a delay of four minutescross, at 1.5, some Hellenic foundations. At 1.22an ancient sorus is in the road, and near it a wall,traversing the road obliquely : between this and afountain, where we arrive at 1.28, are other Hellenicfoundations near the road side, and 200yards on the left, above the right bank of atorrent which descends from near Platanaki, a monasteryon the. mountain, a small height retainsevident traces of the citadel of an ancient town.The source of water and foundations probably markthe position of the city walls, and the sorus mayhave been one of the sepulchres outside the walls.The fountain is on the right bank of the torrent,which is now dry, but after rains unites with othertorrents, and joins the sea near Dhramisi. A roadalong the left bank conducts to Bitzoni.Having halted at the fountain till 1.57, we beginto mount a ridge of hills connected to the northwardwith Mount Khtypa, which now appears onthe left. The road leads between two peakedheights of the ridge by a natural pass, where tothe left are some remains of a wall of loose stones,ascending from the road side to the summit of thepeak. The pass and ruined wall are conspicuous248 EUBCSA. [chap.objects in the Surrounding country. Althoughno towers are traceable, nor any squared blocks ofstone remain in their places, there can be littledoubt that this work is Hellenic, the wall havingbeen of the usual thickness, and consisting of therough materials of which the ancients usuallyformed the interior of their masonry. On the righthand, or eastern side of the pass, are vestiges of asimilar wall, which extend, as I am informed, as faras the inclosure of an ancient city on the mountainimmediately opposite to the town of 'Egripo. It isevident that the road from Thebes to the JEuripusmust in all ages have led through this pass. At2.26 on the summit of the pass a beautiful viewopens of the Euripus of the town of 'Egripo, andof a great part of the island of Evince. At 2.34we begin to descend the mountain into the maritimeplain, and at 3.7 to cross that plain towards'Egripo. It consists of open com land, withoutany trees, and is intersected with low rocks. Thefalls of Mount Khtypa, which bound it to thenorth-west, are also very rocky. The rocks in theplain are of white marble, and are covered withwild thyme. At 3.30 we pass along the shore ofthe southern bay of 'Egripo, under the hill of Kara-baba,and at its eastern extremity cross the bridgeof the MuTipus into the kastro, or fortress, of'Egripo. The current of the Euripus is runningto the southward very rapidly, with a visible differenceof level between the two sides of thebridge. Having passed through the kastro, orfortress, I proceed to the house of the Russianconsul, which is situated at the extremity of theglacis.XI V.J Boeotia. 249Beyond Teumessus Pausanias describes the roadfrom Thebes to Chalcis in terms of which thefollowing is the substance \ To the left of Tenesmus,seven stades farther, were the ruins ofGlisas, and near them, on the right of the road, asmall heap of earth shaded with wild, as well asplanted, trees : it was the burying-place of Pro-marius,and other Argive chiefs slain in theexpedition of the Epigoni '. On the direct road 'from Thebes to Glisas was a place surrounded withchosen stones ^ called the head of the Serpent.Above Glisas rose Mount Hypatus, upon whichstood a temple and statue of Jupiter Hypatus. Atorrent named Thermodon flowed from the mountain.Turning again towards Teumessus, and intothe road to Chalcis, occurred the monument of Chalkwho was slain by Amphitryon, and fartheron * the ruins of Harmaa and those of Mycalessus.On the sea-shore of the My cassia stood a templeof Ceres Mycalessia, containing a statue of thegoddess. The temple was to the right of theEnvious, which divides Euboea from Boeotia; alittle farther in the same direction was Aulis. Herestood a temple of Diana, and two statues in whitemarble, one bearing torches, the other drawing abow. In the temple was preserved some of thewood of the plane-tree mentioned by Homer. Thefountain also was shown where the plane grew,Pausan. Boeot. c. 19. in the former expedition by the battle called that tacking a fortified town Glisas, where the Thebans out any knowledge of the art.suffered for their imprudence in * Mea,meeting the superior forces of * XcOocc Xoyaviv.the Peloponnesian in the field, * ya6t* ^as the Seven Chiefs had done ^ l(i|c*250 Boeotia. [chap.and on a neighbouring hill the brazen foundation ^of the tent of Agamemnon. Before the templegrew some date trees, the fruit of which ripenedbetter than in Ionia, though it was not so good asthe date of Palestine '. The Few inhabitants whoremained in Aulis were potters \ Its territory, aswell as that of Harmaa and Mycalessus, was possessedby the TanagrsBi.The principal question which arises from thepreceding abstract of the remarks of Pausanias is,whether the ruins on the bank of the torrent of are those of GKsas^ or of Harms Teumessusbeing placed at the insulated height before mentioned,and the Mycalessia having been the countryadjacent to the Euripus. The mountain of Samara,which rises immediately above the ruins, andin which the torrent flowing by them has itsorigin, seems to decide that they were those ofGKsas, for the former answers exactly to MountHypatuSy and the latter to the Thermidor inregard to which we may remark, that there is noother torrent flowing from the eastern or southernside of this mountain, or that if any other couldbe found, it would flow into the Theban plaintowards the lakes to the north of Thebes, whereasit is evident from Herodotus that the Thermodonhad an easterly course, since he describes it ashaving flowed between Tanagra and Glisas ^.It may be objected to the positions of Teumes-ovBoQ \aXKov* ' Ktpafitic,This ia one among several * 6 Be Qipfiktiufy mra/xo^passages in the works of Pau pet fura^v Tai^aypiic <^aft TKl-sanias, which show that he had orairoc. — Herodot. 1. 9, c. 43.visited both those countries.XIV.] Boeotia. 251sus and Gusts here supposed, that the distance betweenthem is much greater than the seven stadesof Pausanias, consequently that if Glisas was onthe torrent of Platandki, Teumessus could not havebeen situated on the insulated height. But itseems very unlikely that there should have beenan interval of no more than seven stades betweenthose two totonsy for such they were in ancienttimes, though when Pausanias travelled one was amere ruin, and the other only an insignificantplace. I conceive therefore that there is an errorin the distance, as stated in the text of Pausanias.If Glisas stood on the torrent of Platanaki, Harmaaoccupied probably the important pass leading intothe maritime plain, where the existence of theancient wall affords a confirmation of all the threepositions in question.As to Mycalessus, the proofs of its situation are :first, That Thucydides describes Mycalessus assixteen stades distant from the Hermseum \ whichwas on the sea-shore not far from the Euripus, aswill be more clearly shown hereafter. Secondly,that the temple of Ceres Mycalessia was, accordingto Pausanias, on the shore to the right of theEuripus, by which he certainly meant the south,since he afterwards describes the Anthedonia asbeing to the left of the Euripus. It seems evident,therefore, that the temple of Ceres stood on the^ cc XaXx/^oc r$c Eirj3o/ac XaBity^ irpoc r^ 'Epfjtaif riifXl^if* lowing SuxXivat roy £i;pc* (hero' iiiri^ti ie rfJQ MviraXi|<r-woy Koi &iroj3t/3a(rac ec r^v Cfov iKKaiiiKa fxdKurra fnaSlov^mBoimriay ^yty ahrovQ iwl Mv- — Thucyd. 1. 7i c. 29.KoXfieaoyf koI Tiny fxev yvxra252 Boeotia. [chap.shore of the southern bay of 'Egripo, and thatMycalesms was the ancient city, of which theruined walls still remain, on the summit of theheight immediately above that bay. The connectionof its fortifications with those in the pass ofHarmaa by means of a long wall, tends to confirmthis opinion, for as the plain certainly belonged toMycalessus, it is not credible that Aulis, the onlyother ancient place to which the ruins can beascribed, should have been in possession of thepass which led into the plain. Moreover, Myca-dessus is described by Thucydides as a place ofimportance, and its autonomous coins still exist;whereas Aulis, although a city in the Trojanwar, was chiefly known in after times as aharbour.It is easy to conceive that the Mycalessii mayhave entered into a compact with the people ofHarmaa for the common defence of their passes, or,perhaps, that as Mycalessus still subsisted in thetime of Strabo, while Harmaa was deserted ^ theMycalessii may have made the remains of Harmaaserve for the defence of the pass leading into theirterritory, and may have connected it for greatersecurity with their own fortifications. In the timeof Pausanias, Mycalessus was in ruins as well asHarmaa '. The objection to the position of Myca-dessus just indicated is, that Strabo places it on^ scat 6 VLvKoKnamt^ hi c«^/if| tz^ MvcoXiyrrdi'-strabo p.rec Tavaypur^c* Kccrac Ik trap' 404.'Che ^ atfTuc Kal TO *'Ap/io etfrti'''Ap/iorocKa^MvicoXf|9«oC.Tfjg TayaypiK^Q Kkt^ri epii/xoc — Pausan. Boeot. c. 19.XIV.] EUBCKA. 253throat from Thebes chalcis, whereas itssnpposedruins are near two miles to the rights that road ; butStrabo seems to have been writing loosely of placeswhich he had never seen, and his words wap oSovdo not imply that the ruins were exactly on theroad, but only near it. Indeed it would not beeasy to reconcile any situation on the road withthe testimony of Thucydides.The Sanj4k of 'Egripo includes the kaz4s ofThebes, Athens, Livadhia, Salona, and Talanda,but the revenues of all those places being administeredby voivodas having annual appointmentsfrom the Porte, the power of the Pasha intimeof peace hardly extends beyond the island.He is now absent, and the government is in thehands of a Myself m. The revenue of the Pashalikamounts to about 400 purses, and is derived fromthe sale of the dhekatia of all the lands not feudal,or from the Spahiliks attached to the Pashalik,from the customs and khardtj, from an excise ongrain and other objects of consumption, and frombribes to permit the forbidden exportation of comand butter. The chief produce of the island iswine; from CunuB and Kastrevald alone, 20,000barrels of 54 ones are sent to Smyrna and theBlack Sea, of which the average price on the spotis five piastres a barrel. Wheat and oil are exportedonly in the years when the circumstancesof production and demand happen to be favorable.Vallonea, cotton, wool, pitch and turpentine,are also exported, but in small quantities.The Russian consul has been obliged by hissuperiors to exchange the agreeable residence ofAthens for this miserable place, not on account254 BUBCBA. [chap.of the commerce, which is very small, but becauseit is the residence of the governor of this part ofGreece, and therefore better adapted to the protectionof the numerous Greek ships now sailingunder the Russian flag, or of those of the PeninsularRepublic. As the best security against insult,the consul has found it necessary to take into hisservice, as janissary, a certain Hassan, who issumamed Karabeb^r, or Black Pepper, frcrm hisswarthy complexion, and the fame which' he acquiredhere in his youth, by killing many of hisfellow-citizens in those quarrels for which theTurks of 'Egripb are notorious. Hassan has acquiredso much influence, that last year he quelleda mutiny of the people.Both the Island of JEtiboea and its chief town arecalled "'Eypiiroc, a manifest corruption of Evpiiroc,and which the Turks pronounce Gribos, or Egribos.The greater part of the best lands of the island areowned by about thirty Turkish families, residingprincipally in the Kastro of 'Egripo, which containsabout 1000 others of the lower orders. These,with 200 families in K&rysto, Roves, Ores, and a few smaller places, compose the wholeTurkish population of the island. The Christiansare about five times as numerous, but in thetown of 'Egripo do not form above a third of theinhabitants. Many of the houses in the outer townare ruined and uninhabited, particularly on thesouthern side : this is in great measure the effectof the plague which lately raged here. The townis supplied with water from wells, the best of whichwas choked up on the 4th of last September, oldstyle, by the earth brought down by a fall of rain.Nit.] Euboea. 255which lasted forty-eight hours. The famous Arethusa,which was disturbed in former ages by theeffect of earthquakes, has now totally disappeared'.The only remains of ancient Chalcis I can find aresome fragments of white marble in the walls ofthe mosques and houses, and the bust of a statuein the wall of a house in the fortress. But it isdifficult to explore among these intolerant barbarians.The lion of St. Mark remains over the gate ofthe Kastro ; many of the better houses are of Venetianconstruction, and there is a church with a highpointed roof, square tower, and Gothic windows,which was probably built by the same people, asthey were in almost constant possession of thisplace for the three centuries preceding its captureby Mahomet II. in 1470 '. The most remarkableTurkish monument' is an enormous piece of ordnance,like those of the Dardanelles, which defendsthe approach to the southern side of theKastro.This fortress is a construction of different ages ;square towers erected before the invention of gunpowderare mixed with Venetian bastions of antiqueconstruction, or with Turkish white-washed wallsand battlements. There is a dry ditch, intended tobe flooded at pleasure, but which is now filled withrubbish. The glacis of the Castle is occupied byxdXtv rac icKeirac gained Ores and Karysto ; and*Ape6ov9ac, — £urine IpHig. in a French chieftain, to whomPaul. y. 170. Strabo, p. 58. 'Egripo had been assigned,Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 12. soon found it prudent to placeIn the partition of Greece himself under the protection ofamong the conquerors of the the powerful republic by be-easterempire, Venice ob coming their vassal.BUBCBA.[chap.the Turkish burying-ground beyond which is theChristian town surrounded by walls, in a wretchedstate of dilapidation, encircling the promontory ofthe Kastro in a semi-lunar form from bay to bay ;beyond these the Turks have lately thrown up apalliated rampart of earth across the isthmus.The bay on the northern side of 'Egripo iscalled St. Minds \ that on the southern sideVurko, or Vulgo', a name having reference toits shallow and muddy nature. This bay communicatesby a narrow opening with a long windingstrait which extends about four miles to a secondnarrow opening, where stands a tower upon a lowpoint of the Euboea coast, in the plain of Vasiliko.No vessels except boats can approach 'Egripo onthe southern side, nearer than the tower. Onthe north they have no difficulty in approaching,as there is a depth of four orchis, or morethan 20 feet, near the walls ; nor is there said tobe any such danger in the anchorage as Livywould lead one to suppose ', though it cannot bedoubted that the entire strait between the islandand the main, is subject to violent squalls fromthe mountains. The Euripus which strictlyspeaking is no more than the narrowest part ofthe strait between the foot of Mount Karabab4BovpKDCi BovXkoc*£x patent! utrinque cactusin angoBtias mare, speciesintent primo gemini portsin ora duo verse prsebuerit: sedhand facile alia inferior classstatio est : nam et venti abutiiusque time praealtiB mon-tiburBubiti ac procellosi Bedeficient, et fretnm ipsum £a-ripe non series die licet famasert, temporise static reciprocate: Bed tenere in madamventi, nunc hue nunc illucverso mari, velut monte pne-cipiti devolutuB torrens rapture:ita nee note nee die quies naviesdatum. — Liv. 1. 28, c. 6.XIV.] Boeotia. 257and the western walls of the kastro is dividedas to its breadth into two unequal parts by asmall square castle, founded on a rock, and havinga solid' round tower at the north-western angle.A stone bridge, 60 or 70 feet in length, connectsthe Boeotian shore with this castle, the entrance intowhich is by a drawbridge near the north-easternangle. Another wooden bridge about 35 feet long,which may be raised at both ends for the purposeof admitting the passage of vessels, communicatesfrom the small castle to the gate of the kastro,which is in a tower projecting from the walls. Theinner channel is said always to afford a depth ofeight or nine feet: under the stone bridge thewater is much more shallow. 'Egripo having becomemore barbarous since Upon and Wheler travelled,it may be long before any person has suchan opportunity of observing the flux and refluxof the strait as the Jesuit Basin, whose remarkshave been published by Coronelli, Upon, andWheler. He agrees with Livy, so far as to showthe error of the common opinion entertained by theancients, that the change of current occurred seventimes a day, but he does not confirm the ancienthistorian as to its total irregularity, and its entiredependence on the winds ; which, however, canhardly fail to affect the reciprocation in some de-^gree, by means of the local and temporary currentswhich they cause in every part of the ^gsean.Basin seems to have ascertained that the tide wassometimes regular as in the ocean, and at othertimes irregular; and that both the regular andirregular tides followed the phases of the moon,VOL. II. s258 Boeotia. [chap.though not to such a degree that the tides couldbe predicted to within a day or two before or afterthe changes ; the regular days were generally 19in the month, the irregular 11, and the formerwere in the first and third quarters, the latter inthe second and fourth. The Jesuit's facts seem tohave been chiefly derived from the millers of theNeuritis but unfortunately the mills which arebelow the arches of the stone bridge are no longerworked.It is believed by the people of 'Egripo, that thesmall castle on the rock in the Euripus did notexist in the time of the Venetians, but was builtby the Turks soon after the conquest. Coronelli,however, whose work was published in 1686, theyear before Athens was taken, and Negropont investedby the Venetians, states that the entrancefrom Boeotia first crossed a bridge of stone of fivearches, about 30 paces long, that it then passed atthe foot of a tower of Venetian structure, over thedoor of which the lion of St. Mark still remained(though the Turks had then possessed the place200 years), and entered the town over a woodendrawbridge. These remarks seem sufficiently toexplain that the round tower is Venetian, and theremaining part of the work Turkish, of which indeedthere is every appearance. The communicationfrom the bridge of stone to that over the innerchannel now passes, as I have already stated,through the north-eastern angle of the castle, theround tower remaining to the right, which agreeswith Coronelli.The earliest construction of a bridge over theXIV.j Boeotia. 269Euripus known from history occurred in the 21styear of the Peloponnesian war, when the Eubceansrevolted from the Athenians ^ and endeavouredto obstruct the Euripus. On this occasion theyreadily obtained assistance from the Boeotian,whose general interest it was that ^^ Euboea shouldbe an island for others, but a part of the continentto theme*' A great number of hands were employedin narrowing the strait, so as not to leavea passage for a single ship, but only the necessaryopening for the current between two towers whichwere built at the extremity of the S(ax<tfcric, or molewhich was thrown up from either shore. As theAthenians tried in vain to interrupt the work, andboth Boeotian and Eubceans are stated to havejoined earnestly in forwarding it, a part of itseffects may possibly remain to the present day.The Boeotian mole probably extended across theshallow channel, and included the rock upon whichthe small castle stands.During the expedition of Alexander the Greatinto Asia, the Chalcidenses not only fortified thebridge with towers, a wall, and gates, but, inclosinga place on the Boeotian side, called Cane-thus,within the circuit of their city', thus obtaineda fortified bridge head. CdnethtiSy therefore, wasprobably the hill of Karababd.Thucyd. 1. 8, c. 95. ^lafiaoiy xal tov inpifiokoy rfjcK&Ktiyoif ovfu^ipeiv n)v ndXeutg riv^riaay ciroc Ttiy(pv^'Evfioiay eJyaij rois fjiey dXXoig Xa/3<$vr£c rSy rt KdviySov Koivjiooy^ eavrotc ^' ffxcifMv.— • rov Evptirov, lirnrnifTayTtQ rpDiodor. 1. 13, c. 47. y^^^P9 irvpyovc Kol rcc}(oc KalKara ^e ri^y 'Akt^aySpov irvXac. — Strabo, p. 447.260 Boeotia. [chap.About 140 years afterwards, in the campaign ofthe Romans against Antiochus in the year b. c.192, the bridge seems no longer to have existed,for Livy speaks of the Hermaeum before Saiga*news as the ordinary place of passage into Boeotia,and in describing the entrance of a. body of Achsdansinto Chalcis, he employs the words, ^^ tito trans*gressi Euripum Chalice pervenerunt^" Suchan expression is hardly suited to the passage of abridge to which there was no impediment It isprobable, therefore, that the bridge had been removedbetween the reign of Alexander and theAntiochus war. A fortified dependence of Chalcison the Boeotian shore may have been offensive tothe Boeotian, or to the Athenians, and sometimesto both : and if the people of Chalcis were notpermitted to keep possession of that post, it maynot have suited their interests to maintain thebridge.Twenty-five years afterwards, however, if wemay trust to livy, a bridge had been thrown overthe Euripus ; for he states that P. amplius Paul*lus, in his journey through Greece after the conquestof Macedonia, found the Euripus in thatstate'. But there may be some doubt whetherthe historian's words ih this place have been borrowedfrom the same accurate contemporary ofthe events described by him, whom he usually followed,or whether they do not rather describe thestate of the Euripus in the time of the historianLiv. 1. 35, c. 5O4 continent! juncture, descendit. —Chalice ad spectacle Liv. 45, c. 27.Euripi Ettboeseqtie insulae ponteXIV.]Boeotia.himself; when, as we learn from Strabo, therewas a bridge two plethra, or 200 Greek feet inlength, with a tower at each end, and a constructedcanal through the Euripus ^ whence itwould seem also, not only that no castle existed inthe strait at that time, but that the strait was broaderthan it is at present. The crvpcyS, or canal, mayperhaps have been confined to the passage betweenthe intermediate rock, which must always haveexisted, though Strabo has not noticed it, andthe entrance of Chalcis, and was probably nothingmore than a construction of masonry on eitherside of that channel.In the reign of Justinian the bridge had beenso much neglected, that there was only an occasionalcommunication by wooden planks '.In the plain adjacent to the town of 'Egripo arethree ancient excavated cisterns of the usual spheroidalshape, lined with a coat of cement, andhaving circular openings at the top. Each of thesehas (what I have not seen elsewhere) an entranceon one side. In one of them which is clear ofrubbish, a descent of steps appears, with an archedpassage cut through the rock leading into the bodyof the cistern, which is small and not deep. It isrrlv 'Evfioiav rpowov rivafiipog avr^c (Boeotian) ireiroljj'Ktv h EvpcTOC ostia trevor wvKoi ytf^vp^ tmyi^evyfiiyoi irpocairily BifrXiBpf, — Strabo, p.400.Kal 6 Et/piToc ^* cffTi xX)|-oioy 6 XaXacc^ucoCf etc ov diro"Sovkiov (rra^ioi cj3^op//KDfra.*EoTi S' iir ahrf yi<^vpa SiirXc-0poCf <2»£ lip^xa' irvpyoc ^ £Karipley £<pi(rrriK€y, 6 /xey Ik rfjcXaXW^oCy 6 i* Ik rf/c BonariaQ'piyf. — Ibid. p. 403.Procop. de JEdif. 1. 4,c. 3.262 Boeotia. [chap.now converted into a church of St. John Propriis,and has a skreen and altar of rough stones. Thetwo other cisterns, though now choked with rubbish,seem also to have been churches, as they bearthe names of two saints. Farther south, at the distanceof a mile from the town, are the ruins of anaqueduct upon arches, which supplied Chalcis inRoman times. Northward of the city the plain,and then a cultivated slope, extend along the footof the mountains as far as Politika, a village nearthe sea, distant four hours ; a little beyond whichbegin those great cliffs which are so conspicuousfrom many parts of Boeotia and which border thesea for several miles, admitting of no road along theshore. To the southward of 'Egripo, midway betweenit and the tower, which I have described asdefending the entrance of the narrow winding straitleading from the southward to the bay of Vurko,a round hill named Kalogheritza rises from theshore, and commands a good view of the JEuripusand of the JEubaic frith, as far as Lips northward,and to a cape beyond Kalamo in Attica southward.Mount Messapiumy and the adjacent heights, excludethe view of all the interior of Boeotia exceptthe summit of CfithroUy but to the northwardCnemis is seen, and to the southward Panes withPentelicum appearing over the eastern part of itsridge, and to the left of it Mount Oche in Euhcea.Opposite to Kalogheritza, on the Boeotian coast,are two bays, separated from each other by a rockypeninsula ; the northern is small and windings thesouthern spreads at the end of a channel, into alarge circular basin. The latter harbour, as wellXIV.] fi(£OTIA. 263as a village situated a mile to the southward of it,is called Vathj^, a name evidently derived from the/SaOvc Aifiijv, or larger port of Aulis, in which Strabosupposes the fleet of Agamemnon to have beenanchored, because the small port of Aulis was inadequateto receive more than fifty sail : the rockypeninsula which separates the two harbours correspondsequally well with the AvXcc irfrp^ccrcra ofHomer, and its distance from the Euripus agreeswith the testimony of Livy as to that of Aulis fromthence K Nor, indeed, are there any other harbourson the Boeotian coast to the southward,which can raise a question on the subject. Dicae-arches, who like Strabo proceeds along the coastfrom south to north, names the places in the followingorder : Oropus, the temple of Amphiaraus, •Aulis, the promontory Empereur and Euripus * ;which not only confirms the other authorities asto Aulis, but suggests also the probability thatEra /i^\toy . . Tava- The last word is an evidentypaiutv iro\i\vioyf AvXi^t Su error, the distance in questionNov ara^lovc rpidKovra • . • being near 700 stades.Era Xi/iifv fuyac By xakovvi A Chaldee Quidem trajicitBaBify Xifuya : dff ii AhWg ir£- trim million spatio distance,rpAieQ x^9^^^ Kal'Kw/xri Tava- portus inclitum stone quon-ypa/wv* Xcft^v ^ e^ ircvT^Korra dam mille avium Agamem-wXoioic, &<rT* ehcoQ Toy yavarad'' noniae classis, Dianaeque temprwy 'EXX^vwv iy Tf fieyA" plum ubi navies cursu ad\f hwap^ai Xtfiiyi. Ka 6 £v- Trojan, filia victims aris ^ ttrrl wXriffioy 6 XaXKidi- mota, rex ille rerum petit. —K0£, cic oy &w6 ^vyiov tnd^ioi Liv. ]. 45, c. 27.c/SSo/i^KDvra. — Strabo, p. 403.AZXIc r£ 'BoiutrQy ir6Xt£f trpog p Xc/ij^vK' ^ApTtfuBoc Upoy Ayioy, h Xiyerai icriaai*AyafUfiyiayf elr '^fAiTEpiotoy KaXovfAiyoy*AKporarov, elr' Bvpcxoc Dicaearch. v. 88.264 Boeotia. [chap.Empereur was the peninsula which separatesport Vurko from the Southey part of the Straits.The space between the northern extremity of portCathy and the bay of Vurko is occupied by thehit] of Mycaleasus. On the summit are the remainsof an acropolis flanked with towers, and constructedof masonry of the third species — to whichis attached, on the south-eastern side, the inclosureof the town, built of a very rude kind of Hellenicmasonry, similar to that of the wall, wbidi extendsfrom the acropolis to the pass of Hanna.On the top of the hill of Kalogherltza are tworuined round towers, formerly, perhaps, windmills,XiV.lx Boeotia. 265and near them the foundations of a Hellenic wall,with an ancient column lying on the ground. Inlandthe height falls to a plain, forming a junctionbetween that which encircles the town of 'Egripoand the larger plain of Vasiliko, .which extendssouthward along the coast, almost :to the ruins ofJSretria. Towards the sea the hill of Kalogheritzais very rugged, and consists entirely ^ of rock, inwhich many sepulchral crypts have been excavated,some of them having circular jroo& : herealso are stairs and niches cut out of the rock. Acopious stream issues from the foot of the rocks, andflows immediately into the sea : and a paved roadhere leads along the shore to the village of 'AioNikola in the plain of Vasilik6% Possibly this hillmay be the site of a place named Lelantum, forthe plain behind it being exactly interposed betweenthose of Chakis and JEretria, could hardlyhave been any other than that plain of Lelantumwhich was an object of such deadly contention betweenthe two rival states that a pillar still existedin die time of Strabo in the temple of Diana Ambrosia,distant seven stades from Eretria, on whichthere was an inscription declaring that no missilesshould be used in the war'. The plain of Lelantumis mentioned in the Hymn to Apollo, and was £enviedfor its vineyards ', and vines are so extensively rcc, ^pd^ovoa /xr) xp^crOac T¥i\£(i6\oic. — Strabo, p. 448.Krivalov 3* IviliriQ vavaucXdrrjs Ev/Jo/?ycH3mm. in ApoU. v. 219.Oc/iO£ avdKKtiii^' dvo liv KiipiyOoc oXwXe,AriXdyrov S* dyaBov Kilpercu oiydwiiov.Theogn. v. 888.266 Boeotia. [capturedin the plain behind Kalogheritza, that avillage in the midst of them is named Amelia.It was only in the most populous and opulenttimes that Eretria could maintain a rivalship withChalcis which by its numerous colonies sent toItaly, Sicily, and Thrace, and by its historical importancein every age, from the war of Troy to theRoman conquest, is shown to have been one of themost flourishing cities in Greece ^ Its silver coinsare still found in surprising numbers. Under thesuccessors of Alexander, when Greece became impoverished,and its resources and population inadequateto the maintenance of two large citiesat so short a distance from each other, the peculiaradvantages of the position of Chalcis gave itthat superiority over Eretria which Strabo remarked*, and an increase of the same causes hasended in making Chalcis the only town of anymagnitude in Euboea. But the consequence of theopposite fate of Chalcis and Eretria has been,that at Chalcis scarcely any vestiges of antiquityare found, while Eretria, by means of its desolation,has preserved remains affording an interesting confirmationof the former importance of the city.Dec. 24. — Having recrossed the Eur%puj$ thismorning at 9, we follow the same road by whichwe came, along the shore of the bay of Vurko,with the height of Karababa on the right, for fifeDic«earchus describes Chalk three porticos adjacent to thecis (about the year 300 B. C.) harbour. All the countryas being seventy stades in cir- around was planted with olives,conference, abounding in tern ' Nvrl /icv o2v ^ XoXccc f e-poles, theatres, stoae, gymnasia, pcrai ra irpun-elapictures, and statues, and hav ^evrepevcc ^ ^ *£perpta. — Strainan agora surrounded by bo, p.44S.XIV.] B(EOTIA. 267teen minutes ; then leaving the road to Thebes onthe left, cross the plain in a direction parallel tothe foot of the mountains with the sea on theright. At 9.30, in a ruined church, is a fragmentof a large column, which may formerly have belongedto the Hermseum, or to the temple of CeresMycalessia. Here are a series of wells, the directionof which is towards the middle of the bay of Vurko.They are very narrow, lined with stone and wellconstructed, but do not appear to be of any greatantiquity. At 9.35 Thalia is half a mile onthe right, not far from the sea ; the foot of thelower heights of Mount Khtypa, the ancient ,are at the same distance on the left. Theintermediate level is well cultivated with com,which is just springing up. The plain narrows inapproaching Khtypa, and at 10 we reach the foot ofthe mountain just where it descends in a rapid slopefrom the summit quite to the shore.Just in the angle where the plain terminates arethe remains of a Hellenic town, on the side of asmall port, directly under the highest summit ofthe mountain. The citadel occupied a heightrising from the shore, ninety yards in length andabout fifty broad, and having a flat summit slopingfrom the south-east towards the sea. The sides ofthe hill, which are about fifty yards on the slope,have been partly shaped by art, and then faced withstone in the manner of some ancient places in Syria,of which the castles of Hama and Aleppo are themost remarkable examples. The facing of stone isvisible on every side except the north, where probablyit still exists, though now covered by analluvion of earth. Some remains of walls are268 Boeotia. [chap.visible on the crest of the summit, and a part ofthe town walls on the south-eastern side of theheight. There can be little doubt that these areremains of Salganeus, which, although unnoticedby Pausanias, appears clearly from Dicsearchusand Strabo to have been a Boeotian fortress,situated between the Euripus and Anthedon ^ atthe northern entrance of the narrow part of theEuboic frith. According to Strabo, the namewas derived from the Boeotian pilot of ,who was put to death by the Persiancommander, on suspicion that he was purposelyleading the fleet of Xerxes to destruction, becauseno outlet appeared to the channel. Megabaxus,afterwards regretting his error, erected a monumentto the pilot in the place where his death occurred,and where the town afterwards stood.I have* already alluded to the mention of Sagasby Livy in his narrative of the military transactionsin this quarter, between Antiochus and theRomans *. The first measure of Antiochus, on hisarrival from Asia at Demerits, was an attempt toobtain possession of Chalcis in concert with hisallies the italians. Having passed from Lamiathrough Phocis, he met the italians at Chaeronea,and then marched to Salganeus, from whence hecrossed by water to the harbour of Chalcis, accompaniedby the ^tolian chiefs. Having failed inhis endeavour to convince the magistrates of Chalcisthat it was for their interest to take part withhim against the Romans, he returned to .flies 'EXKdSoQ, ' Liv. 1. 35, c. 43, et seq.p. 20. Strabo, p. 400, 403.XIV.] Boeotia. 269triaSy and in order to prevent succours from arrivingat Chalcis sent thither his fleet, commandedby Polyxenidas, and 3000 land forces under who encamped before Salganens at theHennseam, which was the ordinary place of transit,into Euboea ^ They were too late to preventa small reinforcement of Achaean and of troopssent by Eumenes from entering Chalets, but intimeto oblige Mictio of Chalcis, and 500 Romanswho were approaching with the same design fromthe southward, to retire to Delium, from whenceit was their intention to cross the Euboic frith intothe island ; but Menippus, having surprized themat Delium, and captured or slain a considerablenumber, Antiochus, who had followed Menippusinto Boeotia, thereupon marched to Aulis, andwas admitted into Chalcis. The remaining Romansthen took possession of the castle of theEuripus, while Salganeus was occupied by theAchaean and troops of Eumenes, who had retiredfrom Chalcis ; but Menippus, proceeding to besiegethe latter place, and the king the castle of the Euripus,their opponents gave up the defence, andleft Antiochus in possession of all Euboea.From these circumstances, compared with thedistance of sixteen stades, which Thucydides hasassigned as that between the Hermaeum and My-caresses,it may be inferred that the Hermseum, socalled we may suppose from a temple of Mercury,stood on the shore between Salganeus and themodem bridge, and that it was probably the ordinateSalganea ad Her tia in Euboea insula est.maeunii qua transitus ex Boeo- — Liv. I. 35, c. 50.270 Boeotia. [Chap.nary place of passage because it was nearly oppositeto the northern or principal harbour of Chalcis.The fortress which Livy describes by thewords Euripi castellum, or in Euripo castellumor simply Euripus, would seem from this designationto have occupied the site of the small castleon the rock in the strait, but as many obvious difficultieswould arise from such a supposition , I aminclined to think it was the same place as Cane-thus,or the hill of Karababa.Having quitted the ruins of Salaries at 10.30,I begin, in eight minutes, to ascend the cliffswhich now border the shore, and soon observe thetraces of chariot-wheels in the rock. At 10.42,the road continuing to follow the summit of thecliffs, we arrive opposite to the southern extremityof an island named Gaidharo-nisi, distant half amile from the coast, and which is a mile in lengthfrom north to south. Upon it stands a squaretower, visible from Karababa, but not from thetown of 'Egripo ; ten minutes farther the road descendsupon the sea-beach. At 11.4 are the foundationsof a thick wall near the beach, parallel tothe water's edge. Here is a source of saltishwater. At 11.8 is another and more considerablesaline source, where are the ruins of some mills.The wall, and the traces of wheels in the rock, arevestiges of that road from Chalcis to Anthedonwhich Diceearchus has noticed, though his descriptionis not exactly in accordance with modemappearances, for he represents the road as verysmooth ; instead of which it is like the shore, extremelyrugged where it passes over the rocks.XIV.] Boeotia. 271and where it follows the beach is liable to interruptionfrom the overhanging cliffs, fragments ofwhich often break off in such quantity as to renderthe road impassable. Though Dicsearchus mentionsthe sources of water, he does not remark thatthey are chiefly saline ; and his description of themountain can only be made to answer to MountKhtypa by the omission of the word ovx, for thismountain is lofty as well as steep \ At 11.12 thepass terminates, and we enter on a slope covered withlentisk and holly-oak, which is continued quite tothe summit of the mountain. At the head of theslope, and just under the steep side of the summit,stands the small village of Lukisi, towards whichI proceed after leaving at 11.15 the road toLarmes branching to the right, and passing alongthe foot of the slope near the sea. At 11.25 anancient foundation cut out of the rock is seencrossing the road ; to the left of which, three hundredyards from the road, is a church surroundedwith maria, in which are several ancient squaredstones, and an aghia trapeza formed of an ancientsepulchral stone supported by part of a column.On the stone, which has a simple decoration ofsculpture, is the name Ka^icroSiupa, in letters of thebest times. Leaving this place at 11.40, we continueto ascend, when the remains of anotherancient wall occur at 11.48, and at 11.53 we•^ '£{ *AvdTi^6yoc etc XaXKiBa ^e opOQ oi^x vtf^iyXov ^cv t-xovva,arabia o. ^MI\pi rod liaXya^ &\a€vi {truaKutv ?) Se koI vBaaiWcac oSo£ irapa rbv alyiaXov rniyaloi^ Kardpfivrov, — Dicae-Xc/a r€ iratra Kal /laXar^, r^ arch. /3/oc 'EXXcf^Ci p* 19.fjiiy KuBiiKovira etc B6Xaaoayf r^272 Boeotia, [chap.arrive at Luktsi. Here the women, (the men beingall at work in the fieldfi)j having brought me severalancient coins which havebeen found in ploughingthe corn-fields at the vaXoia \iipa, or oldtown,which is distant a mile and a half at the foot of theslope on the sea aide, I proceed thither, afterdining, and find considerable remains of an ancientcity.S uhotc1,1. Are traces of the town wall, built with wellsquared stones, of the moat regular kind of masonry .Its termination to the south-east I could not exactlytrace : the entire circuit of the city seems not tohave been more than 2000 yards. 2. An acropolissituated on a small height terminating towards thesea in cliffs ; on the brow of which are found largepieces of the ancient wall ; other remains of thewall are seen also on the land side of the acropolis.XIV.] Boeotia. 2733. Midway between the wallof the town and the crest ofthe height of the acropolis aresome cisterns of the usual form.4. Part of the platform ofa public building, thirty-fouryards in length, founded in the sea ; and supportedon that side by quadrangular projectingbuttresses, of which four remain ; there was anascent of a few steps from the sea to the platform.The port, in the midst of which this buildingstood, was defended from the open sea on the northby 5, a mole, connected with the northern wall ofthe town, and built upon a projecting ledge ofrocks. All the foundations of the mole still remain,and it was probably surmounted with a wall,forming a continuation of the town wall. At 6,are the foundations of a similar work of smallerdimensions, the extremity of which approaches sonear to a small sandy island near the extremity ofthe greater mole, as to suggest the probability thatthe opening was occasionally closed by a chain, bywhich the north-eastern part of the bay became axXitoTot Xiftqv, or closed port ; it appears to havebeen excluded from the city by a wall branchingfrom the western extremity of the northernmole, passing behind the building No. 4, and terminating,perhaps, at the nearest part of the acropolis.Strangers arriving by sea might thus haveaccess to the building, which was probablyatemple,without being admitted into the town, and the townmight resist after the port had been occupied byan enemy. The town walls were defended to th274 Boeotia. [chap.west by the ravine of a torrent flowing from MountMesmpium.There can be no question that these are ruinsof Anthedon, of the situation of which we haveseveral descriptions in ancient history. Accordingto a poet quoted by Athenaeum, Anthedonstood on the sea coast, opposite to Euboea, notfar from the Euripus*. Strabo places it on theshore between Salganeus and Larymna near MountMessapium ', Pausanias describes it as a maritimecity at the foot of Mount Messapium to the left ofthe Euripus ', and Dicaearchus as a small town onthe Euboic sea, distant seventy stades from Chalcisand one hundred and sixty from Thebes.The soil on the slope of Mount Khtyp4, aroundLukisiy and that which surrounds the Palea-hora,is, as Diceearchus remarks of the Anthedonia,much better adapted to vines than to com, thoughthere is very little of either at present. He adds,that the inhabitants were chiefly mariners, shipwrights,and fishermen, that they traded in fish,purple, and sponges, and that they had an agorasurrounded with a double stoa, and planted withtrees. In the middle of the town, according toPausanias, was a Sacred Grove of the Cabeiri,surrounding a temple of those deities, near whichwas another dedicated to Ceres and Proserpine,and containing their statues in white marble. Onthe outside of the walls, on the land side, was a^AvBfiiitv vvnc iarXy lire irKev^tn OaKdotniQ'Ayr lor E{r/3o/i|c (r\€^y ISiVpliroio fiodaiy,Theolytus ap. Athen. 1. 7» c. 12.» Strabo, p. 400, 404, 405. * Diceearch. fiioi: 'EXXa^oc,Pausan. Boeot. c. 22. p. 17.XIV.] B(EOTIA. 275temple of Bacchus, containing his statue ; andnear it tombs of the sons of Aloes and Iphigenia,who were slain by Apollo. On the sea sidethere was a place called '* the leap of Glaucus '."It was from the Anthedonii," adds the Greek traveller," that Pindar and aeschylus derived theirfables of Glaucus, who was a fisherman of Pantheon,converted by the Anthedonii into a marinedeity, predicting futurity and delivering oracularresponses, which seafaring men still believe."It seems not unlikely that the building on the shoreof the harbour was a temple of Glaucus.As to the vestiges of antiquity near Lukisi, it isnot impossible that the Nisi, or Isis, of Homer,which latter name was still preserved near Pantheonin the time of Strabo, may have stood atLukisi, and that the modem name may preserveremains of the ancient in its two last syllables.Opposite to Anthedan on the coast of Euhcea isPolitika, from whence the coast to the northwardconsists for seven miles of lofty cliffs, terminatingto the north in the remarkable peak calledKandili. The distance of this mountain from thesite of Anthedon corresponds to the 120 stadeswhich Strabo assigns as the interval between Anthedonand a lofty mountain on which there wasa temple of Neptune iBgseus. The city .dSgse nolonger existed in his time, but it stood probablytowards Limni, as he states it to have been notfar from Orohke ', now Rovies.rXavjcov iHiirifia. cus. — V. Athen. ubi sup.There were various other * Strabo, p. 405.versions of the story of Glut2 •CHAPTER XV.Boeotia.From Anthedon to the Lake Paralimni — Cross Mount Ptaum —Palea, Temple of Apollo Ptoius — Kokkino — Lake Copais —Chasms of the Cephisms — Line of ancient Shafts above thesubterraneous River — Emissary — Valley of Larmes — Za-rymnaf upper and lower — Return to Kdkkino — Kardhitza,Acrcephvam —Inscriptions — Athamantium — Copies — Katavo-thea of Mount Phicium — Ancient Canal between the LakesAcrcephis and Hylice — Hyle — Senzina — Lake Livadhi, //y-lice — Return to Thebes — Schcenus — Leon,I HAD intended to have taken the road along thesea-side to Larmes, and thence to Martinoo, butthe women at Lukisi having reported it impracticableI proceed by the Lake Paralimni to K6k-kino. At 1.32 cross the foundations of the townwalls of AnthedoHj and immediately afterwardsthe deep dry ravine of a torrent which descendsfrom the part of Mount Khtypa, above Lukisi ; onits left bank are some foundations of an ancientwall, the remains perhaps of a bridge. At Lessona height on the side of the same torrent are tworuined churches, and the remains of two sepulchralreceptacles cut in the rock. From thence, after adelay of 4 minutes, we continue to mount theslope, and at 1.50 arrive at the summit of a ridgewhich connects Mount Ptaum with the lowerheights of Messapium about Lukisi. Here areseveral Hellenic foundations, belonging probablyto works for the defence of this pass, which wasCHAP. XV.] Boeotia. 277on the road from Anthedon to Thebes* Theascent on either side is easy, and the ridge is nothigh, but it opens an extensive view between themountains Ptaum and Hypatus^ and looks downimmediately upon the lake Paralimni, otherwisecalled the lake of Moritzi. It is observable fromhence, that the length' of this lake is in the directionof a peaked hill, over which our road afterwardspasses towards Kokkino, that the summitof the mountain of Zagara is in the same line,and that a little to the left of the latter appearsthat of Faga. After a loss of 5 minutes in thedescent, we arrive, at 2.35, opposite to the northeasternend of the lake, and then leaving it onthe right, follow a rugged path along the last fallsof the Messapian ridges. From the opposite shorerises the steep naked ridge of Mount Ptoum^ ofwhich the modem name in this part is Strutting.To the northward of it is another summit of the samerange, called Skroponeri ^ and to the southwardof it that named Palea ; the former terminates in apeaked cape two or three miles beyond Anthedon.Continuing our route along the rocky foot ofthe hills, we arrive at 2.48 at a part of the ancientroad, 200 feet long, excavated in the rock in theform of a shallow trench, 5 feet 9 inches in breadth.It winds in descending like a similar road betweenSparta and Helps ' ; and though it retainsscarcely any of those marks of wheels which aregenerally seen on the remains of ancient roads inSuch appeared to me to be bably derived from lUo^i^ta^the vulgar enunciation, though and means Scatterwater.Meletius writes Sicpiiroyepi, like ' See Travels in the MoreaSrpiirov. But the name is pro vol. i. p. 194.278 Boeotia. [chap.Greece, there can be no doubt that it is a part ofthat route for carriages described by Dicaearchus,which led from Anthedon to Thebes, and whichwas 160 stades in length. Having remained here5 minutes, we emerge at 3.7 from between theMessapian hills and the lake, into a plain separatedonly by a small rise from the plain ofThebes. MoHtzi is here half an hour on our left,hid by the rising ground. At 3.30 other smallhills border the lake : at 3.35 there are traces ofancient walls near the road, and at 3.45 we arriveat the end of the lake, where on a low rockyheight close on the left of the road, are foundationsof buildings formed of very large stones, andhaving an appearance of remote antiquity. Thereare traces also of an ancient wall following thefoot of the hill towards the lake. It is evidentlythe site of a Hellenic town.From the head of the lake a plain begins,which, widening to the westward, is bounded bya mountain branching southward from MountPalea, and terminating in the plain of Thebes, atthe eastern extremity of the Livadhi, or lake ofSenzina, and thus separating from each other thebasins which contain the two lakes with theiradjacent plains.Having left the ancient site by the lake Paralimniat 3.56, we fall into the road from Thebesto Talanda by Martinoo, and at 4.15 begin toascend the separating ridge above-mentioned,which is very rugged : at 4.40 arrive at the summit,where the steep rocks of Mount Palea arenot far to the right, while on the left we lookdown on the plain and lake of Senzina. BeforeXV.]Boeotia.us are the hills above Kardhltza together with apart of the lake CephissiSy and the marshes borderingon it : beyond these appear Helicon andCaucasus. We quit this spot at 5, and keepingclose under the precipices of Mount Palea, windround them to the right, until at 5.30 the roadpasses a modem fountain, constructed chiefly ofancient squared stones, mixed with stella andpedestals. Here stood formerly the monastery ofPalea, by which the adjacent summit of MountPtaum is still known. The name seems to havebeen derived from some Hellenic ruins once existinghere in greater quantity than at present, andwhich may have given to the monastery the appellationof ri Ilavayia ara naXaia, or ^' Our Ladyat the Antiquities." The ruins were probablythose of the temple of Apollo Pious, or Ptoius \famous for an oracle delivered by a priestess, whowhen consulted by Mardonius, replied to his messenger,who was a Marian, in his own languish '.The oracle belonged to the Thebans, and ceasedwhen Thebes was destroyed by Alexander theGreatsKardhltza is now about half an hour below usThe epithet, according toPlutarch (de Ora. defect.) wasderived from Trrdtaaw, becauseLatona was here frightened bythe sudden appearance of aserpent; but Pausanias, whogenerally inclines to the heroicorigin of names, cites the poemsof Arius to prove that Piouswas the son of Athamas, byChemist, in which he is supportedby ApoUodorus, 1. 1,c. 9.Herodot. 1. 8, c. 135.Pausan. Boeot. c. 23.irpo r^c 'AXe^ci v^pov Kai'NLaKe^Svwv tviarpaTEiaQ KaioXiOpov Tov Qripalwy fiayriiovLiv ahr6di d^l/iviig, — Pausan.Boeot. c. 23.280 Boeotia. [chaponthe left, but having determined before proceedingthither to visit the subterraneous discharge ofthe CephissuSj and to search for Larymna^ I turnfrom it to the right, descend by a winding course,in order to avoid the rocky summits overhangingKokkino, and then leaving to the left the road toMartinoo, turn under the northern side of the abovementionedcliffs, and arrive at Kokkino at 6.8. Thisis a village of thirty houses, which as usual, in thispart of Greece, consist only of one apartment, servingboth for a stable and a lodging for the whole family.The people are of Albanian origin, and use thatlanguage among themselves, so that many of thewomen are ignorant of the Greek : at Mazi andLukisi it was the same. The owner of the cottagein which I lodge is said to possess several thousandgoats on Mount Ptoum^ but dares not live betterthan the other people of the village.Dec. 25.— After having visited, this morning,three small churches, a quarter of a mile to theNee. of Kokkino, where the village formerly stood,and where I find only an altar with an ill-executedornament of metres connected by festoons, anda few other trifling remains of Hellenic times,I proceed at 8.45 to the Katavothra of the C^-phissusy descending the rugged hill till 9, whenin a ravine we rejoin the road from Thebesto Martinoo, which we quitted yesterday evening.Continue descending, and pass over a small plainat the head of a bay of the lake (7opat5, which iscultivated by the people of Kokkino, but in theupper portion only, on account of the inundations towhich the lower part is subject. The lake aboundsXV.] Boeotia. 281in fishy and its surface is now covered with wildfowl,but the peasants reap no advantage eitherfrom the one or the other, for want of the means ofcatching or killing them ; the people of Topolia,however, enjoy a profitable fishery in the lake,and sometimes take, especially at the katavothra,great quantities of those Copaic or Cephissic eel'srenowned among the ancients for their bulk andfatness, and which Pausanias commends from hisown experience*. At 9.18 we arrive on thewater's edge, and then ascending the rocky toot ofMount Skroponeri arrive in three minutes more ata great cavern, at the foot of a perpendicular rockeighty feet high. It is the entrance of a low, dark,subterraneous passage, one hundred and twelveyards long, through which a part of the river orcurrent of the lake slowly flows, and rejoins therest of the river very near the entrance of thesouth-easternmost of the katavothra '. In summerthis cavern, or false katavothra, as it may becalled, is dry, and there is a passage through iton foot ; but at present .it is the resort of a multitudeof fishes.The south-eastern katavothra resembles the cavernin outward appearance, being an aperture atthe foot of a perpendicular rock of equal altitude.But there is much more water here : the streamwhich enters is about thirty feet broad, and four orAiistoph. Acharn. v. 880. eicrly Hurrah, — ^Pausan. Boeot*et in pi. al. Orchestra. ap. c. 24.Athen. 1. 7, c. 13. J. Poll. * to, carajSoOpa, Held.6f c. 10. venice fidpaSpa, ^payyeg, throatde iyxiXeiQ airroBi Kal ydfAoi, \dafiara*fieye6ei fUyivrai^ ical ioBUiv282 Boeotia. [chap.five feet deep, and now entirely fills and concealsthe opening, which in summer is exposed. Nowthat the lake extends as far as Topolia and fills allthis part of the basin, it is not easy to distinguishthe river from the inundation, unless from somefavourable position on the surrounding heights,especially as the current flows not more rapidlythan a yard in a minute, and there is littledifference in the depth or colour of the waterin any part of this inner bay, which is dividedfrom the main body of the lake of CopcR by a projectingpoint under Kokkino, concealing Topoliafrom the katavothra. I now ride over the rockyfoot of the mountain near the lake, and in twelveminutes arrive at a second katavothra, situatedlike the first at the end of an inlet of the lake terminatingin a perpendicular cliff, but much smallerboth in the size of the stream and in the height ofthe cliff, which is not more than twenty feet. Thestream flows rapidly into the cavern, and there isa bank of loose stones across it, intended for catchingfish when the water is low. In summer theinlet is quite dry, and often the river itself : all theadjoining part of the lake is then converted into apasture, with cattle grazing on it. Two minutesbeyond the second katavothra is a third, at the footof a perpendicular rock of fifty feet ; here the courseof the river is well marked, having sand-banks oneither side, and a broad stream running into thecavern. From hence, after riding for a quarter ofan hour along the lake northward, in search ofother subterraneous entrances, without finding any,I return to the third katavothra and proceed fromthence to the emissory of the river in the valley ofXV.] B(EOTIA. 283Larmes. For ten minutes the road mounts a stonyhollow between low hills of the same description,after which the same vale is continued with a descendingsurface. The Cephissus pursues its subterraneouscourse in the same direction, as appearsby a line of quadrangular shafts or perpendicularexcavations in the rock, evidently made for thepurpose of clearing the subterraneous channel whenby some accident it had been obstructed, and hadthereby submerged, or endangered, a great part ofthe fertile plain which extends to the sites ,HaliartuSj TUphosdum and Orchomenus.The first shaft is at two minutes' distance ft'om thethird katavothra. It is five feet eight inchessquare, entirely excavated out of the rock, and isfilled with stones and earth to within a few feet ofthe top. The second shaft, which is three minutesfarther, is clear to the depth of forty-five feet. Thethird shaft is at three minutes' distance from thelast, and is filled at the depth of twenty feet. Themouths of many of these shafts are concealed bythe bushes of lentisk and gurnard which cover thevalley, but they are easily traced by means of themounds of earth and broken stones around them,which were formed probably when the wells wereexcavated. Their obstruction has obviously beencaused by their all lying, more or less, in thecourse of the waters down the valley. The fourthshaft is one minute beyond the third, and not lessthan ninety feet in depth, with stones and earth atthe bottom, like the others. It diminishes graduallydownwards, not in a straight line, but by asuccession of ledges. The second is constructedin the same manner, and so are probably several of284 Boeotia. [chap:those which are filled. All are cut entirely throughthe rock : some have small steps on either side ofone of the aisles. The fifth shaft is one minutebeyond the fourth, and is entirely filled with theearth and stones washed into it from the hills oneither side. Its situation, however, is ascertainedby the mounds around the hollow, and we mayinfer, from the height and extent of the mounds,that this shaft must have been the deepest of all.Here in fact the valley is highest, and from hencethe ground descends all the way to the vale of thelower Cephissus, The elevation I should conceive tobe at the utmost one hundred and eighty feet abovethe level of the lake. The sixth shaft is at the samedistance of about one hundred yards from the fifth,that the fifth is from the fourth : and, like the fifth,it is quite filled. The seventh is in an exact linewith those preceding, but as the valley here takesa turn to the left, this shaft is on the rocky foot ofthe mountain, instead of being in the lowest partof the vale. The engineers who undertook, bymeans of these shafts, to clear the subterraneouschannel of the river, naturally proceeded upon thesupposition that the stream would run direct ornearly so, from the entrance towards the issue, andhence without regarding the nature of the groundabove, they proceeded to excavate the seventh shaftin the same line with those preceding it. In formingit they probably discovered that the subterraneouschannel does not follow the straight line, butconforms to the structure of the ground on the surface,turning in the direction of a ravine to the left ;they continued, therefore, their work in that directionto the eighth shaft, which is found in a pointXV.] Boeotia. 285forming an angle to the left of the former line, atthe usual distance from the seventh, but just at theentrance of the ravine, which is here closely confinedby the adjoining rocky hills, and descendsrapidly. The seventh shaft is twenty feet deep,the eighth, much ruined, about forty-five ; betweenthem to the right, in a little level which occupiesthe comer at the turn of the valley, are foundationsof an oblong building, of large rough stones. Theninth shaft, which is seventy or eighty feet deep,occurs at the usual distance ; the tenth at the samedistance, has a depth of twenty feet. The eleventhat a like distance, is something less deep than theninth. The twelfth at a like distance, is about asdeep as the ninth. The thirteenth at an equaldistance, has the same depth as the last. Hereends the ravine, which now opens upon a ruggedslope, descending into the valley of the lowerCepMssuSy which lies to the right, and is hidfrom view by a rugged point projecting from theridge of Skroponeri. The line of the shafts herechanges its direction towards the right, and threemore are found on the slope above mentioned, in adirection bending towards the rocky point. Thedistances between the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth,and sixteenth, are about double the formerintervals. Their depth is about ten feet. At thefifteenth the valley widens, and the road to Larmescontinues to follow the slope leaving the rockypoint to the left, and entering the lower valley justat the place where the river issues.Its position relatively to the sixteenth shaft, indicatesthe direction of the subterraneous current286 Boeotia. [chap.under the rocky hill. The river emerges at thefoot of a precipice about thirty feet high, in manysmall streams, which immediately unite and formariver forty or fifty feet wide, and three or fourdeep, flowing with great rapidity down the vale.The road follows its right bank for sixteen minutes,then crosses, on the same side, a rocky projectionof Mount Skroponeri, which is divided only by theriver from an equally abrupt termination of themountain on the western side of the vale, and inten minutes descends to a large old church, and themills of Larmes, which are turned by a canal derivedfrom the river Where we crossed theheight, the river is precipitated over the rocks forashort distance with great rapidity. In very drysummers it entirely fails, when the mills are scantilysupplied by a fountain, which issues from arock on the right side of the rapid. From the millsto the head of the bay, where the river joins thesea, the distance is thirteen minutes, the streamwinding with rapidity through a small plain cultivatedwith cotton. The fall of the river throughthe subterraneous channel over the cataract, andalong the two valleys, can hardly amount to morethan a perpendicular of fifty feet.In the valley above the cataract the river flowsthrough a thick copse of agnus-castes, and producesa great quantity of water-cresses. In thelower valley it is bordered with reeds and myrtles.A steep peaked mountain rises on the left of theriver's mouth, behind which are the villages ofMartinoo and Malesina : the latter towards the sea,Martinoo more inland. At about an hour and aXV.]Boeotia.quarter beyond Martinoo is Proskyna, upon thesmall stream which flows into the south-easternangle of the bay of Opus and which I suppose tobe the Platanus, or Platonist of Pausanias. BetweenMartinoo and Proskyna, not far from thelatter, are the remains of an ancient city : probablyCorseiaia.The ruins of Larynx are situated on a levelcovered with bushes, on the shore of the Bay ofLarmes, ten minutes to the left of the mouth ofthe Cephissus. The circuit of the walls is less thanamile. The annexed sketch will give an idea ofthe remains still existing.Larynx.1. Is a small port, anciently closed in the manner here described.2. The town wall, traceable all around. 3. Another wallalong the sea, likewise traceable. 4. A mole, in the sea. 5. Variousancient foundations in the town and acropolis. 6. ASorts. 7. Glyfonero, or Salt Source. 8. An oblong foundationof an ancient building.288 BcfioTiA. [chap.The walls, which in one place are extant to nearhalf their height, are of a red soft stone, very muchcorroded by the sea air, and in some places areconstructed of rough masses. The sorus is high,with comparison-to its length and breadth, andstands in its original place upon the rocks : therewas an inscription upon it, and some ornaments ofsculpture, which are now quite defaced. The Gly-foner6 is a small deep pool of water, impregnatedwith salt, and is considered by the peasants anaycovlpc, or sacred water, because it is cathartic.Meletius, who supposed it to be the lake Anchormentioned by Strabo, states, that in his time personsresorted to the place in spring and autumn todrink of the water, and to some of those, he adds,who drank too much, it proved fatal. This coast,as well as Subcea, abounds in salt springs, andHalcB perhaps derived its name from similarsources near it. Some ruins like those of Larymnaare said to exist at a church of St. JohnTheology, near the cape which projects to thenorthward, beyond Maleslna and Proskyna. Theyare probably remains of Hake.Upon the projection of Skroponeri, which separatesthe upper from the lower valley of Larmes, Iobserved some foundations of Hellenic walls surroundinga height on the right hand side of theroad. These seem to have been merely the remainsof a small dependent fortress, commanding thepass which led to the town.On the rocks above the issue of the CepkismSjthe road from Kokkino to Larmes is crossed bythat from Luklsi to Martinoo. The latter, as I amnow informed, is by no means so bad as the womenXV.]Boeotia.of Lumpy for some reasons of their own, thoughtproper to represent it. From Lukisi it crosses themountain which borders the valley of Anthedon tothe west, and descends upon a vale at the head ofthe bay of Skroponeri, where are some copioussources issuing not far from the shore of the bay,and flowing into it. From thence the road crossesMount Skroponeri to the vale of Larmes. The distancefrom Lukisi to Larmes is reckoned two hoursand a half.Although the name Larmes, or Lames, which isapplied as well to the ruins just described as to theadjacent bay and valley, leaves little doubt that theruins are those of Larymnay yet, as Strabo mentionstwo towns of that name, there may be somedoubt to which of them these remains are to be attributed.He observes, that the Cephissus brokeforth from its subterraneous channel at the UpperLarymna, and joined the sea at the Lower Larymna;that Upper Larymna had belonged toLocris until it was annexed to the Lower or BoeotianLarymna by the Romans ; that the place wherethe river issued at Upper Larymna was calledAnchor, and that there was a lake of the samename' which, it is fair to presume from the etymologyof the word, was the same as that lake atMere hi SaXyavca 'AkOjj-Z^v Eiffl fiiyroi rtTp6i6yri fjuxpov vo\l\>ai BvoT&y BoitarQVf Adpvfjiyd re, trap*fjy 6 Ktf^taaoQ iKBihwn kuI intviKiiya 'Anal ofAofyvfWi role'Arriroic ^^/lotc. — Strabo, p.404, 405.VOL. II.era c|cppi}&v (Cephissus)€iQ n)v cTi^avecav hard fit AoKplBoc Till &y»(roi ydp iripa early &q ciiro/icvM rp OaXdrrfi ii Boiwrcam) ^vpoaidtoay oi 'Pia/ioZoc ri^v&yki>). KaXeirai ^ 6 r6iroc*Ayx^' «^''* ^' *"^ XffiyriU290 Boeotia. [chap.Larymna, which Pausanias describes as a Xf/ivnityxifiaOrigj OT a lake profound at the very margin ^At Larmes, however, there is nothing resemblinga lake, except the small pool or source of salt waternear the ancient walls, which leads one to suspectthat Pausanias could not have alluded to Larmesin describing Larymna, the more so as the wordsvTTcp/SaXovraiv ro opoc ro HtHjovj which he employsin alluding to the road from Acraephium to Larymna,would lead us to suppose that he crossed not merelythe low ridge between the Katavothra and theemissory, but a part of Mount Skroponeri itself,and that he really did so is the more probableiron his having made no mention of the lakeCopais on this occasion, or of the subterraneouschannel of the CephissuSy although the road fromAcrsephium to Larymna, supposing his JLart/mna tohave been at Larmes, could not but have followedthe shore of the lake, and have passed both bythe entrance and exit of the subterraneous stream.There is reason to suspect, therefore, that the Larymnaof Pausanias was not the town which stoodat Larmes, but another in the valley at the head ofthe bay of Skroponeri ; that the Boeotian or LowerLarymna^ was there situated, and that Larmes wasthe site of the Upper y or Locrian Larymna. 1 cannotaffirm, indeed, that there is a lake correspondingto the Ancko'e in the vale of Skroponeri' ; nor ifSfi&wfAOQ. ivTivBty ^* ff^iy 6 \lfiyii Bi trfttriv ivriv Ayytfia'Ki/^co-ffoc iicBlBbun M r^v Bd- Oiic. — Pausan. Boeot. c. 23.Xorrav. — Strabo. p. 406, 407. ' Stuart, in bis notes of a*Xireppa\6vTiov 5c ro opoc rh journey in this part of BoeotiaUrwoVfiaTiyMOaK&fftrfigBoiw-' (printed in the fourth volumerQy ironic Adpvfipa of his Antiquities), describes aXV.]BCBOTI A .that were the site of the Lower Larynma^ is it easyto explain how either of them could have belonged tolocris, all the surrounding districts being Boeotian ;although it cannot be denied, that the Larymna atLarmes was the nearer of the two to the Locrianfrontier. It seems unaccountable also, that pausaniasshould have omitted to notice so curious anobject, both natural and artificial, as the Chasmsof the Cephissus and its shaft; but it is consistentwith the supposition of his not having visited theLarymna at Larmes, which may have happened becauseit had been abandoned, soon after it had beenannexed by the Romans to the Lower Larymna. Asto Strabo, who seems to have been correct only insaying, that the Cephissus emerged near the UpperLarymna, there is great reason for believing thaton this, as on many other occasions, he describedplaces confusedly, which he had never seen, andhis text, perhaps, may be partly in fault. To theone or the other of these causes may also be attributedhis assertion, that the subterraneous passageof the Cephissus was thirty stades in length ; for,with all its windings, it is not half so much.At the issue of the CepMssuSj in the upper valeof Larmes, I was struck with the smallness of thequantity of water when compared with the aggregateof that which enters at the three katavothra.lake which had a discharge intothe sea between the bay ofSkropon^ri and Lukisi. Buthe gives us the idea of a largelake, for which there is no spacein the vale ; and describes it asan hour and half beyond Skro-poneri (apparently a village ofthat name), so that his lakewould rather seem to have beenthe Paralimni. On the otherhand, this lake certainly has nodischarge into the Euboic frithunless by a katavothra.v2292 Boeotia. [chap.and could not but infer that one of the streams, atleast, has a different issue. The two northernkatavothra seem too near to each other, as well asto the commencement of the line of shafts on thesurface, not to have both conducted to the subterraneouschannel below those shafts. It will probablybe found, therefore, that the river whichissues in the vale of Larmes, and which is aboutequal in volume to those two streams, is derivedsolely from them, and that the southern katavothra,which is nearly half a mile distant from the nearestof the two northern, has a different discharge, perhaps,at the sources in the bay of Skroponeri. Thiswould partly justify Strabo in saying, that the Cephissusflowed into the sea near the Lower or BoeotianLarymna.Having taken my Christmas dinner at the Millsof Larmes, I return to Kokkino, following the sameroad by which I came, with the exception of crossingthe rocky height from near the issue of theriver directly to the sixteenth shaft, and withoutfinding any other shaft, though the subterraneousstream flows probably in that direction. It takesthree quarters of an hour to mount from the nearestkatavothra to Kokkino, where we arrive at sunset.The only passage in ancient history illustrativeof the shafts and subterraneous course of theCephissus, occurs in the pages of Strabo to whicha reference has just been made. After describingthe river as entering a chasm near Copse, thegeographer subjoins that one Crates of Chalcis ^^ Casaubon, founding his text of p. 407 on another paa-conjecture as to the defective sage in p. 700, thought thatXV.]BCBOTIAhad been employed by Alexander the Great to remedythe effects of an obstruction of the subterraneouschannels which had caused the submersionof several places situated on the margin of thelake : and that he, Strabo, had seen the reportmade by Crates to Alexander, wherein that engineerstated that he had been successful in drawingoff the water from some districts, especiallythose of Eleusis and Athensee, Boeotian towns onthe river Triton \ when dissensions among theBoeotian put a stop to the work. Although oneof the operations of Crates was to make an embankment' near Athensee, it is evident that his principalmeans of desiccation were derived from the clearingof the subterraneous channels of the river, andhence we might be justified in the inference thatthe existing wells were the work of Crates ; thereare strong reasons, however, for believing thatthey are more ancient, and that Crates only repairedor cleared them. It is obvious that all valleysso inclosed as to admit of a passage to therunning waters only through the surroundingmountains cannot but be liable to occasional inundationsfrom the obstruction of the subterraneousGoigus had been the name ofthe engineer ; but it is clearlyproved from Stephens to havebeen Crates; for in speakingof Athensee of Boeotia, he says,1^ Ik rriQ Xlfiytfc ciya^veiaaficra ro irp6repoy liriKXvedrirairfjf KhnraidoQ ere Panic o,hTiiySurdfpivffty, Stephan. in'ABifyai. The same Crates is noticedby Diogenes Laertes, (1. 4.c. 23.) as a ra^pwpvxoQ 'Axesauywy, — V. Geographiede Strabo. tome 3. claire. 26.^ Pausan. Boeot. c. 24,mentions the destruction ofthese two places by an inundation.^uTaifiptvtrty* V. Stephan.ubi sup.294 Boeotia. [chap.channels. Ancient history records the occurrenceof inundations, thus caused, in the valleys of Stym-palus and Peneus \ where such is the height ofthe mountains that the inconvenience can only beremedied by nature herself. But the chasmata ofthe Cephissus are more accessible, and allowed ofthe excavation of a line of shafts, by means ofwhich the channel of the river might not only bekept clear but even enlarged, with a view to amore extensive drainage of the plain. Strabo remarks,with reference to the ancient riches of theOrchomenii attested by Homer, that, according toa Boeotian tradition, they had been caused by thedraining and subsequent cultivation of a large portionof the plain which in the time of the geographerhad again become a part of the lake ', and isstill an impracticable swamp. Now there is certainlyno period, in history, to which that greatand useful undertaking can be attributed with somuch probability as to that, when all WesternBoeotia was united under the Minyse of Orchome-nus. To that age, therefore, rather than anyother, the original excavations are to be attributed,when they were formed perhaps under thedirection of the Orchomenian princes Trophoniusand Agamedes, who, by their mechanical skill inan age when it was extremely rare in Greece,attained the honours of divinity.Vide Travel in the Morea the spring of 1829 the greaterc. 26. I am informed that part of Uie plain of Peneusthe obstruction of the Ladon was under water,has btely recurred, so that in ' Strabo, p. 415.XV.J Boeotia. 295Dec. 26. — This morning a strong north-westersets in with rain. A ride of three quarters of anhour carries me to Kardhitza, the road passingalong the rugged flanks of Mount Ptaum, Midwaya small plain lies below us to the right, at the footof the mountain on the border of the lake, and oppositeto the plain, not far from the right bank ofthe Cephissus, an island surrounded by cliffs, thesummit of which is incircled by the remains of aHellenic wall. In the inclosed space, as I amtold by some peasants who have been there, aresome foundations of buildings, but no columns.It seems to have been some small town to whichthe little plain just mentioned may have appertained,together with that which is now an inundationsurrounding the island, but which in summermay be valuable land either for grain or pasture.At Kardhitza I find ample employment for the restof the day in examining the adjacent ruins, whichare undoubtedly those of Acreephium, and in copyinginscriptions, of which there is a large collectionin an old church of St. George, standing withinthe walls of the ancient city.Dec. 27. — The longest of the inscriptions hasrequired a continued labour of six hours, the lettersbeing small, and in some places much defaced; and the stone which is in the wall of thechurch on the outside, on a level with the earth,being so placed that the lines are perpendicular tothe horizon, whence it is impossible to obtain a distinctview of them without lying on the ground.The monument is in honour of one of the citieBoeotia. [chap.sens of this place named Epaminondas, son ofEpaminondas ^ After recording some of hisformer services to his native city, one of whichwas the reparation, at an expence of 6000 denaria,of a mound twelve stades in length, probably forthe purpose of protecting the plain of Acrcephiumfrom the inundations to which it is subject from thelake, the inscription proceeds as follows : '^ A legationhaving been required to the Young Augustus,in the general assembly of the Achaean and Pan-hellenesat Argos, and many illustrious and leadingmen in the Boeotian cities having met togetherand refused and appealed to him, he extendinghis magnanimity to the whole nation of Boeotian,and setting aside all consideration of his privateinterests, most readily accepted the charge fromthe nation of Boeotian, applying the strength ofhis mind to this important and unpaid legation.Whence, having become admired and thoughtworthy of approbation, he was honoured by thePanhellenes, as they testified in the letter sent byihcm to our city. Having concluded the legationtogether with the other nations, and brought backthe answer from . • . , he Was honoured, togetherwith his co-legates ; and the general assemblyof the Pamboeoti, mindful of his spontaneousAb I have already pub I have thought it sufficient towished this inscription in the insert the text in the cursiveMuseum Critical, and M. character at the end of thisBoeckh has given it a place volume,in his Corpus Inscription,XV.] BCBOTIA. 297liberality and benevolence, decreed to him thehonours due, and made a communication of theact to our city Heexcelled in greatness of mind and virtue allhis love of glory andgoodness by successive entertainments, being thusheld to be the greatest of patriots and benefactors.And when the games called the Ptoia had beeiiomitted for thirty years, having been named topreside over them, he most readily accepted theoffice, thinking it an honour to renew those ancientgames, the great Ptoia and Caesarea, andbecame a second founder of them. Having takenthe direction of them, he forthwith performed thesacrifices and prophetic offices of the god, entertainingthe archons and assessors five times everyyear with magnificent suppers, and giving a dinnerto the city in the fifth year, without a single omissionin the other years either of sacrifice or of expence.And when the games occurred in thesixth year, he made a distribution for the approachingfeast to all the citizens as well as to the inhabitantsand alien proprietors, giving to each man aCopious of wheat and a Semina of wine, and religiouslyexecuted the ceremonies derived from ourancestors, the great processions, and the dance ofthe Syria. And sacrificing a bull to the gods andthe Augustii, he omitted neither the distribution ofmeat, nor dinners, nor desserts, nor suppers, entertainingat every dinner the children and youngslaves of the cities according to their classes, fromthe tenth to the thirtieth, while his wife Notitiagave a dinner to the wives of the citizens their298 Boeotia. [chap.unmarried daughters and female slaves. Nordid he neglect those who had chaise of the tentsor of the decoration of the festival, but he gavethem a dinner apart by proclamation, which noneof his predecessors had done, being desirous thatevery one should be a partaker of his generosity.In the scenic spectacles he treated all the spectatorsand persons assembled from the cities withsweetmeats, and made large and exquisite cakes,so that his munificence became celebrated in allthe surrounding cities. At the end of the games,after a supper given to the whole people, recommencinghis expences, he made a distribution ofeleven denaria to each couch of three persons, anda Ceramseum of old wine and six denaria to defraythe remaining expences for meat. After the performanceof all these things, as he descended fromthe temple to the city, all the citizens met him inabody, in order to show him every kind of honourand thankfulness ; and he, not unmindful of hismagnanimity, sacrificing in the city a bull toJupiter the Greatest, moved the congregation togratitude. Since then it is proper to exhibit goodand magnanimous and patriotic men adorned withbecoming honours and rewards; it has seemedgood to the archons, the assessors, and the people,to bestow praises upon the aforesaid Epaminondas,for that he has conducted himself towards hisnative city with assiduous benevolence, and towardsthe nation of Bceotians with magnanimity,and has conferred honour upon his native city byhis embassy. And to honour him with a goldencrown , and a good full-length painted portrait-statue.XV.] Boeotia. 299and that all succeeding Agonothetae shall inthe games to be directed by them invite himwith other benefactors to the first seat, in orderthat, from these results, our city may appeargrateful to its benefactors, and that many othersmay become emulous of good actions thus attested.Also to erect images or statues of him, one in thetemple of Apollo Ptoius, the other in the agora ofthe city, together with gilded portrait-statues ofhim, bearing the following inscription : The peopleand the council (have honoured) Epaminondas,son of Epaminondas, as an excellent citizen : andto place a copy of the decree in the temple ofApollo Ptoius, and another in the agora of thecity."The mention made of the Cesarean games, andof their renewal, implying their cessation for aconsiderable time, shows that the monument wasnot of an early period of the Roman empire ;which is confirmed by the worship of the Augustiiin the plural. The earliest emperors who heldthat rank simultaneously were Marcus Aureliusand L. Verus ; but the words Nioc Sc/Sacrroc designatingthe Young Augustus, who presided in thecouncil of the AchsBans and Panhellenes in Argos,to which the embassy of the Bceotians and otherswas sent, seems not to apply so well to Verus as toCommodus, who was in Greece with his fatheron their return from the East, when Aurelius visitedAthens, in the year 176, and was initiated in theEleusinian mysteries. It is true that Commoduswas not honoured with the title of Augustus until300 Boeotia. [chap.the following year \ But as according to the tenorof the inscription y the embassy occurred before thePtoia, and consequently some years prior to thedate of the monument, we may easily conceive thatafter such an interval the people of Acrsephiumwould not studiously refuse to apply the titleof Augustus to Commodus, because he had notyet received it at the period referred to, especiallyas the honour became the greater to £pa*minondas, and as Commodus at the time of the inscriptionwas probably sole emperor. The nextYoung Augustus, to whom the words Nloc 2€/3a<rrocmay be applied, was Caracalla, who with hisfather Severus, passed through Mcesia and Pannoniain returning from the East in the year203 ' : but there is no evidence of either of themhaving been in Greece, and the form of the lettersin the inscription is more conformable to those inuse in the time of the Antonines than to any subsequentperiod. The 2 and E are still angular.The final iota of the dative cases is constantlyomitted, but this omission was already common inthe reign of Hadrian. The confusion which occursin the use of i and n is hardly consistent withthe form of the letters, and may perhaps be partlyan effect of the Boeotia dialect. Thus rt/uii, ycWvrai are written nifiri, yuviovrai, while €cc, wpM^daVfa^ca0€ic> Ta^u^y SciTTvov, fiaprvpcurOai, are written CC)irp€ff|3tav, a^ioOtg^ ra^iCy Siirvov, fAaprvpurOat.Dio. 1. 71, c. 81. — I. Ca ■ Herodias. 1. 3, c. 10.pistol. in Antonio. Philos. —Philos. in Adrian, c. 4.XV.] Boeotia. 301This monument is a good example of the vanityof a rich Boeotian Archon in those times, or ratherof the mean flattery of his fellow-citizens payinghomage to his wealth. It is a complete specimenalso, of the pompons inanity and wordy feeblenessof the language, which it is curious to comparewith some Attic inscriptions of about the sameperiod, when Attics Herodes was the arbiter oftaste at Athens, and when amidst an abundance ofaffectation, there still remained some wit learningand elegance of composition.There are two other marbles in the walls of thechurch, bearing inscriptions not much shorter thanthe preceding ; one of these is in the northern wall,where the effect of its exposure to this aspect hasbeen to cover it with moss. As very little of it couldpossibly be deciphered, I have not attempted to copyit. The other forms one of the jambs of a side door,and has in one part been worn smooth ; in anotherplace the letters have been destroyed by the stonehaving been cut away to make room for a latch.The parts which have been exposed to the air aremuch defaced, and the stone is so placed that theletters are reversed, but I can perceive that mentionis again made of the embassy of Epaminondas,son of Epaminondas, and that the names of theBceotians, Locris and Eubceans occur, being probablythe nations whose ambassadors, according tothe former inscription, accompanied Epaminondasto Argos. The words avSpiavrcc, |i€YaXo^v)^fa, andravpoOvrriffa^ also occur as in the former, but themost important are 'Aicpai^ildiv ap)^ov(rc, which takentogether with the mention of the temple of ApolloBoeotia.[chap.Ptoius in the other inscription, and compared withthe situation of the tom and temple, as describedby Herodotus, Strabo and Pausanias, can leave noquestion that the ruins are those of AcrsBphium ^Of the other inscriptions in the church of St.George, the most curious are three fragments ofcatalogues of egoistic victors, all which probablybelonged to one and the same record of certaintriennial games called Soteria, when Theomnestus,son of Paramonus, was priest of Jupiter Sober,and when the Soteria were celebrated for thefirst time " after the war," by which, as thecharacters are of considerable antiquity, the Mithridateswar is probably meant, when Boeotia sufferedseverely. Pausanias makes no mention ofthe Soteria, or of Jupiter Sober, or of any templeat Acrsephium, except that of Bacchus, which containeda statue of the god.Among other fragments of antiquity in the churchof St. George, are a very small fluted Doric columnwith sixteen flemings, and two of those circular pegrov TLt&ov 'AiroXXbTvocro rc/ievoc* rovro ^c to ipov xa-Xierai fuy llrwoVf earl Be Oi|-fialiaVf fceerai Be vnep r^c Kctf-ndiBoe XtfJLyric wpbg ovpei^Ay^orarw 'Arpac^/i^c irSXiot, —Herodot. 1. 8. c. 135.'YiripKeirai Be to [IriJoi/ rovTfiyepiKOv ireBiov ral t^c Kwirai-Bot Xifxyric irp6£ 'Airpat^/y* Gi}-(ialu)y ^ ^y t6 re finyTelov koIr6 opoQ' ro Be 'Arpa/^iov koI throicelrai Iv vi/^ec. — Strabo, p. 418.*Aicpai^i/iov •Ktirai ro ir^Xiirfia ty open rfllr^^. — ^Pausan. Boeot. c. 23.*Ayriov &pj(pyroCf dyiayode-rovv(roc) UorrXlov KopyriXloVfrov UoirXiov viol • • • • ftaiov^rQy rpiffriipbiy 'Zurripifay irp«tf-(rwi^) diro rov iroXefiov^ tepareV"oyroc Be roy Ai)oc rov SwT^jpocOeofiyfftrrov rov llapafiSyoVf oiBeeyUwy, &c. — V. Inscr. No.50, 51.XV.]B(EOTIA.details smaller above than below, which are oftenfound in Greek churches, sometimes with Ionic,but more commonly with Doric capitals, mouldingsand flutiugs. They were probably, as I have beforesuggested \ the apostates of the KpnrripBg ', orlarge basins which were used in the temples tocontain lustral water, and which having been generallymade of metal have disappeared, while theirapostates of stone have remained. Altars formedin the shape of a column surmounted with a squareplinth, are not uncommonly found also in themodem churches, where they sometimes servefor the holy table. As the temples were generallyconverted into churches, on the establishment ofChristianity, the apostates and altars have oftenremained in their original places, while the templesthemselves may have totally altered their appearance,in consequence of successive repairs and thechange in their destination.There is no church in Greece more likely to havebeen a heathen temple than this of Kardhltza,^ Travels in the Morea, vol.1, p. 49S.Pausanias has described,what I conceive to have beenone of these articles of the furnitureof ancient temples, inthe following words : vKotnaTriQKldov Kol Xovrfiputy iwl ry ^iro-ardrri xaXxovy, (Phocis. c# 26.)The Mffrarot or hwoKpririi prov ofthe Silesian inscription, as wellas the famous iron wroKprirripi''Boy of the vase dedicated by Ha-latterat Delphi (Herodot. 1. 1.c. 25. — heathen. 1. 5, c. 13. Pau-san.Phocis. c. 16. — Philos. invit ApoU.Tyan.l. 6,c.2.)seem8not to have been exactly thesame kind of thing, but a base ofthe cup itself, separate from anymarble hypobase upon which itmay have stood. We find thethree parts all mentioned in aLatin inscription of Garter (p.48), which records a gift to Herculesof a crater a Argyro-Co-^cynthia with a asia sua, anda hypobasis marmorea.Boeotia.[chap.Standing as it does in the middle of the ancient site.It is supported within by columns formed of pieces ofancient shafts, put together without much harmony ^but crowned with handsome Ionic capitals, whichas well as the portions of shafts, belonged probablyto the temple of Jupiter or Bacchus. The churchhas a dome, and the most modem part of thepatchwork does not seem to be later than thetwelfth century. There are several similar churchesin Boeotia, which have outlasted many of later date :particularly those more recent than the Turkishconquest, scarcely any of which are more than halfa century old, being like the modem houses, builtso as not to be capable of enduring longer.The name of Acreephium is obviously derived fromthe conspicuous insulated airpa or summit on whichthe town was built, and which is noticed by Strabo ^This height is steep and rocky, but much less soonthe northern side towards Kardhitza, than in theopposite direction, where it falls to a plain whichThe termination of theword, as well as the form of thegentile, mary in different authors.In the lexicon of Stephensit is 'A/cpai^ia, hut heremarks that it was also written*Aicpa/^iov, hy Pausanias'AKpat^vioVf and hy Theophilusra *AKpai^yia, The gentilewas *Ai:pai^iacoc, or *Aicpa/^toCfor *AKpal*^yuoc9 OT^AKpau^ytwrtiQfor *AKpai^yuvc, It is curiousthat the orthography derivedfrom the inscription differsfrom them all, heing'AiTfiai^icvc.In our copies of Strabo thename is in one place ' Arpa/^v,in another 'Acpac^ac, in Herodotusit is *Ajcpai^ci|, in LivyAcraephia. Stephens mentionsan Acraephieus, son of Apollo,who was supposed to have givenname to the place. This was probablythe doctrine of the peopleof Acrsephium, but Pausanias,though generally Inclines bothto local traditions, and to heroicetymologies, makes no mentionof any such person. The neighbouringpart of the lake wascalled *AKpal^ic Xifiyii, (Stephan.ibid. — Strabo, p. 411.)XV.] BOEOTIA. 305borders a bay of the Lake Copyist and separatesthe lower heights of Ptoum from those of Phicium.Between it and an extremity of Mount Ptoum tothe northward, which terminates in bare and ruggedrocks washed by the lake, is the opening whichI have before noticed as conspicuous from manyparts of the surrounding country. The ancientwalls are partly of the polygonal, and partly of thethird kind of Hellenic masonry. They are bestpreserved at the summit of the hill, where are someniches in the inside of the wall, six or eight feetasunder, and just wide enough for a man to standwithin them. Their purpose was probably thesame as that of the niches in the secret gallery ofTiryns, namely to oppose the advance of an adversarywho had entered the passage. There aremany Hellenic foundations on the slope of the hilltowards Kardhltza down to the very bottom of it,but nothing sculptured except at the church. Suchan advantageous position as that of Acreephiumcould scarcely have been unoccupied in early ages ;and we cannot doubt, therefore, that it is the site ofone of the Homeric towns of Boeotia. Some criticsin the time of Strabo supposed it to have been theAne of the poet * ; but Ane, there is every reasonto believe, was the same place as Chaeronea.Peteon, from the association of names in the catalogue', is that which may be attributed to it, withthe greatest probability.^ Strabo, p. 413.OS a* 'EXewv* elxov, 4^ "YXifv, ral UenQva,*Oi:oXci|v, Miit^vd r' kvKrifiivov uroXUdpor.II. /3. V. 500.VOL. 11. XBoeotia.[chap.Four roads lead from Kardhitza through openingsin the surrounding mountains : 1, to Topolia ; 2,its continuation to Thebes ; 3, to Kokkino ; and 4,through the chasm already mentioned, into theplain on the southern side of the hill of Aercepkium.The road to Topolia, now inundated, crosses theriver by a bridge, leaving the fortified island alittle on the right. The indications of Straboand the more particular description of Pausanias *,leave little doubt that Topolia, where some remainsof walls and some inscribed marbles have beenfound *, was the site of Copse ; for Cap(B^ like To-poli,was on the margin of the lake, and its directionfrom Acrsephium is shown by the narrativeof Pausanias beyond Copse, to have been towardsCyrtones, Corseiaia, and the river Platanius, which isexactly that of Topolia. He remarks, that betweenAcreephium and the lake Cephissis, otherwise calledCopais, there was a plain named Athamantium,from its having been anciently inhabited by Atha-massy and that not far from thence, the river Cephis-^ Konriip' • . . irpoffapKru)^ii kfrriy iitX r jf Kanraidi X//ivp.—Strabo p. 410. v. et 406. 411.*££ 'Aicpai^Wov Zi hom eir-Btiav Ik\ XifiVTiy Hjy KrffiaaiZa(pi Be KtanatZa ovo/ia^ov^i 77)1^aifTijy) inSloy xaXovfieyoy larry*AOafidyrioy oliaiffai he *AOa-flora iy ahr^ (^my Ic he ri^yXlfiyfiy 6 re tcorafjioc 6 Kti^piaffockKhlZiaaiy^ iipx&f^yoc Ik AiXa/acTui ^laxiufyy xal BtawXevtrayriig Kwirac' Kelyrai he ai Kwxaiir6\i(rfjM girl rpf X/fivfj. — Pausan.Boeot. c. 24. There seems tobe something Wanting in thelatter part of this passage*One of these, in the Scepticdialect, has been published bythe Rey. R. Walpole, in hissecond Collection of Memoirs,&c. p. 566. ; where the veryincomplete second line mayberestored thus : TOIAEETPA^FANTOENOnAITAIS,showing the document to be aconscription of lioplitse.XV.] Boeotia. 307SUB entered the lake, across which there was a navigationto Copse, a small town Containing temples ofCeres, Bacchus and Sarapis; Hence it is evident,thstt the plain Athamaiitium was not that to thesouthward of the height of Kardhltza, hut that in theopposite direction; nelir the fortified island, whichlatter may haVe been a town or fortress namedAthamantium, though Pausanias, perhaps from itshaving been a ruin in his time, has alluded to itonly as the former residence of Athamas, and hasdescribed the plain only. The hill of Topdlia resemblesthis island, as well in its degree of elevationas' in its rocky margin, and is itself an islandduring a great part of the year, but being situatedvery near the neighbouring heights, it is sometimesa promontory, and generally presents thatappearance.The distance of Palea from Kardhitza agreesexactly with that which Pausanias states tohave been the interval between Acraephium andthe temple of Apollo Ptoitis, namely, fifteen stades ;and its position to the right of the road leadingfrom Acrsephium to Latina seems equally to accordwith his words \ for the road to both theLarymnee could not but have followed the modernroute as far as Kokkino. The three summits Palea,Striitzina and Skropon^ri, each well defined, andyet forming one range of nearly equal . altitude,UpoeXdorTi ^c Aro r^c ^^ *Yir€pliaX6yrwy Si to opoc t6Xeii>C ^y ^e{i9 ircvrc wow xal ZtKa nrJov, lariv tir QaKoLaari^oraBlovCf Tov *Airo\Kwy6c Itni Bociorwy ir6\i£ Adpvfiya. —Tov Dr^pov t6 Upon Pausan. Bceot. c. 23.x2308 B(EOTIA. [chap.perfectly illustrate the epithet tpucapavovy whichAlcseus applied to Ptoum ^.Taking the fourth of the above-mentioned roads,I pass in 13 minutes from the church of St. Georgethrough the chasm into the plain on the southernside of the hill of Acrtsphium ; in 10 more arriveat the mountains on the southern side of the plain,and then follow the margin of the lake, along thefoot of the mountain which overhangs it, andwhere scarcely any path is traceable, sometimespassing through the water, sometimes over littlegreen levels under the rocks. At the end of 27minutes from the foot of the chasm of Kardhitza,a projecting point of the mountain affords from itssummit a good view of the adjacent part of thelake where I had already noticed a causeway ofstone, crossing the mouth of that bay of the Cfe-plessis, which is bordered by the valley of Acresand seems to have been sometimes knownto the ancients by the name of the lake Acrsephis.The causeway connected the foot of Mount Phiciutnto that of Mount Ptoumy and although defective inmany places, would still with a little repair bemarriageable all the way : its length was about twomiles. A similar paved road may be traced near theisland of Athamas leading from the bridge of theCephissmy towards Topolia, but it is not in suchgood preservation as the former. The solid constructionof these causeways leaves little doubt thatthey are works of the ancients, and which seem to• Kai iroT€ rhv rpiKcipavoy Ilrwov KtvBft&ya Koria^iBt,Ap. Strab. p. 413.XV.] fiCEOTIA. 309have been kept in repair, even during the Byzantineempire : the first is exactly in the directionof Acreephium, from Haliartus, not far from theformer of which it joined the other causeway,which was in the direct road from Thebes toCopse. It is not impossible that these werethe works upon *which Epaminondas of Acresis recorded in the inscription of Kardhitzato have expended 6000 denaria, in which case itwould seem that Pausanias visited Acreephiumbefore the repair, since he speaks only of a navigationfrom the plain of Athamantium to Copse.In fact, this will agree perfectly with the date ofthe travels of Pausanias in Greece, which did notextend in time beyond the earliest years of thereign of Marcus Aurelius. Continuing to coastthe lake for eight minutes, and having passed inone place through deep water at the foot of therocks, I arrive at a katavothra, or small cavern,,which is lower than the present level of the adjacentwaters, and into which a slender streamnow flows. A mile farther towards HaUartus isthe Cape of Mount Phiciumy at which the causewayleading to the foot of Mount Ptoum begins.All this part of the lake produces abundantly arush, of which mats are made at Kardhitza andother villages near the lake. It has a soft roundstem, and is called Papj^ri, the name by whichthe same plant is known at lodnnina, where it isequally used for making mats. Many other kindsof reeds and rushes are observable in the lake, buttheir tops only are now visible above the water.Neither here nor in any other part of Greece have310 Boeotia. [chap.I seen the triangular Cyprus Papyrus, of whichthe paper used by the Egyptians and Greeks wasmade.Strabo remarks that the whole lance, called inhis time Copais, but which Pindar named Ce-plessis,had anciently separate denominations,derived from the adjacent cities. The Dalmatianmarsh is the more distinguishable from those ofOrchomenus, Acrasphium, and Cop,, because thelatter are harmed from die superfluous waters ofthe Melts, Cephissus^ Probatia, Phalarus, andCuralius^ whereas the marsh of Haliartus is causedby the rivers which descend into the basin nearthat. site, and which appear never to mite withthe CephisstiSy but to have an exit through MountPhicium by katavothra; possibly that which Ivisited is not the only one. In summer the courseof the streams may be more apparent in . everypart of the Cephissic basin so that in the spacewhich is now a continued inundation, distinguishableonly by a greater depth of water in someplaces, there may be several separate portions ofwater divided from each other by firm land, explainingthe several denominations of Acraephi^,Copais, Haliartia. At present it is not even possibleto say decidedly where the stream whichflows into the katavothra of Mount Phiaum originates,but most probably it is formed from thejunction of some, if not all, the rivulets ancientlycalled Permessus, Lophis, Plates, Ocalea, andperhaps also Tilphossa.Having returned along the margin of the laketo the plain of AcrtBphiumf I follow the southernXV.] Boeotia. 311side of that plain, not far from the foot of themountain, where some foundations of masonry areobservable lying in the direction of the route, aswell as some others at right angles to the former,at a point which is half way between the lake anda small ridge which separates this plain from thatwhich borders the lake of S^nzina. They appear tobe the remains of some works intended to defendthe upper part of the plain from those encroachmentsof the lake of AcrtBphmm which now prevent all thelower part of it from being cultivated. The foundationshave not much appearance of Hellenic work,but there are traces of a canal to the northward ofthem which seem to be of those times : here alsois a line of wells, or shafts, some in the bed, andsome in the direction of the canal, similar to thosewhich are above the subterraneous channel of theCephisms. I say the direction, because the hollowand mounds of excavated earth on either side, bywhich the former existence of a canal may bepresumed, have been in some places obliteratedby the plough, or have disappeared by the effectsof alluvion in the parts where the ground is mostmarshy. The canal however is easily traced tothe ridge at the end of the plain, which it seemsto have entered between two ranges of rock, whichmy guide of Kardhltza calls the Vrakho\ Theposition of some of the shafts is recognised onlyby small hollows and surrounding mounds, at equaldistances ; but two or three of them are still open,and, like those of the subterraneous channel of6 ^pa'xoc.312 Boeotia. [chap.the CephissuSy are rectangular excavations in therock, — not square, however, like them, but oblong,and having their long sides half as longagain as those of the Cephissian wells. I observethat one of them widens below like an ancientcistern. The opening at the Vrakho makes aturn to the left, almost at right angles to thedirection of the canal, and then again graduallyto the right until it enters the plain of Senzina, atabout a mile from that village. My guide supposedthe opening at the Vrakho to be artificial,but though the sides are uniform, and the breadthnearly the same as that of the canal, or 50 feet,there are no marks of art on the rocks, and thegreat length, as well as the general appearance of it,make me believe it to be natural ; though certainlyvery conveniently contrived by nature to facilitatethe formation of a canal. The bed or bottom ofthe Vrakho is below the present level of the lakeCopyist and a line of hollows is traceable alongit, forming an evident continuation of those in theplain ; but the hollows only are apparent, theshafts, if they exist being entirely buried. I was18 minutes riding, preceded by a man on foot,from the south western comer of the plain whereI entered it from the katavothra, to the openingof the Vrakho near the centre of the head ofthe plain. Here leaving the road to Senzina tothe right, I continue to follow the hollow betweenthe rocks for 12 minutes before I enter theplain of Senzina, Although the hollow is in oneplace crossed by a ridge, vestiges of the canal arestill visible as far as the plain, where it is againXV.] B(EOTIA. 313crossed by a ridge, and then ceases to be traceable,the Vrakho at the same place falling off tothe right, and subsiding into the plain.To the left of the apparent extremity of thecanal are the foundations of a long quadrangularbuilding of large squared stones, and beyond it,on the opposite side of a small torrent, a heightonly three minutes distant from the entrance intothe plain, and occupying a large space in it.This height is situated midway between the lakeand the foot of Mount Palea, from which it isseparated by another torrent. On its summit arethe remains of a quadrangular inclosure, consistingof walls flanked by towers and constructed ofrough masonry and small stones ; but among thefoundations of which are some large hewn massesin the Hellenic style, showing that the ruins whichare now called the Paleokastro occupy a Hellenicsite. It was probably Hyle, for Homer placesHyle near the lake Cephissis^ and Strabo de->scribes the Hylice as a lake in the Thebes, whichwas small compared with the Cephissis, and whichwas supplied from the latter by a subterraneouscommunication ^. In adding that it was situatedbetween Thebes and Anthedon, he was not so*Opeo'/3cov aloXo/ilTpriv"Oc ^' ev "YXp vaitoKt^ f^y^ nXovroio /le/iifX^CyAlfiyji KeK\ifiiyO£ Ki/^co'o'/^i* iron ^i ol aXKoi"Savoy Bocwrol, fiaXa iciova Bilfioy t\ovr€t.II. E. V. 707.'H fiiy (Kiifurirli:) ttrri fu viroy6fuay nXripovfiiyrif Kiifiiytiy<!iXi| Kol ohK (y r^ 9i7j3ai&* if fieralv Orifice ical *AyOfiB6yoc,ii CYXur^) fiucpa, iiceiOcv h* —Strabo, p. 408.314 BCEOTI A . [chap.correct, and seems to have confounded this lakewith the Paralimni. Hyle appears from Homerto have been renowned for its manufacture ofthose Boeotian shields, which became the commonesttype of the coins of this province, for thecelebrated sevenfold shield of Ajax was made byTichius of Hyle \Below the hill of Hyle the plain suddenly changesits level, all to the northward bordering that sideof the lake, being very little above the water,while that at the western end towards S^nzina ismuch higher* . Hyle stands in a line between theeastern extremity of Mount Faga and the pass ofPalea leading to* Kokkino, in a line betweenKardhitza and Thebes, and in a line also drawnfrom Haliarttis through the long diameter of theParalimni, or lake of MoHtzi, and the pass leadingto Anthedon. I mention these interlineations, becausethere is no kind of geographical observationso convenient or infallible.It takes fourteen minutes to ride from the Palesto Senzina, which is a small village on a rockyhill connected with Mount Dictum : some higherridges of the same mountain overhang the westernextremity of the lake, where at less than a mileto the southward of Senzina is the emissory of thesubterraneous stream from the lake Cephissis. TheTac ^ kyyvdtv {XOc ^iputv ffdKOe ijirrt irvpyoy,XaXxtov iTrrafidiioy, 6 ol Tv^loc KafjLe T€vj((upf^KvroTOfnay 6j^ pierrot, "YXp tyi oiKla yaday."Oc 01 iirolffaey traKof aldXoy kirrafiotioyTavpufy ^arpf^coiv, viri 8* oyZoov ^Xavt yoKKoy,II. H. V. 219.XV.] B<EOTlA^. 315direct distance from the katavothra is about twomiles, occupied entirely by a rocky ridge, advancingnorthward from the summit of Mount Phidamjand throwing out a branch to the south-east, whichfor some distance beyond the. emissory continuesto border the lake and then becomes a low ridge,separating it from the inundation of Pumari, inthe Teneric plain. Further on, towards Thebes,the shore again becomes steep and rocky. Thelake is named Livadhi, or lake of Senzina. Itabounds with fish, is now covered with wild ducks,and appears to be deep, as might be presumedfrom the boldness of the greater part of its shores.Its depth, abruptness of margin, and inferiorityto the Cephissic basin, indicated by the subterraneousriver flowing into it from the Hcdiar-tian marsh, may serve to explain the intentionof the ancient canal in the plain of AcrcBphium.Such a canal might obviously have been usefulin draining the marshes near Aersephium andHaliartus, with very little risk of injury to thelands .bordering on the HyJice^ the shore of thislake being exposed to inundation only in thelower part of the plain to the eastward of Senzina,where it might be protected by means of an embankmentof no great extent. Nature, indeed, seems tohave shown the expediency of making this deepand rocky basin a recipient of superfluous waters, bydirecting into it a stream through Mount Phicium,and the construction of the ground between thelake Hylice and the shore of the Cephissis nearAcrsephium, gives great facility to the undertaking.It is to such peculiarities in the geolc^cal316 Boeotia. [chap.construction of this country, that the creation anddevelopment of Greek ingenuity may, in greatmeasure, be attributed. As there are few morepowerful stimulants to national industry, and to theexertion which leads to wealth and power, thanlands subject to inundation, such lands in generalbeing, when relieved from that inconvenience, themost fertile and productive of any, so there is nocountry more abounding in these motives to diligenceand invention than Greece. From its intersectingmountains, incased valleys, and marshylevels, from the peculiarities of its maritime formation,and the wonderful extent of its sea-coast,ultimately proceeded all the features of the nationalcharacter, and the effect of which has been torender the study of their history, arts, and literature,curious and instructive beyond that of allother nations. Even now the same causes seemto operate in rendering the Greeks, degraded asthey are, industrious beyond any other peopleliving in the same southern latitude.If the canal of Acrsephium was intended for thepurpose of draining the Cephissis into the Hylice,it may have formed a part of the works of Crates,undertaken by order of Alexander the Great ; andas there is reason to doubt whether it was everfinished, this would agree with the fact, that Crateswas obliged to desist from his operations in consequenceof the intestine quarrels of the Boeotian.When the Thebans were restored to their city andrecovered their authority, they might not be verywilling to promote a work which would benefit thepeople of Acreephium at the expense of their ownXV.] Boeotia. 317dependent district of Hyle, however slightly itmight injure the latter , and notwithstanding thatmany of the Thebans had been indebted to thehospitality of Acreephium, after the destruction ofThebes by Alexander*. Soon afterwards the wars,of which Greece became the field and victim, withthe generally increasing poverty of the country,were causes sufficient to prevent the undertakingfrom ever being renewed.At 3 p. M. quitting Senzina for Thebes, we descendinto the lower plain on the northern side ofthe lake, and at 3.11, leaving a tower standing ona rocky promontory in the lake, half a mile on theright, cross the lowest part of the plain, where awinter rema from Mount Palea inundates all thelevel ground as it meets the water of the lake,which is now gradually rising : at 3.25, at the endof the plain, we mount a rocky height, and at 3.40descend into a little hollow on the side of a smallbay, where on the opposite shore there is an openingin the rocky engagement of the lake, exactly inaline with Thebes. This opening is called therema of the Kanavri*, because through it the smallriver called Kan&vri, or Kanavari, which rises nearErimokastro, and which I crossed in approachingThebes from Livadhia, here enters the lake. Wenow pass over another rocky height, the continuationof that which we passed on the road to Kokkino, onthe evening of the 24th, and descend upon anotherbay of the lake, from whence there is a passage ofonly a quarter of an hour over a ridge on the left,Pausan. Boeot. c. 23. * to ptvfjia row Kayafipiov.318 Boeotia. [chap.into the plain at the head of the lake Par&Knini.At 3.57, having arrived at the end bf the secondbay, we find the water at the foot of the rocks sodeep, that we are obliged to return : from the headof this bay the ground rises gradually, and I observeancient walls stretching across the valley, andalong the slope of the hill to the right At 4.4 weascend from the head of the bay, and at 4. 1 3 descenda little, with the village of Moritzi^- directlybefore us. The superiority of the level of the plainof Moritzi above the lake Livadhi, is here veryapparent.We now turn to the right, and at 4.22 arriveupon the extreme bay of the Livadhi, where a smallrema, coming from the direction of Moiitzi, flowsinto it. We then ascend ten minutes, and arrivein the plain of Moritzi, which, although it is notseparated from that of - Thebes by any markedridge, is distinguishable from it by its superiorlevel, and is intersected with low rocky heights orcultivated inequalities of ground, whereas the plainof Thebes is a dead flat. The soil of both seemsequally good. Our road continues along the footof the stony heights which border the lake ,passes some Hellenic foundations at 4.48,and at 4.50 enters the plain of Thebes, after adescent of several minutes. The road from Moritzito Thebes, which we here join, enters the plain byan opening in the same bank, which we descended.This opening has an artificial appearance, and as^ Properly perhaps Mavp/jccoci which was a common nameamong the lower Greeks.XV.] Boeotia. 319the superfluous waters of the plain of Thebes flowthough it occasionally after heavy rains, it wouldseem to have been a work of the ancient Thebans,to drain their plain into the Livadhi, probably bymeans of the torrent of Moiitzi.At 5 we arrive in a line with the south-easternextremity of the hills which border that lake, wherethey approach nearest to Thebes, and having crossedthe plain, pass a little below the town through a fewruinous plantations of mulberries and figs, whichare irrigated in summer, as well as some cottongrounds near them, by the superfluous waters ofthe Theban sources, and at 5.46 we arrive at theeastern tower of the castle. Though there hasbeen no great quantity of rain, the plain of Thebesis already well moistened. The soil is a light richmould, like that of the Thessalian plains, and itoften happens here, as in Thessaly, that the harvestis abundant when there is a dearth from thewant of rain in other parts of Greece. The angleof the plain at the foot of Mount Phidumy whichis separated only by a low rocky ridge from the lakeHylice^ is now inundated to a great extent, as itusually is in the winter. In summer it producesgood crops of kalamb6kki. Pausanias leaves nodoubt of its being the extremity of the Tenericplain, having clearly described that plain as situatednear the mountain of the Sphinx, and to theright of the temple of the Cabeiri, which stood at adistance of fifty stades from Thespiae, and aboutforty from Thebes ^ Strabo adds, that the Teneric^ Pausan. Boeot. c. 25, 26.320 B(EOTIA. [chap.plain was not far from Onchestus ^ ; whence heseems to have included under the denomination ofTemerity the plain at the foot of Mount Faga, onthe south, where there is now an inundation aswell as on the eastern side of that mountain. Buthis words are not to be taken rigorously, for his observationthat Mount Ptoum rose above the Tenericplain, is obviously that of a person not well acquaintedwith the places : Phicium, or the mountainof the Sphinx, being totally separated fromMount Ptoum by the plains of Hyle and .In the Teneric plain stood a large templeof Hercules, surnamed Hippolytus, because hebound the chariot-horses of the Orchomenii, whenthey had advanced into this plain in their warwith the Thebans*.I am not aware that there is any allusionto the lake Parallmni in history. Possibly thename is ancient. It is a shallow stagnunij moreresembling the inundations of the Teneric plainthan the deep encased basin of the Livadhi, and insummer it is sometimes reduced to small dimensions.The ancient city, of which there arevestiges at its southern extremity, would seemfrom Strabo to have been either Schcenus, orPeteon, for he places both these towns nearthe road from Thebes to Anthedon, which isexactly the situation of those ruins. In regardto Peteon, however, he contradicts himself, byattributing it at the same time to the Haliar-Strabo, p. 418. ' Pausan. Boeot. c. 26.XV.] Boeotia. 321tia ' ; and it may be observed, in favour of Shoesthat the ruins in question are very nearly atthe distance of fifty stades from Thebes, stated bythe geographer. On the other hand, he gives usto understand that there was a river flowing throughthe district of Schoenus, and that both the riverand the district still preserved that names. Ni-canteralso attests the existence of a river Shoes•, whereas there is no river near the Paralimni.One cannot but suspect, therefore, thatthe Kanavari, which is in fact the only runningstream in this part of Boeotia, except the two rivuletsof Thebes, was the ancient Schoenus, and thatthe town of that name stood on its bank, — notwithstandingthe objections that no part of this river isso far as fifty stades from Thebes, or in the routefrom Thebes to Anthedon, and that Nicandermakes his river Schoenus flow to the lake Copais.The last objection, however, is the less important,as the same poet assigns a similar termination tothe Cnopus, which, according to his scholiast, wasthe same as the Ismenus ; so that it is very possiblethat in both instances he confounded theCopais with one of the other lakes. As to theruins on the shore of the Paralimni, they are per-llerewy ^' harl Kktfiri r^c Qri/iaiKfft Kara ri^v o^ov r^v earlQriPaiioc iyyvc r^c «»■' 'Ay 'AyBrfidroc, hiiy^pvaa Orj^wvdri^oya o^v •• Say TrtyriiKovra araiiovQ' fit. Heartily ^e rijc 'AXiap- ^€ koI worafiog ^i* awr^c S^oi-Wac Kai MtBeifv jcal *ClKa\ia. vows, — Strabo, p. 408.Strabo, p. 410. ' Nicand. Theriac. v. 887.VOL. II. Y322 Boeotia. [chap. XV.haps those of Leon, the name being well suitedto a position on the borders of such a lake, andthe arrangement of the towns in the Cataloguegiving some reason for presuming that Leon wasnot far from Hyle *.Vide supra, p. 305, note 9.CHAPTER XVI.BCBOTIA.From Thebes to Kokhla — PotnuB — River Asiyptu-^ Plataea —Fountain YergutUni — Kriakfiki — HysUe — Bubuka — Katzula,Erjfthra — Scohu — Eteontu — Fountain Gargaphia — PlatinaMonument of jlfarclonitif— Ancient roads from Platte toAthens and Megara — Fountain of Diana and rock of ActionSphragidium — On the Battle of Plataea — Heron ofAndro-crates — Argiopius — The Island — Siege of Platsea in the PeloponnesianWar — Re-establishment of the walls under Cassandra— Hertxwn^ old and new — Description of Platsea by Pausanias— Nate of Eleuthera.Dec. 29. — From Thebes to Plasma. — Kokhla, asmall village, situated near the ruins of Plataea, tothe south-west, is about eight miles from Khiva, bythe road, but the nearest walls of the two ancientcities were not more than six miles and a half apart,and the direct distance was little more than fivegeographical miles. At half an hour from Khivathe road to Livadhostra branches off to the right ;a little beyond this place stood PotnicBy if we mayrely upon the imperfect text of Pausanias, fromwhich it appears that Poise occurred on the roadfrom Thebes to Plataea, at a distance of ten stadesfrom the gate Electra in proceeding towards they2324 Boeotia. [chap.Asopus '. He seems to add that it stood upon a river,which there is some difficulty in understanding, asthe Asopus is the only brook between Platteaa andThebes, and could not have been the river intended,as its distance was more than twice ten stades fromThebes. The descent from the Thehan ridge to theAsopus is almost imperceptible, as far as a smallbranch of that river which flows from the Thespisalong a valley between the heights of Parapunghi 'to the southward, and those of Khalki and Balitza ',which last village we leave a mile on the right.The valley below it, which in summer when I lastsaw it was a dry and cultivated plain, withouteven a brook in it, is now an extensive inundation.Having passed between Platina and Pyrgo, eachsituated on a height at half a mile from the road,we cross, in twenty-seven minutes from the Thespianbranch of the^^o/m^, the eastern branch of the Hereinthree minutes more a smaller branch of the sameriver, which, like the former, is dry, and in anotherminute the third or principal branch of the O'eroCywhich originates in the fountain called Vergutiani,and now contains water, but without any current :six minutes beyond it, occurs a fourth branch, smalland without water, and which, rising between theVerguti&ni and Kokhla, follows a hollow just belowthe eastern walls of Platteaa. The part of theAia/3e/3i|ic(iri Be 4^i| rov irora/iy ry irofm (qu. iraftafi'*AfftaTrby coi r^c ircJXcwc Seu ' fiiovri) rcLc UoryMaQ Oeag oko-fidXitrra di^eerrriKOTi ara^lovQ, fidiovtriy, — Pausan. Boeot. c. 8.noTytiiv iffTty epeiirca Kol iy olr- * Uopairowyyc.rock aXffoc ^^ffirirpoc ical K6pifg. ' XaXirl, MiraXirfa, orra Be dyUkfiara iy (qu. kirk) rf n<ltArCa.XVI.] Boeotia. 325plain intersected by these water-courses is a fertilelevel, now for the most part covered with com justabove ground. It is not so marshy as the plain ofThebes.Sis minutes beyond the brook last mentioned,are the north-western walls of PUUcbcl. The masonryin general, both of the Acropolis and of thetown, has the appearance of not being so old as thetime of the battle. The greater part is of the fourthorder, but mixed with portions of a less regularkind, and with some pieces of polygonal masonry.The Acropolis, if an interior inclosure can be socalled, which is not on the highest part of the site,is constructed in part of stones which have evidentlybeen taken from earlier buildings. Thetowers of this citadel are so formed as to presentflanks to the inner as well as to the outer faceof the intermediate walls, whereas the town wallshave towers like those of the Turks, open to the interior.Above the southern wall of the city arefoundations of a third inclosure, which is evidentlymore ancient than the rest, and is probably theonly part as old as the Persian war, when it mayhave been the Acropolis of the Plataea of that age.It surrounds a rocky height, and terminates to thesouth in an acute angle, which is only separatedby a level of a few yards from the foot of the greatrocky slope of CitluBron. This inclosure is in asituation higher than any other part of the ancientsite, and higher than the village of Kokhla, fromwhich it is five hundred yards distant to the east.Its walls are traceable on the eastern side alongVOL. n. Y 3 -t-326 Boeotia. [chap*the torrent which I before called the fourth branchof the O'eroe, nearly as far as the south-easternangle of the main inclosure of the city. In achurch within this upper inclosure are some fragmentsof an inscribed marble.From the upper angle of the ruins I ride intwenty-three minutes, preceded by a man on foot,over the rocky slope of CitfuBron to the fountainVergutiani, and from thence ascend in five minutesto a projecting rock now serving as a shelter forcattle, in the middle of a natural theatre of rocksat the head of a verdant slope above the fountain.Beyond it the mountain rises steep and rugged toone of the summits. Having descended from thefountain into the road which leads from Kokhlaeastward to the villages along the mountain side, Icross the branch of the O'eroe^ which, coming fromThebes, I called the first, and eight minutes farthera hollow, the waters of which form a branchof the Aaopus ; its upper extremity is very nearthe sources of the easternmost branch of the O'eroe.Here, therefore, is exactly the partition of thewaters flowing on one side to the sea of EuhcBa^ onthe other to the Corinthian Gulf.The principal sources of the Asopus are at a spotjust under the village of Kriakuki, where are twotrees, a well, and several springs. Though thesesources are plentiful and . permanent, there is nowater now flowing in the bed of the river belowthem. Having proceeded from hence eastward,and passed several small torrents flowing to thesame branch of the AsopuSy which may be calledXvi.] Boeotia. 327the main stream, I cross, at 4.48, the road fromThebes to Megara by Petrogheraki. The Asopusjwhich from Kriakuki to this place had a coursenearly parallel to my route, now turns towards theplain, still continuing to receive some torrents fromthe mountain. A little beyond the great road Iobserve, on the foot of the mountain, a great quam -city of loose stones in the fields, together with sometraces of ancient walls, and the mouth of a well orcistern, of Hellenic construction, now filled up.The situation agreto exactly with that of HysuBjwhere, in the time of Pausanias, there remainedan unfinished temple of Apollo and a sacredwell ^ At 5 we pass a fountain at the foot ofC^h^BraUj surrounded with lai blocks like thatof Vergutiani. At 5.3 cross a hollow descendingto the AsapuSj and at 5.11 arrive at Bubuka',situated under the steep slope of the mountain,on the western side of a ravine in which anothertorrent descends to unite its waters with the rivuletof Kriakuki, just above the union of the latterwith the Asopus.Dec. 30. — On the summit above Bub^a arethe ruins of a village named Alezopulo, where asmall church still remains; after visiting thisplace I cross the ravine to Katzula, which, likeBubuka and many other small villages in the Parasopha, are Ziam^ts or Tiers ', more commonly in^ Pausan. Boeot. c. 2. prov, which was the name of theMirov/iirovica. same kind of feudal tenureThe Turks have borrowed under the Byzantine Greeks,this word from the Greek rifia-328 Boeotia. [chap.Greece called Spahillks, belonging to Turks of'Egripo, and consist, in general, of a few hutswhich form a quadrangle. They are usuallyestimated by the number of zevgaria of oxenwhich they employ; four oxen being reckonedto a zevgari. Bubuka and Katzula have eachten houses, with a pyrgo for the Spahi ; few of themare so lai^e, and some of them have only three orfour houses.At Katzula observing a circular inclosure of loosestones, having two nicely squared ancient blockswithin it, one in the centre of the circle, the othernear the circumference, and enquiring the use of thisstructure I find that it is called a church, and thatthe stone near the circumference is the altar. It iscommon among the Greeks when they are unableto rebuild or repair their ruined churches, to preservethe vestiges of them as sacred relics, occasionallyto perform mass in them, or at least to repeata prayer and to bum incense on the altar, whichi» often nothing more than a wrought block of stonefrom some ancient ruin, but I have never beforeseen such a mere symbol of a church as this, thediameter of the circle being only eight feet.The part of CitJweron above Katzdla on the nightis not very high, and there is verdure among therocks, where goats and sheep are fed. Thesituation is called Gdvnitza, and upon it arethe remains of a ruined village named Pale Gh^-liss '.KavKcr^a or FicavFcrfa, ViXiatruXVI.] Boeotia. 329To the eastward of Katzula on the foot of the rocks,are some foundations of Hellenic walls, together witha church containing a Doric column and its capital.These remains are sufficient to mark the site ofErythne, its position as well as that of Hysiee,having been exactly described by Herodotus,Thucydides, Euripides, Strabo and Pausanias \That the eastern of the two positions was Very*three and the western Hysise, might be presumedfrom Pausanias, who in entering Boeotia fromAttica, states that they were both in the Platesupon Mount Cithseron, and names Hysise thefirst'. But Herodotus leaves no doubt on thisquestion, by first informing us that the camp ofMardonius extended along the Asopus from theErythema beyond Hysiae as far as the land ofPlatsea, and then that the Greeks who had beenencamped at Erythrse opposite to Mardonius,moved by Hysiae into the Plates*. Erythreeappears to have attained to great populationin very early times, for Erythrse in Ionia wassaid to have been its colony*. With the increaseof Athens and Thebes, it was probablyreduced, like all the surrounding places, to comparativeinsignificance. Ery three was noted amongthe Athenians for its vineyards, to which theHerodot. 1. 5, c. 74. — ^1. 6, ' Paasan. Boeot. c. 2.c. 108. — ^1. 9, c. 15, 25. Thu • Herodot. 1. 9, c. 15, 25.cyd. 1. 3, c. 24. Eorip. Bacch. * Strabo, p. 404.V. 478. Strabo, p. 404. Pansan.Boeot. c. 2.332 Boeotia, [chap.have seen, is confined by Pausanias, at least withreference to ErythraB. And hence we may infer,the Asopas in the time of the latter author havingbeen the boundary between the Platseis and The*sea \ that Eteonus was to the right of that river.As Ery three and Hysise occupied the Parasopiawestward of Scolus, Eteonus probably stood betweenScolus and the frontier of the Tanagrice,which latter district is naturally separated fromthe Parasopia by the approach of the Ciceronianrange to that of Soro, forming a rocky gorgewhich begins about two miles beyond Tarimari,and through which the Asopas finds its way intothe plain of Tanagra. The epithet iroXvjcviifioc appliedto Eteonus' by Homer, would be well adaptedto a place situated near such a defile. The Asopusin the ravine of Eteonus winds to the left, andthen to the right, and at the end of two milesemerges in the plain of Tanagra after crossingwhich it traverses another rocky strait in thebranches of Mount PameSy and enters the maritimeplain of Oropus.Having returned to Bubuka I proceed to Platanini,passing over ploughed heights intersected by threebranches of the Asopus, all which are nearly equalin size. The last has its origin in a fountainwhich I examined on my former visit, and foundeven in that dry season as well supplied with wateras the Vergutiani. It is incased, like that source,^AwoKpivei ^£ Kal %'vv tri 6 ^AouiKOQ, — Pausan. Bceot.uiro rfiQ Of^jSaiitfv ri^v IlXarau^a c. 4.• 'S^oivov re, ^kwXoy re, voXvKi'vifiov r *£reMvov.II. ft. V. 497.— V. et Estate. ibid.XVI.] Boeotia. 333in an artificial basin covered with squared stonesof ancient fabric. This I take to be the Gargaphiaof Herodotus. In the wall of a ruined tower situatedbelow the supposed site of Hysise, I remarkedseveral stones which have been employed in ancientbuildings, and the fields around are spread withfragments of Hellenic pottery.Just below Platina to the south, are the sourcesof a water-course, which after making a circuit atthe foot of the hill of Platanini follows the road fromThebes to Kokhla for some distance, and then joinsthe Thespian branch of the Asopus, just above abridge in the road. From thence I cross thebranches of the O'eroe to Vergutiani, and returnby a lower route than that of yesterday to the samepoint at the southern angle of Plants from whenceI set out yesterday on this little tour, the object ofwhich has been to visit some parts of the Platceis^not properly examined on my former journey, toascertain the sites of Hysise and Erythrse, to tracethe courses of the several branches of the Asopusand Oeroe, and to notice the principal springs ofthe Platffiis with a view of identifying the Garga-phil. If this be the fountain just indicated aboutmidway between Kriakuki and Platanini, it is probablethat Vergutiani is the fountain of Diana,where Actseon was said to have seen the Goddessbathing, and that the rock which I have describedabove the fountain, was that on which Actaeon wasreported to have been in the habit of reposing whenfatigued with the chace. Pausanias, after returningfrom Hysise into the road leading from Eleutheroeto Plataea, describes the monument of Mardonius334 Scotia. [chap.as being on the right hand side of that road, andimmediately afterwards states that there was a roadfrom Megara to Platsea, on the right of which werethe fountain of Diana and the rock of Actaeon \Thus it is evident that the road from Plates toMegara was different from that leading from Plataeato Eleutherse ; and we find the same distinction inXenophon, who states that Cleombrotus, marchingfrom the Peloponnesus into Boeotia, avoided thePass of Eleutherse, which was in possession of anAthenian force under Chabrias, and mounted by theroad which led to Plataea ^ If then the road fromEleutherce descended by the modem Derwent leadingfrom the Isthmus to Thebes, and about Kriakukiturned towards Plataea as seems to be its naturalcourse, that from Megara probably descended theface of the mountain obliquely at a considerableelevation, where it would pass very near the fountainVei^tiani.Immediately opposite to the southern angle ofthe walls of Plataea on the steep rocky rise of themountain, which is here separated only by a narrowlevel from the ancient site, is a cavern 30 feetin length, 10 wide, and 4 high. Before it thereis a little verdant level, surrounded and overhungby rugged rocks* The beauty of the spotwould tempt one to believe it to have been thecavern sacred to the Nymphs of Cithseron,called the Sphragitides, which once contained an^ Pausan. Boeot. c. 2. (^/ijSporoc dyifiturs Kara ri^y icKai r^v fiey it 'BXcvdcpwy IlXaracac portray. — ^Xenoph«oioy Xa/3ptac cx^^ 'AOiyKaiwv Hellen. 1. 5, c. 4.XVI.] Boeotia. 335oracle of the Nymphs, and was noted for Nympholepsy.But the testimony of Plutarch and Pausaniasis positive in placing that cavern on thenorth-western side of one of the summits, and ata distance of only 15 stades below it*, consequentlymuch higher in the mountain, and having adifferent aspect. On the same summit there wasan altar for the celebration of the lesser Dsedala,which was a festival instituted by all the peopleof Boeotia in commemoration of their reconciliationand alliance with Platsea, after the restorationof Thebes and Plataea, by Cassander. As thereare two summits of Cithseron equally conspicuous,a circumstance explaining the words fuf jcopv^y,in Plutarch, it is not easy to determine on whichwe ought to seek for the altar or the cavern,though probability seems to incline towards thatwhich is nearest to Plataea.In order to justify the ancient names in theplan of the Platseis, which accompanies the presentvolume, and the positions which are thereassigned to the contending forces in the greatmilitary operations which terminated the Persianwar, little more will be necessary than to describesuccinctly the events immediately preceding theTO tGv ^payiridfMfy yvfi' vwep Bi r^c KopwpijCf kif f Toyi^y dvrpop ev fu Kopv<^^ rov fioifiov woiovvrtu^ leivrt irov /jlA'Ktdatp&y6c koriy cic Iwrim^ Xiora Koi Hxa vnoKara^yrtilKlov Ocpivac rerpafJLfUvoyf kv arailovc, yvft^y km\y dyrpoyf K(u iiavTtiov ^v vp6r€poyf Hi KiOaiptayiS^y ^paylBioy fuyfaffif Koi KoXKol Korel^oyro r&y 6yofial^6fi€yoy, — Pausan. Bceot."iwi^ttplwy ovc Nvft^XZ/xrovc c. 3.wpo^yoptvov, — Plutarch, inArtistic.336 Boeotia. [chap.battle, and the circumstances of the action itself,both extracted almost entirely from the contemporaryhistorian ^Xerxes had not been many days in possessionof Athens, the chief object of his armament, whenhe was an eye-witness of the utter defeat anddispersion of his fleet, and found himself underthe necessity of returning immediately to Persia.He was advised at the same time to leave threehundred thousand men in Greece ; with these Mardoniusundertook to complete the conquest of thecountry ; but as the approaching season was unfavourableto military operations, (the battle of Salamishaving been fought in October,) it was resolvedthat Mardonius should pass the winter in Thessalyand Macedonia, which were much more capable ofsupplying the wants of an army than the provinceswithin Mount (Eta. While Xerxes was in Thessalyon his retreat, Mardonius made choice of the troopswho were to remain with him. They consisted of allthe immortals, except their commander Hydarnes,who refused to be separated from the king, of thePersian thoracepheri, or cuirassiers, and of all theModes, Sacre, Bactria, and Indians, both horse andfoot, with a selection from the other allies. Sixtythousand of these men, under Artabazus, servedas a body guard to Xerxes in his march to theHellespont, where he arrived with scarcely anyother forces, so great had been the numbers left sickin Thessaly, Macedonia, and Pseonia, or who hadperished on the way from hunger, plague, andHerodot. 1. 8, c. 113. 126, et scq. ; 1. 9, c. 1, et seq.XVI.] Boeotia.* 337dysentery. Artabazus on his return employed theremainder of the winter in reducing the revoltedcities of Fallen, and was detained no less thanthree months in the siege of Potidsea, where helost a considerable portion of his troops by theeffects of a sudden inundation of the sea.Mardonius did not advance from Thessaly untilhe had consulted some of the oracles of Greece,and until he had learnt the event of an embassyto Athens, the object of which was to inducethe Athenians to make a separate peace. Theoracular replies he considered favourable; andthose of Thessaly and Boeotia were probably intendedto be so by the priests, but Alexander,king of Macedonia, who was charged with hismessage to the Athenians, could make no impressionupon a people whose city and villages werein ruins, — whose families, having taken refuge inthe neighbouring Peloponnesian cities, became asurety in their hands for the fidelity of Athens tothe general cause, and whose government in Salamiswas beyond the reach of the Persians. Sopowerful were these motives, and so unbroken thepublic spirit of the Athenians, that when he againtook possession of Athens, he found the people asdetermined as ever to resist his menaces and hisoffers. Deprived of the Persian fleet, he could notlong remain in such an exhausted country; as soonas he was informed therefore by the Argives that thePeloponnesian were moving towards the Isthmus,he completed the destruction of Athens and returnedinto Boeotia, which afforded greater means of subsistence,a country better suited to the operations ofVOL. II. z338 boeotia. [chap.his cavalry, and where he was surrounded by afriendly or submissive people. The Boeotian had endeavouredto dissuade him from marching to Athensand to assure him, that by bribing some of theleading men in the several cities, he might createa division among the Greeks, and at length overcomeall those who should resist him. But Mardonius,according to the historian, was determinedto gratify his vanity by a second capture of thatcity, although now empty and in ruins, and tohave the pleasure of communicating the event toXerxes at Sardes by fire-signals at night on theintermediate islands of the ^gaean \If the Persian war produced some of the finestexamples of human virtue which history affords,there is no period in which the Greeks have atthe same time more strongly exhibited their characteristicselfishness, jealousy, and the want ofgenera] patriotism. It was chiefly the fear of analliance between the Persians and Athenians, andof an attack upon the Laconic shores by theirunited fleet, that induced the Lacedaemonians tofight in company with the Athenians at Salamis.The same apprehensions made them diligent inendeavouring to counteract the efforts of Alexander,to produce a separate peace between thePersians and Athenians ; but no sooner had theiranxiety upon this head been relieved, than, regardlessof the entreaties of the Athenians, whoThe following stations Zia, Sera, M^kono, Nikana,would be sufficient for this Same, Mount Malkin andpurpose : — Mount Hymeilui^ Mount 7W/ti#.XVI.J Boeotia. 339proposed that the Lacedaemonian army shouldunite with theirs, and fight the enen^y in theThriasian plain, at their entrance into Attica, theydelayed until that province was once more overrunand despoiled, and were not at length prevailedupon to march until after some evasionsand delays. Herodotus ascribes this conduct tothe completion of the wall across the Isthmus,which was begun a little after the battle of Thermopylae,but was not yet finished when Alexanderarrived at Athens on his embassy ; nor were theLacedaemonians, according to die same historian,at last moved to activity, but by the convictionthat even the fortified Isthmus would little availthem, if the Athenians should be under the necessityof accepting the Persian proposals.Mardonius, on his march from Athens towardsBoeotia, received intelligence that 1000 Lacedaemonianhad arrived in the Megaris, upon which hemade a retrograde movement to intercept them, andhis cavalry overspread the Megaris ^ ; but as .soonas he heard that the rest of the Peloponnesianarmy had arrived at the Isthmus, he continued hisroute into Boeotia by Deceleia and Sphendaleae toTanagra. Here he passed a night: then took thedirection of Scolus, entered the Theban territory,^ This was the most western as fish: as Delphi in the precedingin Europe, says Hero ingyear; — an instance of thetotus, which the Persian army inaccuracy of the ancient au-reached(^raordrw rec Ei'P^nnic thorn, as to bearings and aTO wpoc h^iov ^voyroQf 1. 9, proof of their defective geog.14.) though they had been graphic.z2Boeotia.[chap.and encamped along the left bank of the Asopus,his line extending from over-against Ery three \ asfar as the Platseis. In the midst of it he caused'to be erected a wooden fortification, flanked withtowers, and inclosing a square of eight stades;and in providing this place of refuge in case ofdisaster, was under the necessity of injuring thelands of the Thebans, although they were hisfriends *. The Grecian allies by whom Mardoniuswas here joined, are vaguely computed by Herodotusat 50,000. In the motives of the alliance ofsome of them we have again some curious examplesof the power of that neighbourly jealousy andhostility which are a part of the Greek character.Platsea and Thespiee were inimical to Thebes, andtherefore allied with Athens ; it was chiefly froma hatred to Athens that Thebes became the mostzealous supporter of the Persian cause against thecommon interests of Greece ; and the opposition ofSparta to the Persians made Argos favourable tothem, though the situation of the latter was suchas rendered it incapable of affording the Persiansmuch assistance. Of all the auxiliaries, the Phocisjoined Mardonius with the greatest unwillingness; the others had accompanied him to Athens,wapfiKt ht avTOV to trrpa-'Totter dpioLfXEVoy itiro *£pv-Spiuty irapa *XtrtAc' Karireiye Be«C Ttly nXaratf^a yfiv irapa roy'AcoMTOv varafiov reTay/jiyoy,c. 15.Herodotus does not here say,** over-against," but he afterwardstells us that the Greeksat Erythrse, on the roots ofCithseron, were drawn up oppositeto (arrtrafftroyTo) thePersians on the Asopus (eir2r^ ^AtruTf), — c. 19.fraiVfp ^rihCSyrwy. — c. 15.XVI.] Boeotia. 341but it was not until he returned to Thebes that thePhocis joined him. Out of hatred to this peoplethe Thessalians had prevailed upon Xerxes in thepreceding year to destroy all the accessible partsof Phocis, and had obliged the Phocis to retireto the heights of Mount Parnassus, from whencethey assisted the Greek confederates by excursionsagainst the Persians and their allies ; but nowtheir country being at the mercy of the enemy,and surrounded by medicine Greeks, they sent1000 men to the Persian camp, who, having beenaccused, as it would appear, by the Thessalians,either of cowardice or treachery, were not receiveduntil they had undergone the proof of standingan attack from the Persian cavalry, which seemsfrom Herodotus to have been something more thanamere feint.The Lacedaemonians were joined at the Isthmusby the other Peloponnesian, and the sacrificeshaving been found auspicious, the army advancedto Eleusis. Here the appearances of the victimshaving again been favourable, they moved forwardtogether with the Athenians, under thecommand of Aristides, who had joined themfrom Salamis, and proceeded to Erythrse, wherethe position of the combined forces stretched alongthe roots of Mount Cithaeron, opposite to the campof the Barbarians, on the Asopus. Mardoniusperceiving that the Greeks did not descend intothe plain, sent against them all his cavalry underthe command of Masistius, who was esteemed thesecond man in the Persian army. The Megarenses,342 Boeotia. [chap.-who were in the most exposed part of the Greekline, finding themselves unequal to withstand theattack, were obliged to call for succour, when theonly volunteers to relieve them were a body of300 select Athenians, under Olympiodorus, accompaniedby a body of archers. The latter, bywounding the horse of M asiatics, caused the riderto fell, when he was slain by the Athenians. Hisfollowers endeavoured to recover the body, but allthe Greek infantry moving to the assistance ofOlympiodorus, the enemy retreated. The bodyof Masistius carried through the camp of theGreeks animated them with the best hopes, whileall Boeotia re-echoed to the sound of the enemy'slamentations, who in token of mourning cut offtheir beards, and the manes of the horses andbeasts of burthen. This was the only importantoccurrence in the first position of the two armies.The Greeks now came to the determination ofdescending into the territory of Plataea, as beingmore convenient for encamping than that of Ery*these, because among other reasons it was bettersupplied with water'. In fact, the Plates beingsituated at the foot of a high mountain, and atthe sources of many rivulets, can never be totallydeficient in water'. The Greeks at Ery three,ra Se &K\a koI eifvBp6rtpo^. both relative and peculiar;. 25. which cannot but often renderBesides this great convent a desirable position for anniece, the position of Plataea encampment,has other obvious advantagesXVI.] Boeotia. 343therefore, taking up their arms, moved along theroots of Mount Cithseron, and passed by Hysiee intothe Platsais, having entered which they drew ^p inorder according to their respective nations \ partlyupon hills of no great height, and partly upon alevel plain, near the fountain Gai^aphia, and thetemenus of one of the archagetae^ or ancient heroesof Plataea, named Androcrates '. As the positionof this heroum is shown by Thucydides to havebeen on the right hand of the road from Plataeato Thebes, about a mile distant from the city,and as a part of the Greek position was in theplain, it is evident that the Oargaphia could nothave been either the fountain Vergutiani, or thatat Kriakuki.By ancient custom and the consent of allGreece, the Lacedaemonian had the post ofhonour on the right, and their king Pausanias thecommand (though not, as it appears by the sequelavery absolute command) of the whole army.After a contest between the Athenians and theTegeatse for the left, the Lacedaemonians awardedto the former that second place of honour ; the took post on the left of the Lacedaemonians,and the other nations occupied the centre. Theentire force was 110,000, in the proportions anddrawn up in the order from right to left stated below ^Kara idyta.^c. 25. * Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 24.hia 6xO*>y Tt 0&X v^pfiKAy * Hoplitae of Sparta 5000 ;Kol ax€?ov x^aplov. — c. 26. Laconia 5000 ; Tea 1500 ;• V. et Plutarch, in Arise. Corinth 5000 ; Potidaea 800 ;Boeotia.[chap.Their position is described by the historian as beingcri r^ 'Acrciiir^, (on the Asopus,) and as it appearsfrom the subsequent part of his narrative, that thePersians followed the movement of the Greeksalong the river, there could only have been a smallspace on either bank between the hostile armies.The fountain Gargaphia was in the part of theline occupied by the Lacedaemonians, or towardsthe right: the other Greeks watered from theAsopus until they were prevented by the Persiancavalry, to whom it appears that the Greeks hadno cavalry whatever to oppose, not even an escortfor the security of their convoys and reinforcementsin crossing Mount Cithseron. Nevertheless,the Persians derived little benefit from this superiority,but showed a supineness and want of enterprizesimilar to that exhibited by the army ofDatis, when it was opposed for ten days to ahandful of Athenians at Marathon. It was notuntil the end of eight days that Mardonius waspersuaded by a Theban to send a body ofhorse to the pass of Mount Cithseron, calledOrchomenus of Arcadia 600;Sicyon 3000 ; Epidaurus 800 ;Frozen 1000 ; Leprous 200 ;Mycenae and Tiryns 400 ;Phlius 1000 ; Heroine 300 ;Eretria and Styris of Euboea600 ; Chalcis of Euboea 400 ;Ambracia 500 ; Leucas andSanatorium 800 ; Paleia ofCephallenia 200 ; regina 500 ;Megara 3000; Plataea 600;Athens 8000. Amount ofHolies 38,700 : light-armedHelots, seven to each Spartan35,000 : other light-armed34,500 : Thespienses 1800.Amount of light-armed 7 1,300.Total of the Greek army110,000.XVI.] Boeotia. 345by the Athenians the Oak-heads \ and by theBoeotian the Three-heads*. Here they intercepteda convoy of 500 beasts of burthen, enteringthe plains, and killed the greater part of bothmen and cattle.On the eleventh day, Mardonius, finding thatthe Greeks were daily increasing in number, resolvedupon attacking them on the following day,regardless of the advice of Artabazus, supportedby that of the Thebans, who recommended him toretire to Thebes, where his provisions, which beganto fail, might be supplied ; and. from whence,protracting the war, he might, by means of thebullion, coin, and plate, which he possessed ingreat quantity, endeavour to gain over the leadingGreeks to his party. The advice appears to havebeen good ; for on the one hand the cavalry ofMardonius gave him the command of supplies, andthe power of intercepting those of the Greeks aswell as the means of distressing them by continualattacks, while, on the other hand, he had everythingto fear from a close contest with an infantrycompared with whom his own were but as light-armed.It was probably in conformity withthese opinions, that the Greek priests on the sideof Mardonius had augured success to him, if heremained on the defensive, while Tisamenus, whoaccompanied the Spartans, probably from a similarview of the interests of his employers, promisedApiMxricf^oXat. irpog yap hvXlrai Idrret yv/i-TpiiQ Kf^Xac. yfJTtQ aywya lirouvyrOf c. 63.HvovXot Bi. eoyreci c. 62.346 Boeotia. [chap.victory to the Greeks, provided they abstainedfrom crossing the Asopus, and awaited the attack.Mardonius, however, declared his determinationto disregard every thing but the laws of the Persians,which enjoined them to engage the enemy,and thenceforth no one dared give utterance to anopinion contrary to that of the man to whomXerxes had delegated his absolute power.In the intervening night, Alexander, king ofMacedonia, secretly visited the camp of theAthenians, and informed the commanders of theintentions of Mardonius, as well as of the approachingfailure of his provisions; upon whichPausanias requested the Athenians to changeplaces with the Lacedsemonians, on the plea thatthe latter were unacquainted with the Persianmode of fighting, whereas the Athenians had successfullyopposed that people at Marathon ; forMardonius had placed the Peruse, as being hisbest troops, opposite to the Lacedaemonian andhad opposed to the Athenians and to the Pla-tensesand Megarenses, who were next to theAthenians on the left, the Macedonians, Thessaloniansand Boeotian. But the Boeotian, havingquickly discovered the change, and reported it toMardonius, he restored the Persas to their positionin the left wing, and sent an insulting messageto the Lacedaemonians, who had returned totheir original post, with a proposal for a battlebetween an equal number of Persians andLacedaemonians. No reply having been given tohis challenge, he ordered an attack upon the GregBoeotia. 347can line by his cavalry, who not only annoyedextremely the hoplitee by their javelins and arrows,but succeeded at length in obtaining possession ofthe fountain Gargaphia, and in rendering it useless; and thus the Greeks, having already beendriven by the enemy's cavalry from the Asopus,found themselves distressed for water. Theybegan also to be in want of other provisions, theirconvoys being blockaded by the enemy in Citherand unable to cross the mountain. The Greekcommanders having been assembled by Pausaniasin the right wing, to consult upon these difficulties,it was resolved, that if the Persians should notcome to action with their infantry that day, (foras yet the cavalry only had attacked,) theGreeks about midnight should retreat into aplain in front of the city of Platsea called theIsland, where two branches of the river Hereafterflowing for some distance, with an interval ofthree stades between them, united, and formed onestream. This place was ten stades distant from Gar-gallia,and from the position of the Greeks on theAsopus. The council also determined that half thearmy should be detached from the Island duringthe same night to Mount Citheeron, to open thepassage for the camp followers ^ who had been sentto the Peloponnesus for provisions. During the remainderof the day, however, the Greeks continuedto suffer so much from the enemy's cavalry, thatwhen the movement took place at night, none butthe Lacedaemonians and Tegeatse on the right, andthe Athenians on the left, continued resolute in theOf oircwi'cc* — c. 50, 51.348 Boeotia. [Clap.intention of marching into the island ; the Greeksof the center, who perhaps with reason suspectedthat they should not long be secure from thehostile cavalry in the island, retreating as far as atemple of Juno, which was twenty stades distantfrom Gargaphia, near the city of Platsea. TheAthenians, desirous of ascertaining whether theLacedaemonians had begun to move, sent a messengerto the right of the camp, who found Pausaniasdetained by an unexpected difficulty. Amongthe lochagus of the Pitanatae, refused todisgrace Sparta, as he termed it, by retreatingbefore the enemy ; and he persisted so obstinatelyin his determination, that day-light found the twowings of the Greek army in the position of thepreceding day, but separated from each other bythe whole interval left by the other Greeks, whowere now at a distance of two or three miles inthe rear. Pausanias, convinced that the enemywould soon take advantage of this state of things,and judging that Amompharetus would not longremain after his departure, retired with the mainbody of the Lacedaemonians and the Tegeatse alongthe heights and the base of Mount Cithaeron',thereby avoiding the enemy's cavalry ; while theAthenians proceeded through the plain, in thedirection of Plataea. At the end of ten stades Pausaniashalted on the bank of the Moles, at aplace called Argiopius, where stood a temple ofCeres Eleusinia, and was joined there by Amongc. 56.XVI.] Boeotia. 349The Persian cavalry meantime, on perceivingthat the Greeks had abandoned their position,pursued and harassed them on every side, whileMardonius, recollecting the pains which the Lacedaemoniansshad taken to avoid the troops opposedto them on the preceding day, and supposing thatthey no longer intended to fight, crossed the Asopuswith all his army, who advanced in the most disorderlymanner, shouting as if about to gain an easyvictory, with which Mardonius himself was the moreimpressed, as the Tegeatae and Lacedaemonians onlywere visible, the Athenians in the plain being concealedby some heights, and the other Greeks beingstill more distant.Pausanias having dispatched a horseman to theAthenians to require their aid, or, if they shouldbe too much pressed by the enemy, at least that oftheir archers; the Athenians began to move totheir right, but were so much exposed to the attacksof the auxiliary Greeks on the Persian right,that they were unable to give the Lacedaemoniansany assistance whatever. Pausanias was obliged,therefore, to prepare for resisting all the efforts ofMardonius with the Lacedaemonians and Tegeataealone, amounting to 53,000, of whom little morethan a third were hoplitae. At first, the appearanceof the victims was declared unfavourable, andthe Greeks consequently remained inactive, sufferingseverely from the missiles of the Persians, dischargedfrom behind a breastwork of shields' ; butfpdiayrii rd yifipa, c. 61. action on shore fought on theIn like manner atMycale^in the same day as that of Platsea, the350 Boeotia. [chap.at length Pausanias, having turned his eyes towardsthe temple of Juno, and invoked the assistance ofthe goddess, which was immediately followed bya favourable report of the victims, the Lacedaemonianadvanced to the attack, though not until theTegeatse, who had not waited for similar auspices,had already set the example. The action nowbecame close and general, first at the breastworkof shields, and afterwards at the Eleusinian inArgiopius. The Persians were not inferior to theiradversaries in valour, and such was their strengthand resolution, that many seized upon the spearsof the Greeks with their hands and broke them inpieces ; but not being protected by such defensivearmour as that of the hoplitse, being unused to theGreek mode of fighting, and being inferior in disciplineand formation, their valour was of littleavail ; and as they rushed forward, either singlyor in small bodies, they were slain by the Spartans.Wherever Mardonius appeared, mounted upona white horse, and surrounded by his select bodyof cavalry of 1000 Perse, they sustained the attackof the Lacedaemonians and slew many of them ; butwhen he fell by the hand of the Spartan Aeimnes-tus, and his body-guard was defeated, the restgave way before the Spartans and fled, havinglittle chance with their unarmed dresses and irre-Persians made a rampart of eairovec stray oi Uipacu' AvoirXDishields : <ntvi^pritray rd ye^^a Si idvrec, Kol woe dynrurr^'ipKOQ elvai ff^i, — Herodot. 1. 9» imoviq itravf kali ohK ofioloi rocffip. 99. kvayrioioi vo^iiv. — c. 62.Xil^arifiiy rvy KiupUfAjf oifKXVI.] Boeotia. 351gular order against men covered with armour, andformed into an inseparable phalanx. '' And thus*adds Herodotus, '^ Pausanias, the son of Cleongained the most splendid victory I haveever heard of'* Meantime the Athenians, withtheir comrades of Plataea and Thespis, had defeatedthe Boeotian, had slain 300 Thebans, andhad obliged the remainder to retreat to Thebes.When the Greeks at the Herseum heard that thebattle was gained, they proceeded in a disorderlymanner towards Argiopius. The Corinthiansmarched by the heights directly to the Eleusinian,and reached it in safety, but the Mega-sensesand Phliasii having followed the better roadthrough the plain, were attacked by the Thebancavalry, lost 600 men, and were pursued toCithseron.Artabazus, who had previously given orders tothe 40,000 men whom he commanded, waited onlyto be assured of the result which he expected fromthe rashness of Mardonius, when he marched offfrom the field of battle towards Phocis, and continuinghis route to the northward with all possiblecelerity, preceded every where the news of thevictory, and thus arrived at Byzantium, thoughnot without having sustained considerable lossfrom famine, fatigue, and hostile Thracian. Whenthe Person began to retreat, great numbers of thearmy, who usually looked to them for example, fledwithout ever having been engaged and were slainby the Greeks, who would have effected a muchgreater slaughter had not the fugitives been protectedby the cavalry. Of the Greek auxiliaries on352 Boeotia. [chap.the side of the Persians, the Boeotian alone foughtin earnest, but particularly the Thebans, threehundred of whose best men were slain by theAthenians.The Persians had only entered the wooden fortress,mounted the towers, and made some preparationsfor defence, when the Lacedaemoniansarrived. But these being unskilled in the attack offortified places, made little progress until they hadthe assistance of the Athenians. After a long andobstinate contest, a part of the wall was throwndown, and the Tegeatse had the honour of beingthe first to enter. The barbarians then made nofurther effort, but allowed themselves to be killedwithout resistance. Out of the original 300,000there escaped, besides the 40,000 of Artabazus,not more than 3000, who were said to have beenslain in their passage through Macedonia, by orderof Perdiccas the son of king Alexander ^The spoil which fell to the share of the conquerorswas immense. Besides the rich tents andtheir furniture, the clothing and arms of the slain,there was a profusion of utensils of gold and silver,as well as of the precious metals both in coin andbullion : so numerous in particular were the goldDarius, that they became for a long period afterwardsone of the current coins of Greece, and arestill often found in this country. From the tenthof the spoil, dedicated to the gods, were formedthe golden tripod of Delphi, supported by threeDemosth. Orate. ircpJ o-i/vrajcwc, p. 167. In Aristocrat 687.Reiske.XVI.] Boeotia. 353twisted serpents of brass \ a brazen Jupiter fifteenfeet in height at Olympia, and a brazen Neptuneten feet high at the Isthmus. Some presents weremade, beyond their share, to those who distinguishedthemselves '. The remainder was dividedamong the conquerors. To Pausanias was assigneda tenth of every thing : women, horses, camels,gold and silver. The Tegeatae, who were the first toenter the tent of Mardonius, carried off the brazenmanger of his horses, and placed it in the temple ofMinerva Ale, at Tegea ; the Athenians obtainedhis silver-footed chair, and his scimitar, valued at300 darius, which they dedicated in the temple ofMinerva Polias in the Acropolis'. On the sideof the Greeks there fell only ninety-one Lacedaemonian,sixteen Tegeatse, and fifty-two Athenians.As Herodotus particularly specifies, thai these Lacedaemoniansswere Spartans, it appears that thenumbers indicate the loss of the hoplitse only, andthat he has omitted to notice, or was not informed,how many of the light-armed fell.It is scarcely worth while to advert to the particularsin which the other ancient authors, whohave related this great event, differ from Herodotus: Diodorus and Plutarch lived so long afterwardsthat they cannot have much weight againstSupposed with great reason of these gifts : — Baa fjUy yvyto be that of which a part of the i^alptra roltn aptarivtratri air-brasssupport remained, not ritov iv TLKarai^ifi eioOTi, ovmany years ago, and perhaps Xcycrac irpoc ohBafi&Vf Sophia S*still remains in the Hippodrome lyoiyc ital rovroiin Sodiiyai, —of Constantinople. c. 81.> Herodotus believed so, but ' Demosth. in Democrat. p.could not learn any particulars 741. Pausan. Attic, c. 27.VOL. fl. A a354 Boeotia. [chap.the testimony of the contemporary historian ; theformer, however, does not deviate from it in anyimportant point, and the contradictions of the latterare undeserving of much respect, as being thoseof a Boeotian angry with Herodotus for havingspoken freely of the disgraceful conduct of hiscountrymen, and thinking no mode of exculpationso effectual as that of throwing general discreditupon the historian's accuracy. But impartialityand an anxiety for the truth are conspicuous in thenarrative of Herodotus. - Although he was by nomeans an admirer of the Lacedaemonians, and accusesthem of habitual deceit and perfidy, both hisfacts and his sentiments give the chief glory ofthe day to the 10,000 Lacedaemonian and theircomrades the Legatee, nor could the admirableconduct of Pausanias have received so fine a panegyricfrom the most laboured oratory, as it has fromthe simple language of the historian.It has been doubted by some travellers who havevisited the Platseis, whether so great a number ofmen as Herodotus has mentioned, could have manoeuvredand fought on so small a field, and hencethey have suspected some error or exaggerationon the part of the historian. It certainly appearspossible, on considering how reluctantly some ofthe Greeks advanced into Boeotia, how ill othersbehaved in the field, and that the reinforcementswere continuing to arrive at the Greek camp up tothe very eve of the battle, that the amount of theseveral contingents stated by Herodotus, may ratherhave been that which each city engaged to send,than those actually present and that in many in-XVI.] Boeotia. 356stances there may have been deficiencies. As to thelight troops, more than half of whom were composedof Helots, attending upon the Spartans inthe proportion of seven to one, we are too littleacquainted with the details of Spartan disciplineto know whether there was any accurate muster ofthis force, or whether their attendance dependedupon the individual Spartans whom they served,for upon this must have greatly depended theircomplement in the field : whether complete or not,it appears, at least, that they were in little estimationas light troops \ the Lacedaemonians havingbeen urgent in requesting the assistance of theAthenian bowmen at Argiopius. Similar suspicionsmay attach to the numbers of the light-armedof the Greek centre. As to the most efficientpart of the army, however, the Lacedaemonianand Athenian hoplitae, and those who foughtwith them, they fully amounted, as there is everyreason to believe, to the numbers stated by Herodotus,so that it cannot be supposed that fewerthan 30,000 hoplitae were assembled, nor less thandouble the number of light troops. For such anarmy the space was amply sufficient in each ofthe three positions which they occupied. In thefirst and second the front was about three miles inlength, with an indefinite space in the rear. Onthe day of battle the hoplitae formed three separatebodies, two of these had each a mile for theirfront, and there was nearly a square league ofground to contain all the light troops, togetherYet Herodotus says they xapiipriyro hic «c vdXtfioy, —were trained to war : ira nc 1* 9, c. 29.A a 2356 Boeotia. [chap,with those hoplitae who had formed the centre ofthe Greek line in their second position, and whoin the third were in the rear near the Heraeum.The right, consisting of the Lacedaemonians andTegeatae, amounted to 11,500 hoplitae ; such a bodydrawn up in the space of a mile, which was aboutthe extent of the position, with a breadth of threefeet to each man would have had about seven infile, a depth which, although very small comparedwith that of the phalanx when military science wasat its height among the Greeks ^ was perhaps asgreat as was then customary. The left wing,composed of the Athenians and their comrades,amounted to about 16,000, including light armed,but their duty having been chiefly to resist cavalry,they were probably formed into a close phalanx,and occupied very little ground. As to the enemy'sforce, the estimate of Herodotus has evidently nopretensions to accuracy, for though he conjecturesthe Greek auxiliaries to have amounted to 50,000,he admits that their real amount was unknown;and in reckoning the Persians at 300,000*, heseems to have merely adopted the maximum ofthe army of Mardonius, as nominated by Xerxesten months before, having been unwilling perhapsto question the accuracy of the tradition which hadAt Marathon about the * Polyb. 1. 18, c. 12.same number of the hoplitae of ^ rwy ^e 'EXX^vwv ri^y Map-athensand Plataea occupied, hoviov avfiftdxiav oUt altogetherwith their light troops, ovhl^ apcO/i<$v#— Herodot. I. 9,a front of two miles ; but this c. 32.was from necessity, and we are ^ c. 32, 70.told that their centre was veryweak.XVI.] B(EOTIA. 357been sanctioned by the lapse of twenty years, andto which the Greeks, for the sake of their ownglory, had readily given credit. The historian hasnot hinted at any recruiting from Asia for the purposeof supplying either the ordinary waste in thearmy of Mardonius, or that diminution of 20,000,which he shows to have taken place in the divisionof Artabazus, in the course of its march to theHellespont, and in the subsequent operations inThrace. But with every allowance for such deductions,it is difficult to believe that the Persianarmy on the Asopus was not two or three timesas numerous as that of the Greeks, independentlyof its followers. Even on the supposition howeverthat they were three to one, there was sufficientspace for them in the Platseis, as none but thechoicest infantry were immediately opposed to theGreeks, and the cavalry, as well as the light armed,on both sides may have been spread over a spaceof 12 or 14 square miles. Even in modem warfare,in which the greater range of missiles hascreated an order of battle much less deep thanamong the ancients, examples might be found offields of battle as small, in proportion to the numbers,as that of Plataea \Another point in the narrative of Herodotuswhich may present at first sight some difficulty toa person who views the scene of action at Plataea,is the word vn<ro^ *, there being no island, properlyAt Borodino 250,000 men liar fi Be itm avo tov *Aviawovfought for fifteen hours with rat rfji Kpiivtic r$c Tapya^ifCfthe fipace of little more than heir* ^ corparoffe^evoia'o T6r€fa square league. ^e^a tnaBiovc curixovaoj trio r^ce^e tQ T^v yflvov TiXaraUiav iroXcoc yifiTos H9 aBoeotia.[chap.SO called, in front of Plataea or in any part of thePlatseis. The place i^hich Herodotus so accuratelyindicates as being before the city, at a distance of tenstades from the Asopus as well as from Grargaphia,is nothing more than a level meadow intersectedby several brooks uniting into one stream. Butthis is probably all that the historian meant byan island. His description of it as formed by twostreams which were separated from one anotherin Mount Githeeron, and were afterwards united, isentirely conformable to present appearances. Ifhe had intended a real island, it would not havebeen necessary for him to make any mention of thetwo branches in Mount Cithasron, since the separationof the waters of a single stream, and their reunion,would have been sufficient to form the island.It is easy to imagine that the Plataeenses may havedistinguished this part of their plain by the nameof Island, although it was in reality no more thanapeninsula. The ambiguity of this passage has notbeen diminished by the translators of Herodotus ',who, by referring the word oi to vn<roc instead of tofjL£yoQ 6 TTorafio^ AvtaOev lie tovKiOaipwyoQ pie KCLTia cc to ire*Biovy Ziiyiav an** aXX^Xoiv rapiedpa 6troyv€p Tela ord^ca Kaicireira avfifiitryei ec rwvrcJ' oveBi Oi *Q€p6fi, dvyaripa Hrovrtjv Xiyovffi elrai *A<ni}frovol ifttxwpioi. 'Ec Tovroy ^j) orXAporifhvXtvvayTo jucraraor^-waif <ya koI dean ^x"^^^ XP^^'Bat df06yfj xal oi imrhg tr^iaQfit) tnyolfHTo Atrirtp car' \dv kov"Stay* fieraKiyieffOai re ii6KuTore lircdv r^c wicrAc i BevripiifvXajcrjy wc &v fii) isolate oiTlip<rai e^opfittafiivovs Ktti tr^iaQtirofjLeyoi Tapaaootey oi iinrdrac.diriKOfiiyiay Bi ec Toy \iipoytovTOVt Toy di) 4 'Airwirlc 'Aep<$iyirepitr)(,i(£Tai piovffa iic tov Ki-daipiavoc, Veto ri)v yvKTa rtiwriyi'iB6K€€ rove iifiitri^c diroariX"Xii, &c. — Herodot. 1. 9» c. 51.' Littlebury, Archer andBelow.XVI.] Boeotia. 359irora/uocy have represented Oeroe as the name of theisland, whereas the historian in describing the islandas the place ^ which Oeroe the daughter of Asopussurrounds ^, clearly shows Oeroe to have been theriver. Their mistake may have partly arisen fromthe belief that the river which formed the islandwas a branch of the Asopus, a very natural suppositionfor them to have made in ignorance of thereal topography, as Herodotus no where indicatesthe contrary, and as it is greatly favoured by thelocal myths, according to which Oeroe was thedaughter of Asopus. We find, however, as I havebefore stated, that although the sources of theAsopus and Oeroe are very near to one another,they are not only separate rivers, but flow in oppositedirections, the former to the Euboic channel,the latter to the Corinthian Gulf.Plataea, although enjoying many local advantages,was not happily situated for the repose of itsinhabitants, who continually exposed to dangerfrom their more powerful neighbours of Thebes,and obliged to have recourse to the aid of Athens,were thus dependent upon a comparatively distantalliance, while their enemies were only two hours'march from them. Hence the extensive walls, ofwhich we still see the remains, and which servedas an occasional shelter to the whole population ofthe Plates. The first alliance of Platsea withAthens was in the year B. G. 519 ^ ; it was firmlycemented by the two Persian invasions, and by acommunity of perils and glory at Marathon andXupoy, • Herodot. 1. 6, c. 108.vipiaxiitrai. Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 68.360 BOEOTIA. [chap.Platsea. These best times of Platsea, ended withthe alliance of Thebes and Sparta against Athens.The first act of hostility of the Thebans againstPlatsea, in the Peloponnesian war, was an attemptto obtain possession of the place by stratagem.Three hundred men were admitted within thewalls by some Plataeenses of the Theban faction,and the design only failed by the occurrence of adark and rainy night, which being accompanied bya sudden increase of the Asopus, prevented theThebans from supporting their comrades in thetown, 180 of whom were, in consequence, takenand put to death \In the beginning of the third summer of thesame war, B. C. 429, the Lacedaemonians andBoeotian commenced a siege of Platsea, whichlasted three years, and which has given occasionto Thucydides to furnish us with some curiousparticulars of the military customs of the Greeks,and of the state of the art of the attack and defenceof fortified places at that remote period'. Inthe first year, the besiegers, after various deviceswhich were frustrated by the garrison, were equallyunsuccessful in an attempt to bum the city bythrowing sulphur and pitch into it, with faggots ofwood, which the adjacent Githseron supplied inabundance. Thucydides observes, that they wereprompted to this mode of offence, by the smallnessof the city : a remark by no means in agreementwith the existing ruins, which are not less than twomiles and a half in circumference, but favourable^ Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 2, et seq.» Thucyd. 1. 2. c. 75, et«eq.— 1. 3, c. 20.XVI.]Boeotia.to the conjecture already offered, that Plataea wasconfined at that time to the southern extremity ofthe existing remains. In almost every other part,the masonry is of a less ancient kind, and the ruinsof former buildings may be detected among thematerials, which is no more than consistent withthe troubled history of the later Platsea, and themany repairs and renewals which it underwent.All the efforts of the allies during the first summerof the siege having failed, they converted it into ablockade, and raised a circumvallation round thecity, consisting of two parallel walls, sixteen feetasunder, with a ditch on either side. Squaretowers, of the same breadth as the double wall,and covered with roofs, were raised at intervals ofabout seventy feet ^ along the wall, and afforded apassage through them round the whole circumvallation.Huts were built for the blockading forcebetween the walls, which thus served as an entrenchedcamp to the investing force, as well againstthe Platffienses from within, as against the Atheniansin the opposite direction. A detachment of Lace-thisdistance rests onlyupon a computation, foundedupon there having been teneraX^ecc, or battlements, betweenthe towers, and consequentlyeleven embrasures. Inone part of the walls of Messene,where the battlements arewell preserved, they are aboutthree feet and a half broad, andthe embrasures between thema little less. Thus :10x31 + 11x8=68.362 Boeotia. [chap.caledonians was left to garrison one half of thework, and the Boeotian had the charge of theother, while the main body of the respective armiesretired to winter quarters. The Plaiseenses hadsent all their women, children, and aged, toAthens, before the siege, and there remainedin the city only 400 Platseenses and 80 Athenians,with 110 women to prepare their food. Ayear afterwards, or in the course of the fourthwinter of the war, the besieged being in great distressfor provision, formed the design of forcing theenemy's line of blockade, and succeeded in effectingit : a portion of them escaladed the wall in themiddle of a tempestuous night, and seized two adjacenttowers, from whence, by the assistance of afalse attack of the remaining garrison of the town,on an opposite part of the circumvallation, theyeffected their passage over the wall with the lossof only one man, though not without meeting witha vigorous opposition at the outer ditch. Foreseeingthat the Peloponnesian would proceed to searchfor them on the road to the Dryoscephalae, theytook the road to Thebes, along which they hadmarched seven or eight stades, when perceivingthe torches of the enemy searching for them on theroad to Dryoscephalae, they turned to the right,and made the best of their way to the mountainsnear Erythrae and Hysiae. Two hundred andtwelve thus escaped in safety to Athens.In the course of the ensuing summer, the remainderof the garrison of Plataea surrendered tothe Lacedaemonians, and after pleading their causeagainst the Thebans before five judges sent for thisXVI.] Boeotia. 363purpose from Sparta, were all put to death, beingin number 200 Platseenses and 25 Athenians ; thewomen who had remained in the city were sold forslaves, and the city having been given up to theThebans, was razed to the ground in the ensuingyear. The lands of the Platseis were let for tenyears to Thebans; a building of two stories, containingnumerous chambers for the reception oftravellers, was built out of the ruins of the citynear the temple of Juno, and a new temple wasconstructed in honour of the Goddess.The Platseenses had remained for forty years inservitude or exile, when they were restored to theircountry by the effect of the peace of Antalcidas,B. C. 387, but they were only thirteen years inpossession of it when the city was again razed tothe ground by the Thebans, and the inhabitantsonce more obliged to take shelter in Attica \ Onthis occasion, as in the first year of the Peloponnesianwar, the Thebans resorted to stratagem. Atan hour when the people of Plataea were employedin the fields, and supposed the Thebans to be engagedin the public assembly, the latter marchedround by Hysiee, and finding the city undefended,obliged those remaining within it to evacuate it bycapitulation. After the battle of Chseroneia, Philip,among other modes of humiliating the Thebans,restored the Plataeenses to their city . And to this dateall the existing walls, except those at the southernextremity, may with great probability be attributed.If the Platsea of the time of the PeloponnesianPausan. Boeot. c. 1.364 Boeotia. [chap.war, was confined to the southern part of the ancientsite, and the city was not then of large dimensions,it will follow that the table height, immediatelyoverlooking the Island, was then excluded from thecity, and this supposition seems necessary, to reconcilethe words of Herodotus with present appearances.On that table height probably stoodthe Herseum, or temple of Juno before the city ^which, in the time of the Antonines, was within thewalls. Thus conspicuously situated without thewalls, and just in the rear of the position of Ar-grotius,it was natural for the Greek commanderto turn his eyes towards it, and implore the assistanceof the Goddess when he was suffering underthe attacks of the Persians, without being able torepel them, because the appearance of the victimswas pronounced unfavourable. After the erectionof the new temple of Juno by the Thebans, it isprobable that the old Herseum was no longer repaired,for Pausanias mentions only one temple ofJuno, and by remarking that it was of great magnitude,seems to identify it with that built by theThebans, and described by Thucydides as a vbCjqcicarofiircSoc Xi0ivoc, which if wc are to take the secondword literally, would imply a building about thesame size as the Parthenon. It contained a colossalupright Juno, sumamed Teleia, and at the entrancea Rhea presenting a stone to Cronus, both of Pentelicmarble, and made by Praxiteles : there was also aJuno Nympheuomene by Callimachus. The templeof Minerva, sumamed Area, was built from a shareirpo writ ironic*XVI.]Boeotia.of the spoils of Marathon, and contained a statueof the Goddess by Phidias, nearly as large as thatwhich he made from the same spoils for the Athenians; but the latter was of brass whereas that ofPlataea was acrostic, the face, hands and feetbeing of Pentelic marble, and the rest of gildedwood '. At the feet of the Goddess was the image *of Arimnestus who commanded the Platseensesboth at Marathon and Plataea '. There were twopictures on the walls of the Pronouns, one by Polygnotus,of which the subject was Ulysses slayingthe suitors ; the other by Sonatas, represented thefirst expedition of the Argives against Thebes.The city contained also a temple of Ceres Eleusinia*,and a tomb of Leitus, the only one of the Boeotianchiefs who returned from Troy. Within the gatewhich led to Eleutherae was the heroura of Platsea,daughter of Asopus, and on the outside of the samePausan. BcBot. c. 2.— Plutarchdiffers £rom Pausanias,by asserting that the temple ofMinerva Area was built at theexpence of eighty talents, setapart for that purpose from thespoils of Platsea, not of Marathon.That he meant the sametemple is clear, from his allusionto the pictures described byPausanias, and which Plutarchobserves, ftexP' '^^^ dicfiaZovtraiitafuyovtrtyf so that they werein perfect preservation at theend of six centuries.cicwK. — Pausan. Bceot.c. 4.See also Herodot. 1. 9,c. 72. — Plutarch in Aristides.This temple was probablyerected after the war, and inconsequenceof the circumstancesof the battle. The templeof Ceres Eleusinia at Argiopius,was an old building, the existenceof which was so littleknown, that it had created amisunderstanding as to themeaning of an oracle broughtfrom Delphi by Aristides, whichrecommended the Greeks tofight in the plain of Ceres Eleusinianand Core, this having beeninterpreted to mean the plainBoeotia.[chap.gate the temple ' of Jupiter Eleutherius, which inthe time of Pausanias seems to have been reducedto an altar and statue : it was established after thevictory by command of the Oracle of Delphi, andby a decree proposed by Aristides it was the sceneof a quinquennial festival called the Eleutheria '.Here stood also a brazen trophy for the victoryover the Persians, tombs of the Lacedsemoniansand Athenians who fell on that occasion, inscribedwith elegies by Simonides, and a polyandriumof the other Greeks *. The position of these monumentsis marked, perhaps, by a ruined churchof Eleusis, until some of theelders of Plataea pointed outthe ancient temple in the Platseis.(Plutarch, in Artistic.)That Plutarch should have descriedthe old Eleusinian ashaving been near Hysise, aswell as near the heroum of An-socrates,is not very surprizingin an author who is so often inaccuratein his topography. Itwas indeed toward Hysiae, hutit must have been considerablynearer to Platsea, if Thucydidesis correct in stating that thePlatseenses, when they escapedfrom their blockaded city, hadthe heroum of Androcrates ontheir right, when they hadmarched less than eight stadeson their road to Thebes.^ Up6v, Strabo, p» 412.Plutarch, in Aristides. —According to the biographerthe personages worshipped hythe Patentes were Jupiter,who after the battle was surnamedEleutherius, Juno ,Ceres Eleusinia andProserpine, Pan, the NymphsSphragitides, and seven ancientarchangels, or heroes, of whomAndrocrates was the chief.The Lacedaemonians, accordingto Herodotus (1. 9, c.85.) had three separate O^icai ;the Athenians and Tegeataeeach a tomb, and the Megaren-ses and Phliasii a joint sepulchre,besides which there wereseven cenotaphs of people whohad not been engaged, andamong them one of the i£gi-netae, which was not erecteduntil ten years after the battle.XVI.] Boeotia. 367near the right bank of the torrent, on the left bankof which, nearly opposite to the chapel, are thefoundations of a gate, already alluded to, in theeastern walls of Platsea, not far from the northeasternangle. This gate is placed within a quadrangularcourt or retirement of the walls, andappears to have been the principal gate of the city,as we may easily conceive it to have been, since itwas conveniently situated for leading not only toEleutherae and Athens, to Megara and the Isthmus,but also to Thebes, Chalcis and Tanagra.CHAPTER EvilBoeotia, ATTICA, Morris.Departure from Thebes — TherapncB — Scold — Plain of Siilissi —Sanctum — St. Meletius — Derveno-khoria — Ghyftd-kastro,(Enoe — Myupoli, EUuthera — Pass of Sarandaporo — Ephesus— Plain of Eleusis and Thria — Rheiti — Temple of VenusPhil — Dhafni, Temple of Apollo on Mount PcecUum — Arrivalat Athens — Geography of the Megaris — Route from Eleusisto Megara — Description megara by Pausanias — Long WallsNUcea — Minoa — JEgosthena — Paget — Erineia — Isub—^Mount Kandili, Cerata — Mount Kar^dhi — the Oneia — Polichne— Tripodisctu — jEgeirusa — Geraneia — CimoUa — Serontrocks Scironides.Jan. 1, 1806. — From Thebes to St. Meletius onthe way to Athens. — Leaving the town by thesouthern gate, which may stand nearly on the siteof that which led from the Cadmeia into LowerThebes, the aqueduct is on the right. Like thetown walls, it exhibits many remains of antiquity,and stands perhaps on Roman foundations. In oneplace a sepulchral monument is inserted in themasonry, bearing the common device of a horseman,with one of his horse's feet raised, and restingupon an altar. At 9.56 pass the fountain of theIsmenus on the left side of the road. At 10, leaveon the right the road to Kriakuki and the pass ofMount CithcBroTiy leading to Corinth, called by theTurks the Kasa-derv^ni, and at 10.8 to the left,that which leads to Athens by Sialissi and Kyle.CHAP. XVII.] Boeotia. 369Having descended the long slope of the Psilirakhi,or low central Thehan ridge to the AsopuSj wecross that river at 11.1, at the point where it isjoined by the Rea, which separates Katzula fromBubuka. A small tjiftlik belonging to RashidBey, called Simili, stands on the bank to ourleft. The river flows with a brisk but slenderstream. TherapncB seems to have stood in thisroute between Thebes and the Asopus ; for Euripides,in describing the death of Pentheus, saysthat he went from Therapnse across the Asopus tothe place in Cithseron, where he met his fate ; andwhich, as we learn from Strabo, was near Scolus \Ascending the cultivable slope of Cithaeron, bittwhich like all this part of the Parasopia is littlecultivated, we arrive, at 11.33, at the Metokhi,described on the 30th of December as standingbelow the projecting point of the Cktfueronianrange. The brow of the summit on which theMetokhi stands is surrounded by the foundationof a Hellenic wall, and has evidently been a fortressor citadel ; as I before remarked, it was probablyScolus. The walls were of a very antiquekind of masonry. A little beyond the Metokhi is acopious source of water, which no doubt determinedthe site of the ancient town as well as of the modemfarm. About a mile farther, in ascendingthe steep side of Cithseron, we leave Tarimdri, avillage of thirty houses, below us, close on theleft, and soon afterwards enter a ravine betweentwo ridges of the mountain, answering exactly toEuripides. in Bacch. v. 1029. Strabo, p. 408.VOL. II. B b370 Boeotia, [chap.the description given by Euripides * of the placewhere Pentheus was destroyed by the Menaces,except that the pine-forests do not now extendbelow the higher parts of the mountain. Theravine continues, including a halt of ten minutes,until 12.25, when we ascend the steep side of theridge on the left, and at 12.28, having arrivedupon the crest, look down upon a small stony plainextending towards the summit of Parr. Thedirect road from Thebes to Athens by Phyle crossesthis elevated plain, and then enters another in whichare the villages of Sialissi, vulgarly Slavish, andSkurta. We proceed at 12.42, and continuingalong the same kind of rugged steep road, have,at 1.35, the plain of Sialissi on our left a miledistant ; and the village of that name surroundedby vineyards, in the nearest corner of it : twomiles farther, is Skurta, on the foot of the greatheights of Fames. The Phyle road leaves theseplaces to the left. There are three other villagesin the valley named Kako Niskivi, Kadha-sala, and Aurora. This plain, which separatesthe great height of Citfueron from thoseof Panes is probably that neutral territory ofPanactumj of which Thucydides speaks. Ityields com and vines, but the soil seems meagreand stony, and better adapted to the latterproduction. The neighbouring heights of Panesare well clothed with trees of various kinds, andUtvKaioi (rvfficui(oy,Bacch. V. 1049.XVII.] ATTICA. 371the summit consists entirely of a forest of pines.We continue to mount, and at 1.42 arrive at thesummit of the ridge of dtJuBron^ from whencethere is a fine view of the country on either side.The northern part of the Megaric peninsula lyingbetween the western extremity of the CorinthianGulf and the bay of Eleusis, and bounded by theplain of Megara to the south, consists chiefly ofmountains, of which the two principal summits areKarjrdhi to the west, and Kandili, overhanging thebay of Meum. The latter, as well from the ancientauthorities as from its form, is evidently thesummit called ra KIpara, or the horns \ The rangeof Karydhi has a direction parallel to that ofCttJuBrony and is separated from it by the valleysof Ghermano, Vilia, and Myupoli, which latter isthe largest of the three. Karj^dhi and Kandili havea similar separation by means of the hollows aboutKundura. We look directly down the SatanicGulf, upon the island of St. George, ancientlyBelinda ; to the right of which are Salamis andthe mountains of Argolis and ^giruiy and to thleft the plain of Thriay and the mountains Hymettusand Panes. A descent of thirty-five minutesby a winding road, through a forest of pines,brings us to the monastery of St. Meletius, situatedon the southern face of the mountain, whichfalls into the plain of Myupoli by a succession ofcultivated terraces. Assisted with a few of the conveniencesand embellishments of art St. MeletiusThe modern name Kav- to sharp peaks, Karydhi iaTTiXif candle, is often applied from Kappa, walnut-tree.Bb2i372 ATTICA. [chap.would be a delightful retreat. The buildings aremantled with ivy, and around them issue plentifulsources of water, which descend, shaded by largebay-trees, to the gardens, and the hanging woodsof olives and beeches on the side of the mountain,preserving them in a state of perpetual verdure,which IS finely contrasted on every side with thewild rocks and the dark pine-forests of Citfueron^The weather is now perfectly clear and serene, andthe season more deserves the name of KoXoKalpiovthan the greater partof that to which the word is usuallyapplied, when the air is inflamed, the groundparched, every stream dried up, and not a greenherb to be seen. The monastery is well endowed,and besides corn land possesses 3000 head ofsheep and goats on the mountains. The churchof St. Meletius, which is of the time of the Byzantineempire, is supported within by two octagonalcolumns of a veined marble of the colour of porphyry,which, according to the monks, was extractedfrom the side of the hill, not far above themonastery. As the Greek advent is not yet over,the house contains but scanty fare ; but the Igu-meno \ immediately on my arrival, sends one ofhis monks to the rocks in front of the convent,who, with a voice that would have, done honour toMenelaus, calls out to the shepherds in a distantpart of the plain below to send up one of theirfattest sheep. According to the abbot, the summitsof Cithseron have several modem appellations.Elatia is the name of the two great peaks aboveXVII.] ATTICA. 373Platte, so called from the fir-trees which cover allbut the highest points. A summit between themand the Kara derveni, or road across the mountainfrom Ghyftokastro to Kriakuki, is namedOssa : Kurteza is that between the latter and theconvent, and another towards Tarimari is calledCastra.The plain below the monastery is the easternextremity of a valley extending four or five mileswestward towards Vilia, which village is situatedin another valley separated by rugged heightsfrom Germany a small port on the CarinthiaGulf, and distant two hours from Vilia. At abouttwo miles to the south of the monastery, in thevalley, are the ruins named Myupoli \ which Iformerly visited. The remains are those of a verysmall town, which had a citadel or interior inclosureat one angle. The masonry is for the mostpart regular, and is extant in many places two orthree courses above the ground.The ruins at Ghyftokastro, which I also visitedat that time, are about an hour to the westward ofMyupoli, at the entrance of the pass leading toKriakuki and Thebes, on the summit of a steepand lofty rock between two torrents, one of whichhas a distant origin in Mount Cithceron, the otherrises at the foot of the hill on the road side, in acopious fountain called Petrogheraki. The entirecircuit of the fortress still exists, flanked by squareor oblong towers of masonry, and is preserved insome places as high as the battlements. The walls374 ATTICA. [chap.consist for the most part of polygonal masonry,though some parts, particularly the towers, appearto be more modem. The torrent of Ghyftokastro,increased by the fountain of Petrogheraki, andunited to the waters which rise near St. Meletiusand Myupoli, form a branch of the stream nowcalled Saranda-potamo, and anciently Cephissus,which joins the sea near Eleum. Another branchflows from Vilia, and a third from Kundura.The road from St. Meletius to Megara, as well asthat from Thebes, by Ghyftokastro to the same place,passes a little to the right of Myiipoli, then crosses asteep root of Mount Karjrdhi, and enters the valleyof Kundura, a town of four hundred families, chieflyAlbanian, distant four or five miles from St. Miletus,and the same from Elects. The vale ofKundura is separated from the plain of Eleusis bythe root of Mount CitJuBroriy on which St. Miletusstands, and which follows the western side ofthe plain and bay of Eleusis until it unites withMount Kandili. The Cephisstis passes through thisridge by narrow ravines into the plain. The communicationfrom Kundura into the plain of Megarais by a remarkable chasm midway between the twotowns, and separating the western termination ofMount Kandili from the adjacent heights of Ka*rjrdhi. This and all the other important defiles ofthe Megaris are under the guardianship of sixtowns or villages of this district, hence called theDerveno-khoria, and which, in consideration of theexpences of their charge, are exempted from lodgingstrangers as well as from all other impositions,except 110 paras a head for kharatj. These placesXVII.] ATTICA. 375are Villa, Kundura, Megara, Mazi, Bissia, andPerakhora '. They maintain thirty or forty soldiersat their own expence ; bat, being all armed, canturn out, to the number of three or four hundred,which they often do when a Turk of high rankpasses through the derveni. The derveni Aga isa Turk, residing at Corinth, but having a deputyin constant attendance at the derveni house, nearthe monastery of Kyparissi, on the northern sideof Mount Makryplai, or Geraneia : it is necessarythat he should read Turkish, as he has to inspectthe Buyurdi of the Pasha without which no personis allowed to pass but of the Morea to thenorthward.On referring to a verse of Sophocles, citedby Strabo * ; and to Pausanias, who describesthe Leathers as situated between Eleusis andMount Cithaeron *, there can scarcely be any doubtthat Myupoli and Ghyfto-kastro are the ancientEleutherse and QEnoe, for the plain which reachesfrom Ghyfto-kastro to Myupoli is the only considerablevalley between Plataea and Megara, andthe two ruins on its borders exactly illustrate theword ovyxopro of the poet. There may be somequestion, however, which of these ruins was Leathers,and which (Enoe.In behalf of the opinion that Ghyfto-kastro wasEleuthertBj it may be said that this city was ,Kovvrovpa, Mcyapa, 'iAd'Ciiy MTrrjeroiay Uepaxtupa,OivOTIQ^vYXPpra vaitiv wtSia race 'EXevOcpatCtA p. Strabo, p. 375.Pausan. Attic, c. 38.376 ATTICA. [chap:early an independent member of the Boeotian com*monty, which voluntarily joined the Athenians,but never became an Attic demus, consequentlythat there is little probability that (Enoe, whichwas always an Attic demus, should have beensituated between Eleutheree and the Platseis,which would be the case if Myupoli were JS&u-tierce, On examining, however, the ruins calledGhyfto-kastro, its position and dimensions evidentlyshow that it was a fortress, not a town, beingonly seven or eight hundred yards in circumference,and standing upon a strong height at theentrance of the principal pass of Mount dtfuB-rous whereas Myupoli has every appearance ofhaving been a town with an acropolis placed asusual on the edge of a valley, and commandingonly the pass which led from the Eleutlieris intothe plain of Thriaj or Eleum. The town appears,indeed, to have been of small dimensions, but itsstate of ruin will hardly admit of our forming adecisive opinion on this subject, while Ghyft6-kastro is so well preserved as to leave no doubtconcerning the object for which it was intended.The importance of (Enoe as a military post, aswell as its vicinity to Hysiae, is shown by Herodotusin describing the unsuccessful invasion of Atticaby Clements, in the year B. C. 507, when hemarched from the Isthmus to Eleusis, while theBoeotian, in concert with him, took OBnoe andHysise, the frontier demi of Attica, towards Boeotia'• And Thucydides twice mentions (Enoe inamanner to support the opinion that it wasGhyftokastro ; at the commencement of the Pelo-Herodot. 1. 5, c. 74.XVII.] ATTICA. 377podesta war, when its siege delayed the firstinvasion of Attica by Archidamus* ; and again, inthe twenty-first year of the war, when it was besiegedby the Corinthians and* Bceotians, and betrayedto them by a stratagem of Aristarchus, oneof the oligarchical party at Athens *. On both occasionsthe historian describes (Enoe as a fortress ofthe Athenians on the confines of Boeotia. It is sufficientto observe the situation of Ghyfto-kastro, tobe assured that no other position in this vicinitycould be equally important to the Athenians. Itsecured the dependence or alliance of Eleutheraeand Plates, formed an outer gate of defence to thisentrance into Attica, and if an enemy penetratedinto the plain of Eleutherae from the Parasopia bySt. Meletius, it placed him between two fortresses ;in short, it was the necessary completion of thesystem of defence of the Attic frontier towardsBoeotia, of which Eleusis, Harmaa, Phyle, Sanctum,and Cecilia, were the other fortified points.Pausanias, therefore, in describing the Platseis asbordering on the district of Eleutheree, withoutnoticing OBnoe, though it lay between them, seems,as usus with him, to have had the ancient historyand condition of Eleutherae chiefly in view, and tohave neglected the mention of OBnoe, as beingmerely a fortress, perhaps already in ruins, or asbeing one of the demi of Attica, of all which he hastreated very briefly. When the ridge of Cithseronbecame the boundary between Attica and Boeotia,Hysise, being on the northern side of the mount1.2, c. IS.Thttcyd. 1. 8, c. 98. See also Xenoph. Hellenes. i, c. 7.ATTICA.[chap.tain, was ascribed to Boeotia, while (Enoe continuedto be an Attic demus.Placed in the line of communication betweenNorthern Greece and the Peloponnesus, so small astate as Eleutherse was peculiarly exposed to theruinous effects of such a position, as well in thegreater contests in which Greece was engaged, asin every quarrel in which either Attica or the Peloponnesianwas opposed to any part of NorthernGreece. The Roman wars having left Eleutheraein a state of desolation, it became the resort ofrobbers \ who have often in later times also foundthis thoroughfare an excellent place for the exerciseof their profession. Pausanias, soon afterthe time of the author who represents Eleuthersein that condition, could ascertain only the positionof the city by the ruins of the fortificationsand houses, which he describes as being situated** a little above the plain towards CitherIn the plain there still remained a templeof Bacchus, containing a copy of the originalstatue of the god which had been transferredto Athens. Near it was a cavern, in which Antelopeexposed her twin sons, and a fountain of water, inwhich the infants were washed by a shepherd whofound them'.vero yap vvo XporwK irapd royKiOacp«i»va cc EXevo'cva, oT/iac,/3adcfii>v* cffTcve re Kal roTpavfia iy rain y^tpoiy tl\t'KaX rd iraiBla rd yioyyd aKartXEXolwei avcicaXeTro ratkavT^ lirefiefiftro rtji rdXfitic^oc KtOocpiJva vW€pfidXkwy Kalrd Trepl rd 'EXfvOepc^c x^pio^rrayiprifui ora into rQy woXi"fiuy ^lo^cvwK, ivo fidyovQ ohdra^iiriiyero' Kal rara ^laXacvivre xpvvaQ rat rv/i/3ta rcr-papa /luO* lavrov t\iav» — Lucian.Dialog. Mort. 27.Pausan. Attic, c. 38. BacchusEleutherius was held inXVII.]ATTICA.Jan. 2. — At 8.6, descending from the monasteryby a winding road to the right of the gardens, weleave the Paleo-kastro of Myiipoli a quarter of amile on the left at 8.40, and follow the main routefrom Thebes to Megara by Kundura for some distance,before we arrive at the turning to Lepsina, orEleusis which at 8.52 again brings Myupoli at aquarter of a mile to our left. We now quit thecultivated land and enter upon a rocky levelcovered with small bushes, where the road is bothmuddy and rough. At 9.22 enter a forest of pines.The whole of the branch of CitJuBrony which extendsfrom near St. Meletius to Mount Kandili,and to the plain of Megara, and which separatesthe vales of Myupoli and Kundura fromthe plain of Lepsina, is covered with these trees.After a halt of five minutes, we descend at 9.40into the bed of a torrent, which has its originin the mountains around Vilia, and which at 9.50joins the Sarandaporo, otherwise called Saranda-foro, or Saranda-potami. The latter, which is themain branch of the Eleusinian Cephissus^ originatesgreat veneration at Athens : atemple was built to receive thestatue in the Lenaeum, or sacredinclosure of Bacchus, inLines, and there was anothersmall yaoc in the Academy,for the temporary reception ofthe statue when it was carriedin procession in the Dionysiacfestival from Athens to theAcademy. — Pausan. Attic, c.20, 29. Philos. in Herod.It appears to have been theopinion of the mythologists,that there were three Dionysia ;one of India, the same as theLinnaeus ; a second the son ofJupiter and Semele, born atThebes; and a third, son ofJupiter and Ceres, born atEleutherae. — Diodor. 1. 3, c.73.380 ATTICA. [chap.in Mount Karydhi, and flowing by Kundura^ fromthence enters a ravine between two high summitson our right. At the junction of the two rivers wefall into the road from Kundura to Athens. Onthe summit of the mountain on the left, one miledistant, may be perceived the lower part of a Hellenicround tower.The road now leads along the side of the ,through a forest which seems as if itwould not long exist, as the greater part of thetrees are in a process of destruction for the purpose .of collecting their resin to make pitch. All thebark having been stripped off towards the foot ofthe tree, and a part of the wood cut away, a hollowis made in the ground into which the turpentineflows : the trees which lean a little are preferred,the reservoir and incision being made on the upperside. The process may be repeated for severalyears before it kills the trees. At 10.42 a chapeland well are on the right-hand side of the road :at 10.51 are marks of chariot wheels in the rocks*At 11 we arrive at the junction of the Sarandaporowith the branch of the Cephisstis from Ghyft6-kastro, which receives the collected waters of thevalley of Myupoli a little to the east of the latterruin.The bank of this stream above its junction withthe Sarandaporo is steep and high, and upon itthere are some remains of ancient walls andtowers, and on the might side of the road the foundationsof another tower. We halt here till 11.30.The wood continues until the ravine graduallyopens into the Thriasian or Eleusinian plain, whereXVII.] ATTICA* 381at 11.42 the road to Lepsina branches off to theright, and on each of the summits, bordering theopening of the valley, the ruins of a Hellenictower may be seen. These numerous remains ofancient works show how anxiously the Atheniansfortified this important entrance into their plains,which may be considered as the division betweenthe north-eastern extremity of the Oneia and therange of Cithceron and Parties. This perhapswas the particular pass of Mount Cithaeron, inwhich, in the year b.c. 200, Philocles, an officerof Philip son of Demetrius, stationed himself onarriving from Euboea, while his troops plunderedthe Eleusinian plain, and where he was joined bythe king himself, coming from Achaia. Theythen proceeded to attack Eleusis, the Peireeeus,and Athens, but having been unsuccessful in everyattempt, Philip then destroyed every thing in theunprotected demi which had escaped his formerinvasion, leaving not a temple or building uninjured,and ceasing only from the work of destructionwhen there remained no longer any materialsto gratify his vengeance ^The road now enters the northern angle of theplain of Thiia^ and at 11.48 crosses the dry bedof the Sarandaporo, or CephisstiSj which joins thesea a little on the eastern side of Eleusis : all thenorthern and western part of the plain is stony,barren, and higher than the maritime and cultivatedlevel, which does not extend very far tothe northward of Lepsina. As we descend intoLiv. 1. 51, c. 26.382 ATTICA. [chap.the lower plain , this village remains a mile anda half on the right at 12.28. Here we cross thefoundations of what I take to have been one of thereservoirs of the ancient aqueduct of Eleusis, someruined arches of which are seen to the right, nearthe entrance of Lepsina from Athens. Our roadcrosses the plain of Thria diagonally in the directionof the mills at Mheitiy leaving Lepsina about3 miles on the right : at 12.40 we halt at a wellnear the foundations of a small temple, or otherpublic building. The kalj^via of Khassia is half amile on the left, 2 miles beyond which a road beginsto mount the lowest steep of Parties y towardsKhassia. The greatest length of the Thriasianplain, about nine miles, is from the angle of theEleusinian gulf, westward of Lepsina, to a hayin the plain to the left of our road, where are thelowest hills which unite the range of j^Sgaleoswith that of Panes, and where the Athenians hadfortified that pass into the plain of Chaise witha rampart or breastwork, which still remains.The sepulchre of Strata, son of Isidotus, on thenorthern side of the Sacred Way, is 150 yards onthe right of our road, at 13 minutes beyond thewell above-mentioned ; 5 minutes farther our roadunites with that from Rheims to Athens. The monumentof Strata seems not to have been a pyramid,but a cubical mass of earth cased with marble, onsome of the blocks of which mouldings of architectureare still to be seen. It was probably surmountedby a stele. From hence to Helensthe Sacred Way was a causeway raised above theplain, which is low and marshy in this part. ItsXVII.] ATTICA. 383utility on the great road from Athens to theMorea has caused it to receive frequent repairs,but these, since the decline of Greece, having beenof the rudest kind, the causeway now preserveslittle resemblance to the massy and finished worksof the ancients. Many vestiges, however, of theoriginal lea soc may stQl be distinguished. Inthe bay of JSletisis, and the marshy part of theplain, immense numbers of wild ducks are nowcongregated. Quitting the junction of the roadat 1.43, I pass at 1.57 the first mill of the Rheiti,and at 2.2 the second. The water which turns thesemills is produced from very copious saline springsat the foot of the mountain, which are not sufferedto take their natural course into the sea as theydid anciently, but are formed into a large pond ormill-head by means of a stone dam which extendsfrom one mill to the other. At this pass theSacred Way was cut in the rock ; it is first visiblebetween the two mills,, and is then traced alongthe foot of the rocks above the salt ponds, whereasthe modem road follows the sea shore. Havingpassed the salt ponds, the Sacred Way descendsupon a modem paved road, which it follows alongthe sea-side, as far as the opening of the valley ofDhafni, where that valley ends in the shore of theJSletisinian bay, and where both the modem causewayand the traces of the ancient road terminate.We arrive at the beginning of the paved roadat 2.8, and at the end at 2.12. Here on the edgeof the beach lies part of the body of a seal, thrownup by the sea. The cultivable ground at this ATTICA, [chap.trinity of the valley of Dhafni is prolonged in anarrow stripe along the shore of the bay, at thefoot of Mount CorydalluSy as far as the Metokhiof Skarmanga. We now ascend the valley ofDhafni, the pass narrowing gradually until itarrives, at 2.27, at some niches in the rocks onthe left of the road, below which are the foundationsof the peribolus of a temple, which it isevident from ancient testimony was that of Venuson the Sacred Way. Just opposite to the nichesare some traces of the road, and the ruins of stonewallswhich supported both sides of it for a considerabledistance. The remains of the peribolus,which are between the road and the niches, are24 yards long and 12 wide ; the foundations of thewalls are 5 feet thick, and constructed of greatrude masses of stone, exactly answering to theapyoi Xi0oi which Pausanias here describes \ Tothe westward of this spot are the foundations of asquare tower of similar construction. Under twoof the niches I distinguish the words ^tXp 'A^poSirp,which not only prove this to be the site of thetemple of Venus, but also that it was the Philaeummentioned by Plutarch, and by a writer cited byTheseus', though the latter authority has notcorrectly described it as being atThria. The templewas probably of ancient date, and was repairedperhaps by Demetrius Poliorcetes, when he here^ ficra ii tcvto 'A^po^liyic * Plutarch, in Demeter. —raoQ ktrri Koi wpo avTov rccx^C Dionysius Trypbonis, ap.iipy&y XlOufv Oeai 6i^y, — Pau Athen. 1. 6, c. 16.san. Attic, c. 37.XVII.] ATTICA. 385instituted divine honours to his wife While, withthe surname of Venus \At 2.3, leaving the temple of Venus I proceedalong the left hank of a torrent flowing to the Bayof Eleusis and observe the traces of the SacredWay on the opposite bank, in some places cut inthe rocks, but, for the most part, a causeway supportedon the side of the rema by a wall of roughstones. At 3.49 arrive at the Monastery of Dhafni :there can be little doubt that this building occupiesthe site, and consists in great part of the remainsof the temple of Apollo on Mount Pcecilumywhich was probably converted into a church on theestablishment of Christianity at Athens. The modemname Aa^vii seems connected with the worshipof Apollo, and may have been derived from a groveof sacred bay, which had survived that worship. Butat present no bay trees remain here. AlthoughDhafni is despoiled of the finest of those remainswhich formerly made it interesting, the outer inclosureof the monastery, and the church itself, are stillmade up almost entirely of Hellenic materials ; andthere are several sarcophagi remaining, the mostremarkable of which stands with the bottom upwardsin the portico before the cells of the monks :it is of white marble, large and massy. Thesesepulchral monuments were probably collectedfrown the Sacred Way, the sides of which were acontinued cemetery from Athens to Eleusis. Thedome of the church at Dhafni is now supported byDoves of white marble and had been placed as dedicationterra cotta have been found to Venus,under the niches, where theyVOL. II. C C386 ATTICA. [chap.two cross beams of wood, and shows several largecracks caused by the operation of taking awaythree Ionic columns, which, on my first visitto Attica, were in their original places, envelopedin the wall of the monastery. A high squaretower with a little dome at the top, like those inSyria, appears to have been erected in the time ofthe Franks.One of the greatest objections to the removal ofancient remains from Greece to England, or othercountries, is, that in consequence of the negligenceof those who remove or collect them, it is not alwaysknown from whence they came, so that monumentsserving to illustrate ancient history on the spot,often become useless for that purpose. Nor is thisremark confined to inscriptions, although it is undoubtedlymost applicable to them, since, in agreat majority of instances, Grecian works of art,of every kind, had some peculiar reference to localhistory and mythology. Il has often happenedmoreover, that while by the separation of the monumentfrom the place, both have lost a portion oftheir interest, the former, either from its want ofmerit or its state of preservation, has been of littleutility to modern art in the place where it hasbeen deposited. The evil is by no means of recentoccurrence, for every collection in Europe containsremains of antiquity, which have become inexplicableby our ignorance of their origin.The monastery stands at the highest and narrowestpart of the Pass : beyond it the road is levelfor a short distance, and then gradually widens until,at the end of 12 minutes from the monastery in pass-xvii.]ATTICA. 387ing between a conical hill on the left, and the slopeof Mount Cornwallis on the right, Athens and itsplain opens to view. The prospect from this point,although not so extensive as that from the fortressof Phyle on the road from Thebes, is more interestingfrom the greater proximity of the city,and of all the more remarkable objects. On formeroccasions I have seen it only in the midst of summer,but it is more beautiful in the present season,the larger proportion of the trees of Attica beingevergreens, such as the pine, the prints, and theolive, together with a variety of shrubs, and thefields and pastures, which have recovered a portionof their verdure, affording a peculiarly agreeablecontrast to the rocky mountains. In summer thescene displays an arid monotony, relieved only bythe pale green of the olive ; and a vapour risesso rapidly from the earth, that there is a constanthaze over the distant objects, which are always moredistinctly seen in a fine winter's day. In enteringAttica, after a journey in Boeotia, the causesare forcibly apparent of that atmospheric differencebetween the two provinces, which gave riseto the Athenian sarcasm adopted by the Latins, onthe density of Boeotian air and intellect. Three-fourthsof the valleys of Boeotia are so entirelyencased by mountains, that even the running watersare discharged into the sea by subterraneous channels,whence lakes and marshes abound, and thevapours arising from them, detained by the surroundingmountains, are slowly dissipated ; whilethe Attic peninsula, labouring under a deficiencyof water, and ventilated, often to excess, from thecc388 Maris. [chap.Corinthian, Saronic and ^gean seas, enjoys withthese inconveniences and in consequence of them,a purer air and serene sky than Boeotia. This physicaldifference may possibly have had some influenceon the moral cause to which the low station of Thebesamong the states of Greece was justly attributed byEphorus^ and which ought to be a lesson to allgovernments on the importance of encouraging artsand literature. But the proverbial contempt ofBoeotian intellect was carried far beyond the boundsof truth and justice, as a long catalogue of heroes,statesmen, poets, sculptors, philosophers and engineersmight be adduced to demonstrate.Having descended into the plain, we pass at theend of thirty-eight minutes from Dhafni, by thechapel of St. George at the entrance of the olivewood, the road through which is now muddy andcut up by the torrents. At 4.30 pass by the puissanttjiftlik of Hadji Al^^, and enter Athens at theMora Kaposi, or Hora rri^ Mop^ac, at 4.15.In order to complete that comparative view ofthe ancient and modern geography of Greece whichhas been the principal object of the present work,as well as of two others ^, I shall here subjoin someremarks on the topography of the Megaris, whichdistrict I visited in a former journey.Of the great isthmus which extends from the'Ephor.ap. Strabo. p. 401. and Travels in the Morea.See p. 220 of this volume. The present observations mayNamely, On the Demi of be considered as a sequel toAttica published in the first the 29th chapter of the lattervolume of the Transactions of work, which relates to the to-theRoyal Society of Literature, geography of the Corinthian.IXVII. J M£OARll». 389foot of Mount Cithaeron to the Acro-Corinthus, andwhich connects Northern Greece with the Peloponnesianabout one fourth, including the narrowestpart or Isthmus properly so called, belonged to theCorinthia, the remainder, which was included withina sea coast of about thirty miles on either gulfwith a breadth varying from twenty miles to thirty,formed the Megaris. Like the Corinthia, it wastoo small to have had much influence on the generalpolitics of Greece, or even to preserve its ownindependence ; and by its position it was not lessexposed than that territory to the effects of thefrequent contests between the states of Greece.Being very mountainous, barren, and incapableof supporting a large population, it sent forthin the times of its prosperity colonies to theEuxine, Propontis and Sicily, and from the samecause, under different circumstances, experiencedthe greatest distress, when the Athenians, justlyincensed against the Megarenses for having joinedthe Corinthians, and massacred the Athenian garrisonat the beginning of the Peloponnesian war,excluded them from the use of the Attic ports andmarkets ^ . The redeeming attribute of the Megaricterritory was its excellent position for the pursuitof commerce both by land and sea ; and it was undoubtedlyto this advantage that Megara owed anopulence and splendour, which were quite disproportionedto its natural resources. Like ^gina, andmany other once-flourishing republics, its decline isto be dated from that increase of power in the leadingThucyd. 1. I.e. 67, 114, 139.— Aristoph. Acharn. v. 534.729, &c.Maris.[chap.states, which destroyed the independence of thoseof second rank. Its commercial advantages, however,still maintained it in a respectable condition,as long as Greece was wealthy, and densely inhabited,but when it became poor and depopulated,and still more when the Roman government wasno longer able to protect its distant subjects,insecurity was the only effect of the peculiaritiesof the situation of Megara, and has continuedto be its ordinary condition during the long agesof the debasement of Greece. An inscriptioncopied by Chandler at Megara, shows that itstowers were repaired in the end of the fifth century,by one Count Diogenes, an officer of the emperorAnastasiu8\ But in later ages, the Byzantinegovernment was incapable of affording any protectionto these coasts from the pirates or cruisersof Europe, and the Turkish navy has been so unequalto the task, that the inhabitants of Megarahave more than once been obliged to abandon thetown, and retire to the villages of the OnAoL.In proceeding to trace the ancient geography ofthe Megaris I shall, as usual, chiefly follow Pausanias.The places mentioned by him betweenChandler, Travels in Greece,c. 43. Ins. Ant. 130. Thesame Diogenes gained greatcredit by wresting Claudiopolisfrom the rebellious Isaurian^and restoring it to the emperor.At Megara he expended, accordingto the inscription, 100pieces of gold (xpvaivovc) onthe towers, and bestowed 150pieces, with 200 feet of marble,on the construction of a bath.Pausan. Attic, c. 39. Inthe order of his description,Pausanias probably pursuedthe course of his own travelsfrom Athens into the Peloponnesian.That his work isarranged in conformity with thegeneral direction of his routeXVII.]Morris.Eleusis and Megara are, 1. The well called avOiovor avOivovj ' the flowery ;' this answers to a springon the road side, in a branch of the Eleusinianplain near the head of a small curve of the coast,which forms the north-western angle of the bay ofEleusis. 2. A little beyond the well, stood theTemple of Meganeira, and the monuments of theArgives who were slain at Thebes in the war betweenCreon and Adrastus, and whose bodies weresaid to have been rescued by Theseus, and hereinterred by him. 3. The sepulchre of Alope, andnot &r from it, 4. The palaestra of her father Coercion,by whom she was killed. No remains of these monumentshave yet been discovered. Pausanias has notexactly stated the boundary between the Eleusiniaand M egaris ; but we can hardly doubt that it wasMount CeratUy now Kandili, which interrupts thethrough Greece, is strongly indicatedby a remark in hisseventh book, or Archaic, wherehaving occasion to notice theOdium of Herodes at Athens,he states that it was not builtwhen he wrote his first book, orAttica. In some of the details ofeach province, on the contrary,it is possible that the order ofthe excursions may have givenway to the general plan ofthe work* But the veploBoeUavtrayiaiciiy or Pausanias tourof Greece, might still be recommended,as forming a very convenientplan of travels throughthis country : namely, fromAthens through the Megaris toCorinth ; from thence by Sicyonand Phlius to Argos;round the Argolic peninsulaagain to Argos ; from Argos toSparta ; round the eastern La-<conic peninsula again to Sparta;round the western Laconic peninsulainto Messenia, fromMessenia into the Eleia andAchaia, and lastly the tour ofArcadia, requiring various deviations.After having returnedto Athens, the traveller mightfollow Pausanias to Eleutherae,to Plataea and Thebes ; andfrom thence make the tours ofBoeotia and Phocis.Hearts.[chap.level coast for a considerable distance, and the projectionof which occurs at about a third of the distancefrom Eleusis to Megara. It would seem fromPhilochoruSy cited by Strabo, that there was atemple of Apollo Py thus on this part of the coast,which Phosphorus considered the boundary of theMegaris ^ ; it is not noticed by Pausanias.Megara retains little of antiquity but the name,which is still ra Miyapa, and seems originally tohave been derived from certain piyapay or sanctuariesof Ceres, though the later Megarenses preferred, asusual, a heroic origin, and derived their name fromMegareus, son of Neptune, a native of Onchestus.Pausanias remarks, that the vengeance of the Godsfor the murder of the Athenian herald Anthemshad never been thoroughly appeased, andthat Megara had been an exception to the cities ofGreece which had profited by the munificence ofHadrian *. Nevertheless, there still existed publicedifices, and monuments of art sufficient to provethe former existence of that opulence, which has^ Twy nay^ioyiZ&y retradptiyoyrwy^ Alyewc re Kal Avkov KalTl&XXayros Kal rerdprov fiitroVKol rfji *ArrMC^c €*C rirrapa fUpiiBiaipeOelariQ, 6 ^Ivoq i^y Meya-pisa Xaxot' Cal rrcVac n)i/ ,^iX6)(ppOQ fiky o6y dirorov *lerdfwv fJtixp^ tov HvOlovSiilK€iy ahrov ^rftri ri^y dpxfly*"Aydptay Be fUxpi *EXev&ivo£ Kairov Opiaalov weBlov, — Strabo,p. 392.Pausan. Attic, c. 36. Aninscription found at Megarashows, however, that here as wellas at Athens, a new tribe wascalled Adrian's, in honour ofthe emperor. From anotherinscription, we learn that Sabinawas worshipped here underthe title of i^iaAiy/Lt^n^p. Boeck.Ins. CrrsBc. VoL I. p. 566.And Pausanias himself describesa temple of Apollo ofwhite marble, built by Hanau*XVII.] MEOARIS. 393been variously attested in ancient history. Thetown stood on a low hill with a double summit,situated a mile and a half from the shore of theSaronic gulf, near the southern extremity of a plainsix or seven miles in length as well as breadth, ofno great fertility, and which is bounded on everyside, except towards the sea, by the mountainsOneia. The following is a brief abstract of the descriptionof the city by Pausanias, in which I shallexactly follow the order of his narrative, as it isamong the clearest and most methodical which hehas given of the more celebrated cities of Greece,and may lead to some interesting discoveries,when circumstances shall allow the site to be properlyexplored ^ The fountain, which took itsname from the Nymphs Simonides, was adorned byTheagenes, tyrant of Megara, with a building remarkablefor its magnitude and numerous columns.Near it stood an ancient temple, containing a brazenstatue of Diana Soteira by Strongylion ', statuesof the twelve gods, the reputed works of Praxiteles,and images' of the Roman emperors. In theadjoining Olympieium, or inclosure of JupiterOlympus, stood a magnificent temple, containinga statue of the God, the finishing of which was interruptedby the enmity of the Athenians in thePeloponnesian war : hence the face of the God wasof ivory and gold, and the remaining parts of clayPausan. Attic c. 40, et seq. tis, but he was chiefly cele-Three of the Muses in the rated for his horses and oxen.Grove of the Muses at Mount Pass. Boeot. c. 30.Helicon were made by this ar * eixoytQ,394 MEQARIS. [chap.and plaster. It was the joint work of Phidias andof Theodosius of JVf megara. On the head of Jupiterwere represented the Hours and Fates. In theback part of the temple were some half-wroughtpieces of wood, prepared by Theodosius for thereception of the ivory and gold with which theremaining parts of the statue were to have beenadorned ^ The temple contained also the brazenbeak of a galley taken, as the Megarenses asserted,from the Athenians in the contest for the possessionof Salamis.Anciently, each summit of the hill of Megarawas occupied by a citadel ; one was named Caria,from Car, son of PhoroAeus son of Inches, theother Alcathoe, from Alcathous son of Pelops.Having ascended from the Olympium into Caria,there occurred a temple of Bacchus Nyctelius;this citadel contained also a sanctuary of VenusApostrophe, an oracle of Night, a roofless temple ofJupiter Conies, statues of aesculapius and Hygeiaby Bryaxis, and the MIyapov, or temple of Ceres,said to have been founded by Car during his reign.Below the citadel Caria to the northward, near theOlympium. was the tomb of Alcmene. from whencePausanias was conducted by his Megara guideto Rhus', a place so called because the watersopiate ^e rov yaov Ktirai plantae statues of the Greeks.iiiXa TifxUpya' rara tfisWtv 6 On this subject see the work ofBt6KoafiOQ iXiipavTi koI 'xpvaf M.Quatrem^re, entitled /tfpi/frKOfffiiiaa^ TO AyaXfia iiCTiXiaeiy Olympian,Tov A«Sc* — c. 40. ' TLvTivdey 6 rQy imxt^pl^yThis remarkable passage iffuy i^ifyvfrrf^ ffytlro Ic x^P*^^throws great light on the mode 'Povv.~€. 41.of constructing the chrysele-XVII.] Regards. 395from the neighbouring mountain * were collectedin this place, until Theagenes having turned offthe water, erected an altar here to Achelous. Notfar from thence was the monument of Hyllus, sonof Hercules, and near the latter a temple of Isis,with another of Apollo Agrees and Diana Agrotera,which is said to have been dedicated by Alcathouswhen he had slain the Ciceronian lion. On descendingfrom this temple occurred the heroum ofPanton, and near it the tomb of Hippolyta,fashioned like an Amazonian shield, then that ofTereus, who married Procne, daughter of Panton,and who is asserted by the Megarenses to haveruled over the country about Page.On the right hand of the ascent to Alcathoe wasthe sepulchre of Megareus, near which was thehearth of the Propontis ^ or place where Alcansacrificed to the deities who assisted himin raising the walls of Megara; here was thestone on which Apollo laid his lyre ' on that occasion,and which thenceforth uttered when struckIt was probably the same Nicander to have been calledwater which supplied the fourth Maimonides, or plantainof the Simonides. The ionia.nearest heights appear fromOf fM€v vwo SicvpoiFOf opfi llafifxbjvta r* aivri,Nicand. Theriac. v. 214.Tc/x^d re trpoXinoyrit rep TLafifjuavlBac ^x^oc*Eitrtrvfi€yoi Mcyap^cc iyevvaaffayro do/ioiO'c.Id. in Thebaic, ap. Schol. in Theriac. v. 214.eaTtadiHy llpoBofiitiiy. — c. 42. ' KiOdpa.396 Morris., [chap.a musical sound \ similar to that which Pausaniasheard at Thebes in Egypt from a half statuegenerally called the statue of Memnon, but whichwas said by the natives to be that of Pha-menoph, though some ascribed it to Sesostris '.In Alcathoe was a council-house', formerly thesepulchre of Timalcus, and on the summit ofthe same citadel stood a temple of Minerva,^oc)3e &yai, wot fiey iirvpyioffag ir6\iv Axpifv'AXxaOof JUKonoQ ircuSl j^apiCofieyoQ,Theogn. v. 771.Regia turns erat vocalibus addita maris,In quibus abraham proves Letoia ferturDeposits lyra : saxo sons ejus inhabit.Ovid. Metal. 1. 8, v. 14.Juvenal agrees with Pau person for whom it was in-sanias, both as to the con tended,edition of the statue and theDitnidio magical resonant ubi Memnon chordae,Atque vetus There centum janet ohruta ports.Juvenal. Satyr. 15. v. 5.Numerous inscriptions, still by Cambyses. According tolegible on the leg of the late discoveries, the Memnonstatue itself, attribute it to in question reigned at Thebes,Memnon, and two of them two centuries before the greatadd that the Egyptians called conqueror of Asia, known tohim Phamenoph, or Amenoph. the Greeks by the name of Se-sincethe time of Juvenal and nostrils : and nothing can betterPausanias, the upper part of the show the ignorance of the The-statuewhich had originally been bale Greeks than their havingmonolithal, like another near it, confounded this person with thehas been reconstructed of seven Memnon of Homer, who was aral pieces of stone, and in this Persian of Susa, and lived fourstate it still remains. Pausanias or five centuries later,asserts that it was overthrown * fiovktvriipuov.XVII.] MEOARIS. 397containing a statue of the goddess, entirely gildedexcept the face, bands, and feet, which wereof ivory. Here likewise were sanctuaries ofMinerva NiKn and Minerva Atavrcc, the latter socalled, in the opinion of Pausanias, because thestatue was dedicated by Ajax, son of Telamon.The temple of Apollo was anciently of brick, buthad been rebuilt of white marble by Hadrian. Itcontained three statues of Apollo made of ebony ;those sumamed Pythias and Decatephorus werein the egyptian style : the Archagetes was in the.£ginetan manner. There was also a sanctuary ofCeres Thesmophorus, in descending from whichoccurred the sepulchre of Callipolis, son of Al-cautious.On the way to the Prytaneium were the followingmonuments : the heroum of Ino surroundedwith a stone fence, within which was a plantationof olives, — the hero of Iphigenia and of Adrastus,both of whom, according to the Megarenses,died at Megara, and a temple of Diana, saidto have been founded by Agamemnon. In thePrytaneium were the sepulchres of Menippus,son of Megareus, and of Echepolis, son of Al-cautious,and near the same building a stonenamed Anaclethra, because here Ceres, whensearching for her daughter, sat down and calledher. The iBsymnium was a council-house, sonamed from its founder; it contained a monumentof the heroes of Megara. There were alsosepulchral monuments of the Megarenses whohad fallen in fighting against the Modes, and thetombs of Pyrgo, wife of Alcathous, and of his398 Morris. [chap.daughter Iphinoe, which were in the way fromthe ^symnium to the heroum of Alcathous : thelatter structure served in the time of Pausanias fordepositing writings. In the entrance to the Dionysius,or sanctuary of Bacchus, was a tom ofAstycrateia and Santo, daughters of Polybius,son of Oceanus, who founded the sanctuary, andplaced in it a wooden statue of the god sumamedPatrons, of which the face only was visible. Nearit was a Satyr of Parian marble, by Praxiteles,and a Bacchus, sumamed Dasyllius. Near theDionysius was the temple of Venus. It containeda very ancient statue in ivory of the goddess,sumamed Praxis, and images of Persuasion ^, andof Consolation *, made by Praxiteles, and of Love *,of Allurement*, and of Desire*, the works ofScopas. Near the temple of Venus was that ofFortune, containing a statue by Praxiteles, andanother temple in which were the Muses, and abrazen Jupiter by Lysippus.In the Agora stood the tomb of Coroebus, whichwas inscribed with verses relating to the story ofCoroebus and Psamathe, and supported * statuesrepresenting Coroebus killing the monster Poena :Pausanias thought they were the most ancientspecimens of sculpture in stone which be hadseen in Greece. Near this sepulchre was that ofLysippus, who gained a victory in running atOlympia, and who, when military commander ofthe Megarenses, enlarged the boundaries of the .43. * "I/xcpoc.TlapyiyopOQ. * OoOoc*9 "Epic. ^ iwlOtffJta iari rf ra.XVII.] Megara; 399paris. In descending from the agora by the streetcalled Eutheia, the temple of Apollo Prostateriusstood a little on the right; it contained, an Apollo ofgreat merit, a Diana, and a Latona, besides whichwere Latona and her children, by Praxiteles. In theancient Gymnasium, near the gates called Nym*shades, was a small pyramidal stone, named ApolloMarinus and a temple of Lucina. On the descent tothe port of Megara, which in the time of Pausaniasstill bore the appellation ofNisaea, there was a templeof Diana Malophorus, the roof of which had fallenin. The citadel of Nissea still remained ; on thesea side was the tomb of Lelex, who is said tohave been an Egyptian, the son of Neptune andLibya, and to have reigned at Nissea. NearNisaea, adds Pausanias, there was a small island ^,where Minos of Crete was said to have shelteredhis fleet in his war with Nisus.There remains nothing of ancient Megara aboveground,save some fragments of the walls of thethree citadels, Caria, Alcathoe, and Nissea, togetherwith some vestiges of the Long Walls, andsome fragments of the buildings of the city, butthe place has been fertile in inscriptions ^ ; and ifthe situations in which they were found had beenexactly noted they might have contributed not a«^ In the iDOBt ancient norwich bore the name of a deity,ship of the Greeks pillars or ' irapiiKet vfjaot ov fjLBydXri, —square pyramidal stones were c. 44.worshipped under the name of ' All the inscriptions of Me-thegods. In the agora of gara are collected in the workPharae, in Achaia, were 30 of Boeckh Corp. Inscr. Gr. Vol.quadrangular stones, each of 1, p. 553.400 KEGARI9. [chap.little to a knowledge of the ancient topography.From one which is now at Oxford we learn thatit was deposited in the Olympium. Anotherin honour of some gymnasiarchs was probablyin the Gymnasium. The modem town occupiesonly the hill of the two ancient citadels,and extends not much beyond the western summit:unlike the other towns of the continent ofGreece, the houses are built with flat roofs likethose of the Grecian islands. Alcathoe havingbeen the more important of the two citadels, wasprobably the western, or that upon which themodem village is chiefly situated; and in thatcase, the tower; which crowns it occupies the siteof the temple of Minerva. The Olympium wason the northern side of Caria : and the Agoraseems to have been towards the southern end ofthe ancient site, as the street Eutheia led fromthence through the gate Nymphades into theLongomural street, and to Nissea. As nature hasprobably resumed her sway in regard to the courseof the waters from the neighbouring mountains,their natural receptacle, called Rhus, from whichTheagenes turned away the water in order to formafountain in a more convenient situation, mightbe thus identified, and it would serve as an importantguide to the ancient topography.The Long Walls which connected Megara withits maritime fortress Nissea, in the same mannerthat the Piraeus was connected with Athens, wereconstructed by the Athenians in the year b. c. 455,when in consequence of the naval power whichthe victory of Salamis had given them, and theXVII.] MEOARIS. 401disgust conceived by the Megarenses against theCorinthians, the Athenians obtained a paramountinfluence at Megara, and placed garrisons inNisaea and Pagae. These, together with Nau-pectus, which city at the opening of the Peloponnesianwar they occupied with the refugees fromMessenia, gave them stations at both the extremitiesof the Corinthian Sea, and consequently thenaval command of it ^ The Megaric Long Wallsare noticed at this time by Aristophanes ' ; theywere destroyed by the Megarenses themselves uponrecovering them out of the hands of the Athenians,in the eighth year of the Peloponnesian war'.Seventy-four years afterwards they were restoredby Phocion ^. Strabo alludes to them as if theystill existed ^, but the silence of Pausanias seemsto show that they had fallen to ruin before histime.The harbour of Nisaea was formed by the islandMinoa, which, from the description given by Thucydidesof the operations of the Athenians againstMegara, in the fifth and eighth years of the Peloponnesianwar ®, seems not to have been the nearestisland opposite to Megara, which is too small, andtoo distant from the shore, but the peninsula, a milefarther to the east, at the entrance of the strait of .1. 1, c. 103. 107. r&y Meyapwy deVa dicr<i» Trail.SiovQ reis ir<$\eAic Sii^oy^ axi"TO, MeyapiKa trKiXtf, — Xeviv eicaripiaBiy trvyanrdfuyoyLysist. V. 1172. wpoc abrriy. — Strabo, p. 391.• Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 109. • Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 51 1. 4,Plutarch, in Phocion. c. 66.*H Sc N/<rata early kiciytioyVOL. II. D d402 MEOARIS. [chap.lamps. Pausanias, in describing M ina as an island,adverted perhaps to its earlier condition rather thanto that which existed in his time ; for Strabo, neartwo centuries before had applied to it the word a^cpa,or promontory ^ The examples of the conversionof islands into peninsula are so numerous on thecoasts of Greece, that the present instance hasnothing surprising in it, especially as the straitwhich separated Minoa from the main appearsfrom Thucydides to have been narrow at the entrancefrom the sea, and to have terminated in amarsh, over which there was a bridge or causeway.In the fifth year of the war, the Atheniansperceiving that Minoa, in which the Mega-senseshad only a tower, would be a much betterstation than Budorus and Salamis for observingthe Peloponnesian fleet, and for blockading Megara,Nicias seized two of the towers of thewalls of Nisaea, which had prevented his shipsfrom passing between them and the island ofMinoa, and then built a wall in the island, bywhich he cut off *' the communication betweenMegara and Minoa by means of the bridge whichled into the island across the marsh ^." He thenformed a fortress in the island and left a garrisonin it. If such was the situation of Minoa, it willfollow that the length of the Long Walls was not8 stades, as the text of Thucydides gives it ^, but^ Mcra sri rac XKeipiaylBa^ ' fiaxpa Tti\ri , . • , Ijy Hnirpac &Kpa wp6iceiTai Mivufa irraSluty fioXttrra oicriif diro r^cwotovtra tov iv r^ Nccrat^ Xi/i^- iroXcctfc cvi riiv ^itraiav top Xiv.— strabo, p. 891. ficVa avrwy. — Thucyd. 1. 4, c.^lo TEi'dyovQ, — Thucyd. 66,1.3. c. 51.XVII.] Regards. 40318, as we find it in that of Strabo ; the peninsulabeing not less than three miles from Megara.In the eighth year of the war, the Atheniansstill holding Minoa, but the Peloponnesian havinga garrison in Nissea, the former in conjunctionwith a body of troops from Platsea, and by theassistance of a party in Megara, obtained possessionof the Long Walls, and built a cross wallwithin them for protection against Megara. Theythen prolonged the circumvallation of Nisaea tothe sea on either side, obtaining plentiful materialsfrom the suburb, and making its houses serve,with the addition of battlements, for a part of thefortification. The Peloponnesian in Niseea beingthus deprived of their daily supplies, were obligedto surrender, when the Athenians took possessionof Nissea, and entirely separated it fromMegara, by breaking down a part of the LongWalls. Braids, the Lacedaemonian, who wasthen at the Isthmus preparing to march intoThrace, on hearing of the first success of theAthenians at the Long Walls, summoned theBoeotian, who were already collected at Plataeafor the relief of Megara, to meet him atTripodiscus, a Megaric town * at the foot of MountGeraneia. The united forces amounted to 6000 ;and the Athenians, who had received a large reinforcementfrom Athens, were not much inferior innumber. Each party being more anxious to supportits adherents in Megara than to come to action,nothing took place but a combat of cavalry in theKutfifi. — Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 70.Dd 2404 Megara. [chap.plain, in which the Athenians had some advantage.At length Braids, having succeeded in obtainingadmission into Megara, the oligarchy was reestablishedin the city, the Athenians still retainingpossession of Nisaea and Minoa. It was inthe ensuing winter that the Megarenses, havingbeen sufficiently strong to recover possession oftheir Long Walls, entirely destroyed them.From a part of the narrative of Thucydides, itappears that there was a sanctuary of Mars, calledthe Enyalium, not far from the gate by which theAthenians first made their irruption into the LongWalls, and which seems to have been a gateopening from the northern Long Wall into thesuburb on that side.We find by the terms of the truce agreed uponbetween the Athenians and Lacedaemonians in thespring of the ninth year, that towards the sea on thenorth-eastern side of Nissea, there was a monumentof Nisus, at a gate of Nissea, and a Posidonium, orsanctuary of Neptune, between it and the bridgeleading into Minoa. By the conditions of thetreaty, the line of demarcation between the Atheniansin Minoa and Nisaea, on one side, and theMegarenses and their allies, on the other, was theroad which led from that gate of Nisaea to thePosidonium, and from thence a direct line to thecauseway ^Having finished the description of the city, Pausaniasproceeds to notice the places situated in theopnvriy or mountainous part of the Megaris to thenorthward of the plain, after which he describesThucyd. 1. 4, c. 118.XVII.] Morris. 405the Road from Megara into the Corinthia. Theonly places named by him in the Oreine are Page,j£gosthena, and Erineia.Although the historians and geographers haveleft little doubt that j3Sgosthena was at Ghermano,it is satisfactory to be able to confirm this fact bymeans of an inscription found on the spot ; from acopy of which, although very imperfect, I have beenable to decipher enough to show that it was a decreeof the people of ^gosthena in favour of Apol-diodorus, son of Callimachus of Megara, grantinghim the ordinary rights of proxenia, with the useof the pastures of the district for his cattle, andthe privilege of a front seat at the public ceremonies'. The decree is to be recorded in the temple*E^€iSri *Airo\(\o^w)poc 'AXKifiaypv Meyapev^(cvY'ovc) ii*y SiariXeirf haynf rev AlyoaOtvirav . . • •r^ Zdynf 7cp6^evov etfieyaf/rov Roi tKyovovQ ahrov . . « • rac ir<$Xioc AiyotrOtpiTayKal ilfity avrf iKTrfiriy ydc <cac oiKiat xal &X\a jravra Saa ical toXq&XX01C TpoiiroiC ofwittQ KeXcvcc etfuv avrf koI eiriyofiiay• •• . iivaypdyl/dvrui oi i •••••••iy Tf Ups Tov MtXdfxwo^os' ^iSovdai ^£ Kale. • • rdy MiXafiwoBdiay Kal KaXiiy airroy el irpotSpiarKaddirtp rcu rove fiXXovc xpo^vovc*The Doric dialect is ac proof of which he notes a lostcounted for hy ^gosthena passage of Polybius. The in-having been considered a town scription shows the correctnessof the Megaris. Stephens of Stephens. The Ethnicremarks the difference of the AtyoirOcVeioc, therefore, is errorof the gentile in the neons in Athenaeum, who citesnames Megara and .^gosthenai some words of Polybius, show-althoughboth are neuters plu ing that ^gosthena produced aral ; for while the ethnic of sweet wine, AtyotrOeyei^ yXvA:£cMegara is Megareus, that of (oivfi).— Athen. ]• 10, ell..£gosthena is AlyoffOtyiTrn, in406 MEOARIS* [chap.of Melampus, and mention is made of the Melam-podeia, which we learn from Pausanias to havebeen a festival celebrated every year at iBgos-thenceThe position of JEgosthena thus ascertained,illustrates two interesting passages in the Hellenicof Xenophon. Between Ghermano and the valeof Livadhostra, which stands on or near the site ofthe ancient Creusis, a projection of the highest partof CithcBron terminates abruptly in the Carinthiaor Alcyonic Gulf, and forms a natural separationbetween the Megaris and the Boeotian district ofThespuBy of which city Eleusis was the port, leavingno passage along the shore except a path onthe mountain's side, which now serves for a roadfrom Livadhostra and Ai Vashti to Ghermano andVilia. Like the Sdronian rocks, along whichthere is a similar road from Megara to Crommyonjthis termination of Mount CithcBron^ as well as allthe adjoining part of the Alcyonic sea, is subjectto sudden gusts of wind, by which the passage ofsuch a cornice is sometimes rendered dangerous.The Lacedaemonians under Cleombrotus werehere overtaken, on their march from Creusis toi^^gosthena, when retreating from Boeotia in thewinter of B.C. 379-378, by one of these tempests.Such was the force of the wind, that the shields ofthe soldiers were wrested from their hands, andmany of the asses that carried the burthens were1 M'£v AiyoaQivoi^ Se McXa/i- r^ M<Xd/Liiro^c Kal dra irasvoBoQ row *AfLvddoy6t ktmv Ito ko^^v Ayovot. — Pausan.lipoy Nul &.ytlp ov /xeyac iwetp-' Attic, c. 44.ynafjiiyos iy trrtiX^' Kal dvovaiXVII.] Regards. 407blown over the precipices into the sea Sevenyears afterwards the Lacedsemonians again retreatedby the same road after their memorabledefeat at Leuctra. Little trusting to the peacewhich the Thebans had granted them, theyavoided crossing Mount Cithseron by the ordinaryroute in the face of their conquerors, and preferredthe risk of marching in the night by the narrowand dangerous path at the back of the mountain.The historian states that the Spartan commandersconcealed their intention by moving from the fieldof battle near Leuctra in the evening, with theavowed purpose of being ready to cross the Citherby the usual route in the morning at daybreak; but that, instead of pursuing it, theyturned off to Creusis, and proceeded from thenceto j^osthena of the Megarice, where they met thearmy of Archidamus coming to their support ^.Not less certain than thei position of iBgosthenais that of Pegee or Pagae, as it was called in theMegaric dialect. From Thucydides and Plutarchwe learn that it was the principal harbouron the western coast of the Megaris ; and fromStrabo that it formed with Nisaea the narrowestpart of the Megaric Isthmus, the breadth of whichwas 120 stades'. These data correspond exactlywith the port of Psatho, not far from the shore ofwhich are found the remains of an ancient fortress.Near the road from Megara to Pagae there was arock (according to Pausanias) covered with marks^ Xenoph. Hellen. 1. 5, c. 4. 111. Plutarch in Peril.Ibid. 1. 6. c. 4. Strabo, p. 334.^ Thucyd. 1. 1, c. 103, 107,408 MEQARIS. [chap.which were supposed to have been made by thearrows of an advanced body of Median cavalry,when Mardonius, hearing of the arrival of thePeloponnesian at the Isthmus on their way toPlataea, made a movement from Attica to interceptthem ^ Pausanias relates that they wandered tothe rock on the road to Pagae in the night ; thatunder the impulse of a madness inspired by Diana,they consumed their arrows by discharging themat the rock, mistaking it for the enemy, and thatthus disarmed they were attacked in the morningand put to death by the Megarenses. At Pagethere was a brazen statue of Diana Soteira, erectedin memory of this event, and exactly resemblinganother dedicated to the same deity at Megara.Page contained also the heroic monument ofiBgialeus, who fell at Glisas in the second expeditionof the Argives against Thebes '.The third town of the Oreine, mentioned byPausanias, was Erineia, in which was a monumentof Atone, daughter of Cadmus*. As Viliaand Kundura are the only inland positions in thenorthern part of the Megaric isthmus having anynatural advantages, we may presume JSrineia tohave occupied the one or other of those sites; andas Strabo notices Isis, formerly a town of theMegaris, as having been situated near Cithaeron^,I am disposed to place Is at Vilia, and JSrineiaat Kundura. There can be no doubt, as beforeHerodot. 1. 9, c. 14. Mtyapixf inciOcv dfrfKiafuyriPausan. Attic c. 40, 44. (ex Iso Boeotian sc.) eyyvcPausan. Attic, c. 44. rov KSaipAyos* Strabo, p. 405.^v yap 6 "Iffoc ironic ^y rpXVII.]Regards.remarked, that Kandili is the mountain whichthe ancients named Kipara, from the sharp rockswhich rise from its summit ; the ancient name ofKarj^dhi I am unable to discover, except that itwas the highest summit of the Oneia, as Strabodefines those mountains, that is to say, as extendingfrom the rocks Scironides to Cithseron and theconfines of Boeotia*. Other authors, however,appear to have comprehended in the Oneia, notonly all the mountains as far as the Isthmus, buteven the ridge to the southward of it, whichstretches from CenckreitB to Corinth, having apparentlyconsidered Geraneia only as the highestsummit of the Oneia '.In a verse preserved by Strabo, which the Athenianswere suspected by some of the ancient criticsof having ejected from the Iliad, for the sake ofinterpolating another, which proved that Salamisin the time of the Trojan war was a dependency^ '£f it, rj TCLpaXi^ ij KardSoXa/icFa KtiaBai avfifialyei rdfata Tile Meyapctf^c koI r^c *opt ivo & Kokovffi Kipara,Strabo, p. 395.Oi Meyapeic • • • ToperitioLyrowpoQ role Xo^cc ro7c KipaffiKoXov/iiroic. Diodor. Sicut.1. IS, c. 65.• . If fuBopif life Mcya-piioc inrip stir KoXovfUytar KegPlutarch, in Themis., » , ra Kokovfuya *'Oveiaopif« iiartlyoyra fie^pc BoitariacKa KiOatptiyoc two rQy ISiceipw-yliiiiy TtTpwy^ kqX r^c paparavrac oiov irpoc r^v ^Amicfiy*Strabo, p. 380."Er* 9 ^ X^P° ^^^ Mcyo-piiay wapaXvirpoCf Kaddirep rac^ 'Attics Kol TO wXioy avrtjckiri\€i rd KoXovfxeya "Qytiaopij, ^X'C rcc /xiiKvyofiiyri fuy&xd r&y Ixtipmyihay werp&y Mr^v Bouin'lay koI roy KtBaipHya^iulpyovaa H ney Kara N^oacavBakairffay diro T^fc Kara Kpltr^pray [al. Kpioway^ 'AXjcvoyldoQirpo€rayop€vofiiyiiQ, Strabo, p.393.See Travels in the Morea,Vol. iu. p. 310.410 MEQARIS. [chap.of Athens, mention is made of ^geirusa, Nisaw,and Tripods, in the Megaris, as part of the dominionsof Ajax of Salamis Whether the latterwas the genuine version or not, it is at least evidentfrom Strabo, that iBgeirusa and Tripods, likeNissea, still existed in his time. Of Polichne, thefourth Megaric town named in the verses, wehave no other notice in ancient history.Tripodiscus* is shown by Thucydides, on theoccasion already mentioned, to have been at thefoot of Mount Geraneia, in a situation convenientfor forming a junction of troops who were assemblingfrom Plataea in one direction, and the Isthmusin the other, for the purpose of acting at Megara.And accordingly, at the foot of Mount Geraneia^in the road from Plataea to the Isthmus four orfive miles to the north-west of Megara, I remarkedin my former journey, when passing by that routeStrabo, p. 394. The verses as we now have them are —Tac ^ Ik 2aXa/xcvoc 6.yty ZvoKal^EKa v^acSr^o'e ^ &yii»v, ty *Adrivaluv taravro ^dXayycc*The Megarenses asserted that Homer wrote as follows :Aiac ^ Ik ^Xafuyog 6,y€v veal, ec re HoXIx^^C''Ejc t Aiyiipoifffcni^f Niora/ijc re, Tpivo^wy re.Some of the ancient critics gave her of the names of places instrong reasons against the au Greece : Thucydides writesauthenticity of the Athenian read Tpciro^tVicoc ; Pausanias, Tpc-ing ; on the other hand, it iro^itrjcoi, Strabo, Tpuro^tVctoK,seems improbable that the Herodias (ap. Stephan. in Tpi-number of the ships should iro^iiricoc) TpuroBloKfi^ whichhave been omitted, as would seems to have been the formfollow from the admission of understood by Plutarch, whothe Megaric version. writes the gentile adjectiveThe termination of the plural TparoiiirKaioi*name varies, as in a great num-xvii.]Maris.from Megara to Corinth, the evident vestiges ofan ancient town. The position is perfectly inagreement with the fable of the foundation of Tri-priscus,related by Pausanias. According tothat author, Coroebus the Ai^ve, after havingslain the monster Poena, which had been sent byApollo to punish the Argives for the death of thechild of Apollo by Psamathe, daughter of theirking Crotopus, went to Delphi to give himselfup to punishment. He was ordered by theoracle to take a tripod out of the temple, to returntowards Argos, and wherever the tripod fell to theground to reside there, and to build a temple toApollo ^ The remains are exactly on the shortestroute from Delphi to the Isthmus, over MountGeraneia, leaving Megara a few miles on theleftIt is probable that i^geirusa, like Nissea andTripodiscus, was in the western part of the Me-paris,for none of the places mentioned in theMegaric reading of the verses in the Iliad areamong those which, according to Pausanias, occurPausan. Attic, c. 43.According to Canon, (narrate.19, ap. Phot. Bill. p. 179,)Crotopus, not Coroebus, wasthe founder of the Argive colonyat Tripodiscus.Strabo says, TpiiroSiffKioyRaff 5 fi yvy iiyopd tis Mc-capitalKccroc, from which itmight be supposed, that Tri-priscuswas nearer to Megara,but this does not follow. TheMegarenses held probably amarket near Tripodiscus, onaccount of its being a more centralsituation to the Megaris thantheir own city; such marketsin some spot convenient toall the vicinage, and generallynamed from the nearesttown, are still common in everypart of the Levant, and appearto have been equally so anciently.Regards.[chap.pied the Oreine, or mountain district to the northwardand eastward, whence it would seem alsothat the western part only was claimed by theSalaminii and M egarenses as the ancient dominionof Ajax. ^geirusa, according to Theopompus,was also called iBgeirus\ In Scylax, we findAris noticed as the last place on the Alcyonic ornorthern coast of the Megaris*. It is not improbablethat among the numerous corrections requiredin the names of Scylax, should be that ofAtytcpoc in place of "Epic* In this case it becomeslikely that ^geirus occupied the slope of MountGeraneia towards the Corinthian Sea, and that itsdistrict bordered upon that of (Enoe of the Conn-this,which appears from Strabo to have beensituated not far to the eastward of Cape Olmise'.On some part of Geraneia there was a town orfortress, homonymous with the mountain. Thisappears as well from Scylax as from Thucydides,who states the Athenians to have maintained agarrison there before the Peloponnesian war, andthat by the possession of Geraneia, Page, andMegara, they commanded the communication besAp. Stephan. in Alyct-povaa,Mcra dc Boitirovs Mcyapcicelaiy idyog koI xoXcic ate. Qijyal, reixoc Tepd-ytia, "Apis. UapdirXovg ^c riiiyMiyofiijjy x^P^^ ffraiia p\Scylax. Peril. Mcyopnc.'El' ^£ ri fJL€T€L^V TOV total Tbiy TLaydy to t^q*AKpalag fiayreloy "Hac vxfp-%£ TO warrior' amt ac *OX/i<a«,TO county dxpiariipwy Toy KokrTOV, iy ^ H T€ Oly6ri ica2 IlayalyTO inky Twy yLtyapimy ^povpwv^4 hi OlyAfi T(Sy KopiyOlt^y."^Strabo, p. 380.'El' he rf KoiXoTOTf tov r<SX-xov TOVTOv (sell. Tou KoptyBui'^Nov) ovfiL/iilirfKe Tag Uaydg Ktitr-Oac Kid Ttjy Oly6iiy» — Strabo,p. 409.XVII.] MEOARIS. 413tween Northern Greece and the Peloponnesus ^When Cassander, after having reduced a greatpart of the Peloponnesus in the year B.C. 316, retiredinto Macedonia, he left a garrison in Geraneia'.The fortress probably stood at the summitof the ridge where the road must in all ages havepassed.Cilia is known only as having been the sceneof action of a victory, obtained by the Mega-refusesand Athenians over the Corinthians' in theyear B.C. 458. It appears to have been in theplain of Megara: perhaps at the place whereWheler found the remains of several churchesbuilt on the ruins of more ancient buildings, andwhere he copied a Latin and a Greek inscription :this place, called Paleokhori, is three or four milesnorthward of Megara.In the western angle of the Bay of Megara, atthe commencement of the rocks Scironides, Chandlerobserved many Hellenic foundations and otherremains. It is not improbable that they may indicatethe site of a come named Scire, for as well ascan be understood from the imperfect passage inPausanias, which introduces his mention of therocks Scironides, and the story of Ino and Meli-certe, there was a place named after Sciron, whowas polemarch of the Megarenses when Nisus wastheir king, and who was the first to make a foot-pathThucyd. 1. 1, c. 107. * A Journey to Greece, p.Did. I. 19, c. 54. 434.• Diodor. Sic. 1. 11, c. 79.Maris.[chap.along the rocks ' . This path may easily be made impracticable,as the Greeks rendered it after the lossof TherinopylsB'y or it may be made passable by twocarriages abreast, as Hadrian rendered it*. Whelerpassed it in 1676 with horses, but at present it is onlypracticable by foot-passengers. The length of theScironian rocks was reckoned six Roman miles, andaccording to Pausanias they were all comprehendedwithin the Megaris. The two most projecting andremarkable rocks ^ were named the Molars, andthe ivayuc, or execrable. From the rock Molars itwas reported that Ino, or Leucothea, pursued byher husband Athamas, threw herself into the seawith her son Delineates, otherwise called Palermo,who was carried by a dolphin to the Isthmus,where the Corinthians worshipped him as a divinityand instituted games in his honour. The *^ execrable"rock was that from which Sciron therobber threw strangers into the sea, and fromwhich he was himself thrown by Theseus. On thesummit of the mountain there was a temple ofJupiter, who received the epithet Ephesus forrijv ^£ oyofia^ofiiytiv diroSic/piiivoc cal €c t6^£ l^Kipuy [al.^KipwvTiy] fiplKa Meyapevtriyiiro\tfiap\ti irpwTOQ (f^aO ^^Xiyovffiy evoiri^ey &y^pa<nytv(wyoie oSiveiy, — Pausan. Attic,c. 44.Herodot. 1. 8, c. 71.Ap flora iyayrla ikavyetrBaiPausan. Attic, c. 44.Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 7.■• werpatf at icara to(TTEvoy rriQ olov fidXitna dvi"\ov<ny, — Pausan. Attic, c. 44.• A sea-tortoise lay underthe rocks ready to devour thevictims of Sciron. These animals,adds Pausanias, differonly from land-tortoises intheir greater size, and in theshape of the foot, which resemblesthat of the sea-calf (^ko).XVII,] Regards. 415having removed the drought, which ceased afterlacus had sacrificed to Jupiter Panhellenius in^gina. The temple of Ephesus containedstatues of Venus, Apollo, and Pan. Beyond theexecrable" rock occurred the sepulchre of Eurystheus,who was slain here by lolaus, after whichthere was a descent to the temple of Apollo Latus,near which was the boundary of the Megaris andCorinthia, in a spot where Hyllus, son of Hercules,was said to have fought with Echinus theArcadian.CHAPTER XVIII.ATTIC Ay Boeotia.Mount Fames — ^Yiew from the summit — Departure from AthensKifisia — Vrana — Plain of Marathon — Suli — Tricarythus —Temple of Nemesis — Evreokastro, i^AamntM— Giammatiko —Yamava — Mount Mavronoro, Peleus — Kalamo, PsaphU —Mavrodhilisi, temple of Amphiaraus — apostles, Delphi'Oropo, Oropus — Sykamino — ^Dhilisd, Delium — Battle ofDelian — Skimatari — Grimadha, Tanagra — Rivers Larii andAsopus — Battles of Tanagra and CBnophytue — 'IxasiyCEnopkytcBAndritza, Phardt — Archaic inscriptions — ^Ylokho— MountsSoro, Sulla — Return to Thebes — Chalia — CynowtphdUe —GrceaS'Stethus,Jan. 10. — A continuation of the serene weather,which I found on entering Attica, tempts me tomake an excursion to the summit of Mount Fames,notwithstanding the time of year. This point,although not so distinct and unambiguous as thesummits of Pentelicum and CitluBron^ or that ofKhlomo near Talanda, is more comprehensive thanany near the south-eastern extremity of Greece inthe extent of its view over Attica, Boeotia, Euboea,and the Saronic Gulf. Passing through the GribosRapes, or Tlopra rov 'Eypiirov, at 1.41, we very soonafterwards enter the olive woods : at 2 pass manyfoundations of ancient walls ; at 2.27 cross thenoSovi^m, or Washfoot, as the Cephissus is nowcalled, and in four minutes more a larger branchCHAP. XVIII.] ATTICA. 417of the same river, from which many channelsare derived for mills and gardens. At 2.45Dervish Agu and Turali, two small villages onthe river, are at a small distance on the right.At 3.20 we arrive at Menidhi. Here on somerocky heights a little to the left of the town, arefoundations and antique fragments, indicative ofthe site of a demus ; at a small chapel there is asarcophagus in its place, and lying near it an inscribedmarble adorned with a vase in relief; bothwhich were excavated on the spot. On the northernside of the village is an abundant source ofwater, which does not fail in summer. Menidhiis the largest village in Attica next to Khassia ; itconsists mostly of small houses two stories high,and is surrounded by a plantation of olive trees andsome gardens.From hence I proceed to the monastery of AioNik61a, at the foot of Mount Panes. A little beyondMenidhi a massy foundation of ancient wallcrosses a torrent now dry, which flows from Famesin a wide gravelly bed, and after passing Menidhijoins the Cephissus. A Menidhiote peasant, ofwhom I inquire whether he knows of any otherwalls of the same kind in the neighbourhood, describesto me the situation of Phyla above Khassia,and when I ask him the name of that castle,answers <rro ^vX! Xiyo/iuv ^fucc ; thus showing thatPhyle still preserves its ancient appellation, though,like many other Greek names, it is neutralized into*i;Xi instead of being 4>vXii. The Xcyofiev lijutic of theMenidhiote was not without its Attic salt. Knowingthat the ruins are of Hellenic construction, heVOL. II. EC418 ATTICA. [chap.thought that the place might have had a differentname anciently, which name I might know, thoo^he was ignorant of it. He seems pleased to learnthat ^v\fi was the Hellenic name of the castle,and this little lesson in archaeology an Attic peasantis not likely to forget.We are just an hour in riding from Menidhi toSt. Nicolas. The road passes along the right sideof the torrent before mentioned, and then ascendsby a gentle slope to the monastery which standsimmediately below woods of pine which cover thesteep acclivity of the mountain, and commands abeautiful view of the plain of Athens, includingthe city, and the Saronic Gulf. St. Nicolas is asmall metokhi dependent on the monastery of'Asia Tptac, vulgarly Ala Triad, or the HolyTrinity, situated midway between the metokhiand the summit of the mountain, in a valleyabounding in sources of water, and shaded withwalnut and chestnut trees. The sopriiy or feast ofthe saint, is in May, and is much resorted to fromthe city. I am lodged at St. Nicolas in a cell of oneof the monks, small, but having a ceiling, floor,and fire-place ; luxuries to which I have been littleaccustomed in Thessaly and Boeotia. Indeed, inevery part of Greece it must be the lot of the exploringtraveller to partake of those miseries ofGreek poverty of which Aristophanes drew a picturein the Plutus so true and lively, that the traveller,who has once read the verses, will not failto be continually reminded of them *. The snug^ 2v yap ay Trop/aac ri ^vvai* &ya66y vXify i^&Buy l/c /SaXave/ov,Kai iraihapitay vTotreiyutyruty koi ypdi^itay KoXoovproyfXVIII.] ATTICA. 419cell at St Nicolas is peculiarly opportune, as aviolent northerly wind, accompanied with rain, detainsme all the 11th of January, and an ascent ofthe mountain in such weather is out of the question.I have not observed in Attica any of thebirds called Torn, a species of bustard which I sawin immense numbers in the plains of Boeotia, andwhich I suppose to be the oiri&c observed in thesame plains by Pausanias. A nobler bird of thesame genus, the wild turkey, exactly resemblingthe domestic, makes its appearance in the spring,and I was informed by Mr. Consul S. at Pard,that they are sometimes sold there in the market.The bird and its name were probably introducedinto England from this country.Jan. 12. — The Igumenos of Ala Triidha, whocame to St. Nicolas yesterday on hearing of myarrival, accompanies me to the summit of themountain. The shortness of the days, and theuncertainty of the weather, making the most directroad preferable, we do not pass by Ala Triad,but ascend the south-eastern slope of the mountain,in ace of Kifissia and Mount Mendeli, r* dpiBfJioy xai Ktay&tjrtav Ka i^XXiaK {pvhk \iyut foi'Yiro Tov irX^Oovc) at /So^/Bov^ai irepc rrlv ff£^aXi)v iLyiwviVt*lEiireytlpov(rai Kal ^pa(ovffaif T€iyri<nis, &XX' €Trayitma,Upon Si yt rovTOiCi duff ifiarlov fate ex^iy ^KoCf dyrl Be icX/vi|cSrcjSdda axoiyt^y Kdptmy fiforfiy^ ^ root cv^vrac iyiiptuKa ^6piioy ix^iy dyrl rainyroc ^axpov, dyrl $€ KpovKii^XalovAlloy evfuyiOvi xpoc ry icc^oXy * frirtitrdai ^ dyrl fiey AprtayMaXaxriQ irrdpdovc' dyrl Si fid(riQ ^vXXci, i<r\yiiiy pat^aylButy^*AyTl Si Opayov^ ardfiyov KefaXijy Kareaydroe, dyrl Se fiaxrpagTiiOaKytiQ xXcvpav, ififiiayviay Kal ravrriy,Aristoph. Plut, ▼. 535.E e 2420 ATTICA. [chap.ing two or three remata which flow to the Cepkissus.The lower part of the mountain is covered withpines ; these, as we proceed, are mixed withholly-oaks and firs, and at length, towards thesummit, the wood consists entirely of the last.Three years ago an accidental fire caught the fir-wood,and consumed three quarters of it ; such atleast is the calculation of my companion the abbot;but one quarter perhaps would be nearer the truth.He says that the fire burnt four days, but that thegreater part of the mischief was done in a fewhours. Not much of the timber has been destroyed,but the dead and leafless trunks give a desolateappearance to the scenery, which before this accidentmust have been beautiful even in the presentseason : frequent rivulets and green ravines occuramidst the firs, and here and there a small space iscultivated with com. With these exceptions themountain is entirely covered with forests, and containsan inexhaustible supply of timber for theAthenians. It is to the manufacture of plank thatI am indebted for the means of ascending themountain on horseback by a tolerable road.Fames still continues to supply Athens withcharcoal, but the demand not being such as tocause any great consumption of wood in the manufactureof it, the people of Menidhi and Khassia,who have succeeded the avdpaKtlq oi Charms inits manufacture, have no necessity at present toascend very high in the mountain for their materials.The wild thyme, lentisk, myrtle, andother shrubs, produced in abundance upon Hymettusand the uncultivated parts of the ITcSiov,XVm.] ATTICA. 421supply a sufficiency of wood for heating the ovensof Athens, and the mangel is not much used duringthe brief Athenian winter, when it is more the customamong the upper classes, all whose apartmentshave chimneys, to bum on their hearths some oldolive or ilex, which has been overthrown by Boreasor Sciron. Both those trees make excellentfirewood, but particularly the olive.Mount Panes still contains wild boars, as in thetime of Pausanias, but bears are very rarely if everseen ^ It abounds also in wolves, hares and partridges,and is covered with a good soil, better indeedthan that of the now totally uncultivated plainwhich lies between it and Mount PenteUcum. Towardsthe top of the mountain, the rock makes itsappearance on the most exposed ridges, but in generalthe firs reach to the very summit, and theyimpede in some directions the view, which is oneof the most extensive in Greece. Attica Boeotiaa part ofPhodsy the southern portion ofSubcea, thebarriers of the Isthmus and the Saronic gulf, withthe opposite coast of Argolis are geographicallydisplayed. To the right of Mount Parnassus risethe snow-capped range of mountains on the bordersof j^tolia and Doris which extend to (Stay to theright of which a long snowy ridge makes its appearanceabove the Boeotian mountains Ptoum andHypatuSj which I recognize for Othrys. In thenorthern portion of Euboea, the cliffs which borderthe coast between Politika and Limni are conspicuous,and the highest summit of them, called .Attic, c. 32.422 ATTICA. [chap.dill, shows itself between Khtypd and 'Egripo. Stillfollowing the horizon to' the right are seen the hillof Kalogheritza, the straits near it, the mouth ofthe AsopuSj Mount Dhelfi, anciently Dirphe orDirphjfSy the highest mountain in JEktbcui next toOche and remarkable for its sharp cone, then themountain immediately above Kumi in JSubcsay theftKalamo in Attica ^The channel of Mubcea changes its direction fromnorth to north-west at the cape of Rhamnus, inAttica J which is the termination of the great BtBOto-Attic chain of Citfutron and Pomes y and is immediatelyopposite to the bay of Stura, the ancient Strainthe midst of which is an island, probably the.cilia of Herodotus *. Here the island of Euboea^ The following angles, connecting points in Euboea and threeother islands with the main, may possibly be of use to geographers.Mount Kandili (cliffs in Euboea between Politikaand Limni) with summit of Khtypk . 9^ 25'M. Khtypd and the Euripus 12 10and the tower at the entrance of the stndtnearVasiliko •••••. 16 12and mouth of the Asopus ••••••• 37 19and summit of Mount Dirpke 44and summit of the hill above Kumi • • ^ • • • 70and Kalamo in Attica 73 23M. Dirphe and Kavo Dora 90and Mount Pentelicum •••.••••. 106 ISPentelicum^ and the north point of Skyro 91 31and the south point of Skyro 76 7and the north point of Zia •• • ••••• 6 14and the south point of Zia • • • • 18 4and south cape of Andhro • 10 50and east cape of Ydhra 61 49Bearing of PenteUcum by compass, S. 39 \ E.» Herodot. 1. 6, c. 101, 107.XVIIl.] ATTICA. 423is narrower than in any part, except at the istb-»mus of Lithidha at the'north^vn extremity. Boththese narrow places seem to be unknown to modemgeographers ; the isthmus of Stura is noticed byPlutarch in the life of Phocion, who after the battleof Tamynse occupied a fortress on the isthmus,named Zaretra. The peninsula to the southward ofStura terminates in the great round mountain, thehighest in JSuboeaj anciently called Oche, which tothe north-east throws out the terrible Cathartic,now Xylolago or Kavo Doro^ and to the south-westcape Mandible, the south-eastern extremity of theisland, and anciently named Greraestus. It appearsfrom the ancient authors, that there was a town andtemple of Neptune on this cape, and a port belowit \ which seems very small, though lily describesit as ^^ nobilis £uboefle.portu8^" It may have derivedsome shelter from a small island which liesimmediately off the cape. Between this promontoryand the islands Pelagius, the ancient Retaliate, isthe great bay of Karysto, and in the middle of itis the town seen a little to the right of Kavo Dora,and situated, as Strabo describes it, at the foot ofMount Oche.In the Gulf of 'Eghina or the Saronic Gulf it isobservable that the eastern end of /Sa2a«ii9, thewestern end o/iJEigmaj the eastern end of Pitt/anesus(now called Anghistri), the western end of the peninsulaof Metbana^ and the summit of mountOrthoUtbi in the Argolic peninsula, fall in the sameline. To the right of these, is the cluster of rocksStrabo, p. 446. Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 3. Xcnoph. Hellen. 1. 3, c. 4.« Liv. 1. 81, c 45.424 ATTICA. [chap.called the Pendenisia, or five islands ; in a linewith Mount ArcuihndBvm near Ligurio. A littleto the right of the Pendenisia is seen a cape ofthe Argolic coast, round which the coast retiresto the left, and forms the bay of Sofiko. Anothersmall island shows itself a little to the right of ,lying between it and the Pendenisia, andanother of the same size nearer to Salamis formingnearly an equilateral triangle with the former andPendenisia.The nearest district on the BcBOiian side is theTariagricey or TandgrcBa^ inclosed between thelower heights of Barnes and the low Theban ridge,of which the principal summit is now called Soro.The Adapts is seen forcing its way through a rockyravine of no great length from the Parcuapia intothe plain of Tanagra which is separated only fromthe maritime plain of Oropus by the last falls ofBarnes near 'Oropo and Sykamino, above which twovillages the Asopus again traverses a rocky defile,which probably formed the separation between theTafuigrice and Oropia. At the head of the plain ofTarmgray just under Barnes stands Mavromati, inaline with the convent of Siamata. In the middleof the plain of Tanagra Skimat&ri interlineateswith Mount Kandili of Euboea ; and near the seaVath^^ is seen in a direction a little to the left ofthe Euripus ; close under Barnes on the right bankof the Asopus J is the tower and village of Stances.In the direction o( Pentelicum we look down onTat6y, near which village a fountain, some fragmentsof ancient sculpture, and the foundations ofwalls, indicate the site of the celebrated Deceleia.XVIII.] ATTICA. 425On the slope of a round mountain behind HhamnuSyand in a line with its summit, are seen Kapandrlti,and a little beyond it Khalkuki. From thence acultivated slope descends to the valley of Marathon.From the north-western side of the same height,and from the adjacent parts of Panes the watersmeet, and form a torrent, which passes a little tothe right of Markopulo, and falls into the sea betweenthe mouth of the Asopus and Kalamo.The direction of the streams in Attica shows thedifferent slopes of the land. All the waters fromthe south and south-east of Pomes flow to the the most distant origin of which is in someheights attached to the north-western side of about four miles to the south-east of Tatoy.The river receives contributions from Pentelicum asit proceeds through the plain, particularly thatrising at Kifisid, which in fact is the principalsource of the river. The waters from the northernside of Pentelicum and from the southern side ofthe range which stretches from Panes to RhamntUymeet and form the Charadra of Marathon ; the lowridge of Tatoy which connects the slopes of P^n-tecum and Panes, separates the waters contributingto the Cephissus and flowing to the SatanicGulf, from those which flow to the Charadra andthe JEubaic frith.The mountains of the Mesoghia are well distinguished,but the greater part of its plain is hiddenby Hymettus which is now called Telovuni. Thefirst mountain of the Parthia, seen to the left ofHymettus is 'Elymo, a round hill of no great heightand not far from the sea, and which has a village426 ATTICA. [chap.of the same name at its foot. To the left of itappears Mount Pan, which beginning eastward ofVary runs inland to the plain oi the Mes6gfaia andto Gratia. Beyond Pan! uses the ancient Laurina,for which I cannot lean any modem namesthen a hill the highest of all the minor ones, andsimilar in fcnnn to Hymettus, near the villageMarkopulo (of Mesoghia) ; beyond which are twopointed heights, one on the southern, the other onthe northern side of Porto Raft.Jan. 13. — Return to Athens, leaving St. Nicholasat 8.21, and passing through Menidhi at 9.3.At 9.20 halt by the side of a cultivated risingground, on the summit of which are modem walls.Soon afterwards reach the side of a torrent calledlanula \ now running rapidly in consequence ofthe late rains. It rises in a gorge of Pomes eastwardof Phylcj passes by Khassia, receives thegreat torrent from Fames which passed by Meridianthus forms a principal branch of the CepkissuSywhich it joins at some mills a little below Turali.We pass the junction of the two streams at 9.57,and a few minutes after cross the Cephissus. At10.50 enter the 'Egripo gate : the Menidhi roadbranches from that of 'Egripo at the passage of theCephissM.Jan. 28. — From Athens to Kifisia and Vrana*.*layov\a, or TiavovXa, AUlca^ printed in the Transihave omitted the Tine* actions of the Royal Societyrain of some excursions around of Literature, vol. L For theAthens, because the results same reason the Remarks onadded to those of former jour the Marathon and the I tine-news,have been published in rare through Attica have beenan Essay on the ^ Demi of . very much curtailed.XVIII.] ATTICA. 427At 9.55 pass through the 'Egripo gate : at10.20 arrive at Ambelokipo, where are gardensand olive-grounds with small casino, situated alongthe lUssuSy for a considerable distance above themonastery of Petra : from thence proceed alongthe south-eastern side of a ridge called Lule-vuno,the lusus remaining at a short distance on theright. By the road side are several round holesof great depth cut through the rock, belonging toa conduit apparently of ancient workmanshipwhich still supplies the town, entering it at thenorth-eastern gate, which is vulgarity called ,from the noise of the water in the conduit.At 1 1 on our left are the ruins of a Romanaqueduct on arches, crossing a valley, and whichappears by its direction to have brought waterfrom Mount Fames. It was probably the samewhich was constructed for the Athenians by Trajan,and terminated by Antoninus Pius, as welearn from an inscription over the gate at Bubun-intra. It is very possible that here, as at Eleusis,there was more than one source to the aqueduct ;and that all the three mountains, Panes Penteli"cum, and Hymettus may have contributed waterto the supply of Roman Athens. The work ofTrajan was perhaps an addition from MountPomes to the original conduit which was excavatedin the rock, according to the mode customaryin Greece before the time of the Romans.We now enter the olive plantations which surroundKifisia and the adjacent villages. At 11.22pass Nato Marsh, often called Lc^otheti, as belongingto the English vice-consul of that name.428 ATTICA. [chap.It contains only a pyTgo» a garden, and two orthree cottages. At 11.25 cross a stream calledPispir, which originates near the monastery ofMend^li ; it forms a considerable branch of theCephissus. Having crossed several other smallerremata, and at 11.35 passed through Upper marshywe arrive at 11.56 at Kifisia, vulgarly pronouncedKifishd or Tjifisha. Here are several largepyi^hi with good gardens, and a mosque, beforewhich are a fountain and a beautiful plane-tree.The rare advantage in Attica of an abundance ofrunning water in the middle of summer has renderedthis place a favourite abode of the Turks ofAthens ; but the generality of the houses are in aruinous condition, and all in the present season areempty. The Greeks are at work in the olive-grounds,corn-fields, and vineyards ; and thewomen, alarmed at the sight of an armed Albanianservant of mine, lock up their houses andhide themselves.Having proceeded from Kifisia at 12.38, theolive-woods soon cease, and we enter upon theuncultivated root of Mount Pentelicuniy whichunites that mountain with Fames. All the upperpart of the plain of Athens adjacent to this ridgeis covered with arbutus and stunted pines. At1.25, having turned the end of the mountain,we are in a line between its summit and the passof Deceleiay where the modem road to 'Egripopasses between two heights which are separatedby a deep rama originating at a Kefal^vrysi underTatoy, a village, the territory of which is a narrowstrip of cultivated land among the pine-woods.XVIII.] ATTICA. 429The torrent of Tatoy is a tributary of the CephissuSybut the fountains of Kifisla are the principal feederof that river, though not the most distant, whichis at Fasidhero, on the heights between Kifisfa andTatoy : this branch flows through the plain at nogreat distance to the west of Kifisla.At 1.50 we pass the small village of Striata inan elevated situation, surrounded by a few barrenfields, among woods of pine. It was probably theBite of a demus ; but no fortifications or other remainsare to be seen, although the position is importantas being in the middle of the communicationbetween the plain of Marathon and that ofAthens. Several torrents flow through ravines onour right from Mount PenteUcum^ and after uniting,enter the plain of Marathon at Vrana. We ascendthrough a barren mountainous tract studded withpines, until at 2.36, being at no great distance tothe northward of the peaked summit of MountAforismos \ an opening in the ridge commandsa view of the plain of Marathon, the marsh, andsalt lake, together with the channel and islandof JEubcsaf Mount Oche, the islands Petalue^ andthe bays of Mammary and Stura. Aforismos,though steep, has a very regular slope, and isbeautifully clothed with pine-woods. It is probablythe ancient Icarus. The descent fromhence to Vrana is long, and we do not arrivethere till 3.10. This village stands immediatelyat the foot of the mountain, on a low rocky heightsurrounded on three sides by the deep stony bedI »A^pc<r/i6c>430 ATTICA. [chap.of the torrent before mentioned, which spreadsand is lost in the plain of Marathon. The peakedsummit of Mendeli, or Pentelicumy appears throughthe opening of the torrent at the back of the village.A third peak, in the same cluster of mountains,called Argaliki \ lying eastward of Amorisrises immediately from the plain, and sendsforth a deep charade which extends from thesummit quite into the plain. On its bank, justat the foot of the mountain, are some remainsof Hellenic walls among other ruins of a moremodem date ; this I take to be the site of theHeraclea, or temple of Hercules, near Marathon; for this demus I believe to have been situatednot at the modem Marathon, but at Vrana. Eachof the three summits called Mendeli, Aforismos,and Argaliki, had probably its ancient name ;but the whole mountain I conceive to have beenthat called Brilessus^ which may also have beenthe specific name of Mendeli, as being the highestand most conspicuous of the three. The identityof Pentelicum and Brilessus can hardly be doubtfulon comparing Thucydides, Theophrastus,Strabo, and Pausanias '. There is no other summitin this part of Attica of sufficient importanceto answer to Brilessus ; nor any author but Pausanias,who employs the word Pentelicum as the nameof the modem Mendeli ; about his time, therefore,this appellation probably became common in consequenceof the celebrity of the marble of the*ApyaX//fci. plira8t.de Sign.Temp. — Strabo,Thucyd.l.2,c.23. — Theol 399. — Pausan. Attic, c. 82.XVIII.] ATTICA. 431demus Gentle, and thus expelled the old wordBrilessas or Brilettus, which, like Hymettus, andseveral others having a similar termination, belongsto the earliest languid of Attica.The season has been so dry, that at presentthere is not a drop of water in the Charades ortorrent of Marathon with the exception of a fewstagnant pools towards the mouth. The wheat isjust above the ground, the barley some incheshigh : large tracts in various parts of the plain arecovered with hyacinths in bloom, and the uncultivatedparts are clothed with a fine grass, affordingpasture to large flocks of sheep and goats, whichhave been brought hither for the most part fromMount Helicon and are now followed by a greatnumber of lambs and kids.Jan. 29. — Having on a former occasion passedfour days at Marathon, I have little to detain mehere. While I was employed on the summit ofthe Soros', as the tumulus of the Athenians iscalled, my servant amused himself in gathering,at the foot of the barrow, a great number of smallpieces of black flint which happened to strike hisobservation. These flints are so numerous, andhave been so evidently chipped by art into theirpresent form, like gun-flints, that there is goodreason for believing them to have been the headsof arrows discharged by the Persians who fought atI o aiapog, the heap. It is applied to a tumulus heapedprobable that tropic* a coffin, over the dead,was originally the same word,432 ATTICA. [chap.Marathon, and to have been interred with the Athenians,after having been gathered from every partof the plain, after the battle : Herodotus shows,that some of the Barbarians were armed in thismanner, though his remark is applied not to thearmy of Darius, but to that of Xerxes'. Flint ofthis kind, if produced in any of the adjacent partsof Greece, is at least very rare. I have heardthat arrow heads of bronze have also been foundhere, but we searched for them without success.The earth of the tumulus is mixed with a finesand, and resembles that of the soil of Egypt.Mammary, on the opposite coast of Euboea, isan ancient name mentioned by Strabo, fromwhom we learn that it was so called from thequarries of marble commonly called Christian,which were there situated. With rather moreaccuracy than usual, Strabo describes it as over-againstHale Araphenides in Attica ^ Oppositeto the middle of the Bay of Marathon is anisland named Platina, situated two or three milesfrom the JEubcean coast. At Cape Cynomray ofthe Marathoniay the channel narrows to fivemiles, and the Bay of Stura extends from thenceto Porto Bufalo. Stura, the ancient Styra, is nearthe shore in the inner part of the bay, in thmiddle of which is the Stura-nlsi, or j3EgiUa.From Soros I proceed to the chapel of St.George, under Mount Stavrokoraki ; and fromthence ride round the foot of that mountain to theStrab. p. 446. Stephen. in Mupfidfuov.XVIII.] ' ATTICA, 433comer of the great marsh, which stretches fromthence to the salt lake of Dhrakoneria. TowardsKato-Suli the road passes over rocks, from underwhich issue some copious springs of water; a littlebelow them is the deepest part of the lake of Mara-town.In summer, when the water is confined toa small space, eels are caught here. This,and the Dhrakoneria at the foot of the ridge ofCynosure or cape at the northern extremity of theBay of Marathon are then the only parts of themarsh which preserve any water. The springs atthe foot of Stavrokoraki are probably the fountainMaria.Having sent my baggage by the ordinary routeto Grammatiko and Kalamo by Upper Suli, Iproceed with a single attendant to visit the sitesof Tricorythtus and Rhamnus. That of the formerdemus is at thirteen minutes from Kato-Suli, on the right of the road to Manus, wherea rising ground is covered with fragments of Pen-relicmarble, many wrought blocks, and in oneplace some remains of columns without flemings.The plain of Tricorythus is of a semicircular form,and terminates in a pass, from which a torrentissues, and, after crossing the plain, joins themarsh.At 1.4, ten minutes beyond the ruins of Trickswe enter the pass, which at 1.10 opensinto a plain, about three miles in length, and onein breadth, separated from the shore only by arocky ridge, and inclosed on the opposite side bythe mountain of Dhimiko.This valley formed the best part of the ancientVOL. II. F f434 ATTICA. [chap.Rhamnusia. Like the plain of Suli, it containsmany velanidhi trees, has a tolerable soil, but isploughed only in a few places. At the northernextremity are the ruins of the temple of the Rham<-nnsian Nemesis, lying in a confused heap on theperibolus, the wall of which is still a conspicuousobject. In the plain, at a small distance from thewall, is the foundation of a square and another ofa round monument, of small dimensions, probablysepulchral. The peribolus included two temples \and stood at the head of a gorge leading by aregular slope to Ovrio-kastro, which is elevenminutes distant from the temples on the sea shore ;the remains of a wall are observable on the left ofthe road all the way down. Ovrio-kastro, a commonRomaic form of 'E^paio-Kaarpovy or JewishCastle, is situated on a small height overhangingthe sea, and is closely surrounded on everyother side by higher hills, which are barren andcovered with shrubs. To the north the height isstrengthened by a deep torrent, now dry : on theopposite side there is a hollow and a small levelby the sea, so that the fortress itself was only connectedwith the hills at the back by a little ridge,on which stand the remains of a gateway, with theadjacent walls still extant to half their height.They are of the third order of masonry, built of Atticmarble, and being mixed with shrubs and bushesform a very picturesque ruin. On the highestpart of the hill, a small quadrangular keep occurFor a description of the and a paper On the Demi oftemple of Nemesis, see the Attica in the Transactions ofUnedited Antiquities of Attica the R. S. of Lit. p. 197.XVIII.] ATTICA. 435pied an angle of the inclosure : the walls aretraceable in most parts, bat are not of any considerableheight except near the gate. The wholecircumference of the inclosure was little morethan half a mile, but the ground about the templesseems also to have been inhabited. In the middleof the inclosure of the fortress lies a monument ofwhite marble, concave on one of the sides, andbroken into two pieces, on one of which, in themiddle of the concave side, are the words,PAMN0Y2I02KQM0IA0I2in very neat characters. The name of the manof Rhamnus, who dedicated the monument, wasprobably on another stone. Immediately oppositeto HhammUy in the narrowest part of the Euboicfrith, where the breadth is only two miles, is theentrance of Porto Buffalo, which I take to havebeen anciently the harbour of Porthmus. The occupationand destruction of the fortress of Portusby Philip, after expelling the Eretrians, towhom it belonged, was one of the accusationsrepeatedly urged against him by Demosthenes :the orator particularly alludes to its position,airavrucpv riic 'Arruni^j or opposite to Attica, andhis commentator Ulpian observes, that Porthmuswas a harbour dependent on Eretria '. The advantagesof this harbour seem to have given importanceto Porthmus during a long succession of ages'.DemoBth.Phmp.3,p.ll9. * Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 12.125. Reiske; 4, p. 133. De Hierocl. p. 645.Corona, p. 248.Ff436 ATTICA. [Chap.A little to the northward of Porto Bufalo is Dhysta,the ancient Dystus, against which, according toTheopompus, Philip proceeded from the vicinityof Eretria ^ in the course of the same transactionsreferred to by Demosthenes. Styra^ now Strainseen to the southward, and Mount Dirphebearing 6® to the north of west.From the temple of Nemesis, a tine drawnthrough the pass leading into the plain of TVt-corythuB will cut a cape near Porto Raft, whichI observed from the foot of Mount Stavrokor&ki ;Ovrio-kastro is in the same line produced northward.At 3.22, quitting the temple and crossinga part of the plain, we ascend the mountains tothe north-westward, which are a continuation ofMount Dhimiko, and follow the torrent of Ovrio-kastro to its source, where we arrive at that ofanother rama, flowing to the plain of Suli, andfrom thence, after having crossed some cultivatedheights which extend in the direction of Kalamo,arrive at 4.35 at Grammatiko, a village of 30 or40 houses, prettily situated in a sequestered hollowamong orchards and corn-fields. In one ofthese orchards the rain has lately brought to lighta sepulchral stone, adorned in the usual mannerwith a pediment, below which are three figuresabout one quarter of the human size, in high relief.A woman seated has her right hand joinedto that of another woman standing : between themisa man with a front face in lower relief. Thewomen are clothed in long drapery, covered with^ Theopomp. ap. Stephan. in ^votq^.XVIII.] ATTICA. 437a loose upper robe thrown over the shoulders;above the three figures are the nameseEOFENIS NIK0AHM02 nOAYAAOalmost obliterated : the form of the characters is ofa good time, as well as the style of the sculpture.The monument, as well as the situation of theplace, leave little doubt that Grammatiko was thesite of a demus ; but there is no clue to guide usto the name.Jan. 30. — At 8.24, leaving Grammatiko, weascend a high round ridge north-westward of it,which I observed from the summit of Parties. Itis usually called the mountain of Vamava (Barnabas),from a small village below it on the sidetowards Tatoy. It is higher than either Dhimiko,or the hill of St. Demerits which is another similarsummit between Grammatiko and Marathon.The mountain of Vamava terminates abruptly atthe sea in a rocky peak to the south-east ofK&lamo, which I have remarked from severalpoints, among others from Psilirakhi. Inlandthis mountain takes a sweep at the back of Ka-lame,where one of its highest tops is calledMavron6ro, and despite its name, is, like thegreater part of the ridge, a round bare whiterock. From thence there is a branch of ruggedpine-clad hills as far as 'Oropo, which placeis situated at the foot of the extremity of thisridge. Though much broken it is in all parts acultivable mountain with an easy slope. It comprisesall the territory of Markopulo and Kdlamo,except a small plain on the sea-side northwardof Kalamo, and another smaller to the ATTICA. [chap.ward ; Kalamo itself standing on an extremity ofthe hills between them. I take these mountainsto be the ancient Peleus,Having crossed the ridge of Vamava, we beginto descend at 9.15, and at 9.30 having thehighest summit on the right, arrive at a Hellenictower, half ruined, and prettily covered with ivy.Just below it is a fine source of water and a ruinedchurch, in which are some pieces of small columns,with a fragment, preserving part of a figure in lowrelief. Both the tower and the sculpture are likealmost every thing ancient in Attica, of white marble.They indicate the site of another of the demiof Mount Peleus, of which we shall never knowthe names, unless some inscriptions should hereafterreveal them. Near the ancient tower standsanother of modem date. The village of Vamava isnot far below us on the left. After a loss of tenminutes we continue our progress over a mountainousroad, through a country in which there is somecultivated land amidst oaks, pim&ria, and the commonshrubs. At 10.10 we are opposite the openingof Tatoy, in the ridge which joins Pomes toPentelicum : the summit of Hymettus is seen overthe opening. Many torrents as we proceed flowto the right in deep ravines towards the sea, particularlyone which we cross a quarter of an hourshort of Kalamo, and which terminates in thesmall maritime plain already mentioned. Otherson the left of the road contribute to the river ofMarathon.Kalamo, where we arrive at 11.23, is situatedon the heights above the sea, in face of thedeep gulf of Aliveri^ in Euhosa. It belongs to theXVIII.] ATTICA. 439district of Livadhia, contains about 200 houses,and has an air of improvement and comparativeopulence: there are several new houses of twostories, smartly white-washed, and having outhousesand inclosed yards. The Priests has evenglass to his windows. The hill above Kalamocommands a good view of all the surroundingparts of Attica and Boeotia, and of the oppositecoast of £ubcsa. On that shore, a little to thenorthward of Porto Bufalo is seen Dhysta, avillage with a pyrgo and lake, then the southerncape of the Bay of Aliveri^ and Aliv^ri village, atthe bottom of die bay, about two miles from theshore* The coast has a westerly direction fromthence as far as JEretria. To the southward ofAlive, the position of a Hellenic ruin near is pointed out to me, bearing N. 73 £. Onthe northern side of the plain, snowy cliffs whichI observed from Psilirakhi reach from N* 35 £. toN. 18 K, to the westward of which latter directionis seen the village of Ghymno, situated in a plainat the foot of a high mountain which extendsto JEretria. Ghymno is perhaps the site of and the mountain the ancient Cotylseum^The acropolis of JEretria is visible, and on theadjacent coast four small rocky islands. Thetopography of the Euripus is well seen. F^^la,which bears N. 28^ W., seems to have derivedits name from its position exactly on the communicationbetween the plains of 'Egripo and Vasi-Herodot. 1. 6, c. 101. — Ces. p. 480, Reiske. — Stc-Strabo p. 447.— ischia. in plan. in Kor^aiov.440 ATTICA* [chap.like, and occupies perhaps the site of an ancientfortress named ^vXn. Beyond the town of 'Egripo,the cliffs which stretch along the coast from Politikanorthward are again conspicuous, and their highestpoint, Kandili, bearing N. 24 W. The principalsummits near Chalcis and Thebes are easily recognized.The easternmost point of the Boeotianshore is in a line with the summit of Othrys.Kumi, the ancient Came, from which the townsof the same name in Ionia and Campania werenamed, lies on the eastern end of the cliffs, whichare to the north of Alive.An inscription at K41amo contains a grant ofproxenia by the Oropii to one Theophilus of Crete,and directs a copy of the decree to be placed on apillar in the temple of Amphiaraus ^Quitting Kalamo at 1.40, and descending overthe hills by a bad road, we arrive, at 2, at thegreat Charadra, or torrent, which I observed fromthe summit of Mount Panes and which is said tocontain water all the year. The place is calledMavro-dhilissi ', to distinguish it from another Dii*liss beyond 'Oropo ; and there was probably oncea village of that name, but no habitations now exist,though the sides of the hills are well cultivated ; amile below, the torrent taking a great turn to theclirev* ^€d6\0ai yrjy Kal Kara OdXarrar jcac rTf ^ilfif Oiy6^ikov ^/(\wy)oc &XKa wdvra Bvaictp koX rootKpfjra vpdUyoy tlrat Kal ehep- aXXoi( irpoHyote kill eh^pyirai^'yirriv rfic ir<$Xewc *Oponr'ntfy koI dyaypdyj^ii it r^€ ro ^^c^fiaaiiroy Kal €Ky6vovi Kal tlyai ty oriiXjii XiOiyff Kal arfiffai hahrf yfJQ Kal olKlag eyKTrftny rf ups rov *A/i^apaov.Kal dtr^aktiay koX dtrvXiay Kai ' Mavpo-A^Xiff^c.woXifAov feal cip^Ki/c Scat KaraXVIII.] ATTICA. 441right, enters the northern plain of K41amo, and therejoins the sea. There are many ancient remains atMavro-dhilissi, particularly the foundations of wallson the steep slope of the hills on either side of theravine, which seem to have been intended only forsupporting terraces, some of those on the slope ofthe northern hill being traceable parallel to eachother at small distances. A more explanatory relicof antiquity, however, has been lately brought tolight by the rains, and is now lying near someancient foundations. It is part of a cornice ofsome great building, formed of white marble,and inscribed with the letters AEI in large charactersof the best times, deeply engraved, andat a great distance asunder. Another and largerportion of the same cornice was not long sincecarried to K41amo, to be used in the new buildingswhere I saw it. The latter is inscribed withthe letters TOSAM^I. From this evidence ofthe practice of resorting to Mavrodhilissi for thematerials of the buildings which have latelybeen erected at Kalamo, there can be little doubtthat the inscribed marble, now at Kilamo, whichrecords the favours granted to Theophilus, wasbrought from Mavro-dhilissi, as well as anotherwhich has been carried from Kalamo to Athens,and which, like the former, appears to have beenanciently deposited in the temple of Amphiaraus.The Ami on the cornice at Kalamo, may be apart of the name Amphiaraus, and all the threemonuments, therefore, concur in proving this placeto be the site of the Amphiaraeium, which havingstood near Psaphis, between Rhamnus and Oropus442 ATTICA. [chaponthe road from Athens to the latter place, andnot far from the sea agrees in position withMavro-dhilissi. As the words of Strabo imply onlythat the temple was near, and not at Psaphis, andas Kilamo stands in a situation which the ancientsare likely to have occupied, it is very probably thesite of that Attic demus, for such Psaphis became,although originally, as it would seem from Strabo,it was a dependency of Oropus, and consequentlya part of the Boeotian community '.At 2.30, I begin to descend from Mavro-dhSlissithrough a gorge in the hills by a gradual slope,and in a few minutes perceive the village of Mar-populoon the left, in a lofty situation, and distantabout as far from the left bank of the torrent ofMavro-dhilissi, as Kalamo is from the right. At2.53 enter a plain which extends along die shoreas far as the mouth of the Asopus^ and immediatelyafterwards cross another, gremat rema, now dry. At3.3 pass a third torrent of the same kind, not farto the right of a range of cultivated hills, which areacontinuation of Mavronoro. At 3.21 arrive at '^ theHoly Apostles '," so called from a ruined church,"Era *Pa/iwwc» owov to rfJQ koI ro 'AfificLpatiSv itrri rtrt'Ne/ie(rcaic i€p6y' cira ^dt^ic ^ firifiivoy irori fjuxyreioy^ &C.—rAr 'Op»T/w iyravOa ^i irov Strabo, p. 899.• ••.•. heir hai' 'Op«#iroc ir^XccKoi life OaXdrrtis liiciypy upon ijh xoXv"Eflrr* *Afiftapdov Kal ve^c Kal to riiitvoQ*Dicsearch. v. 85.For further remarks on the the Royal Society of Literature,temple of Amphiaraus and vol. 1, p. 200, and at the end.Psaphis, see On the Demi of ' orovc dylov^ *Airo9r6kuvc>Auicaf in the Tnmsactiona ofXVlIl.j ATTICA, 443near which is a hut with some gardens and wells,situated on the sea side, in the centre of a bay includedbetween two low projecting points about twomiles asunder. Here are some remains of a Hellenicwall just within the sea, apparently an ancientjetty, and in the church a fragment of a smallDoric column.Opposite to Apostolus, on the shore otJEuboBa, isKastii, the site of Eretria^ which celebrated citystood on a projection of the coast, at the southwesternextremity of a great plain extending inlandbetween two high mountains, and containing thevillage of Ghymno. At the opposite comer of theplain is Vath^, a small village near the shore. Theentire circuit of the ruined walls and towers of theAcropolis of JEretriay still subsist on a rocky height,which is separated from the shore by a marshyplain. At the foot of the hill are remains of thetheatre, and in the plain a large portion of thetown walls, with many foundations of buildings inthe inclosed space. The situation was defendedto the west by a river, and on the opposite sideby a marsh.Above Apostolus rises an insulated hill, havinga small conical termination on the further part ofthe summit, where I find some foundations ofancient walls, amidst a heap of rough stones.They seem to be the remains of a small fortressor watch-tower. The monastery of Ambighi isseen from hence, pleasantly situated in a wood onthe mountain side, at about one third of the distancefrom Markopulo to ^Oropo. Markopulo, as wellas Apostolus, belongs to Rashid Bey of "Egripo.444 ATTICA. [chap.At the foot of the same height on the western side,and not far from Apostolus, a rained chapel containsa sepulchral stone inscribed with the nameT^iavSpiSiic, in neat and antique characters. In alittle rema at the foot of the height, nearer the sea,are some ancient squared blocks of stone.Leaving the foot of this hill at 4.5, and crossingthe plain at no great distance from the right bankof the AsapuSy we arrive at 4.37 at 'Oropo '. Thisvillage, which contains about thirty houses, with apyrgo and kiosk of the Turkish Spahl, stands onthe lower heights of the ridge of Markopulo, abovesome gardens containing a few olive and fig-trees,which extend to the Asopus. The hills above thevillage are partly clothed with pines : their highestsummit, which is at no great distance to the southward,is called Karakaxa. The plain of 'Oropoextends along the sea shore from Apostolus to thevillage of Aliqui ', a distance of about three miles,and narrows from its maritime base, until it endsin the angle, not quite so distant from the sea,where 'Oropo and Syk&mino are separated fromeach other only by the Asapus.A summit on the south-eastern side of 'Oropohas the appearance of an Acropolis ; no remains ofwalls are to be seen, but at the foot of the hillseveral ancient sepulchres were uncovered by thefloods of last October, when among other usualcontents of Greek tombs, were found many headsof spears and lances made of brass, some of whichI purchase from the people of the village. TheseXVIII.]ATTICA.remains of antiquity, added to the preservation ofthe ancient name without any corruption, cannotleave much doubt as to the position of the city,notwithstanding that they are in contradiction tosome authorities, from which Oropas wouldseem to have stood on the sea coast. Strabo, continuinghis route along the coast from south tonorth, notices next to the Amphiaraeium the sacredport of Delphinium, and twenty stades beyond itOropus, then Delium. Opposite to Delphiniumwas Old Eretria in Euboea, and, opposite to Oropus,New Eretria : the passage across the strait in theformer situation was sixty stades, in the latter forty \As the mouth of the Asopus makes a projection inthe coast, and narrows the strait between it andKastri, from whence the shore of JSubcea retiresin an easterly direction to Vathjr, leaving therespective breadths of the channel from the mouthof the Asapiu to those two places, nearly as Strabohas indicated, his description leads directly to theconclusion that Oropus was at or near the mouthof the Asopus^ New Eretria at Kastri, Delphiniumat Apostolus, and Old Eretria at Vathjr or thereabouts; and this maritime position of Oropus is'£{4c if-riiv jreptfiYnfTiv r^cX^P^i (sc* Boeotia) ircMijrcov,dpiaftivovQ diro r^c ifpoc £v*fioiay irapaX/ac rj|c ovveypvc rf"AiTUfJ. *Apxi y o *QptinrbQyKai 6 Icpoc Xifii^i', or KoXovtri^UKi^yioy, Off hv 4 iraXaia'£f>irpca iyr^ 'Eiffioi^ iidrKovyeX^'v^a mKOvra vra^liity* Mcra^e TO Jik€\flyi6y ioriy 6 *Opii»rociy tiKotri trra^ioie' Kara Bi tovToy koTiy jj vvy ^^pirpia' BidirXovQ y sir' ahrr^y urdBioi rtr-rapoKoyra. Era ^r/Xwy to UpoyTov *A7r6XXwyo^ Ik AijjXov dei"^pivfuyoyf Tayaypaltay iroX/^-yioy, AifklBoc iUy(py frrailovQTpidKovTa* Swov fJtti\ji XtufSiy'TtQ *AOf|vacbi, &€• — Strabo, p.409.446 ATTICA. [chap.confirmed by other authorities. Pausanias describesit as being iwl OaXaa<nic S and we learn from Diodorusthat in the year B.C. 402, the Thebans, whohad taken it from the Athenians in the twentiethwin^r of the Peloponnesian war ', removed the inhabitants,in consequence of a sedition, to a distanceof seven stades from the sea '. Perhaps thislatter fact may lead to an explanation of the difficulty.As the removal was evidently made for thepurpose of placing the town out of the reach of theAthenian ships, an opposite motive may have inducedthe Athenians to make it a maritime townwhen it was in their possession. 'Oropo, therefore,I conceive to have been the site of the originalBoeotian city, as well as that to which theThebans removed the Oropii, though it must beadmitted that the distance is greater than the sevenstades of Diodorus ; and here they probably remainedfor a long time, even after the cession ofOropus to the Athenians by Philip ^, and the destructionof Thebes by Alexander, for Dicsear-chus, after the restoration of that city by Cas-wander,still describes Oropus as belonging to, oras being a colony of Thebes *, although he describesthe Oropii as Athenian Boeotian, an expressionwhich he applies also to the Plataeenses •. As to theviri OaXaaatig of Pausanias, there seems no mode ofaccounting for it, but by the supposition that theOropii had, in his time, again removed to the sea.Pausan. Attic, c. 34. ' oUla (aL diroucia) Qiifiitif.Thucyd. 1. 8, c. 60. — Dkaearch. p. 12.Diodor. 1. 14, c. 17. * 'Adnydioi BoM#rou — ^p. 12,Pausan. ubi supra. 14.XVIII.]ATTICA.They then occupied , perhaps, the site of Delphiniumat Apo8t61u8, for it is remarkable that Pausaniasmakes no mention of Delphinium, and hisdistance of twelve stades from Oropus to the ,though still much within the real distancefrom Apostolus to Mavro-dhilissi, will at leastbe fifteen stades nearer the truth, than if theOropus of his time had been at 'Oropo.There are several ruined churches at 'Oropowhich show that it was once a Christian town ofsome importance. One of them contains a brokenmarble inscribed with portions of three decrees ofProzenia by the people of Tanagra ; one of theforeigners is of Chalcis, the native city of the twoothers is not preserved ^ The inscription is valuablefrom being, like those of Orchomenus, in thecolic or Bceotic dialect ; but there is some difficultyin accounting for its being found here, forC a^ovTOCf 'OfioXtouui rptfrKTi^€K&Tfif eireipa^i^^c Iovppavipoc ^afAOKXiio^ tXe^t' ltd6\dii tv ^afiv irp(${£-(voy ilfuy Kii)iv€pyiTay rac ir<(Xcov Tayaypclwy Atoyiytfy 'IapoffXc7o( • . .• •»••• (jah)roy ari) IvydyiaQ scil tlfuy aWvQ yac an) FvWac einra-(jffiy sci) Fi0'orc)X/av in) aa^aXtiay a:^ dvcvXiay n) woKifiiit m) ipdvac(lanraQ n) i:ar)a ydi' r^ Kara ddXarray^ KaO&irtp n) rvQ AXXv^ irpo~(fiiyv^ Kfi thypyirtis.Ay aOapxo'AftiyokXtioQ Ap^oyro^fl-K€}p6Lf^tSie ^OptrlfitXiit' M6\dii TV irac ir^Xioc TavaypeXaXxi^cia ahoy ici) e^-rac iwicaaiy m) Pianom) Kard yaw in) hard 6iwrac ici) r&XXayvQ ff tif€p •v. lascriptioii No. 60.448 ATTICA. [chap.Tanagra could not have been less than four milesdistant from hence, and the Bceotic dialect wasprobably not employed at Oropus, unless in theages prior to its dependence upon Attica. Theinscriptions found at Mavro-dhllissi) which was inthe Oropiaf are in Hellenic, and three tombstonesat 'Oropo bearing names, have the father's in thepossessive case, which was the Attic method, andnot the usual Boeotian form It is observable, however,that they have not the name of the demus,which favours the supposition, that Oropus neverwas an Attic demus. The probability is, that theTanagrsean decree, which is on a thin slab ofwhite marble, and lies in a ruined church, unattachedto the building, was brought to 'Oropofrom the deserted site of Tanagra, for the purposeof preserving it, as the Greeks are often in thehabit of doing when they find inscribed marbles*.Having crossed the Asopus, we arrive in fifteenminutes at Sykamino, which is now smaller than'Oropo, and does not possess so many zevgaria,though three ruined churches, and some modemremains upon the hill above the village, show thatit was once a place of greater magnitude than it isat present. It stands exactly at the opening of theravine through which the Asopus finds its way fromthe plain of Tanagra. The channel of the river isnow quite dry : the modem name, which in theinterior is Vuriemi, is here pronounced Vuriendi.In one of the churches is still preserved the sepalsInscriptions Nos. 62, pie bears N. 26^ £. by oom-63, 64. pass, and the ruins of EretriaFrom Oropo, Mount JDtV- N. 33 £.XVIIl.] Boeotia. 449coral inscription in memory of Aphrodisius, sonof ZoiluB, of Oropus^ which was published byUpon.Jan. 31. — Having sent my baggage horses toSkimatari by a road which leads by Inia and theleft bank of the AsapuSy I follow the 'Egripo road,at 8.23, in search o{ Deliumy and cross the hillsextending from Syk&mino to the sea. These arepartly in cultivation, and partly consist of a forestof pines, among which there is some good pasture ;for some time our road lies in a line parallel to theshore at the distance of about a mile, but at length,at 9.15, descends upon the sea-beach. In threeminutes more, after passing a ruined church inwhich are some ancient fragments, we again leavethe sea-side and enter a small plain, which is abouta mile In width at the water-side, and narrows fromthence to Dhilissi', situated at its southern extremity,where I arrive at 9.25. The village consistsonly of five or six houses and a roofless chapel,where are some Hellenic fragments and squaredstones, a lai^e bowl made of stone, 2 feet 1 inch indiameter, 4 inches thick, 9 inches high, piercedwith a hole in the centre, and on the outside cutinto furrows. In a field below the chapel there isa large wrought stone of five sides, or rather quadrilateral,with one angle cut off. There is nowater here, and the village is supplied from wellsnear the sea-shore.Delium is described by Strabo as a temple ofApollo, and a small town of the Tanagreei, thirtyV. Inscription No. 61. ' AfiXivai,VOL. II. G g450 B(EOTIA. [chap.stades distant from Aulis It is celebrated forhaving witnessed the defeat of both the most illustriouspeople of antiquity. That of the Romansby a part of the army of Antiochus I have alreadyhad occasion to refer to. In the eighth year ofthe Peloponnesian war, the Athenians formed adesign against Boeotia, which was to be executedin the beginning of the winter by simultaneousoperations at the two extremities ofthat province. On the Phocis frontier a revoltin the cities of Siphee and Chaeronea was tobe supported by a landing at Siphae of Canadianauxiliaries from the Athenian fleet, whichwas at Naupactus, under the command of Demosthenes,while the Athenians from the Attic frontierwere to seize and fortify Delium. The Boeotian,however, obtained notice of the design, Demosthenesfailed at Siphse, and the Boeotian had timeto place garrisons in the disaffected places on thePhocis frontier, and to return to Tanagra beforethe Athenians had been more than three days atDelium. During that time Hippocrates, the Atheniancommander, had fortified the consecratedground at Delium, after which his army encampedamong the hills between Delium and Oropus, at adistance of ten stades from the former. The Boeotianconsisted of 7000 hoplitee, 10,000 light-armed,500 peltastae, and 1000 cavalry. The Athenianshad about the same force of hoplitse, and were wellprovided with cavalry, but they had no light troops,except some followers of the regulars, indifferentlyStrabo, p. 403.Xviii.] Boeotia. 451armed, the greater part of whom, as soon as thefortifications were finished and the army in position,returned to Athens.It was towards evening when Pagondas ofThebes, the Boeotian commander, advanced fromTanagra. Hippocrates, who happened to be atDelium, joined his camp as soon as he heard of theenemy's approach, leaving 300 horsemen to protectthe fortress and to act during the battle accordingto circumstances. The two armies wereseparated by a hill and unseen to each other, untilPagondas, crossing the ridge, advanced in quicktime, and was met in like manner by the Athenians.The extremities of either line were preventedfrom encountering by certain ravines, butinthe centre there was close fighting. The Atheniansoverthrew the left of their opponents' centre,where the Thespienses were the chief sufferers, buton their own left were obliged to give way beforethe Thebans, whose phalanx was twenty-five file indepth, while that of the Athenians had a depth ofonly eight. Pagondas at this moment sent to therelief of his left a body of cavalry which, appearingsuddenly from behind the hill, made the Athenianssuppose that the enemy had received a reinforcement,and caused them, though victorious in thatpart of the line, to retreat just about the time thatthe Thebans had broken the adverse phalanx ; a completedefeat of the Athenians was the consequence,and it would have been still more disastrous hadnot Pagondas on the approach of night withdrawnhis forces to Tanagra. Some of the Atheniansreached Delium, others Oropus, and others theGg 2462 Boeotia. [chap.heights of Fames, after having suffered greatlyfrom the Boeotian cavalry, and from some Locriswho had just arrived to the assistance of the Boeotian.To the request of the Athenians for permissionto inter their dead, Pagondas replied, thatif the dead were in Boeotia, the Athenians mightcarry them away on quitting the Boeotian territory,but that if they were on the Athenian territory, itwas for themselves to act as they thought proper ;by this answer implying, that the cession of theOropia was to be the condition of compliance withtheir request, Oropia being a Boeotian districtwhich had been conquered by the Athenians. Itshows that the boundary of the Oropia and Tana-gracewas less than ten stades to the eastward ofDelium. On the seventeenth day after the battle,Pagondas took the fortress which the Athenianshad constructed at Delium. The description of itby Thucydides gives a good idea of a Greek fieldwork,and the mode in which it was destroyed bythe enemy is not less curious. In fortifying theplace, the Athenians first excavated a trench roundthe consecrated ground containing together withthe temple, the portico of which was in ruins a well,or source of water. Having thrown the earth of theditch outwards, they drove a circle of piles along theedge of the ditch, and then filled the interval betweenthe piles and the embankment with mixedmaterials composed of earth, of vines which grewaround the temple, and of some ruined buildings.On the summit of the wall thus constructed theyerected wooden towers. It was not until the Boeotianhad been reinforced from Corinth and MegaraXVIII.] Boeotia. 453and by the Peloponnesian garrison which the Athenianshad recently driven out of Nissea, as well asby some archers and slingers from the towns of theMaliac Gulf, that they ventured to return fromTanagra to Delium in order to attack the fortress.After several attempts they succeeded in settingfire to the combustible materials of the walls.Their engine for this purpose was nothing morethan a hollow mast or trunk of a tree, to oneend of which was adjusted a cauldron filled withcharcoal, sulphur, and pitch, and to the other apair of bellows, for the purpose of raising the fireas soon as the cauldron was brought in contactwith the rampart ^ The machine having been conveyedto the fortress upon carts, the conflagrationof the wood and vine branches soon obliged thegarrison to abandon the walls. Some of themwere slain, 200 were made prisoners, the remainderescaped to their ships and to Athens '•The facility with which the Athenians retreatedto their vessels renders it probable that Deliumwas situated not at the modem village, but on thesea-shore, where alone wells are now found correspondingto the ^^ water at the temple" mentionedby Thucydides. But Livy is decisive on thispoint. His words are, Templum est ApoUinisDelium imminent mari ; quinque millia passima Tanagra best ; minus quatuor million inde inproxima Euboea est mari trajectus'. The icpov,This kind of engine was « Thucyd. 1. 4, c. 76, 77.improved in later times, and 89, et seq.the Ktpaia^ or pipe was made of ' Liv. 1. 35, c. 51.iron. Apollo. Politic. p. 20.Paris.454 Boeotia. [chap.therefore, with its consecrated ground and surroundingvineyards, was near the shore, and theiroXixviov, or small town of Deliver, at the modemvillage of Dhilissi '.Having ascended a narrow hut well cultivatedvalley from Dhilisst, I arrive in thirty-five minutesat a source of water and a reservoir, from whencethe remains of an aqueduct are traceable in thedirection of Dhilissi. A road to Dhrimisi, Vath^,and 'Egripo turns off at the reservoir to the right.Soon afterwards we enter an open country wellcultivated, and in twenty-seven minutes enter theFrom Dhiliasi, Eretrta bean N. 70 £., Mount Dirjtke39 E., Fla N. 15 E.XVIII.] Boeotia. 455village of Skimatari. Three miles to the southwardof it is Grim&dha or Grim&Ia, once perhapsthe name of a modem village, but now attached onlyto the ruins of a Hellenic city which was certainlyTanagra, and which seems to preserve sometraces of its Homeric name Tpaia \ in the presentappellation '. Tanagra was advantageously situatedin the center of a fertile champaign, consistingof plains and undulated ground included betweenMount Panes and the Evboic frith, andextending in the other direction from the Thenceto the OrojAa. Standing at the eastern extremityof the ridge of Mount Soro, and not far from theroot of Mount Fames, which stretches to Deliumand OropaSj it was placed exactly in the point ofcommunication between the plains at the foot ofFames and those towards AuUs and the sea. Thetown was near two miles in circumference, of anirregular form, determined by the nature of theground, which consists of a> height commanded bythe eastern extremity of the ridge of Soro, at thedistance of about a mile above the junction of theVuriemi or Asopus with a rivulet named Larii, whichwe crossed midway from Skimatari. The upperangle of the site is rocky and abrupt, and looksdown on a natural terrace, below which stood the^ There were different orient of the identity. Tananions among the ancients as to seems to be an .colic prefix,the situation of Graeca. Axis of which the import is yet totitle supposed it to have been be discovered. Vide Stephan.Oropus, but the name itself of in TaVaypa.Tanagra sometimes written ' TpifidBa, Fpi/iaXa.Tani^prsea, is a strong argusBoeotia. [chap.body of the town on a broad level raised a littleabove the third or lowest plain which reaches tothe two rivers, and has a breadth varying fromthree to five hundred yards. The town walls followedthe crest of the height and the last falls ofthe ground above the plain. No acropolis is distinguishable,though probably there was someinterior inclosure at the upper angle. About onehundred yards below the summit are ruins of atheatre excavated in the bank which separates thehighest point from the terrace immediately belowit. Its diameter is between three and four hundredfeet. A part of the masonry which supportedthe two ends of the cave remains, but neitherseats nor proscenium are visible, nor any vestigesof the stoa which Pausanias describes as attachedto the theatre of Tanagra. On the terrace belowthe theatre, to the north-east of it, are the well constructedfoundations of a public building, formedof marble of a very dark colour, with a greencast. The city walls, which are of ordinary limestone,are a mere heap of ruins, though they aretraceable in the whole periphery, as well as manyof the towers. The masonry is almost regular,and as usual is faced only with wrought stones,the center being filled with rubble.On the left bank of the AsopuSy a little aboveits junction with the Larii, stands a mill which isturned by derivations from both the rivers, and oppositeto their junction, not far from the right bankof the AsopaSy is one of the high towers which Ihave before alluded to, as not unfrequent in Boeotia,and as having been built probably by the Franks.XVIII.]BoeotiaThis tower has since been converted into a Greekchurch, in which are lying several fluted Doricshafts covered with a coat of stucco, and a largerectangular block of the same kind of black marbleas that which was used in the great buildingin the city. Inscribed on it, in characters ofancient date, is the name H2XINA2, the Boeotiaform of Ai(r)(cviic»In the wall on the outside of the tower is anotherinscribed marble, but not of the dark kind.The inscription begins with an epigram in twoelegiac couplets, showing that the stone supporteda statue dedicated by one Pfaorystas, son of Trial,who had obtained a victory in the games of Jupiter,and who, upon several other occasions, hadbeen the first in the foot race ^ Below the verses,which are in common Hellenic, is a decree ofProxenia, in Bceotic, by the people of Tanagra, infavour of one Dioscorides of Athens ; the form isexactly similar to that of the Tanagreean decrees atElr^va riivS' dyi^riK€ ^^opvaraQ irate ^ Tp/aicocyxfipvi riKTiffaQ Ka\6v dyuva Ai6c'&\Xovc r d^\(H^6pov£ uravoiQ woaly eTXov dy&yoQfev6\(iov Be irctrpac &tm/ jcaXov ari^yti,Ka^iiriaQ kiroturt.- pw 6.py(pyT0Cf fJLuyOQ*IinroSpCfiiut irporpiaicddc, lireAoipodiw cXeCc* 2e*B6x^ TV idfiv [irp6i$yy)y etfjuyici) (htpyirav tSlq ir6XM^ Tava-ype/wv Acov(rropida[v] - » w*A^a]y€loyf alrroy k^ l^yo-yiaCf ici) tlfuy ahrvc ydc iciFv[ic/ac iinra]aiy m) PuroreXlayKil dtrfdXiiay n) daovXlay m)TToKifJLut [ic Ipdvac cwjcrac, k^Kura ydy ici Kara ^dXarray, <n)r&XXa irdyra [6x<5rra r^ rv]c6XXvQ irpo^yvlo], — ^V. Inscription,No. 70.458 Scotia. [chap.'Oropo. There is no apparent connection of subjectbetween the epigram and the decree, and it isdifficult to understand how they came to be on thesame stone. But that the verses should be inHellenic and the decree in Boeotia is not surprising,even if we suppose them to be contemporary, sincePindar preferred the Doric to his own native dialect,and poets claimed the privilege as earlyas the time of Homer, of using any dialect or allof them at once. Diplomacy on the other hand,appears to have preserved the local forms in manyparts of Greece, even after the period when theyceased to be in common use. We find in thefirst inscription, that while the poet wrote in Hellenic,the maker of the statue recorded his namein Bceotic by the words Ka^Mriac iir6a<n.In the Augustan age Tanagra and Thespiswere the principal towns of Boeotia, and werelarger, or at least more populous, than Thebes '.In the time of the Antonines Thebes seems tohave recovered a little, but Tanagra still possessedthe lands of Aulis, Harmaa, and Mycales-sus *. Pausanias praises the Tanagrsei for havingplaced their sacred buildings in a place entirelyseparated from, and unmixed with, the houses ofthe town ', whence it would seem that all the templesmentioned by him were on the height nearthe theatre, where, unincumbered by any ordinarybuildings, they were seen undoubtedly to great advantage.The principal temple was that of Bac-strabo,pp. 403, 410. » Ibid. c. 22.Pausan. Boeot. c. 19.XVIII.] Boeotia. 459chus, which contained a statue in Parian marbleby Calamis, and the figure of a headless triton.Near it were temples of Themis, of Venus, and ofApollo, in which last Diana and Latona were alsohonoured. All these buildings may have stoodon the platform which still exists. There weretwo temples of Mercury, in one of whichhe was sumamed Criophorus, in the other Pro-marius: in the former he was represented inastatue made by Calamis as bearing a ram onhis shoulders. The latter temple was near thetheatre, and probably near the gymnasium also,the surname having been derived from a fable ofthe Tanagrsei, according to which Mercury hadled them to victory against the Eretrienses, marchingat the head of the ephebi, armed only witha strigU. The same gymnasium contained a pictureof Corunna with the band of victory on herhead, and represented as so beautiful that Pausaniasis disposed to attribute her success over Pindarto this cause, not less than to the .colic dialectof her verses, which had an advantage overthe Doric of her great rival in being more intelligibleto her hearers. There was also a monumentof Corunna in a conspicuous part of the city ^ Ata place called Poison was the observatory of Atlas,and on Mount Cerycium, in which mountain theTa-agreereported that Mercury was born, was the tombof Orion. If we are to take literally the assertion ofPausanias,that these two places were ^4n Tanagra''it would follow that Mount Cerycium was no otherthan the height above the theatre, and perhaps that460 Boeotia. [chap.Cerycium was the name of the Acropolis, and thatthe temple of Hermes Promachus stood on the hill,on which he was reported to have been born ; butit is very possible that by cv Tavayp^ Pausaniasmeant the district of Tanagra, and that Ceryciumwas the entire mountain stretching westward fromGrim&dha.At the time when Thebes had recently beenrestored by Cassander, and its desert inclosurelaid out in streets, Dicsearchus described Tanagrain the following terms : ^^ The road from Oropusto Tanagra leads for thirty stades through a countrycovered with olive plantations and forest trees,where the traveller is free from any apprehensionof robbers. The city stands on a ru^ed and commandingheight, and has a white argillaceous appearance.^ The houses are remarked for theirhandsome porticoes, and encaustic paintings. Thecountry abounds less in com than in wine, whichis the best in Boeotia'' He then commends theinhabitants, who were all landholders, for a frugalityvoid of avarice, for justice, good faith, hospitalityand charity ; and adds, that Tanagra wasthe safest and most agreeable residence in Boeotiafor a stranger '.The river Larii, although only a small brook, is^ rpa^cia /xev koI luriwpoQy ' From the Summit of theXevn) ^£ r^ iicii^vdq. koX apytX- walls of Tanagra, Mount DirpkeX&ific Dicssarch. fiioc *£XXa- bears N. 47 £•, its angle with^C9P*12. The author probably Khtypa 57*25, with Famesalludes to the contrast of Ta 108.40.agra with the dark appearanceof Thebes, which he says was^P XP^ /ticXayycioc, p. 14.XVIII.] Boeotia. 461said not to fail in summer. It receives a considerablecontribution from some springs, whichissue from the rocks, on its banks just below thecity. No notice occurs of this stream in ancienthistory, and it seems not unlikely that it still pre-<serves its ancient name.From Grimddha to the foot of Mount Fames,and to the slope which conducts to the Pass ofSt. Mercurial, extends a plain, which is coveredwith pines towards the foot of Fames, and in theother parts is fertile, and well cultivated. Jewpines and brushwood cover the part of MountSoro, near Grimddha. The place where the Asopusissues from the rocky ravine, which I have before describedas separating the Parasopia from the Tanagrace, is not far above Tanagra: the summit ofCithasrqn appears through the gorge ; just belowthe exit the river is joined by a deep rema fromMount PameSy and in the angle formed by thejunction stands the hamlet of Latani, in a loftysituation. This gorge of the Asopus being exactlyin the direction of Scolus and Flattery Dicsearchushas correctly described the road from Tanagra toPlatsea, as having been in some degree desert andstony, and as having passed near Cithseron. Hisremark that it was not very dangerous, alludesprobably to the robbers who appear to have frequentedCithaeron from that time to the present ^On the edge of the hills which stretch along thesea-coast, and meeting a branch of PameSybound the plain to the eastward, are seen nearSee p. 878 of this volume. textual error; the distance notThe 9y or 200 stades from Ta being so great.agra to Platsea, is perhaps a462 Boeotia. [chap.the left bank of the Asapus the village andtower of 'Inia, or Stagnates, at the entrance of thelower gorges which separated the Tanagrice fromthe Oropitty and through which the river flows toSykamino. Further on, towards St. Mercurial,is the hamlet of Buidti *. The champaign countryaround Tanagra extends beyond Skimatdri, as faras the range of Khtypa and Siamata, and communicatesin the direction of Vasiliko, in Enbceajwith a descent into a lower maritime plain, inwhich are Dhramisi, Vathj^, and the great portof Aulis.The Tanagrice having been near the frontier ofAttica and Boeotia, was frequently the scene ofcontention between the two rival people, or theirallies. Besides the battle of Delium, there weretwo other celebrated actions fought in this districttwenty-five years before the beginning of the Peloponnesianwar, and with an interval of only twomonths between them ^ In the first, the Athenians,with their allies, who were chiefly of Argos,and amounted in all to 14,000, were opposed to asomewhat smaller force of confederates, headed byPleistoanax and his tutor Diomedes, who in returninghome with 1 , 600 Spartans from Doris, whereinunion with a large army of allies, they had beendefending their kinsmen, the Dorian, against thePhocis, were afraid of attempting a passagethrough the Megaris, which was in possession of theAthenians, and diverged therefore into the territoryof Tanagra. They were victorious on this occasion,in consequence of the treachery of a body ofMwovyiaTi.Thucyd. 1. 1, c. 107, 108. Diodor. 1. 11, c. 79, et seq.XVIII.] B(EOTIA. 463Thessalian cavalry, who turned against the Atheniansduring the battle. The scene of action wasprobably the plain between Tanagra and the footof Fames, across which mountain the Atheniansreceived their supplies. Diodorus relates, thatthere were two actions : that the Thessalians whodeserted in the first, attacked on the same nighta convoy of the Athenians, which brought on thesecond general conflict; that the latter was ofdoubtful event, and that it was followed by a truceof four months.Sixty-two days after the battle of Tanagra, as itwas usually called, Maronites of Athens, who hadin the preceding year been twice successful in battlewith the Corinthians in the Megaris, obtained athird victory over the Boeotian atCSnophytae, whichwas of much greater importance than the former, ashefollowed it up by razing the walls of Tanagra ;from whence he led his victorious forces to Thebes,and through Boeotia to the frontiers of Phocis andLocris, receiving the submission of many Boeotianand Phocis cities \ and taking hostages from theOpontii of Locris. As we cannot doubt fromthe circumstances of the event, that Neophytewas in the Tanagrice, not far from the Atticfrontier, the name further shows that it was theplace where the wine was chiefly produced, forwhich the Tanagrice was renowned. It is by nomeans unlikely that the modem 'Inia, writtenDtvia, is a corruption of Ocvo^vrai : it stands, as Ihave already remarked, in a commanding positionnear the left bank of the Asopus, between TanagraThucyd. ibid. Pollen. 1. 1, c. 35.464 Boeotia. [chap.and Oropus, or nearly in the situation where it isprobable from history, that the battle was fought.Returning to Skimatdri, I overtake a monk belongingto a convent not far distant, who says thathe has always understood the ancient name of theruins at Grimadha to have been Tanagra, so hepronounces it, guam Taivaypa. In a tower a littleto the left of the road, which, like that near Gri*madha, has been converted into a church, I findon a block of the same kind of black marble whichwas employed in the principal building at Tanagra,the name Hipparchus in very ancient characters,the X being formed like an ordinary i", and theinitial aspirate expressed by H. Another marblehas the name Borrow. Several other sepulchralstones, each with a name in the nominative, withouteither paternal or ethnic, are preserved in thechurches in or near Skimat&ri. There is one alsoof a woman named Lais, in the dative preceded byifrl. These two forms appear from a variety of examplesto have been the Boeotian mode of inscribingnames on tombstones, and to have been adhered toat very distant periods of time ; whereas, so nearas Orontes we find the name of the father added onfour sepulchral inscriptions at 'Oropo and Syka*mino. In Attica the demus seems to have beenan indispensable adjunct. All the inscriptions atSkimatari are on black marble, except one whichis not sepulchral, and on which I can distinguishonly the letters ONTANAFPA. These letters, andthe marble of the other inscribed stones, render itprobable that they were all brought from Grigmadha, from which place, as it has been longdeserted, the neighbouring inhabitants have beenXVIII.] Boeotia. 465accustomed to remove the ancient inscribed orsculptured stones, as they have been brought tolight by the rains or the plough, to the churches inthe surrounding country.Feb. 1 . — From Skimatari to AndHtza and Thebes :the road follows the left bank of the Larii in adirection parallel to the range of Soro. Besidesthe sources which issue from the bank of this rivernear Grimadha, there are others more copious,which join it not far above the tower or church,which I visited in returning from the ruins ; butabove the latter sources the Larii is nothing but adry torrent, and in most places the water-course iseven ploughed. We cross it, and a little afterwards,at 8.20 (having set out at 7.55), the village of Brazilis at the foot of the mountain on the left. Soon afterwardswe ascend the inferior hills of the range ofSoro, which border the plain on the west, and thenarrive in a deep x^t^uippoc, or torrent-bed, in a richsoil, and which, though now dry, is occasionallythe principal feeder of the Larii. It receives othersfrom the northward, and flows at first to the east,but afterwards turns to the southward, through theplain of Brats and Skimatari. It is clearly not theThermodon. At 8.44 the hamlet of Kapandriti is onthe right, at the distance of a mile and a half : at9.8 we arrive at Andritza, a village of ten or twelvehouses, forming what in the northern parts of EuropeanTurkey is called a planks, that is to say, aquadrangle, having all the doors and windows ofMirparft.VOL. II. H h466 Boeotia. [chap.the houses within, and a single gate ; thus the wholeconstitutes a rude fortress. This village, thoughlittle more than two miles distant from the roadfrom Thebes to 'Egripo, is entirely concealed fromit by a range of heights, which are distinguishedfrom the low undulating hills characteristic of thispart of Boeotia, by precipices of white rock, whichcrown the summits.On a part of these rocky heights, distant 6 or 7minutes to the north-west of the village of are found the remains of a small Hellenicpolis or fortified come. The walls of the citadel aretraceable round the most precipitous part of one ofthe rocky brows, which is about 140 yards longand 40 broad ; and those of the town are in manyplaces visible, enclosing a slope to the south andwest of the acropolis, in which direction the sitewas bounded by a small torrent, descending fromMount Soro, and flowing into the plain eastwardof Mount Siamata, where it joins the torrent whichdescends from the convent of Platanaki on thatmountain. The ruins of the ancient walls are mostconsiderable on the eastern side of the citadel,where a projecting rock is occupied by a squaretower, and a similar piece of the wall adjoins it tothe northward. Here the remains are about 15feet high.Tower. Curtain.XVIII.] Boeotia. 467The masonry in the upper parts of the workconsisted for the most part of irregular polygonsjoined with the utmost accuracy, but the basis isformed of narrower and regular courses. Beyondthe torrent, where are some foundations, perhapsthose of a temple, the rains of last October haveuncovered an ancient pedestal, formed of a handsomekind of breccia with a red cement, about8 feet 9 inches square and 1 foot 6 incheshigh, divided in its mid-height by a moulding,and shaped at the top in the form of a trianglewith a round hole in the middle, to whicha statue may have been attached, or perhaps atripod. There is no inscription, but on one sidebelow the moulding a large vase is representedbetween an ox and a man, who is seated in achair with a sceptre in his right hand : the twofigures look inwards towards the vase. The styleand execution are indifferent. The vase and oxmay allude to the productions of the landed propertyof the seated figure, who was perhaps thededicator of the tripod.Between the place where this monument islying and the S.W. angle of the acropolis, wherethe rocks are highest, a copious fountain issues fromunder them, and discharges itself by two spouts. Asmall church stands just above it, and there areseveral other churches on the hills around, but allare in ruins except one near the village similar tothat at the fountain. On the western and highestextremity of the hill stands a high square towerin ruins, which I remarked in proceeding fromThebes to 'Egripo ; it seems to be of the time ofHh2468 Boeotia. [chap.the Franks. There are remains also of a reparationof the wall of the citadel, apparently of thesame date, on the crest of the rocks on the southernside. This repair, as well as the churches,show that the source of water and the fertile soilof the surrounding plain had caused the place toretain its inhabitants from Hellenic times to thoseof the Lower Empire, or at least to be restored atthe latter period, although they have been unableto save it from Turkish desolation. Only a smallportion of the surrounding soil is now cultivated.It is only by negative arguments that any conjecturecan be formed of the ancient name of thisplace. Its situation and small dimensions stronglyargue that it was one of the four kw^mi of theTanagrice, which were Harmaa, Mycalessus, Leon,and Phase ^ The two former having been on theroute from Thebes to Chalcis, could not have beenvery near Andritza ; indeed the situations of themboth are tolerably well determined : and as Leonof the Tanagrice was so named from its marshes,of which there is not the smallest appearance nearAndritza, these ruins may rather be ascribed toPhase, which, from Strabo and Stephens, butstill more from an extant autonomous silver coin,bearing on one side the Boeotian shield and onthe other a dicta with the letters ^A, appears tohave been a place of some importance althoughit was not among the Homeric towns of Boeotia,unless, as some of the Boeotian thought, WmavTt ZaOiriv had been improperly substituted in theStrabo, p. 405.XVIII.] B(£0T1A. 469catalogue for 4^apa^ n taOiaQ \ Of the other Boeotiantowns named by the poet, Hyria and Elysiumare the only two to which I have not yet adverted,with an attempt to their identification. Strabosays, or has been made to say, that in going fromThebes to Argos, Hyria lay upon the right of theroad, and Tanagra on the left, which cannot betrue of the road from Thebes to Argos, nor indeedof the road from Thebes to any other conceivableplace, if Hyria, as he asserts, was near Aulis*.Either the text therefore is faulty, or the informationof Strabo incorrect; and probably some ofthe ancient critics were right in supposing thatHyria was the same place as Hysise. Elysiumlike Leon, indicates, as Strabo remarks, a marshyposition, which is not easily found in the part ofBoeotia, where the names associated with it in thecatalogue would seem to place it.At the foot of a height similar to that of ,and situated in the direction from thenceof Mount Soro, there is an ancient crypt, orsepulchral caves of a semi-circular form, excavatedin the rock. Conspicuous from Andritzaalso is a summit of the range of Soro, towardsTanagra having a peak of naked rock which iscalled Villa, or the look-out. It is separatedfrom a higher summit towards Thebes by a narrowpass which leads to Mustafadhes, and someother small villages on the southern side of theridge. From this pass to the Psilirakhi inclusive,extends a chain of summits, about the middle ofII. B. V. 508. ' Strabo, p. 404.VOL. II. 2 H 3 -4-470 BOEOTIA. [chap.which is the highest point, or proper Soro. Ihave in vain endeavoured to discover in history theancient name of these heights, which, though low,compared with the surrounding mountains, are aremarkable feature in the topography of the these,and of all eastern Boeotia. Soros being aHellenic word, the mountain may retain perhapsits ancient name. Towards the north it is separatedby some hollows from a low parallel ridge stretchingfrom the rocky heights of Andritza in thedirection of the phil] which advances into the plainof Thebes towards the foot of Siamata, and whichI suppose to have been the site of Teumessus.Andritza itself stands nearly opposite to a projectionof Mount HypatuSj a little westward of theremains of Glisas, mentioned Dec. 21.Ten minutes beyond Andritza, proceeding towardsThebes, at a ruined church of Aghla Paras-levi,or St. Friday ^, I find a long block of blackmarble, of the same kind as that of the foundationsat Tanagra, and of which the monumentsat Skimatari are composed, as well as that inthe tower between that village and Grimadha.On the marble are inscribed two lines of charactersof remote antiquity, rudely engraved, buttolerably preserved. Two sides of the stone arerough, as if broken, and one end of the inscriptionis thus lost ; but enough remains to show that itwas simply a dedication to Bacchus by one Chron,or ^schrondas^ the name of whose father'Ay (a Ilapaflricev^* tian men, corresponding to thetaylaQ was a common ter Attic taviBrft,mention in the names of Bcbo-XVIII.] Boeotia. 471is imperfect \ The coincidence of the black marbleand the worship of Bacchus are sufficientreasons for believing that the monument wasbrought from Tanagra. The dialectic peculiaritiesof AE and 0£ to express the Hellenic AI and QIare unexampled in any Greek inscriptions I haveyet seen, and are the more remarkable as they havenothing in common with the Bceotic, accordingto the specimens of that dialect, which are affordedby the inscriptions of Orchomenus, Tanagra, andLebadeia.From Ala Pataskevi, following the road toSpakhidhes *, we arrive, after crossing the hills forseven minutes, at a source of water and a smallruined church of the Panaghia, before which liesa cubical stone I foot 7 inches in the side, havinga rough moulding almost worn away by timeat the bottom, but in other respects quite plain.The inscription is complete, and although it consistsonly of the name of a woman, Pacha, precededby inly the letters are so large as to bedisposed in two lines, and are written in Boustrophedon,as appears from the final E, which facesin the opposite direction to that of the former line.Here again, as in the names HIIIIIAP^IA andAES^RONDAS, the X is expressed by the ^ ofthe Hellenic alphabet, and the Hellenic AI as inthe document containing the latter name, is representedby AE ^ The two monuments, therefore,AES^RONDASAEAIT . . » STraxt^ecDionysia • EniHAAVFor the exact form of the let 3A*.tears, see the lithograph copy, V. Inscription, No. 72.Inscription, No. 71.472 Boeotia. [chap.both evidently of a remote antiquity, concur inproving that there were dialectic forms employedin Boeotia in early times different from those ofthe middle period, when the Hellenic at was convertedinto i|, as 'Haj^ivoc for Alaxtv^ic, and thedative masculine was converted into v, as TVArmy for Toi AHMQI, which in the earlier dialectwould have been TOE AAMOE \It is highly interesting to observe, that theseforms agree with those of the Latin language,which is no more than natural, that languagehaving been, like the Boeotian itself, a branch ofthe iEolic. I am not aware, indeed, that thereis any instance in Latin inscriptions of OE in thetermination of the dative masculine, but it may bequestioned whether there is any Latin inscriptionextant so old as these monuments of the Tanagrice;and the final E may have been dropped in the Latindative at an early time, as occurred at a much laterperiod in the Greek, in regard to the final LThere are some foundations of a Hellenic wallat the fountain, and some other wrought stonesof large size, lying detached on the side of theextremity of that low chain which is characterizedby its summit of white bare rocks. On the oppositeside of the ridge, looking towards Mount Soro,stands the village of Vlokho, less than a miledistant, and consisting only of three or fourfamilies. Here we join the road from KalamoAn example of the use of ancient vase, on which otherA£ instead of AI in Thessaly Greek names are inscribed, Ioccurs in some very ancient have seen that of Croesus writ-coinsof Clarissa, inscribed ten Croesus.AARISAEON, and on anJXVIIl.] Boeotia. 473to Thebes. Twelve minutes beyond Vlokho,Spakhidhes is a mile on the right; 8 minutesfarther, in a narrow valley at the foot of MountSoro, we pass immediately under the principalsummit, and after another half mile diverge 10minutes to the left of our route, to visit a spring,called SovXXac, which gives name to an inferiorsummit detached from Soro. Water distils fromthe rocks, forms a pool in a small cavern, and isno otherwise remarkable than as being useful tothe shepherds in this part of the mountain, wherewater is scarce. From thence, at the end of a mileand a half, we regain the road from Kalamo toThebes, on the low uncultivated slope of MountToto, immediately opposite to the rocky insulatedheight which I suppose to have been the site ofTeumessus. A little farther, at a ruined churchupon a height, are many ancient wrought stones,and two handsome cisterns, of the usual bottleshape, stuccoed within. These are on the leftof the road from 'Egripo to Thebes, at a milefrom the hill of Teumessus : a little beyond them,on the left, is another cistern of the same kind ;we then fall into the 'Egripo road, and arriving atthe wall of Thebes at 3.58, in 10 minutes makehalf the tour of them before we enter the town.Feb. 2. — We learn from Stephens of Byzantium,who quotes Theopompus, that there was a town inBoeotia of the name of Chalia. That is was a polisof some importance and that the inhabitants wrotethemselves XAAEIEI2, and not XAAIOI as in thewords of Theopompus cited by Stephens, is evidentfrom an inscription at Oxford, brought byHawkins from a place near the Asopus^ which heBoeotia.[chap.called Vasiliko. I have inquired in vain for thisplace, but I learn from a list of the villages of thedistrict of Thebes, that there are two named Thalia ^in the Parasopia. It was in that part of Boeotia,therefore, that the marble was probably found byHawkins, and that the ancient Chalia was situated.As Theopompus couples Chalia with Hyria, it is anargument that Hyria and Hysiee were the same, forthe site of Hj/sice is at no great distance from Thalia.Among the minor places of the These wereCynoscephalse and Grseasstethus. In the first invasionof Boeotia by Agesilaus, B. C. 378, he proceeded,after crossing Mount Cytheeron, to Thespiae,and from thence entered the district of Thebes.The Thebans had thrown up entrenchments, as wellin their passes as in many parts of their plains ;behind these they fought, or sallying with theircavalry through openings which had been left forthat purpose in the ramparts', annoyed the Spartansso as to oblige them frequently to shift their ground.Agesilaus nevertheless contrived to drive them fromtheir positions, and destroyed the country up tothe walls of Thebes '. Xenophon, in again statingthese transactions, in his Agesilaus, there remarksthat the king passed Cynoscephalse, in the Thebanterritory, advanced to the city, and offered battle to1 XaXia.A complete specimen of arampart of this kind still existsin Attica, but as it was intendedfor the defence of theplain of Chaise, towards thatof Thria, it was of a more permanentkind than we can supposethe field-works, herementioned by Xenophon, tohave been. — See On the Demiof Attica in the Transactionsof the Royal Society of Literature,vol. 1, p. 138.Xenoph. Ellen. 1. 5, c. 4.XVIII.] Boeotia. 475the Thebans both in the plains and among the hills,by which the panegyrist intended apparently to contrastthe conduct of Agesilaus with that of Cleonwho in the preceding winter, though he hadmoved from Thespiae to Cynoscephalee, and hadencamped there sixteen days, had not advancedbeyond it, nor had laid waste the Theban land. Inthe second expedition of Agesilaus, in the followingspring, he again took the road of Thespiae, aftercrossing the Cithseron, but as soon as the Thebansmoved towards the same point, he turned suddenlyin the opposite direction, to Scolus, and havingpassed the Theban entrenchment which had beenformed at that place, he proceeded to lay wasteall the eastern part of the Thebes as far as theTanagrice^ Returning from that frontier, hemarched to Thebes, and passed the city with thewalls on his left ; while the Thebans, having retiredfrom near Thespiae, prepared for battle in anarrow and difficult pass called the Graeas-stethus,in front of an entrenchment which they had thereformed. But Agesilaus not choosing to attackthem in such a strong position, made a flankmovement towards the city, which obliged theThebans to quit their position at Graeas-stethus, andto move in all haste to Thebes, taking the roadby Patriae as being the safest. Some of the Lacedaemonianmorae approached the Thebans as theywere proceeding along the heights; and one ofthe polemics was slain in the encounter, whileon the part of the Thebans the rear suffered alittle, when they had nearly arrived at the city,from the cavalry and Scoriae, and were obliged toSee p. 331 of this volume.476 Boeotia. [chap. XVI 11.turn and face their pursuers, who thereupon retreated.Agesilaus then occupied the position atGrseas-stethus, which his manoeuvre had obligedthe enemy to evacuate, and on the next day hemarched to Thespiae.Cynoscephalae was renowned for having been thebirth-place or residence of the great lyric poet ofBoeotia ^ ; and its situation seems to have beennot more than half a mile from the walls ofThebes ; for Pausanias, after having describedsome monuments on the outside of the gate Neitae,proceeds to remark that the route which ledtowards Onchestus^ crossed the river Dirce ; andthat the ruins of the house of Pindar were on theopposite bank of the river, with a temple ofDindymene, containing a statue which had beendedicated by the poet ^ Probably CynoscephalsB,like many other places in the time of Pausanias,preserved only its sacred edifice, together withruins of the poet's house, which had been preservedfrom respect to his memory. Grseas-stethusseems to have been in a narrow valley of theKanavari, which lies exactly in the route fromThebes to ThespicBy and affords several passes, suchas Xenophon describes '. As Ponies was ten stadesfrom Thebes, on the way to Platsea ^, the marchesof the Lacedaemonians through the Thebes arethus perfectly intelligible.Kvyoc KefaXal ' Possibly some remains ofjjlv Se xiaplov Oriftwy^ &^' ol antiquity at a mined church,UiyBapof Ldi^vTov vedic, midway from Thebes to theBouoroQ Ik Kvvoc Kf^aXbiy, site of ThetpicBt mentioned infitX^y noitfriit. — Stephan. in the next page, may be the exactvoce. V. et Thon. Mag. in site of Orseas-stethus.Vita Pindar. * Pausan. Boeot. c. 8.Pausan. Boeot. c. 25.CHAPTER XIX.B(EOTIA.kDeparture from Thebes — Vale of the Kanavari — Rimokastro —Lefka, Thespis — Leuctra — Battle of Leuctra — Paleopana-hia — Py^aki, A sera — fountain Aganippe — Grove of theMuses — Hippocrene OlmeiuSf Permesstu — Neokhori — Ceres*sus — Tateza — Fountain of Narcissus — Xeronomi — Pyrgo onMount Korombili — Port Aliki — Kakosia, Thisbe — Vath^,Port of Thisbe — Dobrena — Inscriptions at Kakosia — KhosiaMonastery of Saint Taxiarches — Port Sarandi — Spice —Dobo — Zalitza, Bulis — Thence Corsica — Port Eutretus —Eutresis — Arrival at Kyriaki.Feb. 3. — From Thebes to Rimo-kastro. Havingpursued the road to Livadhla for 40 minutes asfar as the crossing of the Kanavari, we turn to theleft along the right bank of that river, which flowsbetween downs of no great height, and in 20minutes from the turning arrive at the ruins of achurch on the left which contains some remainsof an ancient monument, consisting of squaredblocks of white marble. Having remained here5 minutes, we soon afterwards cross the Kanavari,and proceed along the left bank. Hereabouts theriver is joined by several smaller torrents from thehills on either side, which are all now flowing inconsequenceof last night's rain. In 42 minutesfrom the church, at 11.17, we pass a mill on theright bank of the river, and at 11.30 the hamlet478 Boeotia. [chap.of Arkhudhitza, on the hill which borders the valleyon the same side.Twenty minutes farther, a verdant plain, containingthe sources of the river, opens to view ; andat 12.5 we begin to ascend the height which risesfrom its northern side, and which is one of the mostcommanding points towards the western extremityof that long range which extends from Mount Heliconby Thebes to Tanagra. On the summit standthe villages of Erirnokastro, or Rimokastro S tothe west, and Katzikaveli * to the east, separatedonly from each other by a torrent flowing to theKanavari. To the southward the valley abovementionedis bordered by a parallel ridge whichterminates eastward at Khalki and Balitza, threemiles north of PlatcBay or rather is there blendedwith the downs, which extend from the Asopus toThebes. The valley is separated to the eastwardby ground so gently rising from the plains ofLeuctra and of Plataea, that it may be consideredas continuous with those plains, although thewaters on either side of the rise flow in very differentdirections ; those to the eastward of it formingthe western branch of the AsoptiSy and thosebelow Rimokastro feeding the river Kanavari,which joins the lake Livadhi or Hylice.In the middle of the vale, immediately belowRimokastro, are extensive ruins of an ancient*Eprifi6K€i(rrpov — Deserted vowel is one of the most com-castle ; derived evidently from mon of Romaic corruptions,the neighbouring ruins. The ' Kar(iKa{ii\i,suppression of the initial shortXIX.] Boeotia 479town, undoubtedly Theseus the founders of whichseem to have chosen the site for the sake of thesources of the Kanavari. Such a low situation,commanded by hills on either side, although notso important in ancient as it would be in modemtimes, must have been inconvenient in any kindof warfare; and the instances of Greek cities insuch a position are rare. The only remains ofmilitary architecture are the foundations of anoblong or oval inclosure, built of very solid masonryof a regular kind. It is scarcely half amile in circumference ; but all the adjacent groundto the south-east is covered, like the interiorof the fortress, with ancient foundations, squaredstones, and other remains, proving that if the inclosurewas the only fortified part of the city,many of the public and private edifices stood withoutthe walls. The place is called Lefka, from avillage of that name no longer in existence, butthe ruined churches of which still remain to thenumber of five or six. When I visited these ruinsin 1802, there were still three inhabited cottagesat Lefka, but these are now deserted and ruined.In the time of Wheler the village appears to havebeen nearly of the same size as Rimokastro orKatzikaveli ^The springs which give rise to the Kanavari arein various parts of the valley ; so that at the ancientsite the stream is already formed, and flows" Rim6caatro ia divided one below." — Wheler ^ p. 470.into three little knots oi He mistook the ruins for thosehouses, two upon the hill and of Tkishe,Boeotia.[chap.along the northern side of the ruins, where it isjoined by other sources which issue from the slopesnear the river's bank, as well as from below thewalls of the fortress, and even from among theruins within the walls. The churches contain theremains of cornices, ceilings, architraves, columns,and plain quadrangular stones, all of white marble,and similar relics are found in all the surroundingvillages and solitary churches, showing that thecity which stood here was one of the most considerablein Boeotia. Lefka, Afvira, so nearly resemblinghtvKTpa^ would at first incline one to thebelief that Leuctra was here situated, but Leuctrawas never any thing more than a village of theThespis, and it no longer existed in the time ofStrabo, whereas the geographer's description ofThespis, as the only considerable town of Boeotiaexcept Tanagra ^ corresponds to the abundant remainsat Lefka, as well as to the date of the inscriptionswhich still exist here. Though I do not findthe city named in any of these documents, Meletiushas given us a copy of two which he discovered at 'Rimokastro bearing this evidence * ; to which I mayHaving described Thebesas, ohht KWfirfc d^u)\6yov rinrovtruiovtray Strabo adds, koI &XXaiirdXeig dvdXoyoy exovvi wX^vTavaypoc foi Otavi&y' alrai^ iKavdc tnffJLfilyovin irpoceKelvaQ Kpivofuvai, p. 403 ;and again, p. 460, Nvv2 SifjLovri (Qienrua) ervyi^rtiKe rmvBoiutTiKwy TrSXewy Kal Tavaypa*T(Sy ^ aXXbiv Ipttiria Kal oyo^'tiara X^Xecxrai.Oemrtiay if jSovXi^ xal6 ^/ioc''Apv^v(?) Ilapa^OFOvdpv^Q tytKty,AirroKpdropa Tpdiayoy Kal'papa Lefiaaroy toy ehepytTiivKal Krlvrriy fj x<SXtc Beewii^y,Stoic. — Melet. Geog. torn. ii.p. 341.XIX.] Boeotia. 481add the fact, that at the two villages I have procuredseveral coins of Thespiae, which are not verycommon in other parts of Boeotia. It must be admitted,that the description of Respite by Pausanias,and by a poet cited by Stephens, both ofwhom describe it as situated vero, or at the foot ofHelicon ^ would lead one to seek for it rathernearer to that mountain than Lefka ; but, on theother hand, the distance of this place from MountFag exactly accords with the fifty stades whichPausanias places between Thespiae and the mountainof the Sphinx.The inscriptions of the date of the Roman Empireare a fragment in honour of Trajan at Lefka,another containing the name and titles of Pertinaxat Rimokastro, and a stele at the latter place inscribedin honour of a native citizen named TitusFlavins Philips, who had attained under one ofthe Roman emperors not named, the dignity ofquaestor Asia, tribune, praetor, legate of Cyprus,and proconsul of Lycia and Painphylia '.Among several broken inscriptions in the ruinedchurches at Lefka ', there is one more ancient thanthe others consisting of three lines of characters ofthe best times, engraved with great care on ablock of white marble, the face of which is dividedby lines into squares, so that each letter is inclosedOitnria vero ro opoc rov 'BXiicw va fieri, — Pausan. Bceot.c. 26."AylpiQ 6* at voT tvatoy vero KpordipoiQ 'ElXuccliyocAiifiari nuv ahy^ti Geoircac ehpvyppoc*Pleiades Megarensis ap. Stephan. in GeWeca.V. Inscription, No. 78. * V. Inscriptions, Nos. 74, 75, 76.VOL. II. I i482 • Boeotia. [chap.within a square \ Unfortunately one end of themarble is built into the wall, so as to conceal theend of each line, and the entire tenor of the inscriptionis thus left uncertain, though there isenough extant to show that it recorded the dedicationby Arches and Thrasymachus, of a workmade by Praxiteles of Athens. As Pausanias observedin the temple of Eros or Love, which wasthe deity held in the highest honour at Thespis,statues of Venus and Phryne in marble, made byPraxiteles, the great Athenian sculptor ^, it is notimprobable that the existing inscription may relateto those works. As to the celebrated statueof Love in Pentelic marble, which was presentedby Praxiteles to the iraipa Phryne, and by her tothe Thespienses, by which she conferred a greatbenefit upon her native city by attracting strangersthither, the words of Strabo show that it had beenremoved from Thespis considerably before histime ^ ; and Pausanias found only an imitation ofit by Menodorus of Athens. In the time of Plinydie original was in the schools of Octavia atRome ^ ; and its ultimate fate is unknown. Abrazen Eros, which Lysippus had made for theThespienses, not inferior in merit perhaps to thatV. Inscription, No. 77. 1. 13, c. 6. Phryne is .Boeot. c. 27. firmed by Pausanias in twonporcpov fey ovy 6y\/6yLtvoi other places. — Attic. 1. 1, c,nycc ros "Epwra <£v€/?atKov cri 20; Phocis. c^ 14; and byriiv QitnrtiaVf &c. Strabo calls Atben. 1. 13, c. 6. Antholc^.the lady, Glycerin ; but Glycerin Jacobs, vol. i. p. 164 ; vol. ii.was a different person, almost p. 254.equally renowned. — V. Athen. * Plin. H. N.i. 36, c 5.XIX.] Boeotia. 483of Praxiteles, was destroyed by fire at Rome, afterhaving been first carried thither by Caligula, restoredto Thespiae by Claudius, and again transportedto Rome by Nero ^ The earliest representationof Love worshipped at Thespis, stillexisted in the time of Pausanias in the form of arude stone.The other principal monuments of Thespiae werenot near the temple of Eros, but in a different partof the city near the agora, which contained a statueof Hesiod in brass. Near the agora was the theatre,a temple of Venus Melaenis, a statue of Victory inbrass, and a small temple of the Muses, containingtheir figures in stone of small dimensions. Therestill existed at Thespiae also, in the time of Pausanias,a very ancient temple of Hercules, and inanother part of the town images of Jupiter Saotes,of Bacchus, of Fortune, of Health, and of MinervaErgane, with Plutus standing by her, both whichwere the work of (Thereon ?)The principal cause of the present superiority ofRimokastro over the neighbouring villages, andperhaps of the desertion of Les ka, is the fame of itspatron saint named Kharalambo, XapaXa/iiro<:, whohas the reputation of curing the plague, and ofpreserving from the infection. When the disorderrages in Thebes, or Livadhia, or 'Egripo, a disasterwhich though not very frequent in Greece is sureto happen occasionally where Turks reside, theGreeks often fly from the infected town, and placethemselves under the Saint's protection at Rimo-kastro. His church stands on a hill to the .Boeot. c. 27.VOL. II. I i 2 -I-484 Boeotia. [chap.ward of the village. Among the pictures whichcover all the walls, is the figure of the saint himself,bearing very little resemblance to the ancientpatron of Thespis, as imagined by Lysippus orPraxiteles, with the plague represented as a monsterin chains at his feet. In another picture acrowd of kings, bishops, archons, and others, aredriven by the plague, or the destroying angel,into the flaming gulph. The same church containsa large Hellenic sepulchral monument, representing,in indifferent workmanship, a nakedman and a dog, without any inscription. It wasfound not long ago in a corn-field to the south-westof Lefka. The inscription in honour of Philipsis at the same church ; and in the wall outside areinserted two sepulchral stones, on one of which isthe common heroic emblem of a man mounted on ahorse, which has its left fore foot on an altar. Theother stone has nothing but the name Phipps, invery ancient characters*.The heights to the northward of Rimokastro andKatzikaveli are covered with vineyards : the rest ofthe surrounding country, like all that which extendsto the mountains bordering the Etiboic frith on oneside, and to Mount Fames on the other, consists ofplains or downs bearing com near the villages, butthe greater part in natural pasture, with scarcely atree or shrub to enliven the scene. It was not soanciently, when an oracle of Delphi bestowed theepithet of shady on Leuctra and when, as we areV. Inscriptions, Nos. 78, 79.Fausan. Bceot. c. 14.XIX.] Boeotia. 485told by Plutarch, the heroum of Androcrates nearPlatsea y9BB thickly surrounded with trees \ Therewere then probably gardens and plantations jtiearthe waters, the heights were well wooded, and allthe detached temples and hero stood in the midstof groves.The Kanavari, which has its rise in thesprings of ThespicBy probably took that modernname from plantations of hemp* which onceexisted on its banks. It is said to retain waterall the year, a rare quality in the smaller, andindeed in some of the more celebrated riversof Greece; for the Asapus flows only about fourmonths in the year. But the Kanavari, though itis preserved in the dry season by the narrownessof the valley below ThespuB^ which admits only ofthe water being diverted to mills, serves in itslower course for the irrigation of the plain ofThebes, so that in summer little or no water remainsto be discharged into the lake Livadhi.The site of Leuctra is very clearly marked by atumulus and some artificial ground on the summitof the ridge which borders the southern side ofthe valley of These; this position being exactlyin the line between Thespis and Platcsa^as Strabo intimates Leuctra to have been', whileits smaller distance from the former accords withthe fact of Leuctra having been included inthe district of Thespis. The battle of Leuctrawas fought probably in the valley on thePlutarch. in. Artistic. * tv Acvrrpocc r^c Geovftic^c.Kavafii, — Xenoph. Hellen. 1. 6, c. 4.Strabo, p. 414.Boeotia.[chap.northern side of the tumulus, about midway betweenThespiae and the western extremity of theplain of Plataea. Cleombrotus, in order to avoidthe Boeotian, who were expecting him by thedirect route from Phocis, marched by Thisbe andthe valleys on the southern side of Mount Helicon^ ; and having thus made his appearance suddenlyat Eleusis, the port of Thespiae, capturedthat fortress, and twelve triremes belonging to theThebans. From thence he moved upon Leuctra,where he intrenched himself on a rising ground ;after which the Thebans encamped on an oppositehill, at no great distance. The position of thelatter, therefore, seems to have been on the easternprolongation of the height of Rimokastro.The Theban commanders having cited an oracle,which declared that the punishment of the Lacedaemonianss,for the violation of the daughtersof Scedasus of Leuctra, by two Spartans, wasto take place in the plain of Leuctra*, where themonuments of the women were erected, the The-bankadorned the tomb previously to the battle'.inrpoahdKriToy iroptvOel^ a^-yEirai clc Kpevviy, — Xenoph.Hellen. 1. 6, c. 4.^lei^Xdity rife rrapaBaXarrlayahoy 'xaXewily oltray iyi^oKiy£«C r^** Boiwr/av dtayivyta^, —Diodor. 1. 15, c. 54.According to Diodorus (1. 15,c. 52), Cleombrotus was encampedat Chaeronea before hemoved towards Thebes, andEpaminondas waited for himat the passes near Coroneia, rdT€p\ riiy Koptafvccav anyd^ probablyat the pass of Petra.*Ev Tf AevKTpucf «reJ/y,—Plutarch, in Pelopid.£K6fffififfay d^ rovro rofiy^fia ol Qfijidioi wpo r^cfjLd\fic* — Xenoph. ibid.XIX.] Boeotia. 487Hence the monument and the plain appear to havebeen between the two positions. The numbers ofthe contending parties are not stated by Xenophon,but by the most probable accounts of subsequenttimes the Lacedaemonians had 10,000 hoplitse and1000 cavalry; and the Bceotians 6000 polite,with a better, if not a more numerous cavalry, thatthat of their opponents ^ The two armies met in:the plain, with their cavalry in front. That of theLacedsemonians was soon defeated, and in turning,,disordered their hoplitse, just at the time when theTheban phalanx which was fifty shields in depth,attacked the right of the Lacedsemonians, who wereonly about twelve deep. The close order of theThebans had been purposely arranged by Epaminondaswith the hope that, if he could break theSpartans where the king commanded, the rest ofthe army would be an easy conquest. The resultwas more successful than he could have expected.Cleombrotus, together with Ninon and Sphodrias,two of his chief officers, were slain ; the rightwas turned ; the left, as soon as they perceived it,retreated to the rising ground, and the whole armytook refuge within the entrenchments, when findingthat 1000 Lacedaemonians had fallen, including400 out of 700 Spartans the surviving leaders de-plutarch,in Pelopid. — hon, and it is confirmed byDiodor. 1. 15, c. 52. Plutarch, who, in his life ofMilford doubts whether the Agesilaus, represents the wholeSpartans were included among Lacedaemonian loss to havethe Lacedsemonians, but such I been 1000.think was the meaning of Xeno-488 fiCEOTiA. [chap.termined to demand a truce to bury their dead,and thus to acknowledge themselves beaten, uponwhich the Thebans delivered the dead and erecteda trophy. As the barrow on the site of Leuctrais exactly on the summit of the ridge which wasoccupied by the Lacedaemonian camp, it is probablythe place of sepulture of the 1000 Lacedaemonianwho fell in this celebrated contest, fromwhich is dated the decline of Sparta ; it is thereforea monument of the same kind as the tumulus ofMarathon, and a relic of antiquity scarcely lessinteresting.On leaving Rimokastro for Paleo-panaghia, wedescend into the plain and proceed along the footof the hills. At about half-way, the village ofNeokhorio stands on a projection of the oppositemountain. In the middle of the valley, in thesame direction, lies a large block of marble, on oneside of which, in a circular compartment, figuresof a man and horse are represented, below which isinscribed, in very large characters,PI2TQN1AHPQIThe inscription is incomplete at both ends, onebeing buried in the ground and the other broken;but the name was evidently Aristides. Havingreturned into the road, six minutes farther a churchoccurs, which is made up of pedestals, altars, tombstonesof different sorts, and other fragments ofancient architecture. Among the sepulchral monumentsare five which represented horsemen inrelief, like the hero above-mentioned. There areXIX.] Boeotia. 489two monuments of the same kind at the churchof St. Kharalambo, another in the village of Rimo-kastro, others below that village, among the ruins ofThespis and there is a similar one in the aqueductof Thebes. In some of these the man is on foot bythe side of his horse ; in others he is mounted andarmed with a shield and sword. The horse generallysets his left foot upon an altar, and the man'sname is inscribed below with the addition ""Hpoic-In the same ruined church a part of a humanfigure in high relief, representing a man in the actof stretching out his right arm, has lately been uncoveredby the rains : a part of the figure is stillburied in the earth. The place seems to be the samewhich Wheler states to have been called Paria, butno knowledge of that name now exists.At the end of the plain of Neokhorio we cross aslight elevation, and arrive at sunset at the villageof Panaghia, situated among vineyards, alittle above a small plain which reaches to thefoot of Mount Helicon. The distance from Rimo-kastro is thirty-six minutes. At the church of AioVlasi at Panaghia are three inscriptions, the mostcurious of which is a stele of a singular form, inscribedwith the name of Timon, and x^P< foeCoif e in the Boeotia dialect, like kti for kuI in theinscriptions of Tanagra ^Feb. 4. — the ruins of Paleo-panaghia are abouta mile distant to the north-westward of the presentvillage, on a rocky summit in the directionof the mountain of Zagara. Here standsV. Inscriptions, Nos. 82, 83, 84.490 Boeotia. [chap.a ruined tower of the middle ages on a peakedrock, at the foot of which are remains of churchesand houses. Wheler, who calls this place ,without the Pale, shows it neverthelessto have been exactly in the same desolate state itis at present. It would seem that new Panaghiawas not then in existence, for he describes thevalley and river, which is between it and Neok-horio, without any mention of the village. Hesupposed the ruins to stand on the site of Ceressus,a strong fortress of the Thespienses, whose city,standing in a plain, seems to have required somesuch place of retreat towards the mountains. TwiceCeressus served as a place of refuge to them ; firston occasion of an incursion of Thessalians, whoseattacks they here successfully resisted ; and againafter the battle of Leuctra, when the place soonyielded to £epaminondas The tower commandsa fine view of the Thespvce and Parasopia as far asMount Panes, as well as of Thebes and a part ofthe Lake Copais. The nearer view is confined tothe HeUcanian summits. To the right the serratedtop of Mount Zagara, or Libethrvamy is seen foreshortened: and a little on this side of the highestpoint appears the monastery of Zagara, delightfullysituated on a woody slope which falls to the retiredvalley where stand the two villages also calledZagara. To the left of the mountain the snowysummit of Parnassus just shows itself.The rocky ridge of Paleo-pans^hia is dividedonly from Helicon by a valley, which branches to^ Pausan. BcDOt. c. 14.XIX.] Boeotia. 491the north-east. This plain is probably the territoryof Ascra^ for on the opposite side of it are theremains of a Hellenic fortress, on the summit of ahigh conical hill, or rather rock, which is connectedto the north-west with Mount Zagara, andmore to the westward with the proper Helicon.The distance of these ruins from Les ka correspondsexactly to the forty stades which Strabo placesbetween Thespiee and Ascra ; and it is further remarkable,that a single tower is the only portion ofthe ruins conspicuously preserved, just as Pausaniasdescribes Ascra in his time, though there are alsosome vestiges of the walls surrounding the summitof the hill, and inclosing a space of no great extent.The place is now called Pyrg^ki from thetower, which is formed of equal and regular layersof masonry, and is uncommonly large. Hesioddescribes Ascra as a disagreeable residence bothin winter and summer \ which may have beencaused by the confined circuit of its walls, the abruptnessof the hill, and the proximity of the greatsummits of Helicon, rendering the winter long andsevere, and in summer excluding the refreshingbreezes of the west. Ascra however is surroundedwith beautiful scenery, with delightful summer-retreats,and with fertile plains, enjoying a mildclimate during the winter ; and it was less, perhaps,upon its intrinsic defects, than upon a com-tiaavaro ^ &yx *£Xiicwvoc oi(vp^ ivl KutfJijf"AffKfnj, X^'M^ KciK^f Oipei apyaXep, oh^i trot laBXjmHesiod. Op. v. 637.Hesiod is here speaking of his father, who was forced by povertyto seek a new residence.492 Boeotia. [Clap.parison of it with the delightful Asiatic iEolis, fromwhence his family came, that Hesiod founded hiscondemnation of Ascra.The middle of the valley, which lies betweenPaleo-panaghia and Pyrgaki, is watered by a torrentwhich is joined farther on by two smallstreams from Mount Marandali, as the neighbouringor eastern summit of Helicon is called, andthus forms the river which flows between newPanaghia and Neo-florio. From the left bank ofthis torrent, midway between Paleo-panaghia andPyrgaki, issues a fine perennial source of water,which, by the numerous squared blocks around it,seems anciently to have enjoyed considerable reputation.On one of the blocks are the lettersIPO M I 0/in large and well-formed characters : the fieldsaround are spread with stones and remains ofhabitations, among which are two or three smallchurches in ruins. If Pyrgaki was Ascra^ thisfountain was probably the famous Aganippe j forPausanias, after having described Ascra, proceedsto the Grove of the Muses in Helicon, and remarksthat Aganippe was on the left hand \ which isexactly true of this source, supposing the Groveof the Muses to have been at St. Nicolas, of whichI was satisfied on my former journey, by an inscriptionwhich I found there, relating to the Games ofthe Muses, mentioned by Pausanias'. This inscribeBoeot. c. 29. Ge^irieic koI kyQya ayovviiTipioiKovvi Bi Koi dvhpt^ to Movcrcta. — Pausan. Boeot. c»diXaroc Koi ioprfiv re evravBa oi 81.XIX.]Boeotia.tion, after having proceeded from the foot of thehill of Pyrgaki to Aio Nikola, I again copy. Itcontains a catalogue of victors in the Museia, precededby the names of the AgonothetsB and of theArchon (of Thespiae), under whom the games werecelebrated, which are styled the Great CaesarianAugustan Mused '. St. Nicholas is a metokhi, orchurch and small convent dependent on that ofMakariotissa, which is in the upper region of Helicontowards its southern declivity. The metokhiis beautifully situated in a theatre-shaped hollowat the foot of Mount Marandali. The buildingsstand in the midst of a grove of pine, walnut, plane,and olive, mixed with myrtle, bay and oleander,and adjoining to them are some gardens containingmany hazel trees. A constant verdure is maintainedhere in summer by a copious source of water.The fountain Hippocrene, which was twenty stadesabove (iiravafiavTi) the Grove of the Muses, was1 'AyaOp rwX5* 'AywFoOc-TovvTOc Tui fiiyaXdty KaiaapltaySc/Saffr^iiiv Movfftliay Avpiy.KaXXiicXcavov tov Swri/pixov,irrl Ap')(pvroQ Ahpri. Movacpoi-TOQf xvp^opoviTOc Ahpri. *Apc0'-tokKIovs tov 'ETTiicra, ypafifxa-'rcvoJTOc Avprj. Ai(iavov tovAiliavoVf kvtlKtav otho* (raXiric-ri^C TLov. AiXcoc Zepair/wy'E^VcoC) Ktipv^ M. Avp^. £v-rv^iJC Ta^aypaToCi payj/^SoiM. Airp^. "EtVKaipoQTayaypaloQfIlvOucoc ahXriTfit M. Avp^. *Iov-Xioi'oc TpiiroXc/nycj TlvdiKo^ ict-OapitrrrJQ Aov. Tails AiXioc'AXefavdpocy jcvicXioc auXfyr^cM. Ahpfi, 2€irr4/iioc Ne/ieaia-I'OC 'AyTiytylSriQ KoXofv *Avn-o\!£VQf Tpayf^ot M. Aht^l^ioQ*ApT€fiil(apoQ Kop/v6ioc» icvfif-66c M. EtVTV^iayoQ 'AOiyvatoc,fccOapy^oc M. Ahpii, *AXc(aF-6poQ NeiKo^i}2cvCi xopov roXei-Tucov Avpii, Zkfffifxiayoc FXv-Ktayoc Qccnricvc, Bia trayrutyM.Airpi^. Scirr/fiioc fiifuaiayocWyriytylBric K6\iay 'Avrcoxtvc.y. Inscription, No. 80.494 Boeotia. [chap.probably at Makari6ti9sa, which is noted for a finespring of water, though the twenty stades of Pausaniasaccord better with the direct distance, thanwith that by the road. At the Hippocrene, Pausaniassaw an ancient copy of the ''Epya of Hesiod writtenupon lead, and much injured by time S In my formertour in Boeotia, in which I proceeded from St.Nicholas to Zagara, and after following that valley,descended by Kotomula to Livadhia, I remember tohave remarked two other springs on the ascent ofthe mountain from St. Nicholas, but as these arescarcely more than half the distance mentioned byPausanias, and are very inconsiderable in summer,neither of them can be the Hippocrene ; there is awell also near the summit of Mount Marandali,noted among the peasants as serving to water theircattle in summer, and called Kriopigadho (coldwell), a name which is sometimes applied to thesummit itself. If Marandali was the sacred summitof Helicon as its vicinity to the Shrove of the Musessuggests, Kriopigadho corresponds with the fountainnear the altar of Jupiter on Helicon, alludedto by the author of the Theogony ".The Grove of the Muses preserved in the timeof Pausanias a greater number of statues, by eminentmasters, than any place in Boeotia, not extKai foi fidXvfi^oy c^eiicvv- written by Hesiod, and thatffaVf ivOa fi ^tiyijt t6. iroXXa even of this the first ten linesinto Tov yp6yov "KiXvfiaafiiyov were spurious. — Pausan.Boeot.lyyiypatrrai Si ahrip ra'Epya. c. 31.The natives (oi ir£pi rov*£Xifc«- « Hesiod. Theogony. v. 3.va oitcovyrii:) maintained that v. ins. p. 497. n. 1.the Erga was the only poemXTX.] B(EOTIA. 496meeting Thebes ^ and the extant inscription givesstrong reason to believe, by the form of its letters,that the Museia were celebrated long after the timeof Pausanias. The statues of the Muses remainedhere until the reign of Constantine, when they*were removed to his new capital, where they wereconsumed by fire in the year 404 '. In the approachto the also, Pausanias remarked a rockwrought in the shape of a cavern, which containedportraits in relief of Supreme, nurseof the Muses, and of Linus. In the sanctuarywere the nine Muses by Cephisodotus, andanother set, of which three were by the samesculptor, three by Strongylion, and three byOlympiosthenes. Here also were Apollo andHermes in brass, contending for the lyre, a Bacchusseated, the work of Lysippus, and anotherupright Bacchus, the finest of the productions ofMyron, except his Erechtheus at Athens. ThisBacchus had been presented by Sylla, who hadtaken it from Orchomenus. There were portrait-statuesof several poets or other followers of theMuses', namely, Thamyris blind and bearing abroken lyre, Arian of Methymna on a dolphin, Sa-casasof Argos, Hesiod seated with a lyre on hisknees, Orpheus (seated) with Telete standing byhim, and surrounded by brutes in marble andbronze. The Grove contained also a statue ofArsinoe, sister and wife of Ptolemy, seated onPausan. Boeot. c. 29, et seq. * rroirirac v AXKiac iirifaveicEuseb. de Yitd Constant, earl fwvtnic^, — Pausan. Bceot.1. 3, c. 54, Solomon, 1. 2. c. 5. c. 30.Zosim. 1. 2, c. 21, 1. 5, c. 24. * KiOdpa.496 BffiOTiA. [chap.an ostrich of brads, and the figure of a deergiving suck to Telephus, near which were an oxand a statue of Priapus. Among the votive tripods,the most ancient was that dedicated byHesiod, who had obtained it at Chalcis, as aprize for his verses.** The vicinity of the Grove' adds Pausanias,'^ is inhabited, and the Thespienses here celebratea festival and contest called the Museia, andanother in honour of Love in which there are prizes,as well in the arts of the Muses* as for Athlete'*The water from the fountain at St. Nicolas, togetherwith that from the adjacent slopes, joins thestream from Aganippe and the valley o{ Scrap thelatter having previously received another smallcontribution from the pass which leads to Zagari,and which was the ancient road from Thespiae andthe Museum of Helicon to Coroneia, by the valleyof Libethrium. The united river or rather rivulet,then leaves the two Panaghias on the left, andNeokhorio on the right, flows three miles in thedirection of Plataea then takes a sudden turn tothe south-west, and dividing the roots of MountKorombili from those of Helicon follows a stillmore westerly course to Dobrend and Kakosia,leaving on the right Karada and Tateza, and onthe left Xeronomi. What was the ancient nameof this river ? — which having had its origin in suchillustrious sources as Aganippe, Hippocrene, theFountain of the Muses, and that of Narcissus, cannotbut have had some celebrity among the Greeks.1-.T "Tip Ephori. Movtfirfc*XIX.] BOEOTIA. 497Hesiod mentions only the Permessus and Olmeius \I have already remarked, that the evidence ofStrabo and of the Scholiast on Hesiod ^ is favourableto the opinion that the river Kefalari,which joins the lake Cephissis near the site of Ha-hiatus,is the Permessus and its confluent the riverof Zagara the Olmeius. But to this conclusion someobjection may be made : both the testimonies justreferred to are derived from Herodotus, an Ephesianwho lived in the time of the second Ptolemy,and of whose judgment on Grecian topographyAiO* *'EXtKwyoc tx^^^^^ opoCf ftiya re (aOedy reKal T€ iTipl Kpijyriy loei^ea rrdaa* &7ra\oi(riy*Op\€vyraif Kal (iotfioy Ipiadeyioc Kpoviuyoc'Kal r€ Xoiaaafuyai ripeya XP^ UipfiTitrero'iOf*H 'linrovKpii} i|c fj 'OX/icioD CaOioto,'Axpordrf 'EXucfivt )^<$povc €vciroi//0'avro.Hesiod Theogony. v. 1.Though Hesiod does not iyx^p^oi cd to irpwroy ^yiiyaiassert that the Pennessus and Ilap/uiyo'ov, ^c ^>90'& Kpiiriyc ^yOlmeius were rivers, the mas roi Bouarticdi^, '£/z)3aXXec ^cchine termination, and the be etc Try KciMrai^a Xifxytiy, *Eylief of all subsequent writers, ^e rote ZrfyoBoTeioic ypa^ei Tep-fully warrant the presumption firiadto. Toe ^c miya^ c^ci iythat they were not mere fours Qeawiaic^ X^P9 "^^^ ^^' <i^^cpains like Hippocrene, Aga pec etc r^v KcDTrai^a Xifiyjiynippe, or that fountain near tcaiciDcy ^ yap TspfitivoQ opocthe altar of Jupiter, on the itrrl Kal oh TorufjidQ. Kal 6summit of the mountain, of 'OX^eioc iroTafiSc iariy iy '£\i-which the poet has not given icwyi rfjc Boca^riac Kard tousthe name. &Kpoy ahTov, diro *OXfiecov tovStrabo, p. 407, 411. — 01 ^itrvfov irac^oc* Tpiaicdvia Befiiy TTorafjioi r^c Botwriac (sc. irov vrdSia itvixti 0ij/3i»v.—Permessus et Olmeius) ovroi Schol. Hesiod. Theol. v. 6,tl9i. Uipfififfo^ hy icaXovfft oiVOL. II. K kBoeotia.[chap.Strabo does not leave a very favourable impressionwhen he remarks, that Herodotus proposedto alter the iroXv^o^vXov ''Apvtiv of the Iliadinto iroXvcrra^vXov ''A^fKpriv, in opposition to the descriptionwhich Hesiod has given of his nativeplace, and the still stronger language of Eudoxus \Pausanias, the only author besides Hesiod whomwe can rely upon as having certainly seen the riversin question, says only of the Permessus that it wasa river of Helicon, and the reputed father of Aga-nippe* ; and of the Olmeius, that it was a smallriver flowing on the summit of Helicon ^, which isso slight a mention of these celebrated streams,and so different from the usual confidence of Pausaniasin recognizing places renowned in history orfable, that one cannot but suspect that he haddoubts as to the identity of the rivers of Hesiodwith those pointed out by the i^nynraly and whichwere probably the same alluded to by Strabo. Hissilence as to any river in the Haliartia except theLophis, which rose not in Helicon but near thewalls of Haliartus, tends to support this opinion ofthe impressions of Pausanias. Nor ought we toFihdS^ov nov Xiipia Xiyoy-roc Tcp* Tuft "Aajcpiyc, — Strabo,p. 413.■ dvyaripa ^i elvai r^v *Ayo-vimcriv rov Uepfxriffffov Xiyovtri'pit ^c Koi ovTos 6 YlepjAriffffOcTTtpi rov 'EXcKciiva. — Pausan.Boeot. c. 29.• *EkI de Aicp^ r|J fcopv0^ rov'ISXiKwyoQ TTOTafiOQ ois ficyacitrrly h A^fioQ (lege 'OXfitdc). —Pausan. Boeot. c. 31. I haveno hesitation in making theemendation here proposed, foron comparing the words ofPausanias with those of theScholiast on Hesiod (6 'OX/mcociroTafi6c ioTiv kv 'EXucwfi KurdTO aKpov avrov), it is evidentthat the latter refers to thesame river intended by Pausanias,and that both authors hadin view the words 'AKpordrf'EXiKkiyi in Hesiod.XIX.] Boeotia. 499omit the consideration that both Pausanias andthe Scholiast seem to have mistaken the meaningof Hesiod, who does not place the Olmeiuson the summit of Helicon (a singular situationfor a river), but only says that the Musesbathed in the Permessus, Olmeius or Hippocrene,and that they danced at a fountain and altar ofJupiter, on the summit of the mountain. If, then,we can suppose that the names of Permessus andOlmeius had been changed between the time ofHesiod and that of the Polemics, or of the Romanempire, it will be natural to conclude that the tworivers noticed by the native poet, are those whichwe now find to be the only two considerable andperennial streams on the eastern side of Helicon,and that if the Kefalari was the Permessus^ theriver which rises in Aganippe and the Grove of theMuses, and flows to Kakosia, was the Olmeius^.Returning in 20 minutes from the Metokhi of St.Nicolas to New Panaghia, we descend from thenceat 11, by a gentle slope to the river, cross it at11.12, and immediately mounting the foot of anadvanced height of Mount Marandali, arrive in afew minutes at Neokhorio. If I understand Whelerrightly, it was on the hill above Neokhori, whichis well defended by its form on every side excepttowards the mountain, that he supposed Thespisto have been situated, having observed upon it some^^ ruins of an ancient city' and having found in aPossibly a line of Pauses the top of the mountain as wellnias has been lost between as of the situation of the Olmand irora/ioc, which meus.may have been descriptive ofKk2500 Boeotia. [chap.church on the ascent, an inscription containing thename of Thespiee. But as Thespiee was certainlyat LfCfka, this was probably the site of one of thesubordinate towns of the Thespis ^, to which suppositionthe inscription itself is not unfavourable,having belonged to a monument which was erectedin honour of one Prologues, son of Aristarchus,by the young men of Thespis, in conjunction withthose of some of the Ilapoticoc, or neighbouringpeople who were engaged in business in Thespis '.Such a monument might have been placed in anyof the towns of the Thespis as well as in Thespisitself. It is by no means improbable that thisposition, and not Paleopanaghia, may be the site ofCeressus, being more centrical with regard to theThespis whereas Paleopanaghla is on the extremityof the district very near Ascra, and has not the advantageof being backed by Mount Helicon fromwhich it is quite separated.Beyond Neokhori the road quits the cultivatedcountry and crosses the barren roots of the mountain,which are covered with wild thyme andshrubs, particularly the paliuri, or Jerusalem thorn.In descending towards the valley which lies betweenthe mountains Helicon and Korombili, andwhich is watered by the stream from Paleopana-gala, we arrive, at 11.53, at Tateza, a hamlet dependenton Xeronomi. On the opposite bank of a^ The district of Thespifle kv Bc^ircaic TL^woyivtiv Hpwas called Thespis, or Thes TQp\ov rov . . . • • ironplace, or Thespis. ehipyiniy eavrwv. — Wheler,OetnrUwy oi irai^ec koI ira p. 471*poiKwy Tkiv wpayfAanvofiiyiayXIX.] Boeotia. 501rivulet which flows by the village, stands a ruinedchurch, built of ancient fragments, among whichare some heroic monuments like those already described.Here are also two plain tomb-stones, withsingle names in the nominative, in archaic characters^ Five minutes higher up the stream, is acopious fountain surrounded by a modem inclosure,of which the materials are ancient squaredblocks. In the corn-fields above are many remainsof former habitations. It is the site, perhaps, of thatDonacon to which Pausanias adverts, immediatelyafter noticing the Olmius ^, and before he describesCreusis and Thisbe, which two sites occur exactlyin conformity with the order of his narrative, if wesuppose Donacon to have been here situated, andhis Olmius to be the river which flows from Pana-hia to Kakosia, and which receives the rivulet ofTateza near Xeronomi. If the remains near Tatezaindicate the site of Donacon, the fountain is thatof Narcissus.From Tateza we proceed, in 25 minutes, to Xe-ronomi or Xeronomes ', a considerable village in awide cultivated valley, surrounded by high mountains,and watered by the small river before mentioned.Xeronomi has a large ruined church,composed of fragments of Hellenic architecture,and many ancient squared blocks of the whitestone of the neighbouring mountains. Here areseveral heroic monuments, bearing figures of a manand horse ; and three plain sepulchral stones ofV. Inscript. Nos. 85, 86. or ISripoyofiaiQ^ dry pasture,Pausan. Boeot. c. 31. or pastures.SCepoyofi^f or Xiyfxivo/j^,502 Boeotia. [chap.Tery ancient date, inscribed with the names Aristophanes,Nicomachus, and Phrase. Aristophanesis written with a double sigma : the X in Nicobaris represented by * \ One only of the heroicmonuments, and apparently more ancient than theothers, is inscribed : the name of the deceased ispreceded by fir! and followed by np^y bat both thelatter word and the name are in the Boeotia dialect*.It is evident from the numerous churches in thispart of Boeotia, some of which are of large dimensionsand ancient construction, that the Thespiscontinued to be well inhabited under the Byzantineempire, as it had been under the Roman ; and it iscurious to observe that these churches still preservenumerous remains of the temples and other buildingsof Thespis, and its dependent villages andsacred places, which were one of the last holds ofPaganism.Leaving Xeronomi at 2.25, and sending my baggageby the direct road down the vale to Kakosia,I take that which leads to the port of Aliki — soonquit the valley, enter a gorge of Mount Korombiliopposite to Xeronomi, and after following it forabout a quarter of an hour mount the ridge whichborders the Qmnthiac Gulf, leaving the summit ofKorombili to the left. The ridge, as well as thewhole mountain, is a mere rock having some scantyintervals of soil, covered with wild shrubs. On thecrest of the ridge, where we arrive at 3.10, theroad passes over the remains of a Hellenic fortress,where, among the foundations of walls and houses,y. Inscriptions Nos. 88, ' Y. Inscription No, 87-89, 90.XIX.] Boeotia. 503one tower is still standing, which has given to theplace the name of Pjrrgo. The masonry is similarto that of Ascra, and the tower seems to have beenintended as a watch and signal post, as well fromits commanding position as from the great heightof the original work, for though still enough remainsof the tower to be very conspicuous at a distance,it seems formerly to have been twice as high ;the part now standing being entirely filled with thematerials of the upper part which have fallen intoit This point looks immediately down upon theport of Aliki, which opens to the west, but is wellsheltered. The termination of the ridge of Pyrgo,to the south ward forms the northern side of theentrance into the harbour, and being connectedabove with a more abrupt ledge of rock, descendingfrom the summit of the mountain, thus affordsa natural protection to the, harbour on the landside.The ancients, however, were not satisfiedwith this degree of security, but built a wall alongthe crest of the ledge of rock, which completelyexcluded all access to the harbour by land fromthe eastward. The principal remains are a tower,and an adjoining piece of wall of the same kindof masonry as that of Pyrgo. There was also aspace at the foot of the heights inclosed within theancient walls, and on the shore of the harbour isa marshy level, containing ponds for making salt,whence the name Aliki.Pyrgo commands a fine view of the northern shoreof the Morea, and of the mountains which rise fromit, but Corinth is hidden by the Cape of Pera-hora.It is remarkable that the mountains of theMorea are more deeply covered with snow than504 Boeotia. [chap.those on this side of the gulf. Last year I remarkedthe same tardiness of the spring in thenorthern part of the Morea ; here, on the contrary,and ever since I have left Athens, the sun at noonhas been already too warm to be agreeable for travelling.The mountains on either side of the gulfseem to have the same relation to each other in respectof climate as two parallel walls, one of whichis exposed to the north and the other to the south.Half way towards the coast o{Megaris lie heraldNisi, three low islands, upon one of which is amonastery. Eastward of Korombili is Livadhostra,a bad harbour in a large bay. From Pyrgo it liesto the west of the summit of Korombili : nearLivadhostra eastward is another port named Kala-make; then occur those of Ai Vlasi, or AioVasili^ and of Ghermano or JEgostJiena. Tothe westward of Alike, near the Boeotian coast,are four small islands lying in a line parallelto the coast; their names in the direction fromeast to west are Maria, Kumboluri, or stronghold,Kuveli and Ionia. Within them is theentrance into Vathjr, the port of Kakosia and Do-arena.Kh6sia, a large village, is seen immediatelyunder the peak of Paleovuni or Helicon.Farther westward the uncultivated roots of thatmountain impede all prospect of the coast.It is difficult to assign the ancient name to theport and fortress at Aliki. There are surmountsis the harbour at the village of Ai Vlasi, andwhich Wheler slept under a from thence proceeded to ,and the next day fish.ascended a high mountain toXIX.] Boeotia. 505able reasons against its being Creusis, the harbourof Thespis. When the Lacedsemonians twice retiredfrom the Thespis to the Isthmus by ^gos-then, they are reported by the historian to havemarched on both occasions by Creusis : the firsttime under the command of Cleombrotus ; andagain between seven and eight years afterwards,immediately after the defeat at Leuctra,in which the same Cleombrotus was slain ^ Aglance at the map will suffice to show that theroute of the retiring Lacedsemonians could not haveled by Aliki, their object being to make as speedya retreat as possible, at the same time that theyavoided the more direct roads across Mount Ciths;^ron. In order to have reached Creusis, supposingit to have been at Aliki, they must have divergedto the right of their line of march near Livadhostra ;either following the steep maritime side of MountKoromblli eastward, or making the tour of it byXeronomi westward, and must then have returnedby one of those routes nearly to the point in theirline of march from which they had diverged. It maybeconsidered certain, therefore, that Creusis wasin the bay of Livadhostra, and that the fortress andharbour at Aliki were some other ancient place.Leaving Pyrgo I follow the summit of the ridge,and there being no path whatever, consume anhour in threading my way through the rocks tothe valley, from whence, after crossing the riverwhich is near the foot of the mountain, we arrivein twenty minutes at Dobrena ^ or Dobreni, and inXenoph. Hellen. 1. 5, c. 4, * Topirpeva, Nro/iTpevd,1. 6, c. 4. Nro/ijrpcV*.506 Boeotia. [chap.fifteen more at Kak68ia ^ The distance to this placefrom Xeronomi by the straight road may be aboutan hour and a half.Feb. 6. — A strong northerly wind and rain. stands precisely on the site of the ancientThisbe, which is well described by Strabo as situatedat a small distance from the sea, under thesouthern side of Helicon , in a district confining onthose of Thespis and Coroneia'. The position isbetween two great summits of the mountain, nowcalled Karamunghi and Paleovuna^, which risemajestically above the vale, clothed with trees inthe upper part, and covered with snow at the top,but in no great quantity at present. The modemvillage lies in a little hollow surrounded on allsides by low cliffs connected with the last falls ofthe mountain. The walls of Thisbe were abouta mile in circuit, following the crest of the cliffswhich surround the village ; they are chiefly preservedon the side towards Dobrena and the southeast.The masonry is for the most part of thefourth order, or faced with equal layers of large,oblong, quadrangular stones on the outside, theinterior as usual being filled with loose rubble.On the principal height which lies towards themountain, and which is an entire mass of rock,appear some reparations of a later date than therest of the walls, and there are many Hellenicfoundations on the face of this rock towards thevillage. In the cliffs outside the walls, to theKaKdtria. * Kapafiovyyit UaXatofiov^Strabo, p. 411. ran,XIX.] Boeotia. 507north-west and south, are many sepulchral excavations.The primates of the village, on visiting me, inquirewhether I have found in my books any mentionof the mode in which the place was ancientlysupplied with water, and where was the spring,their only resource at present being a well behindthe rocky height. As neither Strabo nor Pausaniasmake any mention of a fountain at Thisbe, theinhabitants probably depended upon cisterns andwells, which can seldom fail at the foot of such amountain as Helicon. The Kakosiotes, however,instead of digging wells, have preferred spendingtheir money in building houses, and the same isobservable at Dobrena; their ability to do so isprobably caused by the retired situation of theplace, and its distance from all the ordinary linesof communication.The port of Thisbe which is now called Vathj^,is a beautiful little harbour surrounded by woodyhills. On the ridge looking down upon it, whichseparates the plain of Thisbe from the coast, arethe remains of a Hellenic tower and station, similarto that upon the ridge above Aliki, and evidentlya fortified point and signal post on the roadfrom Thisbe to its port. There are said also to besome remains of a fortress on the side of the harbour.The modem Scala of Dobrend in PortVathj^ is called Plata, that of Kakosia, Ai lanni :and there are separate roads leading to them fromeither village a mile and a half across the plain,and then over the maritime ridge. The shore ofVath5^ ^^ ^^^ ^^ocky, and abounds in wild pigeons,508 B(EOTIA. [chap.as Strabo and Stephens have remarked \ Thegeographer ascribes to the abundance of pigeonsat the harbour the epithet which Homer gives toThisbe'; but there is no deficiency of them atKakosia itself, for before I had made any inquiryon the subject, my Athenian janissary, whom I donot suspect of having ever read the Iliad, broughtme as a present a brace of pigeons, which he hadjust shot among the rocks near the village. Inthe islands opposite to the harbour these birds aresaid to be still more numerous than at Vath^^.The only building remarked by Pausanias atThisbe was a temple of Hercules, containing anupright statue of the god in stone : a festival wascelebrated in honour of him called the Heracleia '.The Grecian traveller then proceeds to describe apeculiarity in the adjacent plain, which is alonesufficient to identify the place. " Between themountain on the sea side," he says, '^ and that atthe foot of which the town is situated, there is aplain, which the water flowing into it would causeto be a lake, were it not for a strong embankment *constructed through the middle ^ by means ofwhich the watQp is turned every year into the partof the plain lying on one side of the causeway,Strabo, p. 411. — oxoX/nyc iiriyeior frcpiortpQy irXifpec* —QitrPdlot Koi 6 Xifiriv Oitrjiaiiay Step. Byzant. in Qdrjiii,^C ^viv '£ira^p($2eiroc* koX toKfa»irac» Evrpiy^/v re, iroXvrp^parve^ ri Qlvfiriv,II. B. y. 50.Pausan. Boeot. c. 32. * lib. ^cVov.XiX.] Boeotia. 509while that on the other side is cultivated." Infact, the plain of Thisbe is completely surroundedby heights, there' is no issue for the river whichrises in the Ascr€Ba and here terminates ; nor canI even perceive the entrance of any Subterraneouschannel such as frequently occurs under similarcircumstances in the calcareous formations ofGreece: if there be any, it is still, as in the timeof Pausanias, insufficient to the drainage of theplain. The mole or causeway which he describes,still subsists and serves, as it probably always hasdone, for a road across the marsh towards the port.It consists of solid foundations of masonry, and istraceable nearly half across the plain, on the sideopposite to Kakosia. The river crosses the causewayinto the marsh by two openings, the closingof which in the winter or spring would at any timecause the upper part of the plain to be inundated,and leave the lower fit for cultivation in the summer; but as the river is now allowed to flow constantlythrough them, the western side is always inastate of marsh, and the ground has become muchhigher on the eastern side.Besides this work there are the remains of anotherabove Dobrena, which the archons of Kakosiaconceive to have been constructed for the purposeof making each division of the valley cultivableevery two years out of three, whereas the ancientwork only gave cultivation every other year. Theyremark, that the inundation of any part of theland once in three years would serve both for fallowand manure, and would ensure constant B(£OTlA. [chap.utility to two-thirds of the valley. This second workwas between two and three miles beyond Dobrena,in the direct road to Xeronomi, where the valleyis not more than four hundred yards wide. Butit was merely a wall composed of loose stones andmortar, in nothing resembling the solid constructionof the ancient mole opposite to the town, except thatsome squared blocks of Hellenic appearance areseen in one part of it. It is probably of the sameperiod of the Byzantine Empire, when the churcheswere built, which show this part of Boeotia to havebeen at one time well peopled by Christians. Thewall has been carried away in the centre by thestream and could scarcely have served at anytimefor the purpose imagined by the Kakosiotes,but was rather a military separation between thetwo valleys of Xeronomi and Kakosia, or in otherwords, between the Thespis and Thishcsay ofwhich these straits are the natural boundary. Itis very possible there may have been a Hellenicwall here, for such barriers of separation betweendistricts were common among the ancients, as manyremains of them attest, and which in this instancemay have been renewed or repaired in the time ofthe Lower Empire. Just above the wall a narrowvale branches off from the main valley, and conductsagain into it behind a hill which is thus insulatedfrom Mount Helicon. The soil of all thesevalleys is excellent, and produces plentiful crops ofwheat and barley ; there is a considerable spacecovered with vineyards immediately below Do-arena,but the wine is bad, in consequence of theXIX.] Boeotia. 511low and moist situation, and negligent manufacture: a part of the marsh bears in summer kalam-bokki of both sorts.The monastery of Makariotissa, where is acopious source of water, which I suppose to havebeen the ancient Hippocrene, is visible from thesouthern side of the plain of Kakosia ; it is situatedon a little level half-way up the Karamunghi,on the southern side of that summit. The roadto the monastery from the plain of Thisbe ascendsby the valley behind Dobrend.Kakosia preserves several inscriptions, but thename Thisbe does not occur in any of them. Tworelate to a family of the name of Brachas. Oneof these is a fragment, preserving only the endingof two elegiac couplets \ which show that a Bra-chashad erected a monument in the city. Theother, which is on a square stele, is complete, andtestifies that a brother and two sisters, namedUlpius Brachas, Ulpia Paula, and Ulpia Hygeia,had erected a monument according to a decree ofthe council and people to their brother, M. UlpiusParamonus, who was son of M. Ulpius BrachasPatagonians, by Aurelian Arethusa, and grandsonof M. Ulpius Paramonus by Crane Paula.On a cornice or moulding near the top of thestele, is a line in smaller letters, implying that thededicators were descendants of Marcus Ulpius• . • • /i€ Bpaxctc €id(nfae iroXifiroff ^tXdidXov &yaytIkv^ Ka irarpihi TtiniivTfh€ icXioc 0e<(6ev.V. Inscription, No. 91.B(£0T1A.[chap.Nicias, who had held the office of Boeotarch^An inscription which was copied at Kakosia byMeletius, a century ago, and is no longer to befound, related to the same family of Brachas. Itwas inscribed on a monument erected to Trajan byMarcus Ulpius Brachas Epiphanianus ^iXoKowapyin conjunction with his two sons and two daughters', and is probably the most ancient of thethree inscriptions relating to the Braces, beingcotemporary with the Emperor, from whom undoubtedlyso many of the family had assumed thename of Ulpius and Ulpia.^ M. OhXirlov Neuc/ov Bocbi-rdp^ov iLToySvoif M. OvXirioyUapdfAoyoVf M. OifXwlov Bpa^aTlapafwviayod rac AhptXiaQ*ApevKoif(ni{ viol, tyyovov M.OhXiciov Jiapafidyov xal Kopd-ytlt navXijCi oi d^eX^l OvXxioiPapacy IlavXo, 'Yycta' xl/rf^tr"fiat PovXfit Kol ZiifjLov. — V.Inscription, No. 92.In this inscription the wordtyyovoQ seems to be used inthe sense defined by Hey*chins, namely, that of vuayo^^or vloQ vlov* Nevertheless, insome dedications to AntoninusPius and Marcus Aurelius atTVmantf, tyyovov evidentlymeans a step lower in descent;for Antoninus is there designatedas v<oc of Adrian, vlbivocof Trajan, and lyyoyoQ of Nerva;and M. Aurelius as violof Antoninus, vlmyo^ of Hadrian,tyyovoQ of Trajan, anddir6yovoQ of Nerva. — See Travelsin the Morea, vol. i. p.293, Inscriptions, Nos. 35, 36.^ 6v, Aairucov, Hap"BtKOVy virago to /3, Maproc OvX-icacffop, Koi oi viol ahrwj Ovation^rifWvOiyriQf OvXircoc Kpdrtty^ical ai Ovyaripec, OvXiria £v-fropia, OhXwla Bpi^x'XXa, UT&y ihiiay, — Melet. Geog. T.ii. p. 342. 8vo.Meletius must have beenmistaken in the fi indicatingthe year of Trajan's consulship,as he was only Caesar in hissecond consulship, and governorof Germany. The inscriptionis either of the year 116, or117, as in the former Trajanassumed the title of Partibus,and in the latter he died. Hehad then been six times Consul.XIX.] Boeotia. 513Another inscription at Kakosia, not quite complete,records the construction of a house andto the Gods Augustii, by Tiberius Claudius Urebanns, by his wife Claudia Philonicha and by theirtwo children, Uranus and (Ulpius) at their ownexpence*. The earliest Augustii were M. Aureliusand Verus, and the form of the letters doesnot indicate a later time. The monument thereforewas probably erected between the years 161and 169 of the' Christian sera.The only inscribed monument at Kakosia olderthan the Roman Empire, is a dedication toMinerva, in characters of a very remote age, ona long narrow stone, now inserted in the wall of aprivate house ; at one end the engraver, miscalculatingthe space, was obliged to end his line in acurve *.At 3.45 we quit Kakosia, and soon afterwardspass, between the marsh and the mountain,through vineyards in which the vines are mixedwith almond trees now in blossom : — from thenceascend the mountain, which here closes the plain,and at 4.45 enter Khosia, or Hostis ', containing,like Kakosia and Dobrend, about 100 houses,which are beautifully situated under the rocks ofHelicorij and dispersed among orchards of fruit-trees,chiefly almonds. A small torrent falls incascades down a rocky gorge; and in summer,^ Beocc 2e/>ttOToic 9:aX (rfj fidvoi: <^a2 0(vX«'ioc) iic riseir6)kti rov oIkov total TOY llitav iiroifitrav, — V« InBcrip-. . Tifiliptoc KKauiioQ Oirp- tioD, No. 93./Saroc coi 4 yv)yh aWov RXav- ' Y. Inscription, No. 94.eta ^iXwWxa koi ra rixva 06(i- * \6fna^ lii6vTia.VOL. II. L 1514 Boeotia. [chap.when the water is scanty, is received into a tankin the lower part of the village, from whenceit is conducted to the vineyards and olive-treeswhich cover the slope extending to the commencementof the plain of Thisbe. After passingthrough Khosia, we enter a mountainous districtwhere the great counterforts of Helicon descend tothe sea, and cross one of them, the extremity ofwhich forms a lofty cape on the eastern side ofthe bay of Sarandi ^ The summit of this ridgecommands an extensive view of the Corinthian gulf,with the coast of the Mor^a, as far eastward as thebay of Corinth, and the Aoro-Carintkus. On thewestern side of the bay of Sarandi rises anotherridge, still more lofty than the eastern, and midwaybetween them, in a beautiful retreat just underthe woody steeps of Paleovuni, is situated a monasterydedicated to St. Taxiarches', a title of thearchangel Michael, as leader of the heavenly host.Here I halt for the night at 5.25. The house islarge, and contains numerous inmates, both monksand lacs, whose persons are as dirty as their dwelling.The territory of the monastery consists chieflyof terraces on the slope of the mountain, producingolives and corn, and which end in a small levelat the head of port Sarandi. A projection of themountain which advances into the middle of theplain, about a quarter of an hour's walk belowthe monastery, and a mile from the sea-side, wasthe site of a small Hellenic polis.Feb. 6. — A tabular summit formed the acro-XIX.] Boeotia. 515policy of which the walls are still traceable, aswell as those of the town, which was situatedon the eastern slope of the height, the westernside having terminated in a precipice. Withinthe enclosure are the remains of terrace-walls, andto the south, looking towards the harbour, thoseof a narrow gate. On the slope of the acropolistowards the south, are some foundations cut inthe rock. The whole is scarcely a mile in circumference.Some parts of the walls are carelesslyconstructed of rough stones, fitted togetheras in the first order of Hellenic masonry; otherparts are of the second and. third kind. Therecan be little doubt that these are remains of Tiphae,or Siphse, which was said to have taken its namefrom Tiphys, the pilot of the Argonauts', and whereDemosthenes, the Athenian commander, made theunsuccessful attempt already adverted to, whichpreceded the battle of Delium« It may indeedbe objected that Thucydides and Apologies Rho-dies,as well as Stephens, who probably followsthe historian, describe Sq[>h8e as a dependency ofThespis ', between which and Sardndi the wholeof Thisbe is. interposed, but this may perhaps bereconciled by the superiority of Thespiae over allthe places in this angle of Scotia, whence theentire country lying along the Alcyonic sea, underPausan. Bceot. c. 32. kwiBaXaatfi^toi. — Thucyd. 1. 4,ai ii 2/^i ell r^c sac 76.ircicvc yrji iv rf Kpttfoif K6\TfT/^vc ^ *Ayvtdirit Xifaia iraXXiire SfffwvOeawiitty, Apoll. Rh* 1. 1, v. 105.2/^i Mytioy rjfc BunriaKij^. — Stephan. in 2/^t.L 1 2516 Boeotia. [chap.Helicon, as far as the borders of Phocis, includingThisbe, may have often in common acceptationbeen called the Thespis. Pausanias expressly describesTiphse, which was probably the .colic orlocal form of the word, as being on the coastbeyond Thisbe to the westward. We learn fromthe same authority that the Tiphseenses had atemple of Hercules, in whose honour they celebrateda yearly festival, and that they pointed outthe place where the ship Argo anchored on itsreturn from Colchis ^The steeps of Helicon above the convent areclothed with shrubs, growing with great luxuriance,and among which the lentisk, the primary,the wild olive, and the icISpoc or juniper, are themost abundant. These heights folding over oneanother, and crowned with the great summit ofPaleovuni, covered with firs and snow, and sohigh and near that it seems to overhang thelower hills, form a scene of singular grandeur andbeauty.Leaving St. Taxiarches at 9.15, we begin .toascend the great ridge which forms the westerncape of Port Sardndi. The road leads through athick forest of the shrubs, or rather trees, justmentioned, among which the kedhri are remarkablefor their uncommon size. Large tufts ofmyrtle frequently occur ; and as well as the wildolive, the arbutus and the arachne have theirfruit still hanging on them. Of the last, Pausaniasremarks that it produces a sweeter fruit inPausan. Bceot c. 32.XIX.] Boeotia. 517Helicon than in any other place \ At the best,however, they may be compared to a very insipidstrawberry, and are admissible only to the tableat a season when no other fruit is to be had, as Ihave seen the berry of the myrtle in Sicily, wherethat fruit attains a larger size than in Greece.At 10.30 we arrive on the crest of the ridge whichterminates in a cape, known (as well as a greatpart of the neighbouring district) by the name ofVelanidhia, and then descending the western slopeof the ridge, arrive at 10.54 at the monasteryof Dobo^, which is larger than St. Taxiarches,contains a handsome church newly painted, manycells and chambers, and between monks and servants,not less than forty inmates. Some of theapartments are neat and clean, which cannot besaid of the inhabitants. The church is dedicatedto St. Seraphim Thaumaturgus, a Greek of largeproperty, who retired here not long after theTurkish conquest, and built the monastery. Hisskull, which is here deposited, is in great requestin the neighbourhood, for its wondrous power indriving away all kinds of evil. The holy relic*has just been sent to Thebes, to put a stop to anepidemic disorder which has made its appearancein that town ; and it is with difficulty that I canprocure a sufficient number of mules to carry meto St. Luke, all those belonging to the conventbeing employed on that service. There are many01 Ttji dy^pdxvov Bdfiroi * Ao/xwovt or 'STOfiwop.irape\ovTai ruin Trayra^ov icap- ' to Aycoi' XfttpaKOK.iron cf 1fii<n-oy, — Pausan.Boeot. c. 28.518 BCBOTIA. [Clap.manuscripts in the monastery, handsomely writtenon parchment or vellum, bnt all of late date, andall wartpuca^ with the sole exception of a generalhistory, which begins with the creation and warof Troy, and ends with a part of the history ofVenice, and of the Turks. The author's name 1could not discover. There are said to be somegood printed editions of the classics belonging toDobo, but they have been sent to livadhia for theuse of the school there.Sending my baggage to Kyriaki by the directroad over the mountain, I proceed thither by theway of the sea shore, for the sake of visiting aHellenic site near the harbour of the monastery,which we reach in an hour, the road descendingthrough hills covered with shrubs. The ruins arethose of a small fortified town, which we mayconfidently name Butts. It occupied the summitof a rocky height which slopes on one side towardsa small harbour, and is defended in the oppositedirection by an immense. /Spaxoc^ or lofty rock,separated by a torrent from the precipitous acclivitiesof Helicon* These which rise directly toa snowy summit called Tjivri ^, from a small villageof that name, consist of perpendicular whiterocks, mixed with narrow natural terraces coveredwith pines. The slope of the site of Bulis towardsthe sea is cultivated, and contains a house belongingto Dobo, below which there is a level on theshore two thirds of a mile broad, and a magazinewhich was built by the monks when they owned aboat ; but of this convenience, so important toXIX.] PHocis. 519them, as there is no easy access to the place butby sea, they are now deprived. The port is calledZaiitza; between it and Cape Velanidhia is asimilar inlet of the sea, named M&zeri, aroundwhich are some pastures belonging to Zeiiki, orZeritza, a village on Mount Helicon and servingfor its flocks in winter. The Paleokastro has somehandsome pieces of wall of the third order remainingand seems to have been rather larger thanthe ancient town at St. Taxiarches.Although Pausanias places his remarks onBulis in his Phocis, he seems hardly to haveaccounted it a city of Phocis, since he describesit as bordering upon that province ^ He consideredit perhaps, as a neutral town, fromhaving been colonized by Dorian under Belon.Stephens, Pliny and Ptolemy, however, all attributeBulis to Phocis ^. Pausanias describes it asoccupying a lofty site, conspicuous to those whosail from Anticyra to Lechseum, and as distantseven stades from the sea, eighty stades fromThisbe, and one hundred stades from Anticyra,all which computations will be found tolerablycorrect, applied to this site. He notices the remarkabletorrent which here joins the sea, andwhich was named Heraclitus; there was also afountain, Studium ', which I have not discovered,^ij Vi ^ ^tfjcc& SfiOfioc* — BaXatraay mvrp xci/Lia^S)^ BrPausan. Phodc. c. 37* ol £wi')(<uptoi Syo/xdZovmy 'Hpa-Stephen. in BovXic* Plin. kXciok koI iniy^ Bow*H« N. 1. 4, c. 3. Ptolem. 1. 3, Xtd/oic itn-l KoKoviityoy 2avyioy.c. 15« •— Pausan. Phocis. c 37.Karciffi hk Koi trorafio^ Iq520 Boeotia. [chap.perhaps from not having sufficiently searchedfor it. The murex, producing the purple dye,the fishery of which employed half the peopleof Bulis in the time of Pausanias, is no longercaught on this coast, though assuredly it stillexists here. The deity chiefly worshipped by theBulidii was named Megistus, meaning Jupiter.The city contained likewise temples of Dianaand of Bacchus, with statues of those deities inwood.Having ascertained the ancient positions of Siphseand Bulis, I shall revert to the inquiry as to theancient name of the fortress and harbour, nowcalled Aliki. The only authors who afford us anyassistance in this question are Scylax and Pliny,and the extreme corruption of the text of the formerrenders him a most doubtful guide. Proceedingalong the coast from west to east, he namesCorsiee^ Siphse, the harbour Eutretus, a fortress Boston,and then JBgosthena of the Megaris. This isthe vulgar reading, but some of the commentatorshave changed Cordial into Creusa, and Boston(o Boffin) into rCtv Bocairbiv ^ The rejection of theword Corsise is founded on Pausanias, who placesCorsise near the northern shore of Boeotia, andpartly on the improbability of Scylax havingomitted Creusis, which was the chief harbour onthe southern coast of this province. There isreason however to believe from Pliny, that thereMera ht ^aKii^ Bouarol el (r&y Boc^riiii',) 6 vapdwXcvc ^ctfiy iOroQ tfcd woXeiQ aHe' Kop- r^c BouarlaQ Hfii^v iifUp€tQ IXar*trial (Kpeovff/a) 2/^1 xal Xt/ii^K tov. — Scylax in Boturroc.XIX.] Boeotia. 521really existed a second Corsise in this part ofBoeotia, and that it was distinguished from theother by the name of Thebae Corsiese, in whichcase the similarity of name seems to point out themodem Khosia as the successor of Thebae Corsica,its situation just below the highest summitof Helicon, according moreover with Pliny's words,juxta Helicon ^ On this supposition, the arrangementof the names by Scylax is not incorrect,whereas if we read Kptovma for Kopaiai, we mustsuppose Scylax to have placed Creusa the firstname on the coast, when it ought to have been thelast.By the port Eutretus, there is some appearancethat Scylax intended the harbour of Thisbe, whichmay have received the name of Eutretus from thenumerous cavities in the rocks, where pigeonsstill breed in immense numbers, as Strabo remarked.It would then follow, that the recxoc, orfortress of Boeotian, which is the next place inthe arrangement of Scylax, was that still existingat Aliki, the name of which may have been lostby the corruption of the text.But there is still another interpretation whichmay be given to this passage of Scylax. Welearn from Strabo, that Eutresis, one of the Homerictowns of Boeotia, was in his time a village^ Dein is indo sin an hoc man Boeotia oppidtungoluB Boeotia alluitur cum Page unde Peloponned propriisSiphiBy Thebes qun slit cervix. — Fain. H. N. 1. 4,Conical cognominatae sunt, c. 3.juxta Helicon. Tertium abBoeotia.[chap.of the Tliefipice\ Stephens places it betweenThespis and Plataea \ but his information may bedoubted, as there is but one place in the ten milesbetween Platsea and Thespis where any town islikely to have stood, and that was occupied byLeuctra. There is some reason therefore for thinkingthat the Ocn-cwv of Stephens ought to be6caj3a>v, that Eutresis was a kw/ui of the Thespis inthe road from Thisbe to Plataea, and that the valeof Xeronomi . was its territory, for it seems clearthat this valley belonged to the Thespis, and notto the Thisbe, which latter, considering the relativeimportance of the two cities, one cannot conceiveto have extended beyond the narrow placebefore described in the valley of Dobren4, acrosswhich there was formerly a wall. In this view ofthe question it seems not improbable that the ruinsat Aliki are those of the fortress of the Eutresitse,and that the Hellenic remains at Xeronomi belongedto the temple of Apollo Eutresites, mentionedby Stephens, which may have been convertedby successive repairs into the ancientchurch now remaining there. And in this case itis also possible that the words o Xc/niv Evrpiiroc kqI• . • 'EiVrpritTiy . . . KwfjuovQtinrutay' iyravOd i^ai ZfjdoyKol 'AfKftiova oliciiffai reply fiatn-Xev^at Orifice, — Strabo, p. 41 1 •Ktlrai irapd rey oioy IkQttnrnSy elg DXaraidc droyov*aav, ^y irtix^^ ZrfioQ koI 'A/i->^wv . Ktafi^TTig Eirrpiia/rifcdf* oi 6 *A'K6XXuy EhrpiifflTtfc*Kal Upoy ahrov koI fiayreloviyBoidraroy. — Stephan. in £v-The plural tenninatioii ofThisbe is justified by Xenophon,1. 6» c. 4. ; by Stepbanuain Blafitif and by Strabo, p.411, who says, 'H dc Gco^,Burial yyy Xeyovrcu.XIX.] PHOCis. 523rfc^oc riv Bocb^riiiv are all to be referred to theharbour and ruins at Aliki.Having quitted the Paleokastro of Zalitza at 2,we cross the torrent, pass under a singular sharpinsulated rock, upon which are some remains ofancient terraces, and continue to follow the side ofthe rocky mountain by a road overhanging the sea.On the right towards the summit of the heights,are churches of St. Theodore and St. Anthony,but not in sight. These, like the monasteries ofSt. Michael and Dobo are remains of the eremiticaland monastic establishments which peopledthese woody deserts in the time of the Byzantineempire. The hills are chiefly covered with wildolive, ilex, holly-oak, and juniper of a largegrowth. The oaks would furnish an abundanceof useful timber, but at present, like the others,they serve chiefly to supply fire-wood to the townson the gulf. As we proceed, the hills becomevery steep, and terminate precipitously in the sea,affording only an extremely rugged and difficultpath along the side of them : it was no better inthe time of the Roman Empire, for Pausaniasdoubted whether there was any road at all fromAnticyra to Bliss, though more anciently therewas a communication, as Cleombrotus marchedthis way from Chseroneia with a large army justbefore the battle of Leuctra, in order to avoid an^ '£c dc niv BovXiy tK fuy oT^a* ovria SvfffiaTa 6pvi ironr$c Boiwriac OlefiriQ oralLiav Tpa^ia ra fitra^v ^Avrucvpacinly Woe oy&//icoFro, cj 'Attire fori koI BovXt&>c. — Pausan.icvpac ^c file ^ttxitty ^t* ^elpov Phodc c. 37*fiiy Kal c« d^^v cffrtv, ovc524 PHOcis. [chap.encounter with Epaminondas in the passes ofTilphossium and Haliartus on the direct route ^At 4 we turn off from the sea-shore, and ascendthe ridge which borders the sea, in a directionforming a right angle with our former route.The summit commands an extensive view of theCarinthia gulf, and of all the northern part ofthe Morea from Corinth to Mount Voidhia; thegulf of Aspra Spltia also presents itself surroundedby steep, barren ridges, which exhibit an appearancealmost as dismal as any part of Dalmatia,or Albania. Inland in every direction appear thesnowy fir-clad summits of Parnassus and Helicon.Not far from the place where we quitted the coasta high rocky cape extends into the sea, beyondwhich the coast retires as far as Punta, a cape onthe south eastern side of the gulf of Aspra Spitia,opposite to which on the north-western shore isthe peninsula of Kefali. Having crossed two highstony ridges, we arrive at 6. 10 at Kyriaki, situatedin the heart of the mountains under the last ofthe snowy summits of Mount Helicon. Half wayfrom the sea we passed on our left a little level onthe sea-side, where is a port called Aghia, belongingto the monastery of St. Luke, while atthe same time on the right I perceived the roadfrom Dobo to Kyriaki, leading through a hollowbetween two of the highest points of Mount Tzivri.Our baggage was upwards of four hours in comingby this road, having passed a great part of theway through snow, which in some places wasXenoph. Hellen. 1. 6» c. 4.— Diodor. 1. 15, c. 54.three feet in depth. The greater part of it wascollected yesterday and in the preceding night,when it was raining at St, Taxiarches, but theSnow fell as we crossed the higher parts of theridges between that place and Dobo.CHAPTER XX.PHOCIS.Kyriaki — Mount Helicon — Palea-hora — Monastery of StLuke of Stiris — Stiris and its fountain — Amhrysus — ^MetokhiSto lalo — Sidhiro-kafkhio — Aspra Spitia — Aniicyra — MountCirpkU — Dhesfina — Medeon — Marathus — Cape PharynxMychus — Samaria Nape — River Pldsius — Delphi — Itstopography, antiquities, inscriptions, &c.Kyriaki is a village of 30 families belonging to thedistrict of Livadhia, situated on the north-westernside of Mount Tzivri in a small hollow cultivatedchiefly with vines, and surrounded closely on allsides by fir-clad summits of the Heliconian range.The valley is very cold and humid in the presentseason. A torrent runs through the village,which, uniting with others a little below St. Luke,joins the sea at Sidhero-kafkhio in the gulf ofAspra Spitia.Pausanias says, that of all the mountains inGreece Helicon is the most fertile, and aboundsthe most in trees \ Though he may be correctin the main, the western extremity differs in characterfrom the other summits. The Muses naturallypreferred the gentler slopes, the springs, and'O $€ 'EXiJTcliv op&y T&v iy koriv evyewc aral hiv^pmy kyd*TJ 'EXXa^t iy rdiQ fuiXtirrd irXewc* — Pausan. Boeot. c. 28.groves, and smiling valleys to the eastward. Herethe barren and terrific prevail over the beautifuland fertile : the higher parts consist of rocks intermixedwith pine-trees, while the lower roots partakeof the naked barrenness of the neighbouringdrphis, a mountain which is almost entirely of thischaracter. But even on this side of Helicon somepleasant valleys are interspersed among the rocks.In summer the woods and verdant pastures of heliconcontrast most agreeably with the parched plainso{ Boeotia; and if industry were protected, all thecultivable parts of the mountain would speedily beembellished by fields and gardens, villages andhouses, offering delightful retreats in summer, insteadof merely furnishing pasture to the flockswhen they retire in that season from the aridplains. The only villages at present in the upperregions of the mountain, including the divisions ofit anciently called Laphystium and Libethrium,are Tara, Surbi, Granite, ZagaHt, Steveniko,Zeriki, Tzivri, and Kukora.Strabo describes Helicon as equal to Parnassusboth in height and perimeter '. In the latterhe may be correct, if we consider Parnassusas bounded by the Ifape of Delphi to the south,and on the western side by the ravine which extendsfrom G/tinium to Amphibia, but in regard tothe height the geographer was certainly mistaken,as Liakura is some hundreds of feet higher thanPaleovun&, which is the highest point of the Helixftiv oiy 'EXitiiy ov xoXw v^c <"' iripi/itrpoc. — Strabo,2u(m]Ei!i£ ruv Elapvoirov ivan 409.luWit Ivrty ittitf Kara rt528 PHOcis. [chap.coi. In the quantity of cultivable land Partuususmay rival Helicon as there is nothing upon thelatter i^hich can be compared in extent to theupper Parnassian plains containing Agurianf , theCorydon cave and the Kal jrvia of Arakhova ; butHelicon in general is more cvycmcy as Pausaniasdescribes it, and better clothed with a productivesoil, the Parnassian plain just mentioned beingpoor and gravelly, though in some parts barley isgrown and even wheat.Feb. 7. — At a distance of thirty-five minutes fromKyriaki, a peaked summit bordering the valley onthe north retains a piece of ancient wall ; and in thedescent of the pass to the right of this hill, whichleads from the vale of Kyriaki into that of Stirii, aresome other remains of the same kind, and an excavationin the rock. The pointed hill was probably thesite of a dependent come of the Stiritis^ and thepass may have been fortified on account of its importanceas one of the approaches to Stiris fromBoeotia. Continuing to descend by a bad road,we enter, in forty minutes, the valley of Stirii, andin fifteen more arrive at the Pale khora, a heightso called in the centre of the valley, and whichhas every appearance of an ancient site, being atabular hill defended by precipitous rocks, andsituated at the junction of two streams. The summitis surrounded with a wall of loose construction,resembling in some parts the first kind of Hellenicmasonry, though with much smaller stonesthan the Cyclopes used. No citadel is traceable,but the surface of the rock within the inclosure isexcavated in many places for habitations, andXX.] PHOcis. 529there are two or three ancient cisterns near aruined church. The height is between sevenand eight hundred yards long, lying in a directionof Nee. and S.W., and not more than onehundred yards broad in the widest part. A lowerrocky summit of the same height to the south-westwas not included within the ancient walls. Thetorrent of Kyridki is joined at that extremity of thehill by another which comes from the neighbourhoodof Zeriki ; and which, after having receivedseveral tributaries in the valley of Stirii, flows alongthe northern side of Palea khora. All these torrentsare dry in summer. Zeriki is situated betweentwo of the summits of Helicon, called Gdhameni ^and Holes ^ On the northern side of the latteris the village of Urbis not far from Livadhia.From the Paled khora, a quarter of an hour'sride in a New. direction, brings me to the monasteryof St. Luke of Stiris', which stands on theside of a peaked hill advancing into the valley.This height also was fortified by the ancients;some of the foundations still remain on the summit,others are seen a little below the monastery,as well as to the north-east of it, where an angleof the Hellenic wall is still standing, and themonastery itself is in great part built of ancientmaterials. The fortress was of the triangular form,common among the ancients ; the two sides whichdescend from the angle at the summit of the hillfollow two ridges which inclose a hollow betweenTiaftivii. ' "Ayioc Aovicac & Xrtpirii^,KoXXaiff.VOL. II. M m530 PHocis. [chap.them. To the south the height is precipitous. Thewalls seem to have been much more carefully constructedthan those of the Pale khora : the masonryis partly of the third order and partly of regularcourses. Though the hill narrows towardsthe base of the triangle, the circumference of thefortress was greater than that of Palea khora, andthe monks believe it to have been Stiris. Butit could hardly have been the Stiris which Pausaniasdescribes, because there is a copious fountainwithin the walls of the monastery issuing fromthe side of the hill, whereas Pausanias says ofStiris that ^^ it was situated on a stony height, wherethe wells were few and supplied only water fit forwashing or the use of cattle ; and that the inhabitantsbrought water for drinking from a placefour stades below the city, where was a descent toa source excavated among the rocks ^" On theother band, it is not easy to reconcile the source atthe monastery with that which Pausanias mentions,the distance from the Palea khora to themonastery being greater than four stades, andthere being instead of a descent, an ascent, to thefountain, almost equal in height to the descentfrom the Palea khora. The only other source inthe valley of Stiris is a well to the south-westwardof Palea khora ; but instead of being in a hollowamong rocks, it rises to the surface of the cultivatedpart of the valley, and instead of being fourstades, is not more than one and a half from theancient site. An inscription, however, in thePausan. Phocis. c. 35.XX.]PHOCIS.outer wall of the churchy leaves little doubt thatthe adjoining fountain was that intended by Pausanias.Of this inscription there remain abouttwo-thirds, which was more than I expected tofind, as Chandler remarks only that it had beenseen by Wheler, and supposed apparently that itno longer existed in his own time. It resemblesthat at Thishcy which records the dedication of abuilding at that place to the gods Augustii and tothe city, attesting in like manner the dedicationto the gods Augustii and to the city of a icp^vii, orconstructed fountain, with steps, and a coveredbuilding, and a conduit of water which had beenmade at the expence of the dedicators Xenocratesand Eumaridas ^ The word j3a9^i in the inscriptionaccords with the jcanovrcc of Pausanias, andthe rocks from which the source issues, with hisirirpat^^. If the descent to the water is not nowsuch as both Pausanias and the inscription seem toimply, that may easily be accounted for by analteration in the ground, caused by the erectionof the monastery. The word iroXci, though at firstsight it seems to favour the opinion of die monksof St. Luke, is not adverse to either supposition, asThe following is a copy of been omitted by the lithographicinscription after supplying pier near the end of the firstthe ends of the lines from Uponand Wheler: Geaic 2e)3o9ro<ccai r^ II<(Xct n^F cpifyifi' coi rairpoc Tov (iaB/iovg, koX to ivoi^Toy XeyoKpdrriQ Koi "Ehfiapi^a^6.y(dijKay Ik tQv l^ltay Kal rijyTov viaroe glaayutyiiy, — V.Inscription No. 95. An I hasline.70 ii vikfp 01 AySptiwot t6irorifioy 6ooy vraSia riffirapahwoKaTolialyovTts Xafi/idyovaiyIk myy^c* i it iy wirpaiQ itrrlvopwpvyfilyii Kal hpiioyrai xaTi-sevres fc ri^y irrfyfgy, — Pausan.Phocis. c. 35.M m 2532 PHOcis. [chap.the fountain was a mere dependency of the city.Upon the whole, therefore, I believe that theheight in the valley at the confluence of the twotorrents is justly called the Palea khora, or oldtown, and that the fountain is that which the Striaemade use of; but that, from the fault eitherof Pausanias or of his text, the distance of thefountain from the city is not correct, and he hasomitted to describe the fountain as situated on theside of a hill. The ancient walls on this height areperhaps those of a fortress built by the Striae, aswell for the sake of occupying this commandingheight as for that of protecting the fountain, andwhich Pausanias may not have noticed because itmay have been already ruined before his time.The people of Stiris considered themselves acolony of the demus Srcipfctc in Attica, who settledhere under Peters, when he was driven out of Atticaby ^geus*. The city partook of the severepunishment inflicted upon the Phocis by Philip,son of Amyntas, at the end of the Sacred War,B.C. 346, but as generally occurred in regard tothe cities of Greece, which history represents tohave been destroyed, the inhabitants, after havingbeen dispersed for a short time in the villages, returnedto the old site. Stiris still preserved somepopulation when Pausanias travelled, but it containedno public monument worthy of remark, excepta temple of Ceres Spirits made of crude brick,in which were two statues, one of Pentelic marble.Oi ie evravOd ^^c, says Pausanias, as if he did not creditthe story.XX.] PHocis. 533the other of ancient fabric, and enveloped withsashes or bandages The Igumenos of St. Lukewishes to persuade me that the monastery wasbuilt by the same architects who afterwards erectedSt. Sophia at Constantinople. Wheler and Chandlermet with abbots more intelligent, and who knewthat the building was not founded till about theyear 960 by Romanus the Second, in honour ofa hermit of Stiris of the name of Luke, whosehistory has been related by Chandler. Thechurch, however, certainly resembles that of St.Sophia ac fuKpov fieyaXy, being built in the formof a Greek cross, with a vestibule and three doorsat the western end : a dome in the centre, andupper galleries supported by columns on the sides.The length of the nave, from the inner door to theskreen of the altar, is 46 feet ; the OoXoc, or dome,is 31 feet in diameter : some fine slabs of verd antiqueare seen in the pavement and walls. Thereare 130 men, 62 horses, and 23 mules, attachedto the monastery, which possesses two metokhis^one at Patra and the other on the sea-side, atSidhiro-kafkhio. To my inquiry for manuscriptsand books, they reply that every thing of that sortwas burnt by the architect Andritzo. Whetherthis be true, or rather, as I suspect, partly true,and partly used as an excuse to conceal what isleft, it is evident, at least, that the house has sufferedfrom some such cause since the time ofChandler, for I can learn no tidings of the Iambicverses hung up in a frame in the church, whichChandler copied and published. The buildingraiylaic.534 pHocis. [chap.bears strong marks also of having been shaken byearthquakes, which are not unfrequent here ; anda great fissure in the dome is known to have beencaused by one of these convulsions.The valley of Stiris affords a beautiful contrastto the rocks and woods of the lofty and ruggedsummits which surround it. Unlike some of thebasins of the Mor^a similarly encased, which havenot a tree, or shrub, or hedge in them, and aresuch perfect levels as to resemble lakes, this valeis enlivened by rising grounds, and a great varietyof vegetation. Although not more than two or threemiles in diameter, the surface is diversified with naturalpasture, corn-fields now green, and vineyardsstill quite brown, mixed with copses of holly-oak,and ilex, or with olives and cypresses. To the peculiarshape and colour of the two latter trees, whichcontrast so agreeably with all others, the sceneryof Greece is much indebted for its beauty in allseasons. At present those trees, with the twospecies of oak just mentioned, and the smallerevergreens which prevail in all the retired valleysand sheltered situations, particularly the lentiskand myrtle, enliven the winter scene in a mannerunknown among the woods of Northern Europe.One kind of pim&ri ^ grows to the size of the commonoak on the hills around the valley of SHrisyas well as in other parts of the HeUcanian ridges,but there are two other varieties of it, one of whichis a large shrub, the other a small low bush ; thislast is the jcojcicoc of Pausanias, which he justlyKpivcLptf from H. ^pti^oc, Quercus Coodfera, more vulgarlywipyapif or iroupyapi.XX.] PHOCis. 535compares to the ffx^^^> ^^ lentisk, and describes asabounding in the district of Ambry sus, and as producingan insect used for dying wooP. The insectis found on every kind of pim&ri, though of courseit is not so easily gathered from the larger trees.The ilex with smooth leaves', which abounds here,as it generally does in the woods of Greece, andwhich is called aria in the Morea, is here knownby the name of aglami'.Above the heights which bound the vale ofStiris on the north-west, and separate it from thevalley of Dhistomo, rises the bare and rocky Cir-phisy which is itself overtopped, by the majesticsummits of Liakura, painful to behold, from thedazzling whiteness of the recent fall of snow, andreceiving an apparent increase of height and diminutionof distance from that clearness of atmospherewhich in Greece generally attends fair weather inwinter.There are two roads from St Luke to the Gulfof Aspra Spitia : one by the metokhi at Sidhiro-kafkhio, more commonly called Sto lalo * ; theother more circuitous, which passes from thenorth-western extremity of the valley of St. Lukethrough a defile to Dhistomo, the site of the ancientAmbrysus. Having visited this place on a formerjourney, I prefer the route by die metokhi.The remains of Embryos are too considersPhocis. c. 86. ' Quercus ilex.He remarks that the Gauls of ' &yXa/ii.Phrygia call this shrub vcy that * oro yiaXov, at the sea.is, hour, the modem Frenchname of the prints.536 PHocis. [chap.able to illustrate the description which Pausaniashas given of its double wall, built by theThebans against Philip, son of Amyntas, andwhich Pausanias considered the strongest defensivework in Greece, next to the fortification ofMessene \ though the walls were only about fourteenfeet high, and five feet thick, with a distancebetween them of a little more than five feet. Thetown was situated at the southern foot of MountCirpMsj in a small valley giving rise to the streamcalled Platonic, which joins the Cephissus in theplain of Chaeronea. The long valley of this riverfurnished an easy access from that plain to nor is the other approach to it from Chrisdifficult, though both might be perilous routes foran army if the country were hostile, particularlythe former, from the length of the narrow valley.It appears from Pausanias that there was a moredirect road from Chseroneia into the vale of Stirisacross the mountains, for he conducts his readerfrom Chaeronea to Stiris, and from Stiris to Ambrysus,and remarks that the road from Chaeroneato Stiris was rugged, and for the most part mountainous'.At 2.15 we proceed from the monastery to itsmetokhi ** by the sea." The road leaves the plainat its south-western end, and at 2.45 enters a narrowopening, through which the torrent, formed by^ Pausan. Messen. c. 31. Daulis, and the Schiste to• Phocis. c. 36. Delphi, hips rpaxcca re 65ocThere ar two roads, he Kal opeipi^ t& wXiova ig ironicsays, from Chaeronea into ^iaKi(»>y 2r/fHv.Phocis: one by Panopeus,XX.] PHOcis. 537the joint waters of the valleys of Kyriaki and ofStirii, makes its way, bordered on either side byprecipices of white rock, among which g^w a fewjunipers and wild olives. The road frequentlycrosses the torrent, and follows alternately eitherbank, until at 4 it enters a valley included betweentwo steep and rocky mountains, and covered witholive plantations and corn-fields. At 4. 15 we arriveat the metokhi, which consists only of two apartments; one with a fire-place in the middle, and awooden ledge round the wall for the Kalogh^ri tosleep upon ; the other containing an oil mill and apress, with stables for the mules used in the milland farm. The monks cultivate the com andolives, gather in the harvest, and make the oil.The mill is nothing more than a cylindrical stone,turned by means of a horse or mule yoked at oneend of a lever, the other end of which is fixed inthe centre of the stone. The olives thus bruisedare put into baskets and pressed. In the eveninga ten minutes' ride conducts me from the metokhito the sea, where are some remains of a Hellenicfortress, crowning a rocky promontory at the northernend of the beach in which the plain terminates.The road from the metokhi to Aspra Spitia leadsthrough a narrow pass between the promontory andthe mountains which border the vale of the to the northward. The wall of the fortressremains in good preservation on the northern sideof the hill, where in some places it still exists tomore than half the original height : on the othersides it is hardly traceable, but within the enclosurethere are some terrace walls, one particularly.538 PHOcis. [chap.which is a fine specimen of polygonal masonry,verging to a more regular kind. On the roadside,at the foot of the promontory, is a heap ofruins near the shore, consisting of some ancientblocks in situ, covered with the remains of achurch, among which is a capital of white marbleof indifferent execution. There seems to havebeen an ancient tower here which had beenconverted into a church. The promontory andruin, as well as an anchorage for boats withinthe cape, are named Sidhiro«-kafkhi6 ^, meaninga place where iron has been smelted, thoughthere is not at present any appearance or traditionof such works having existed here. The summitof the promontory commands a good view of theGulf of Aspra Spitia with the cultivated landssurrounding it, of the promontory KefaU on theopposite side of the Gulf, and of the coast ofPlods as far as Cape Trdkhila. Opposite tothe latter, on the eastern side of the gulf, is seenCape Punta, which is the extremity of Mount Ver*seniko; beyond it are the inlet and port calledAghia, and then the rugged falls of the samemountain extending to the place where I quittedthe coast coming from Dob6. The little vale ofthe met6khi, watered by the river of Stirs separatesMount Verseniko from the equally rocky andforbidding heights which lie between this valleyand that of St. Luke, and which extend westwardas far as the vale of Dhistomo, and to a narrowpass which leads up to that place from the gulf..] PHOcis. 539Feb. 8. — Pairing returned to Sidhiro-kafkhid, Ipass at 8.15 through the opening which separatesthe promontory from the mountain on the right,and continue along the rocky foot of the latter,near the sea-side, till 9.5, when we arrive on thebeach at the extremity of a little valley, which isthe entrance of the pass already mentioned, asleading from the sea to Dhistomo. In this directionappears one of the summits of Cirphis, nowcalled Xero-viini\ covered with snow. Thatnamed Somalesi^ which was seen from the vale ofStiris, is more to the southward, near Dhesfina, beyondwhich village a part of the same range, calledXeroghianni ', projects into the sea, and terminatesin Cape Trdkhila. Finding here some Kefa-loniote fishermen about to haul their seine, Iremain to wait the event, in hopes of a purplemurex, or some fish with an ancient name ; andnot quite without success to me, though withlittle to the fishermen, who besides a few kala-maria^, or cuttle-fish, catch only two or three ofa small species of herring, the name of which,/lapiSfc, cannot but be Hellenic *. The chief marketfor the fish caught in this gulf is livadhla.Proceeding at 9.30 along the shore of the gulf, wecross the extremity of a root of Mount Oirphis^ andarrive in a little cultivated plain and slope, whereona hill on the right are the remains of AspraSpltia (the white houses), once a considerablevillage, but now only a small dependence on^ lB!ipo(3ovvi, * KaXa/iOJCi, ink-fish.Sw/ioXcVt. ' The vjAapiQ is mentionedKipoylavvin by Aristotle, 1. 8, c. 30.540 PHOCIS. [Chap.Dhesflna. The maggie mules which set out withus from the metokhi arrive at Aspra Spitia at10.20, and continue their route to Dhesfina, whileI visit a spot towards the head of the bay, where,among olive plantations, are some ancient foundationssufficient to indicate a Hellenic site, thoughas building materials are often carried away fromhence by sea to the neighbouring coasts, in a fewyears probably there will hardly be a vestige ofantiquity left. Half a mile farther south is thehigh peninsula named Kefali. It is connectedwith the main by a level isthmus which is cultivatedwith com and olives, and on the southeyside forms the head of a harbour named A\Isidhoro (St. Isidhoro), where on a rocky projectionat the south-eastern comer of the bay are theremains of a castle built with small stones andmortar. To the left, on the side of this peninsularmountain, are some ancient catacombs in therock. From hence as far as Xeropigadho in theplain of Salona, all the shore, with the exceptionof a few cultivated hollows on the sea-side,is rugged and mountainous; the entire promontory,as far inland as the Pleistus^ belongs toDhesfina. One of the small maritime valleys justmentioned is situated within Cape Trakhila, andis in sight from Ai Isidhoro as well as fromSidhiro-kafkhio. It is called Prosaic, and betweenit and Ai Isidhoro are two long narrowinlets, named Steno and Alto. Sten is said tobe a good port, and to be frequented by vesselsof considerable burthen. Carinthia is a cultivatedspot beyond Cape Trakhila, similar to Pr6sako.XX.]Phocis.In the entrance of the gulf of Aspra Spitia arethree islands, two towards Aghia, the other to thewestward, not far from Cape Trakhila. On themiddle one, named Dhaskalio, as well as on thewesternmost, Tzanikhi, are remains of walls, cisterns,arches, and houses, constructed of smallstones and mortar.Having returned to the village of Aspra Spitia,I there find an inscribed marble, serving to provethat the remains near the sea are those of Anti-cora,which Livy and Pausanias sufficiently showto have stood in some part of this gulf ^ Themarble is said to have been originally found amongthe fields near the sea, where it lay for manyyears by the side of a well, and served the womento beat their clothes upon in washing them, bywhich means the greater part of the letters hadbeen obliterated, when it was brought up to thevillage two years since. There still remainsenough to show that it was a record of the rightsof proxenia granted to strangers by the people ofAnticyra'. Although like the other Phociancities, Anticyra was for a time dismantled andabandoned at the end of the Sacred War, it hadsurvived many of the other cities of Phocis in thetime of the Roman empire, an advantage which itliv. 1. 82, c. 18. — Pausan.Phocis. c. 86."ApxoyroQ KdXXiorpAroVfypaftfiOTtvoyroi H rov ovi^-liplov i^oie'HpaKXiiayi SEBiyoKpirov 'A/i-ftpvaaiff ahrf (jcal €Ky6yfHc)wpofyyiaVi inniXlayf defdXtiayfTpoSuciayf imywoXtrslayt (lyacnf*atv yac Koi) oir/ac Kol r^iXXari/iia, Saa Kol role 6XKote wpo*f/iyoic Kal ehepyirtug rac rtiXcocvirdpxti' kyyvoi rac vpoinyia^. . . 'HfKKicXc/dac SECero'ffp . . • • — V. Inscription,No. 96.PHOCIS.[chap.chiefly owed to its situation on this sheltered gulf,and its importance as a point of communicationwith the interior. It was besieged and taken inthe year b.c. Ins, by the Consul T. QuintusFlamininus, when after having forced his waythrough Epinis into Thessaly by defeating Philipat the Aoi Stena, he was repulsed at Atrax, whichcaused him to proceed into Phocis for winterquarters, where he took Anticyra for the sake ofits harbour and the convenient situation for communicatingby land with Thessaly \ These attributesof Anticyra are exemplified on other occasionsin ancient history, and exactly accord with modemexperience, there being no place in the Ckmnthiacgulf more frequented than Aspra Spitia as a pointof passage, in consequence of its central positionand the excellence of the harbour. In ancient timesAnticyra was chiefly celebrated for the productionand preparation of the best hellebore in Greece, —a medicine to which the ancients attached anabsurd value, many persons even coming from adistance to reside at Anticyra for the sake of amore perfect cure '. According to Pausanias,there were two kinds growing in the district, of^ Itaque relict obsidione,quia nullus in tot Acamaniseatone ^toliae ori poxtos went,qui simul et ones onerarias,quae comitatus exerdtui portantcapered, et tecta adhibeznandum legionibus pie-beset,Anticyra in Providein Corinthian vena sinus, adid opportunities sita visa:quia nee procul Thessaly, hoselochs, autant, et exadverse Peloponnesian exiguomaris spado divisor, ab tergo^toliam Acarnaniamque ablateribus Locridem ac Boeotianhabebant. — liv. ubi sup.• Polyb. 1. 18, c- 28 ; L 27,c. 14.aTToBrffUiV Mpo woXXovcKttBdpcrekfc Kttl dtpaweiac X^p<>^*Strabo, p. 418.XX.] PHOcis. 643which the root of the black was used as a cathartic,and that of the white as an emetic.Several of the ancient authors, or rather perhapstheir coppers and commentators, have confoundedthis Anticyra with another of the same name inLocris. When the Romans were allied with theitalians against Philip, (in the year b. c. 210,)Maevius, the Roman praetor, besieged Anticyra ofLocris, both by land and sea. The town stood sonear the shore that the praetor brought the engineson board the ships to bear upon the walls, and inafew days became by these means master of theplace, which he delivered to the iBtolians \ Thehistorian, whose description is the more worthy ofattention as having been taken from Poly bias,represents Anticyra as being a town of Locris,situated on the left in entering the Corinthiangulf, and at a short distance, both by land andsea, from Naupactus. It is evident that such adescription will not suit the Anticyra which stoodat Aspra Spitia ; for this town was in Phocis, asLivy himself states in the former passage justcited ; it was even nearer to the borders of Boeotiathan of Locris, — nearer to the inner extremitythan to the entrance of the Corinthian gulf, — andinstead of being near Naupactus, it was separatedfrom that place by sixty miles of a very ruggedand difficult country. The place therefore takenby Lsevinus, and given up to the italians, wasevidently not the Anticyra which stood at AspraSpitia, but a town towards the western extremitySita Anticyra est in Lorde brevia navigation ab Naupactalaev& parte sinus Coiintbiacum est. — Liv. 1. 26, c. 26.intrantibos, breve iter terr eo,PHOCIS.[chap.of the Locrian coast. The existence of threeAnticyree may be deduced from Strabo; one in(EtsBa, or rather Melis, one in the country of theLocris Ozolee, and the third in Phocis '. Horace in awell-known verse alludes to the three Antics, andascribes the production of hellebore to them all '.Xupia xpoc rf TLaprdatr^, —Stniboi p. 416.• . • Kplam.9 ^* ic oK6\iroQ KpitrtraloQ* tara 'A»ti-Kifi^ (al, 'Ayrlxvpa) ofiityvfw^r^ Kara Toy MoXiairoi' k6\wovKaX rr^y Oirjyi'. — Strabo, p. 418.• . • rf Sxepxccy, rfwapa^oyri ri^v 'AyriKvpav (oL'AvrUtpfiay,) — Strabo, p. 428.Vide et p. 434. ubi sup,Stephens in 'AvriKvpaiproves the orthography of theAnticyree of Plods and Melis,and his gentile *Avrucv|»evcagrees with the inscription atT^C Si Olralag itrrl . . .Roi ^AvrUip^ (al. 'Airiicvpa)ofi&yvfwt TJ iy AoKpoiQ rote'Eflnrcp/oic* — Strabo, p. 484.That Strabo by Hesperiameant the Ozolae, appears fromanother passage, p. 416, wherehe says, KoXovyrai S" 01 fur'Etnripioi AoKpol cal 'OC<(Xat,and adds, that they impressedupon their money the figure ofthe star Hesperus.4 Kpltrva TfJQ ^WKiSoc eorlv . •icai R/fS^ Kai 'AyrUtfi^ (a/.*A>Tiicvpo) ical ra vxep alriiiyiy r§ fitaoyalq, frvyty(fi KelfuyaAspra Spitia.Nanciscentur enim pretium nomenque poetae.Si tribus Anticyris caput incapable nunquamConsort Licino commiserate.Horae. de Arte PoeticA, y. 299.According to Stephens (in But the marshy plain at the'Ai^irvpac) the people of theMaliac Anticyra not onlyclaimed for their city the honourof producing the best hellebore,but supported the claimby the tradition that one oftheir citizens had helleboiisedHercules, when labouring undermadness in their neighbourhood,— iW^Popitrai roy'HpaxXia fera life waylay.mouth of the Spercheius differsso much from the rocky districtround Aspra Spitia, whichwe cannot doubt, frt>m Pausanias,to have been the &-favourite habitat of Uie hellebore,that the daim of theAnticyrenses was probably nomore than an unfounded pretension,supported by a fable.Some of the commentators haveXX.]Phocis.Pausanias remarked at Anticyra some statuesof brass in the agora, and a temple of Neptune atthe port, small, constructed of wrought stones',plastered within, and containing an upright statueof Neptune in brass, one foot of which was upon adolphin, the hand on the same side on the thigh,and the other hand bearing a trident. Therewere two gymnasia, one of which contained thebaths ; in the more ancient stood a brazen statueof a Pancratiast of Anticyra, who had gained theprize at Olympia. Above the agora was a sourcein a well, which was covered with a roof supportedby columns ; a little higher up was a monumentformed of rude masses ^, said to be that of Schediusand Apostrophes, sons of Iphitus. Two stades beyondthe city to the right, upon a high rock, whichwas part of the mountain, stood a temple of Diana,containing a statue by Praxiteles of more than thehuman size, which represented the goddess as bearinga torch in the right hand, and a quiver on theshoulders, with a dog at her feet to the left \Having quitted Aspra Spitia at 1.35, andascended, by a path of extreme steepness, therocky mountain at the back of the village, thesupposed that Horace meantthree islands near Anticyra,upon what authority I cannotdiscover ; they could hardlyhave known of the existenceof the three islands in the gulfof Aspra Spitia, or of the exactsite of Anticyra. But Pausaniasshows that it was not inthese islands that the helleboreVOL. II. N ngrew. If two of the Anticjrraeproduced, or pretended to producethe hellebore, it would besufficient to authorise a Latinpoet in attributing it to all thethree.Xoydtriv XiOoic. — Pausan.Phocis. c. 36.XlBotc Toil EiriTir)(pv9iy.» c. 37.646 PHocis, [chap.same probably upon some part of which stood theTemple of Diana, we enter at 2.20 upon an elevatedplain, bounded on the left by the barrenmountain Xeroghianni, and on the right by Soma-leah,of a similar character. Whether applied tothese or to the height we ascended, the descriptionwhich Pausanias has given of the mountains aboveAnticyra is perfectly just Here it is, he adds,that the hellebore chiefly grows, a fact which, notknowing the plant, I can neither confirm nor contradict.Half way across the plain to Dhesf ina weenter vineyards, on the side of which are xarifpia, orlittle circular constructions of masonry for treadingthe grapes. In other parts the plain is bare, withthe exception of a few scattered wild pear-trees.Midway on the left hand, at the foot of Xeroghi-anni, and hid from the road in a rema, stands themonastery of St. John, from which the mountaintakes its name of Dry-John. The land of the territoryof Dhesfina is cultivated only once in twoyears with barley and wheat, except in certainplaces among the rocks, where they burn thebushes, or where the soil is manured by the sheepand goats which resort to the rocks for shelter.There they sow every year and without any previousploughing. This year all the southern endof the plain lies fallow, while the northern part isploughed.The village of Dhesfina, or Tjesf ina *, is situatedra 6pri to. vvep r^v 'Avr/- * ^etrffnya^ TZitnfiya,Kvpay wtTpw^fj &yay iari.XX.] PHOcis. 647on the western slope of a high rocky hill, on thesummit of which stand a chapel and a large pir-neri-tree. This height is separated only from theequally rocky roots of Xeroghianni by a torrentflowing to the northward, which a little above thevillage issues from a narrow rocky opening betweenthe two mountains : opposite to the villagethe ravine widens, and below it spreads into theplain. The village contains one hundred andseventy families, most of whom inhabit houses of twostories, comfortable when compared with the poorcottages of the peasants of Albanian race in Atticaand Boeotia. Here, as at Arakhova and furtherwestward, the Albanian language is uncommon,although so near as the villages and convents ofMount Helicon it is generally spoken, and manyof the women are even ignorant of the Greek.Though Dhesfina is in the district of Salona, alarge proportion of which belongs to Turks, thereis no Turk inhabitant or proprietor in the territoryof Dhesfina. The mukata and spahillk are purchasedby a native Greek, who collects the taxesand accounts to the Voivoda of Salona for a dheka-tia of one-ninth on com, vines, and olives, for twoparas a head upon cattle, and five piastres a headas an average on all males subject to the kharatj.For himself he receives as Spahi one asper a headon cattle, and four paras the stroma upon vineyards.Lastly, if such a word can ever be correctlyemployed in Turkey in speaking of imposts,the village contributes forty-eight purses a year tothe Voivoda to enable him to satisfy the demandsof A\^ Pasha, The monasteries pay only the khann 2548 PHocis. [chap.rats on their inmates, the dhekatia on their land,and the a(nr()o-jcl^aXo on frpayfiaray or a tax of anasper a head on cattle of all kinds. When I inquirehere whether any traveller like myself hasbeen seen before at Dhesffna, no one can recollectsuch an occurrence, though one man states that heremembers to laye seen one of the people calledMiAiopSoi so near as Arakhova.Feb. 9. — From the chapel of St. Elias, on thesummit of the hill of Dhesflna, I perceive that thishill is the extremity of a ridge which divides theplain of Dhesf ina into two nearly equal parts, andthat above the gorge, and not far from the village,there is another plain on a higher level. About amile to the westward of the village, at the foot ofa rocky projection of the range of Xeroghianni,the plain is covered with a hybemal inundationwhich usually remains until the month of May.It is chiefly caused by the torrent of Dhesfina,and has, I believe, a katavothra, through whichthere is a partial discharge to the Gulf of Crissa.On either side of the village, and even among therocks in the upper part of it, are many ancientcatacombs, but all very small, and capable only ofcontaining a single body. There are others tothe south of the village, excavated in the faceof the rocky height which rises from the oppositebank of the torrent. These remains, slightas they are, are sufficient to show that Dhes-fine is the site of a Hellenic town, as its commandingposition in the middle of this secludedpromontory would alone induce one to presume.I am inclined to think it was Medea;XX.] Phocis. 549for though neither Strabo nor Pausanias in speakingof that city can be said to indicate its precisesituation, yet as the former places Medeon onthe Crisssean Gulf \ and the latter near Anti-cora^, we may infer at least that it was in somepart of the country lying between the two gulfs.Nor are the one hundred and sixty stades, whichaccording to the former authority was the distancebetween Medeon and the frontier of Boeotia, verydifferent from the reality when applied to Dhes-fine.Strabo mentions some other places in Phocis, tothe eastward of Anticyra : first, Marathus, a smalltown ; then Cape Phrygian, with a station forships; and Mychus, so called as being the lastport of Phocis, and which lay below Mount Heliconand Ascra. *' Nor," he adds, " is Able, a citynoted for its oracle, far from these places; norAmbrysus, nor Medeon, a town of the same nameas that in Boeotia '." In another place he remarksthat Mychus, the last port of Phocis, and lyingbelow the western end of Helicon, was 90 stadesdistant from Creusis^. From a comparison ofwhich passages with one another, and with thecoast itself, it seems probable that the remains atSidhiro-kafkhio are those of MarathuSj that thecape and harbour Pluirygium were the same nowcalled Aghia, and that Mychus was the port ofBliss which lies under one of the summits ofyUZtiiy ^ 6 fA€v ^wKiKot ('Avr/icvpa) icara Mc^ccJvoc to,iv Tf Kpiatralf icoXir^, ZU^aav Ipiiiria, — Pausan. Phocis. c."Bou^laQ (rraSiovc cicero 1(4- 36.icoi^a. — Strabo, p. 410. , ' Strabo, p. 423.Kfirai fair ^j) h ironic * p. 409.VOL. II. 2 N 3 -K550 PHocis. [chap.«Helicon though it is obvious that the 90 stadesfrom Creusis must be too little if Pausanias is right,as in fact he is, in placing Bulis at 80 stades fromThisbe. As to the introduction of the names of Abaeand Ascra, as of places situated near this coast, itcan only be considered as an example of the wantof precision, or of the defective information of thegeographer, or of the corruption of his text ; forneither of these places is much less than 20 geographicalmiles in direct distance from the Gulf ofAspra Spltia. He shows the same want of precisionin coupling Medeon with Ambrysus, having beforeplaced it in the Crisssean Gulf ; though a comparisonof the two passages may perhaps afford someargument in favour of placing Medeon at Dhesfina,this place being about midway between the Cris-susanGulf and the site of Ambrysus at Dhistomo.In the steep mountains and rocky paths of thiscoast of the Corinthian Gulf, few horses are kept.Dobo is the last place where I could find any forhire At St. Luke I exchanged them for mules,and at Dhesfina asses only can be procured for thebaggage. The road from Dhesfina to Kastri leadsnearly north across the plain for three quarters ofan hour, and then begins to descend into the valleyof the Pleistus between the two summits of MountCirphiSf now called Somal^si and Kutzura; thelatter of which borders the plain of Salona, andforms the steep rocky coast on the eastern side ofthe CrisstBan Gnl(.The view from the summit of the ridge comprehendsall that magnificent ravine, the famed parnassianNape, from the root of Mount Parnassuswhich closes the site of Delphi to the westward, asXX.] PHocis. 551far as another great counterfeit of the mountaineastward, which, descending from Arakhova, meetsMount Xerovuni, and divides the course of thewaters forming the Pleistus from those which flowthrough the Schiste to the Platania and the .All the side of Parnassus which slopes tothe Pleistus^ from the foot of the white cliffs extendingfrom Kastri to Arakhova, is cultivated :round Arakhova, with vineyards ; between that villageand Kastri, with corn; and around Kastri, witholives, which are also grown along the banks ofthe river wherever there is any level space or easyslope. The range of Cirphis on this side consiststhroughout of precipitous cliffs, every where naked,with the exception of the highest point Xerovuni,which bears firs, and is now covered with snow.The road on the descent of Cirphis is for a quarterof an hour good and not abrupt, leading along aslope covered with bushes; afterwards it is thatzig-zag stony path down the steep side of themountain, which forms so conspicuous an objectfrom Kastri.In 39 minutes from the summit of the mountainwe cross a bridge over the Xeropotami', or dryriver, as the Pleistus is called, for though now arespectable stream, it is dry during a great part ofthe year, as it was when I last saw it in the monthof July. After an ascent from the river of nineminutes in a direction eastward of the site ofDelphi we arrive at a fountain and great planetree, then skirting for seventeen minutes an olivewood, which extends from thence a considerabledistance to the eastward, we arrive at the issue ofHfipoTTordfjii, or SepoworafAi,552 Phocis. [chap.a stream from the hill, so considerable as to turneight or ten mills in the course of its rapid descentto the Pleistus: having ascended five minutesfrom this source, we join the road from Ardkhovato Kastri, on the crest of a small ridge whichbranches from the rocks of Parnassus and whereare the ruins of an ancient tower, so placed as tohave furnished a good look-out on the approach toDelphi from the Schiste. Here begins the ancientcemetery : many sori remain in the neighbouringcorn-fields, some of which have their opercula,some are almost buried, and there are others probablybelow the surface. On the side of the rockswhich overhang the road are crystal with curvedtops. The flat stones which covered the receptaclesare still lying upon some of them, but eitherbroken or a little removed on one side, so as toshow that the tombs have all been opened. Thereare some remains of an ancient road nearer to therocks than the modem path. The sepulchral excavationscontinue from hence as far as the turningto the left which leads to the monastery of thePanaghia; many sepulchres, perhaps, are concealedbehind the earth and stones, which arecontinually descending from the clifis, and aredeposited at the foot of them. Three or fourminutes beyond the tower is a curiously sculpturedincision in the rock on the right, in the styleof those at TelmissuSj and other places in AsiaMinor. The sculpture is on a large mass, nowbroken in two, and which probably fell off from ahigher situation on the cliff, for one cannot imagineany less powerful shock capable of breaking it. Itrepresents a door studded with nails, and undoubted.]PHocis. 553ely belonged to some great excavated sepulchre.Above it are seen several catacombs of differentforms. From hence to the Castalian spring is adistance of seven minutes, leaving on the left themonastery of the Panaghia, which stands on aplatform supported by massy Hellenic walls. Ineight minutes more I arrive at Kastri, at the houseof the Papas, not quite so dignified a personage ashis predecessor, the high priest of Apollo, thoughhe unites to his ecclesiastical character the civiloffice of Protogheros, or prime elder of the village.Delphi is correctly described by Strabo andJustin as occupying a rocky theatre-shaped position\ but the remark of the latter author, thatit is precipitous on every side is not that of anautoptes. The following are the topographical noticesof the place, which Pausanias has left us*: —'* From the Schiste," he says, *' there was asteep and difficult road to Delphi. On enteringthe city, four temples presented themselves in succession':the first was in ruins; the second hadbeen despoiled of all its statues; the third preservedonly a few isles of the Roman emperors ;the fourth was the temple of Minerva Prose *,containing a statue of the deity, and in the pronounsanother larger, in brass, dedicated by the Massa0( AeX^2, irerp&ieQ x^~ ™^^ theatre recesses. — Justin.ploVf diaTpo€iitty Kara Kopv(^ijy 1. 24, c. 6.ivjuv TO fiavreioy koI rijy ir6\iy, ' Pausan. Phocis. c« 5. 8.ara^ikfy licKal^zKa Kvkkoy irXi}- 24. 32.portray, — Strabo, p. 418. * ''EtreXdoyri ^c ig ri^y ironyTemplum Apollinaris Delphi ileiy l^e^^c yaoi. — c. 8.position est in monte Parnassus * Described by Demosthenes,in rule undique impenitent . . (c. Arising. p. 780) as a failuresaxe rules in for toq vcwc*PHOCIS.[chap.liotse. Adjoining to the temple of Pronoun was thetemenus of the hero Phylacu8^ On turning to theleft from the gymnasium, there was a descent ofnot more than three stades* to the river Pleistus,which joins the sea at Cirrha, the harbour ofDelphi. In ascending from the gymnasium tothe temple of Apollo, the water of Castalia was onthe right of the road'. The city stood entirelyupon a slope, and so did the sacred inclosure ofApollo, which occupied a lai^e space in the highestpart of the city, and was traversed by numerouspassages of communication. On going out of thetemple, and then turning towards the left ^, thereoccurred an inclosure containing the sepulchre ofNeoptolemus, above which ^ was a stone of nogreat size, fabled to have been given to Cronus,as a substitute for the infant Jupiter. On returningfrom thence towards the temple of Apollooccurred the fountain Cassotis, to which there wasan ascent through an inclosing wall. The waterwas said to proceed under ground into the adytumof the temple, and to render the priestess prophetic.Above Cassotis was the Lesche, an edifice containingpaintings by Polygnotus of Thasus, whichvo'iaQ ^vXdKov TifA€y6Q icriv, c.8. See also Herodot 1. 8, c. 39.vTroKarafiayri ov TrXioy, kfiolZoKtiVf 3 rp/a vraZia, — Pausan.Phocis. c. 8*tK ^€ Tov yvfAvactov T^v IqTO Upoy iiyiovTi iarW iy Be^ifTrJQ o^ov TO v^up Tfjg KacraXlaQKoi witty ri^v.AeXiJHHc ^c ff woXiQ dyav-KaTCL TO, avTci f c TJ xoXec rpaWi; scat 6 icpoc ^cpt/3oXoc rov'AirdXXwFoc' osric ^e fuyiOiifiiyag ical avtaTaTta tov &4mitcioTi' TeTfitiyTai ^c ica\ e£o2oi Biairrov (nfy€\uc,'E^eXOovrc Be ek tov voov*tai rpawcVn tc QpurrEpdy."^c. 24.iirayaf^yTUXX.] puoGis. 555bad been dedicated by the people of Cnidus \ Thetheatre was contiguous to the sacred inclosure ofApollo : above the latter was a statue of Bacchus,dedicated by the Cnidii. In the highest part ofthe city was the stadium ', originally constructedof the ordinary stone of Parnassus, and in whichstate it remained until Herodes, the Athenian,adorned it with Pentelic marble."Of the two fountains the Cassotis is recognizedwithout difficulty as that now called Kama, whichis just above the village of Kastri, to the northwest; and the Castalia still more evidently as thatalready mentioned at the upper extremity of theancient site towards the east, on the right hand inentering a narrow fissure which separates the tworenowned Parnassian summits. This fissure, called'A/DjcovSopcvfio, or bear-ravine, is the bed of a torrentoriginating in the upper region of PamassuSy and'Yxcp it lily Kairawi^a Delphi had been convertedparty o%Krifia ypat^g '^X^^ ^^^ from a club-house into a ,iLvadiifiara fi€p ture-gallery.Kvi^iw KaXilrai bird AeX^v Pausanias proves the hi ivravBa 0vvc<$>t£c quite of these places of publict6 dgyaiovf rd rt tncovZai&rtga resort from the words which^ukiyovTo Ka oir6oa fivdttiri. Melantho addresses to Ulyssesc. 25. in the Odyssey : (S. v. 827.)It seems that the Lesche of'Hi irov is 'Klcryfip^We have also the testimony of ' Tov wtpifioXov Be rov UponHesiod. (Op. v. 491, 499), diary excrac drag A^toy' cira-whoseScholiast shows that yafikm U rov wtpilUXov Anotherwere extremely numerous yvvov AyaXfia eyravOa Kyi'at Athens, where the poor il^y itrriy kyoBiina* mahov Bifound shelter and fire in them v^imv AyuTarai r^c iroXewcin the winter. toto ivriy, — c. 32.556 Phocis. [chap.which, though generally dry, forms in seasons of raina cascade of about 200 feet in height, falling over arock which closes the ravine of the Castalia 60 or70 yards above that fountain. Near the foot of thecascade is a small perennial spring. The Castaliaitself is a copious pool of very pure and cool water, atthe foot of a perpendicular excavation overhung withivy, saxifrage, and rock plants ; around which growsome larger shrubs ^ in front a large fig-tree, andnear the road a spreading plane. The commendationwhich Pausanias bestows on the water, as witiv^Sv, is confirmed by the natives, who consider it aslighter, more agreeable and wholesome, than thewater of Cassotis. The pool is not only kept constantlyfull by subterraneous supplies, but affordsalso a small stream flowing out of the basin into thebed of the Arkudhorema, and from thence in adeep channel to the Xeropotami, or Pleistus^ unlesswhen the water is diverted for the purpose of irrigatingthe fields and olives below Kastri. The Cos-talais now called the fountain of Ai lanni, from asmall chapel of St. John, standing above one comerof the basin ; and the same name is given to thewhole course of the rivulet down to the Pleisttis.The natural pool of the Castalian spring was enlarged,adorned, and made more commodious bythe ancients by means of an excavation in the rock,both vertical and horizontal, of which the annexedplan, elevation and section, may give some idea *.Dr. Sibthorp had the plea ply of Delphi, and the situa-sureof finding here a new station of the several buildings,lies of Daphne, which he named see the plan at the end of thisCastaliensis. volume.^ For the general topogra-XX.]Phocis.castAlia.Plan,feet.•* >Elevation.3,3UASection.1. Castalia. 2. Canal to carry off the superfluous water.3. Niches. 4. Excavation and chapel of St. John. 5. Stepsdescending into the basin of Castalia.The steps seem to show that the subterraneoussupply of the spring was not always equal : insummer perhaps not reaching above the loweststeps; but filling the basin in winter, when thechannel at the back prevented the water fromrising above the upper step. This channel, however,no longer serves its original purpose ; theKAstrites, who chiefly use the basin for washingclothes, having cut an opening through the uppersteps, so that the depth of water in the basin cannever be so great as it was anciently.The larger niche may possibly have been destinedfor a statue of Apollo, and the two smallerfor figures of Pan and the nymph Castalia, whoPHOCIS.[chap.gave name to the fountain. The chapel of St.John may perhaps occupy the place of the heroumof Antonius, which is described by Herodotus ashaving been at the foot of Mount Hyampeia, nearthe fountain CastaliaStrabo and Pausanias agree in placing thetemple of Apollo in the highest part of Delphi,though it appears from the words of the latterauthor as already cited, not to have been so highas the stadium, the remains of which are fortunatelyextant to guide us, nor even so high as thefountain of Cassotis, as the water of that fountainflowed into the temple. It was, however, very nearthis fountain, for Strabo places the tomb of Neopto-remus, which according to Pausanias was aboveCassotis, within the sacred inclosure*. It seemsevident, therefore, that the sacred temenus orperibolus occupied the exact site of the presentvillage, and this is proved by an inscribed wallforming part of the foundation of a house in thevillage, which recorded the manumission of slaves,or rather the dedication of them as upoSovXot toApollo. It cannot be doubted that these recordswere placed in the sacred inclosure'. The remarkHerodot. 1. 8, c. 39.Ac/icwrac ^ iy rf TefiireiTcii^C 'SeowroXifiov, — Strabo,p. 421. The rifjievos and lepocirepifloXoQ were in this instancethe same, as appears evidenton comparing the words IveX-SovTi tc ro rifityot in c. 9 ofPausanias, with icpoc ictplfto*\oQ in chapters 8. 32.The forms are somewhatdifferent from those of the templeof Sarapis at Chaeroneabut in both, the slaves arechiefly females. At Delphi aftePaiuT^p, or security, in conjunction,when the slave foundthe purchase-money, with thediroc6ft€voc, or liberator, becameanswerable to the capo*XX.]PHOCIS.of Pausanias that the peribolus was of great extentis illustrated by another inscribed wall below thevillage, upon which are recorded grants of proveswith other privileges to foreign benefactors ofDelphi ; in some of these it is expressly statedthat the record is to be placed in the temple ofApollo. As the distance from this wall to thefountain Kern is not less than three hundredyards, it becomes probable that the entire inclosurewas not less than equal to a square ofeight hundred or one thousand feet. The natureof the ground explains the numerous c^oSoi,or passages which Pausanias describes in theperibolus ; for as the entire site of Delphi is asteep declivity, it was of necessity divided intoterraces, many remains of the supporting walls ofwhich are still extant in every part of the slope.The temple itself occupied probably the upper partof the village not far below Cassotisy standing onh)v\oQ for the amount in caseany one should attempt to treathim or her as a slave. Nomention is made in any oneof these inscriptions of any reservationof the services of theslave during the life of theowner, or of a right of propertyin the children of the slave, asoccurs in the inscriptions ofChaeronea.I subjoin in an additional notespecimens of the Delphic manumissions,with the additionof copies in the cursive characterof a few other inscriptionswhich I found at Delphi.M. Boeckh, in his excellentwork (Corpus InscriptionGraecarum), has formed a largecollection of Delphic inscriptionsfrom various authorities,and among them are almost allI possessed of any interest. Afragment which I found amongthe fences below the village,shows that the treasury of thetemple lent money upon thesecurity of houses and lands.The register of these was ofcourse kept within the herm.560 PHOCis. [chap.the higher terrace, below which were others withinthe peribolus containing the treasuries described byPausanias, as well as the other monuments and sacredofferings. It is to be supposed that there weresteps from one platform to another, besides lateralpassages in the transverse direction; and the inscribedwalls were perhaps nothing more than thesupports of the superior terraces, the inscriptionson which might be very conveniently read fromthe inferior platforms, and thus became a commodiousplace of register for the Delphi ^As ancient temples in general, but especiallythose of Apollo, fronted the east, we cannot doubtthai the temple of Delphi had that aspect; andthe relative situations of the tomb of Neoptole-mus, of the fountain Cassotis, and of the temple,as already indicated, will accord with that supposition,Pausanias having remarked that on goingout of the temple it was necessary to turn to theleft to arrive at the tomb of Neoptolemus, and thatthe fountain Cassotis occurred in returning to thetemple from the stone of Saturn, which was abovethe tomb of Neoptolemus. As this stone must havebeen very near the cliffs, it was probably one ofthose numerous fragments which have fallen fromthem. Pausanias proceeds to remark that theLesche stood above Cassotis; and after a longdescription of the picture of Polygnotus *, heDelphi is not the only in- AeX^oc, a woman AeX^i}. Thestance of a Greek city which people are sometimes ol AeX^had no name in ordinary use and sometimes AcX^}, withouthut the gentile. I find from the article,the inscriptions existing here ' To the right the picturethat a native of the place was represented the taking of Troy,XX.]PHOCIS.then states that the theatre adjoined the sacredperibolus, that on ascending from the latter therewas a statue of Bacchus, and that the stadium wasin the highest part of the city. Hence there is agreat probability that the theatre occupied theground immediately below the stadium, adjacentto the village on the western side, comprehendingperhaps a part of its site, as well because thewords of Pausanias tend to that conclusion, asbecause among the Greeks the theatre and stadiumwere commonly contiguous to, or not verydistant from each other; and that in the presentinstance there was not elsewhere any spaceadjacent to the sacred peribolus, sufficient for soto the left the descent of Ulyssesinto Hades. In the formerthe sea-shore was seen in thelower part of the painting, andthe ships of Menelaus ready todepart with Helen and theTrojan captives. Above wasthe taking of Troy, where alone was representedslaying the Trojans,because the picture had beenoriginally intended for histomb. The Cassandra in thispart of the painting was muchadmired by ancient critics.(Lucian. Imag.) To the leftthe river Acheron occupied thelower part with the boat ofCharon, the punishment of theunjust, Eurynomus an infernaldemon, and Orpheus seated onVOL. II. Oa hill with other poets nearhim. Above were Ulyssesand the various personageswhom he found in the infernalregions, his enemies forminga groupe apart from himselfand his friends. Polygnotushad not followed Homer alonein the treatment of his subjects,which Pausanias tracedin many circumstances to Les*chest, Stesichorus and Archilochus,to the *Iliac fUKpa andthe Mivvdc. The figures werevery numerous, and about onehundred and twenty of themhad their names annexed, someof which Pausanias supposedto have been invented by thepainter himself.662 PHOcis. [chap.large a building as we cannot but suppose thetheatre of Delphi to have been, except below themodern village, from whence there would havebeen an ascent of at least five hundred yards fromthe theatre to the stadium, which on so steep amountain would have been very inconvenient.Although Pausanias does not exactly indicatethe relative situations of the temple of MinervaPronaea and of the gymnasium, there seems littledoubt, from the tenor of his narrative, that thefour temples, the gymnasium, and the Castalia,occurred in succession, or nearly so, in the roadwhich led from the eastern entrance of the city tothe temple of Apollo ; and as he states the gymnasiumto have been about three stades from theriver Pleistus, which agrees with the position ofthe ancient wall supporting the terrace of themonastery of Panaghia, there seems little doubtthat these walls indicate the site of the gymnasium.Other foundations immediately above it, probably,belong to the peribolus of the temple of Pronaea,for this temple was a little below, or to the left ofthe road leading to the Castalia and the temple,but not far from the overhanging rocks, as appearsfrom Herodotus, who relates that the temenus ofPhylacus, which Pausanias places near the templeof Pronaea, was above that temple on the roadside\ and who adds, that when the Persians ofXerxes arrived near the temple of Pronaea, largemasses of rock fell from the precipices upon thetrap' aifT^y rr^y o^oy KarvwepOe rov Iftov r^c npoi^ti|c-—Herodot. 1. 8, c. 39.XX.] Phocis. 563barbarians, and settled in the temenus of Proceed,where they still remained in the time of the historian.It is not improbable that the ancient roadwas to the right of the modern path, the earth anddetached rocks having a tendency to accumulate atthe foot of the precipices, and the actual traces ofan ancient road nearer to the precipices than themodem route, greatly favouring the same opinion.Some other terrace walls about midway betweenthe monastery and the tower near the easterncemetery, may have been the platforms of the threetemples at the entrance of Delphi, of which Pausaniashas not given us the names. ».One of the most remarkable features in the siteof Delphi is the great ridge on the western side,which advances from the rocks of Pamasstis andterminates abruptly towards the PleistuSy whichseparates that termination from the opposite precipicesof Mount Cirphis. This western ridgebeing higher than any part of the site of Delphi,unless it be the ground immediately at the footof the rocks, is not beneficial to the place, inasmuchas it concentrates the heat, intercepts theimbat, and prevents the western breezes from moderatingthe heat in summer, which notwithstandingan elevation of twelve or fifteen hundred feetabove the sea, is rendered excessive by the reflectionof the sun from the great south-wall of cliffsat the back of the site. The Kastrites accordinglydescribe the air as heavy ' in summer, butcomplain still more of the terrible gales which/3opvc 6 &epac elvac.O O 2564 PHOcis. [chap.in winter often draw through the Pamasdanvalley.But though the western range may not improvethe climate of Delphi the exclusion of the cityfrom the view of the Crisssan plain and bay whichit caused, added greatly to the singularly wild andsequestered nature of the place, so well suited toassist in producing those effects to which all theresources of Grecian art and priestcraft were heredirected. Even by preventing the persons in thetheorise, or processions which landed at Cirrha,from beholding the city at a distance, it contributedto the same objects. There are two roadsby which they may have approached : either followingthe valley of the Pleistus until they passedthe straits at the end of the western ridge, when theywould have seen the buildings at a great heightabove them, and rather in too confused and compresseda manner; or by the modem road fromKrisso which crosses, in a hollow, the middle ofthe western ridge, exactly in the position wherethe magnificent view which then suddenly openedupon them for the first time, was seen in the mostadvantageous point, and at a distance calculatedto produce the most striking effect. By this route,therefore, I have little doubt that the theoriseapproached, and formed a pageant probably notexceeded in magnificence by any of the ceremoniesof antiquity, not even the Panathenaic processionto the Parthenon'.The admiration and relic Delphi were still farther height-piousawe of those who friend hy the effects of the re-quitted the great festivals at markable echo caused by thexx-lPHOCIS.Above the hollow way in the western ridgefoundations of walls flanked with towers may betraced at intervals along the crest of the ridgeas far as the great cliffs, which were themselvesa sufficient defence to the north. These are evidentlythe western walls of Delphi, and they arethe more worthy of notice, as history testifies thatDelphi was not a fortified city, when Philomela,the Phocian, seized it in the Sacred War, andsuspended the authority of the Amphictyon^s ^Justin again expressly states in his narrativeof the attack of the Gauls, in the year b. c. 278,that Delphi was not fortified ', and Livy almostimplies the same in relating an attempt whichwas made, in the year b.c. 172, by Perseus, toassassinate Eumenes as he approached Delphi incomingfrom Crissa. The historian states thatEumenes was assaulted by the conspirators on theascent to Delphi, as he approached the buildings', which would hardly have been his mode ofrocks and the theatre-shapedsite of Delphi. Media saxerapes in formam theatre re-cessit, qnamobrem et hominemclamor et si quandoaccessit tubarum sons, per-sonantibus et respondentibasinter se quibus multiplex audireameliorate quam editorresonance sole, quae res majoresmajestatis terrorem ignores reiet admiration stupendousplerumque assert. — Justin. 1.24, c. 6.^ The historian remarks thathe fortified the 'Undy, — Diodorus16, c. ^5.Templum et civitates nonmure sed prsecipitia nee manufacta sed naturalis praesidiadefendant ; prorsus ut interdumsit utrum monumentum loci anmajestas Dei plus hic admirationhabet. — Justin, ubi sup.Adscendentibus ad templuma Cirrha prius quam per-veniretur ad frequently edificeslocal. — Liv. 1. 42, c. 15.566 PHOCis. [chap.expression if the town had been walled. Probablytherefore the existing walls are of a subsequentdate, and were constructed when the sanctity ofthe place was falling into disrespect , and theDelphi became convinced of the necessity of resortingto more vulgar means of protection. Thetransaction related by Livy seems to have occurredon the ascent of the western ridge, near the summit,and exactly in the modem road, for thisprobably coincides with the ancient, there beinglittle doubt that Arma occupied the site of themodem Krisso. There are many sepulchral excavationsin the rocks on the outside of the wallson the western side and sori in the cornfields below,many of which are buried in the ground, likethose near the eastern entrance of the city. Exactlyin the opening of the ridge, one of theexcavations consists of a spacious apartment betweentwo sepulchral chambers, at the end ofwhich is a semicircular seat, affording a delightfulplace of repose in the heat of summer.On the crest of the same ridge, midway betweenthe road and the foot of the great cliffs,rises a tumulus, which its elevated situationrenders a conspicuous object, and on the easternslope of the ridge, very near the right hand sideof the modem road at its entrance into thesite of Delphi, stands a small church of St. Eliasupon an artificial platform, which is supportedby two ancient walls meeting in a right angle,like those at the Panaghia, equally well constructed,and evidently belonging to one of theprincipal edifices of the city. There is howeverXX.] Phocis. 567no building described by Pausanias in this situation,and although one of the most advantageousin the site, it is comparatively remote from thatpart of the town which contained the Herm andits appendages. Possibly it may have been thePylsea, or palace of the Amphictyones, which wasremarked for its magnificence, although in a citynoted for the splendour of its edifices K To theeastward of St. Elias, in a lower situation, anotherHellenic wall, similar to that which supports theterrace of St. Elias, crosses the slope of the hilltowards the ravine of the Castilian torrent. Thismay perhaps have been the southern wall, of thecity, for its extent on the three other sides beingknown, the whole circumference will on this suppositionagree with the 16 stades which have beenassigned to it by Strabo '.The prospect from the western ridge is verymagnificent. The Pamassia Nape although notso well seen as from Mount Cirphis^ is all comprehendedwithin the view as far as Arakhova.To the southward the prospect is bounded beyondthe Corinthian gulf by the majestic Cyllenej to theright of which is seen the gulf of Galaxidhi, andthe plain of Salona, covered with olive trees, andhence much more beautiful than it was anciently,when as Pausanias tells us it was quite naked ^.Beyond these the great JLocro-^tolian range risesPlutarch (de Pythias ora.) ' Strabo, p. 418. v. sup.who represents Delphi as not p. 553. n. 1.less agreeable by its groves and ' Pausan. Phocis. c. 37*fountains than admirable forits public buildings.568 PHOcis. [chap.to a height in some parts nearly equal to that ofParnassus. It is clothed with woods above, adornedbelow with the picturesque town of Salon andseveral of its dependent villages, and extendsnorthward nearly in a direct line towards thegreat summit of (Eta, near Neopatra. The mostremarkable point in the range, is the same soconspicuous in many parts of Scotia and Pheasantthere called Mavrolithari from a village ofthat name near it, which is 6 hours distant fromNeopatra, and 12 fromSdlona, nearly in a linefrom the one to the other.Of the two summits above the Castalian spring,which are divided from each other by the Arku-chorea, and which very much to the convenienceof the geographer render the site of Delphirecognizable at a great distance, the western isnow named Rossini S and the eastern Flembuko'.The ancient names of these celebrated peaks wereNauplia and Hyampeia, and it seems clear fromHerodotus that the latter was the eastern, for hesays, in describing the heroum of Antonius, thatit was under the summit Hyampeia, near the Castalianfountain ^, which is on the eastern side ofthe Arkudhorema. There was a tradition that theDelphi put sop to death by throwing him overthe Hyampeia, and that in after ages, from respectto his memory, the Nauplia was made the placeof exit for criminals instead of the Hyampeia^.This also is in favour of the eastern vertex having^ *Po^iyii. * Plutarch, de scud numina^XefiirovKo^. vindicate.» Herodot. 1. 8, c. 39.XX.] phocis. 569been the Hyampeia, since it is more probable thatthe original place of execution should have beenthe nearest to the extremity of the town, and thatit should have been the higher of the two summits,both which particulars are applicable to the easternsummit. It appears that the whole line of cliffson the northern side was known by the name ofa! 4>aiSpcaSfc vhpaiy for according to Suits, Mopwas precipitated from the rocks Phsedriades ' ;and in the Phocis war, b. c. 354, when Philomeluswas attacked by the Locris, it is related byDiodorus that an action occurred near the rocksPhsedriades, and that Philomelus having gainedthe victory, drove many of the enemy over therocks*. It would seem that the Locris had enteredthe upper region of Parnassus from theirown territory, which adjoined the western partof it, and that they had advanced as far as thesummit of the cliffs before they were met by Philomelus.Like the acropolis of Athens, and the sacredinclosure of Eleusis, the Delphic sanctuary is soencumbered by modem habitations, that nothingshort of their removal, and the entire clearing ofthe site from the accumulated rubbish of agescan supply satisfactory particulars of the designor architecture of the temple and its adjunctbuildings. In all these celebrated places, sorich formerly in productions of art, the sacrificewould probably be' fully compensated by the discoveries.The only relic now remaining at DelphiSuit. in AWci»iroc, ^aiBpiuQ. ^ Diodor. 1. 16, c. 28.570 PHocis. [chap.which I can suppose to have belonged to thetemple of Apollo is a piece of Doric column inthe village of Kastri, having a fluting of about afoot in the chord. According to the usual proportionsof the order, such a fluting would requirea diameter of about six feet and a half, and willtherefore lead to the inference that .the templewas a hexastyle, not so broad or. so high as thatof Olympia, of which the columns were more thanseven feet in diameter. This perhaps is nearlywhat might be presumed, from the temple havingbeen more ancient than that of Olympia, thathexastyle temple and its cotemporary the Parthenon,which was an octastyle of the same dimensions,having been built exactly at the timewhen power and opulence made the moat rapidadvances, and when the people of £pis and Athenshad the means of indulging their ostentation underthe cloak of devotion so as to execute buildings,exceeding all preceding attempts of the Greeks, inhonour of their gods. The last Delphic temple was50 or 60 years older than the Parthenon, havingbeen built about 510 b. c. in consequence of thedestruction by fire in the year 648 b. c. of thatwhich had been built before the Trojan war byTrophonius and Agamedes. The funds for thereconstruction were derived from a general contributionto which even the distant colony ofGreeks at Sais in the Delta were parties, andAmass king of Egypt. The contract for thework was taken by the family of the Alcmyonideeof Athens, who engaged with the Amphictyonesto rebuild the temple, with the stone called Porus,XX.] PHocis. 571for the sum of 300 talents, (probably not halfthe cost of the Parthenon) and gave a nobleexample of liberality in adding at their own expencea facing of Parian marble, and some otherornaments to which they were not bound by thecontract. The architect was Spintharus, a Corinthian^Justin relates, that when the Gauls attackedDelphi, the priests who ascribed their defeat tothe immediate interposition of Apollo, declaredthat they saw him descend into the templethrough the open part of the roof (per cumminsaperta fastigia'). Hence it appears tohave been hypsBthral, as temples of that magnitudegenerally were. The anti contained figuresof Diana, Latona, Apollo, the Muses, the settingSun, Bacchus, and the Thyiades, begun byProxies, and finished after his death by Andros-themes,both of whom were Athenians. As inthe Parthenon, gilded shields were suspendedon a part of the entablature : they were thespoils of two very distant nations, but nearly ofthe same form, those of the Persians had beendedicated by the Athenians from the spoils ofMarathon, the Gallic shields by the ^tolians^.In the pronouns stood a brazen image of Homerupon a pillar, and on the walls were inscribedsentences written by the Seven men whom theGreeks called the Wise *. In the cella ' were analtar of Neptune, to whom the oracle in the mostHerod 1. 2, c. 18. — ' Pausan. Phocis. c. 19.Pausan. Phocis. c. 5. * oi 2o^^. — c. 24.Justin. 1. 24, c. 8. ' ev ry ya*572 Phocis. [chap.ancient times was said to have belonged, statuesof two Fates, with Jupiter and Apollo as theirleaders \ the hearth* upon which the priest ofApollo slew Neoptolemus, and the iron chair ofPindar, upon which he was said to have sung hishymns to Apollo.These are the remarks of Pausanias, from whosesilence we may infer that the icparnpt or vase ofsilver, containing 600 amphorae, the work of theodoreof Samos, which stood in the angle of thepronouns to the left, in the time of Herodotus ', hadlong before been converted into money by Philomelus,Sylla, or some other plunderer, as well asall the other gifts of gold and silver, which theDelphi received from Croesus, and cheaply repaidby conferring upon him and the Lydian privilegesof the same kind as those mentioned in so manyexisting inscriptions. From a similar cause thegolden tripod, dedicated from the spoils of Platsea,which Herodotus describes as having been nearthe altar of Apollo, no longer remained in thetime of Pausanias, who found only, and not in thesame place, the twisted serpents which supportedthe tripod.It appears from Euripides, in his Ion, the sceneof which is laid at Delphi, that two of the representationson the exterior front of the temple wereHercules, attended by lolaus as shield-bearer, .Av^oiai irpo/iayTfiitiy ac ,Xtitiy kox wpoehpifi^, — Herodot.^ Herodot. 1. 1, c. 51. 1. 1, c. 54.AeX^oi eioaav KpoiVy icaiXX.] PHOcis. 573straying the Lerasean hydra with his falchion \and Bellerophon on the horse Pegasus, slaying theChimaera'. They were probably on the metresof the eastern front. The battle of the giants, whichthe Chorus describes as being upon the walls ^,seems to have been a painting on the wall of thepronouns, perhaps by Aristophanes, who is stated byPliny to have painted this temple *• The figuresof the Gigantomachia specified by the Chorus, areMinerva striking Enceladus with her spear, Jupiterdestroying Mimas with his lightning, andBacchus smiting another monster with his thyrsus.The poet has likewise described some pepli, ortapestries, in the temple, which were embroideredwith battles and other subjects, like those of theParthenon '. Over the door of the cella was writtenthe word EI, concerning which Plutarch haswritten so much to so little purpose. As to theadytum, Pausanias tells us nothing, except thatfew persons entered into the inmost part of thetemple, but that there existed in it a goldenAepyaloy "X^pay iraiptiXpvtriaic Apraic 6 /^loc iralc*Eurip. Ion. y. 190.Ka fray rays* fiOpiyiroi',IlTCpovyroQ ti^Bpoy IwiroVfTay rrvpiirviovfray eyaipeiTptffut/iaToy dXxAy. v. 201.2icci//ac icXdyoy ly rtlyttnAaiyoiin yiydyriay. y. 206.Plin. H. N. 1. 85, c. 11. » Eurip. Ion. v. 1141.574 PHOcis. [chap.statue of Apollo. It would seem, therefore, thatthe priests still endeavoured to obtain respect by anaffectation of mystery, and closed the inner sanctuaryagainst casual visitors and the vulgar. Fromother writers we learn that it contained a perpetualfire, and a narrow orifice in the ground, whichwas surrounded by a railing, was shaded withlaurel, and surmounted by a tripod. Here wasseated the priestess when she uttered the oracularresponses, after having bathed in the water ofCastalia, and crowned herself with the laurel andmasticated some of its leaves ^It has generally been supposed that the convulsionsof the priestess, which preceded her propheticwords, were caused by a mephitic vapour emanatingfrom a fissure in the rock. Pausanias and Lucian,on the contrary, ascribe it to the water of Cas-satis.As such a vapour, if it had existed, wouldprobably still find its way out of the ground in thesame place, or near it, it is very possible that therenever was such a vapour, though the cavern oraperture in the rock may have been real. Thepropensity of the Greeks to believe in the marvellous,would easily lead them to add a rrvhifia €v0ov-aiaariKov* to a place which they were not allowedto see, if the priests thought fit to encourage theidea.The only buildings within the sacred peribolus,besides the temple, were a portico built by the^ iEschyl. Eum. v. 39. — c. 26. — Lucian in his acea-Euripides. Ion. v. 76. 1321. — sat.Lycophr. v. 6. — Diodor. 1. 16, ' Strabo, p. 419.XX.]Phocis.Athenians, and eight fticravpoi, or treasuries, similarto those at Olympiad where ten of these constructionsstood upon a KpviviCy or basement, betweenthe temple of Juno and Mount Cranium. One ofthe thesaurus at Olympia was so large as to containa colossal statue ; at Delphi none seem to havebeen of such dimensions, but were intended onlyfor the smaller and more valuable offerings, theworks of statuary having been on the adjacentplatforms of the herm. The cities which hadconstructed the treasuries at Delphi were Sicyon,Sinus', Thebes*, Athens, Cnidus, Potidaea,Syracuse ^ and Corinth, to which Strabo addsthe Italian cities. Spina and Agylla. The sameauthor remarks that wealth is difficult to guard,even though sacred ^ ; and agrees with Pausaniasin showing that the treasuries at Delphi were allempty, the contents having long before their timebeen converted into the sinews of war. Nor weresacred offerings, the value of which was derivedfrom theskill of the artists who made them, althoughless tempting to the vulgar plunderer, exempt from^ Kara Ifs Koi ky AcX^oTc'EXX^wv rtv€Q iiroiiiffayro rf'Avi^XXmi^c Oty^avpovc* ^- Fan-san.Elias. post. c. 19.The god had ordered theSiphnii to send a tenth of theproduce of their gold mines toDelphi ; the treasury was builtaccordingly, and the tenth wasfor some time sent. But thetax was probably too heavy.Pausanias says, that in consequenceof the Siphnii havingceased to send it, the sea brokeinto their mines and destroyedthem. — Phocis. c. 11.The Theban treasury wasbuilt after the battle of Leuctra.The Athenian was builtfrom the spoils of Marathon.The Syracuse after theirdefeat of the Athenians.This treasury once containedthe gold presented bythe kings of Lydia.Kay lipoQ ^.—Strabo, p. 420.576 phocis. [chap.the effects of a more refined species of cupidity.Scarcely any but imperial robbers, however, couldindulge a passion for collecting statues at the expenceeither of Delphi or any of the other morecelebrated places in Greece, which were at oncethe favourite abodes of superstition, and the chiefrepositories of art, so long as Paganism continuedin vogue. Of this we have a strong argument inthe catalogue which Pausanias has given us of thecollection at Delphi \ a century after it had beenplundered of 600 brazen statues by Nero". Withthe decline of taste in the third century the passionof collecting gradually ceased among the Romans,which change, as the ancient worship still kept itsground in this part of Grreece, had a tendency topreserve the sacred places nearly in the samecondition as Pausanias had left them, until Constantine,and one or two of his successors, despoiledthem of some of their choicest monumentsfor the purpose of adorning the new capital,as well as for that of degrading the deities ofthe old worship, and of holding them up to ridicule'. It was not until the imperial decrees wereissued against idolatry, at the end of the fourthcentury, that the Christians could indulge theirbarbarous zeal in the indiscriminate destruction ofthe ancient statues. The greater part having beenof brass, were then probably melted for the sake ofconverting them to purposes of vulgar utility. Theworks in marble, although many of them may havePausan. Phocis. c. 9. See ' These motives are statedthe Additional Note at the end by Eusebius (in Constant. 1. S,of this volume. c. 54.) and by Solomon (1. 2.Pausan. Phocis. c. 7. c. 5.)XX.] Phocis. 577been broken, are more likely to have escaped entiredestruction ; and it is difficult to believe that manyvaluable remains of sculpture as well as architectureare not still concealed beneath the surface of theground at Delphi. The steepness of the site, and thefragility of the lofty cliffs above it, acted upon bythe waters flowing from the higher summits, are constantlyoperating a change in the soil ; fragmentsof stone and an alluvion of earth descending fromabove, have a continual tendency to accumulatematter upon the ancient platforms of the city, andto place them lower beneath the surface, of whichthe stadium is a proof, the upper row of seats onlybeing now above ground. Thus the ancient remainsbecome deeply buried, except where atorrent, taking a new course, suddenly removes apart of the accumulation, and thus occasionallybrings some of them to light. It seldom happensthat a heavy fall of rain does not produce the discoveryof some coins, or other remains of art, particularlyamong the terraces to the west and to thesouth of Kastri.The length of the stadium of Delphi (as well asit can be determined in such a ruin) is 630 feet,or nearly the same as that of the other stadia ofGreece, in all which their ruined condition causessomething more than the length of the domus tobe included in the measurement. It seems, therefore,that if there was any such measure as a Pythiastade, longer than the ordinary stade, it wc^ notderived from any excess in the length of the stadiumof Delphi. This structure was composed, as Pausaniasremarks, of the native rock, which is a brownVOL. II. p p678 PHOcis. [chap.limestone, containing veins of white marble ; nordo I perceive a vestige of the Pentelic marblewith which it was decorated by Herodes.The cavern on the slope of Mount Cirphisj whichis so conspicuous from Castri is natural, thoughthe entrance has been squared, and the inside alittle enlarged and made regular, in order to formit into a church, of which some remains exist, ororiginally, perhaps, (and such is the opinion ofthe priest, my host, and other Kastrites,) for anascetic retreat There is a little verdure beforethe door, which is said to have been the gardenof the hermit. All the rest of the rock is a bareprecipice, and the access to the cavern is extremelydifficult. It is dedicated to St. Arsale, or Orsale^to whom the convent above Daulis is sacred, andwhose coprq or festival is on Easter Monday.From Delphi Pausanias conducts his reader tothe celebrated cave named Corycium, and fromthence continues his route across the upper Parnassusto Tithorea. I visited the cave on my formerjourney at a season when Parnassus, nowenveloped in snow and mist, exhibited under abrilliant atmosphere a delightful scene of arableand pasture, intermixed with forests of pine, fir,and the grandest mountain scenery. The cavernis about seven miles from Delphi, to the north-eastward,and at a nearly equal distance to the northwestof Arakhova ; the access from each place is'Asia *ApaaX^, 'OpvaX^. as linpfiiyeOtc, that which isAntoninus Liberals (c. 8) opposite to Kastri will hardlymentions a cavern in Mount answer to it.Morphia ; But as he descries itXX.] PHOcis. 579easy after having surmounted the steep ascentwhich leads from them both into the upper regionof Pamasmsy as it then crosses the great elevatedvalley which extends for about sixteen miles in awesterly direction from the foot of the highestsummit anciently Lycoreia\ and now Liakura.From Delphi the road to the Corycium crosses thewestern ridge just under the Phcedriades Scapularand then immediately ascends by a zigzag pathcut in the rock, very steep and rugged, and whichretains traces of the ancient route. Just above Cos-talathe road to the Kalj^via of Arakhova and toLiakura, probably the ancient road to Lycoreiaand Tithorea branches to the right. Followingthat to the left which leads to the Mavpii Pourra, asthe Corycmm is now called, we entered a countryof pasture interspersed with firs, and peopled withshepherds and their flocks, occasionally passingfields of wheat, barley, and oats, all yet greenthough it was the 27th of July, and the harvest inthe plains of Boeotia had been completed a monthbefore. To the right was a lake fed by the streamsfrom the surrounding mountains, and partly dis*chained by a subterraneous channel, of which theEmissary is probably the source at the mills ofKastri. Having arrived at the foot of the nonneStrabo, p, 418, 423. All are the walls of another Hel-theeastern part of the plain lenic town, which agrees withbelonged probably to a town of the solis of Herodotus (1. 8,Lycoreiat of which some re- c. 35), or equally well with themains are found at the village of Cypresses of Homer (B. 519),Liakura. At the southern foot Strabo (p. 423), Dicsearchusof the mountain, midway be (v. 80), and Stephens (intween the Shute and Delphi voce).pp580 Phocis [chap.tain on the northern side of the valley, we ascendedmore than half way to its summit, when a smalltriangular entrance presented itself, conductinginto the great chamber of the cavern, which isupwards of 200 feet in length, and about 40 highin the middle. Drops of water from the roof hadformed large calcareous crystallizations rising atthe bottom, and others were suspended from everypart of the roof and sides. The inner part of thisgreat hall is rugged and irregular, but afterclimbing over some rocks, we arrived at anothersmall opening leading into a second chamber, thelength of which is near 1 00 feet, and has a directionnearly at a right angle with that of the outercavern. In this inner apartment there is again anarrow opening, but inaccessible without a ladder;at the foot of the ascent to it is a small naturalchamber. There seems to have been ample space forthe Delphi and other Phocis to deposit here theirvaluable property, and even their families, whenthey took refuge in Mount Parnassus from thePersians \ As Pausanias states that there was '* adistance of 60 stades from Delphi to a brazenstatue, from whence it was easier to ascend to thecavern on foot than on a horse or mule ;" the statueprobably stood at the foot of the mountain, thedistance from thence to Delphi being nearly thatwhich he mentions. He remarks that the Cory-chum is larger than many other celebrated cavernswhich he had seen, and enumerates; and observes,that it is easy to walk into the cave for aHerodot. 1. 8, c. 36.XX.]PHOCIS.great distance even without a torch, and that thereare springs and drippings from the roof to the bottomin every part of it. The people of Parnassus,he adds, considered the cave sacred to the Cory-can nymphs and to Pan \ From the cavern weproceeded to Aguriani, distant three hours, in anorth-western direction, through a wide valleyabounding in springs and rivulets which flowto the torrent of Lumpy and where in the intervalsof forests of fir, there was a beautiful varietyof corn-fields, and of pastures covered with sheepand goats : on either side rose the secondary summitsof Parnassus. At Aguriani, which contained60 or 70 families, a large stream issued from thefoot of the mountain above the village, and flowedthrough it, turning several mills, and filling somelarge vats which served for soaking the coarse clothwhich the villagers made from the wool of Parnassus.In an hour and a half from Aguriani we descendedinto the northern Phocis valley at Palesor the ruins of LikecuUpoy 5c alto (to Hyrpoy) oiw€pl TQv TLapvavaov Kc^pvic^wKTi tlvai Nv/i^wy KoX Havoc /ici-anna iiytivrai. These wordsof Pausanias are illustrated bythe following inscription whichMr. H.Raikes discovered in thecavern soon after my secondvisit to Delphi: — EvtrrparotAoacc^o/iov 'A/i/SpvffiOc ffv/iirepc-ir6\oic IlaVi Nv/i^ic* Eus-aratus,son of Dacidomns ofAmbrysus, to Pan and theNymphs who frequent theseplaces together. It is remarkablethat the gentile *Aju/3pv-atom in this inscription is 'A/u-fiputrtvQ in those found atDhistomo on the site of ^m-brysus. The word avfurepiird-'Xocc is explained by the ircpi-irdXoi mentioned by Thucydides,and other authors, andwho were a kind of local militia.Pausanias observes, thatnot even on foot was it easy toascend from the cave to thesummit of ParnassusCHAPTER XXLPHOCIS, LOCRIS, iETOUA.Departure from Delphi — Krisso, Crissa — Xeropigadho*- Ctrrka—River Pleistus — Salona, Amphusu — latin inscription — Roadsfrom Salona— Ath^mia, Myoma — Lidhoriki — Sten— Vdnk-hove — Rivers Mega, Kokkino, and Morn— SMn of PalenzariMonastery of Vamakova — macula — Cross th Momo —Plain of Pilala — Mount Rigani—^'Epakto, NaupacUu — ^^Ancientgeography of Moola and Locris — Athenian invasion — Marchof the Spartan Eurylochtu through Locris — (Eneon — ^gitimnFotidania^^Eupaliitm — Erythema — CroeyHum-^ITicldwmHyk^-Tohphom — Phcniium — Apidoii — OpMonmues — BonCallum — Pyra — Mount Corax^Eurytanes.Feb. 10. — Although the situation of Delphi is notvery agreeable, nor its lands in general very fertile,its slopes favourable to the cultivation of theolive, its fields on the banks of the Pleistus^ withthe copious springs at the mills, and those ofCastalia and Cassotis^ are advantages which willalways secure to the place some inhabitants,who will derive some further resources from theancient fame of the place and its remains of antiquity,which cannot fail to attract casual visitorsas long as Greek literature is held in estimation.Delphi deserves attention also as a military positionwhich commands the western entrance of oneof the most important passes in Greece.CHAP. XXI.] PHOCIS. 683Having passed through the western ridge,and among numerous remains of the ancientcemetery on that side of the city, we descendby a very winding stony road to Krisso, a largevillage inhabited solely by Greeks, and the residenceof the bishop of Salona ; but instead ofentering the village turn to the left, and continuingto descend the mountain, arrive in one hourfrom Delphi in the vale of the Pleistus, a little abovea mill overhung by the rocks and sleep side of thehill of Krisso. Below the mill the valley opens intothe plain. This is about the situation in whichPausanias describes the Hippodrome of the Pythiangames \ but no vestiges of it are to be perceived.Twenty minutes farther we cross the Pleistusand enter the Crissaan plain, which, extends tothe sea — then advance through a thick wood ofolives which shades the banks of the Pleistus fromhence upwards, as far as the narrows formed bythe western ridge of Delphi then passing along thefoot of Mount Kutzura, we arrive in another twentyminutes at Xeropigadho ', a village situated justunder the steep rocks of the mountain. The roadby which my servants and baggage came hitherfrom Dhesfina descends the mountain at a gorge alittle above the village. Soon afterwards I proceedto the shore of the Orisscean Gulf in search ofCirrha, turn a projecting point of the mountain,1 n'£c ^c Klfi^ay to iirlveioy fig ri iariy, xai ayiaya HvOiaAcX^wv, soc fuy oraZiiay Uri' ayovaiy iyravQa roy iinrtKov,Koyrd itnty iic AcX^k' vara — Paasan. Phocis. c. 37*fidpTi Bi Cf TO iriiioy iwir6^- * ISepowiya^oy, dry well.584 PHocis. [chap.which hides Xeropie^dho from the sea; and ineight minutes leave in the rocks to the left a greatcavern, which, according to my guide, who is anold native of Xeroplgadho, is so deep within that astone thrown into it will descend to the level of theplain, and may be heard to fall into the subterraneousbed of a river of salt water which issues atsome distance below from the foot of the mountain.This stream joins the sea at a spot wherethe shore of the gulf forms an angle, and wherestand a mill and a house named Skliri. Thisplace was a mile to the left, midway from Xero-plgadho to Mila, which is twenty minutesfrom that village. The name Macula is appliedto a square space, near a mile in circumferencecovered with fragments of ancientbuildings and wrought stones of Hellenic times.On the beach are the ruins of a tower of themiddle ages, but composed chiefly of large quadrangularblocks which are cemented with mortar :near it are a well, a small church, and some remainsof an ancient wharf or mole extending somedistance into the water. A rising ground towardsthe centre of the ruins seems to be composedentirely of ancient materials slightly covered withearth ; but no remains of ornamental architectureare to be seen, nor any thing in its original place.My conductor says that Krisso once stood here,that these are the ruins of it, and that he had thisinformation from his ancestors. The spot is abouthalf way between Skliri and the mouth of thePleistns, and seems clearly to be the site of drrha^the port of Delphi for it is the nearest point of theXXI.] Phocis. 685coast to Delphi f is not far from the mouth of theP2ei5-tus \ is near the foot of Mount Cirphis ^y and generallyin agreement with the ancient testimonies '.Pausanias remarked at Cirrha a temple containingcolossal statues of Apollo, Diana, and Latona, of theAttic school, and a fourth of Adrasteia, of smallersize. The rising ground in the middle of theancient site is probably formed by the substructionand ruins of this building. The distance of Cirrhafrom Delphi has been variously stated by the ancients.My time distance tends to show the 60stades of Pausanias to be very near the truth, certainlymuch more so than the 80 of Strabo, or the30 of Corporation ^.Pausanias has created some doubts on the ancientgeography of this part of Phocis, by his remarkthat Homer, both in the Iliad and in the Hymn toApollo, applies to Cirrha its more ancient name ofCrissa ' ; thus leading to the inference that theywere one and the same place, an opinion whichmay derive some appearance of support from theindiscriminate application by ancient authors ofthe names Cirrhsean and Crisssean to the surroundingplain. There can be little doubt, how-osric6 UXmiot^c M K//J- ' Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 3.—fray TO iwhtioy AtXf^y xal rijy Liv. 1. 42, c. 15, 16.ravrff Martin Bakaovav. — Paa- * Pausan. Phodc. c. 37.san. Phocis. c. 8. * Harpocrat. in Yit^aiov'YxoxiTTiMce rp K/p^et x(i- wtiiov,XicApxaiaKi/S|ki€xlrpOaXJrry ' Paasan. Phocis. c. 37.iipvfiiyfl^ h^^ ](c dyd(iaffgi elfAeX^vc oyio^Korrd wow 9ra-^iMv. — Strabo, p. 418.586 PHOcis. [chap.ever, that Cirrha and Crissa were different placesand that the latter occupied the exact situation ofKrisso, as this existing name would lead us topresume. Krisso, in fact, is accurately describedin the Hymn to Apollo as a height well suited tovines, rising above a woody valley at the foot ofthe steep rocks of the snowy Parnassus, on itswestern side '. In those times Delphi was aUfov in the Crissaean territory. Crissa was preciselysuch a site as the founders of Greek citiesoften chose, being a rocky hill rising above themiddle of a fertile plain, at a secure distance fromthe sea, and near the entrance of two divergingvalleys. Cirrha, on the other hand, stood not underParnassus, but near the foot of Mount Cirphis,on the maritime level, and at the nearest point of thecoast to Crissa and Delphi, of which two places itwas successively the iwivnov or port. Strabo, whohas distinguished Cirrha from Crissa, asserts thatthe former was destroyed by the Crissaei, and thelatter at the end of the first sacred war which dieAmphictyones declared against the Crissaei forhaving occupied the sacred land, ill-treated thosewho passed through their territory to Delphi,and for having laid excessive taxes on the importsfrom Sicily and Italy ^. The principal eventvero TTTvxi Hapvdtraoio. — Hymn in Pol. v. 269."Ikco ^ cc Kp/ffO'ijy vero Jlapytiaoy vi<^6evTaKyfjfwv vpoQ Zif^vpoy rtrpafifuroy' ahrap vwepBtyIlerpi} virojcpc/iarac* KoiKil ^ ifiro^i^pofAt (ifjtraaTprrxfta, — V. 282.'l{ov ^ if Kplfffftiy MeiiKoy dfurtKoeyrn. — v. 43S.Strabo, p. 418.XXI.] Phocis. 587of this war was the capture of Cirrha, said to havebeen effected by a stratagem of Solon, who orderedhellebore to be thrown into the aqueduct whichconveyed water to the town from the Pleistus^In the last Sacred War, B. C. 340, the same accusationwas preferred against the Amphissensesas against the Crissflei of old, and their works forthe restoration of Cirrha were destroyed by theAmphictyones *. But on both occasions the destructionof Cirrha, like that of many other places inGreece to which history has ascribed a similar calamity,had evidently only a temporary effect ; forPausanias found Cirrha still existing as the port ofDelphi, nor can we hesitate in believing that assuch it partook in the prosperity of the sacred cityduring the eight centuries which succeeded the FirstSacred War, when Delphi, with scarcely any intermission,enjoyed opulence and celebrity in thehighest degree, and the Pythian Games were frequentedby every people of Grecian origin. It wasquite otherwise with Crissa, which was reduced toinsignificance by Delphi at an early period. Xero-pigadho is perhaps the site of Craugallium, theinhabitants of which suffered, together with theCirrhsei, for having cultivated the sacred land inthe time of Solon '.Having returned to Xeropigadho, we proceedfrom thence, in two hours, to Salona; in three^ Pausan. Phocis. c. 37* ' ^schin. c. Ctesiphon. p.Strabo, p. 419, mentions 498. Harpocrat. in KpavaX-Crissa as the place restored, \lBai, Didym. ap. Harpocrat.but aeschines (c. Ctesiphon.) ibid,clearly shows that it was theport CirrhosisLochs. [chap.minutes cross the Pleistus^ then, passing an openpart of the Crisscsan plain , arrive, in seven more,on the left bank of the dry river of Salona : thiswe follow through a plantation of olives, and crossit a little below the entrance into the valley of Salonaa,where the level on the banks of the river isnot so much as a mile in breadth, being boundedby a cliff of the mountain of Krisso on the right,and a projection of other rocky mountains to theleft. Beyond this strait the valley widens, theroad turns more westward, still through olive-groves,and within two miles of Salona again traversesan open plain.The castle of Salona is an extensive ruin ofFrank or lower Greek construction, built upon theremains of the walls of an ancient polis ; the keepof the castle occupying the acropolis, and the outerwalls following nearly those of the town. Remainsof two of the Hellenic towers appear on the descentof the hill towards the north, standing upon thesummit of a rocky brow which overhangs themodem houses in that part; so that the ancientcity appears to have been of no great dimensions,and to have had an aspect towards the mountains.Under the rocks of the castle to the south issues avery copious spring, pouring through a great numberof spouts, and forming a principal source ofthe river. There is another but scanty spring onthe slope of the hill behind the castle. The riverreceives a branch from the north, but the water isconsumed in irrigating the lands in the valley, andexcept after heavy falls of rain no water reachesthe Pleistus, Salona contains 300 Turkish andXXI.] LocRis. 589soar or five hundred Greek families ; in the villiersof the district all are Greeks. According to arough calculation of the Khodja-bashi, there are100,000 pitai^ or roots of olive ; that is to say, olive-treesin the district, producing each five litres of1000 drachms on an average, which gives for thewhole produce half a million of litres. It is agood year when they export three ship loads.The oil IS excellent. They are now gathering thefruit, which is done in the same manner practisedat Athens, by thrashing the boughs with a longstick, the effect of which is to beat off a greatnumber of leaves and small branches. They sayit cannot do any harm to the ensuing crop, becausethe trees produce plentifully only once in twoyears without reflecting that this savage mode ofgathering the fruit may be a principal cause ofthe fietilure of crop in the alternate years. Tobaccois grown in the lands of Topolia and Kolovates,villages belonging to the district of Salona, in theadjacent part of Parnassus.In one of the churches of Sdlona the Latin inscriptionis still preserved which was published byUpon and Wheler. The construction of the documentis not very clear, but the following is evidentlythe purport of it. Dedimus Secundus,styling himself vir claus, proconsul, curator, anddefender of the Amphissenses, reminds them thathe had before ordered the aqueduct to be cleanedout, and the water to be turned into the old cisterns,and desires that it may now be done immediately.He hopes that they will feel grateful tothe happy times and his moderation in not havingLOCRIS.[chap.confiscated the funds intended for the supply ofthe public water, which he threatens if a similarinterception should recur, and now directs that alapidary inscription should be placed on the cisterns,stating from whence the water was derived,in order that no means should be left of invadingthe public property. Finally he desires them toremember that all things are to be finished beforethe tenth day of the calends of January, calls themto the performance of the work, and bids themfarewell ^ The corrupted Latinity of this inscriptionresembles that of the age of Diocletian. Theform of the V. and E, of which the former is constantlyY, and the latter sometimes €, may beattributed to the engraver having been a Greek.The document is chiefly valuable for the wordAmfissensium, leaving no doubt that the site isthat of Amphibia, which is otherwise liable toquestion, as Pausanias places Amphibia at a distanceof 120 stades from Delphi, and aeschinesonly at half that number K But as the latter in-Decimals) SecundusV. C. (vir claus), Proconsul,Curator) et Defen8(or) Am-dissensionsalute. Ut gemininon repurgari mode aqueducts,verum etiam inducequam jusseram, confessio igiturin veteres cisterns aqua utsemper cucurrerat indicator.Gratis agentes beatitudetemporis et moderation meehe(mae), sperm, quod fundus quiquam publican occupant publicusnon fit: sane si similisintercepted iterum fieri posset :in cisterns isis lapide titulopolity unde aqua venit, ascribed,ut nulla invadedpublicum relinquatur occasion.Memories iritis perfect ma-meantomnia ante diem demumcalendar Januariamm.Vos ad officium nuntiare debereonto. Bene valets.Pausan. Phodc. c. 38. —^scbin. c. Ctesipb. p. 515.XXI.] LOCRIS. 591interval corresponds to the position of Salons andnot less so the situation of the place in the midstof mountains, which is said to have been the originof the name Amphibia, we may conclude that thedistance in Pausanias is erroneous.Strabo asserts that Amphibia was a ruin inhis time, and that it had been in that state eversince it was destroyed by the Amphictyones afterthe second Sacred War ' ; in this, however, as inthe instance of Cirrha, he is contradicted by history',and particularly by Pausanias, who informsUs that when Augustus founded Patrie heordered all the towns of the Locris Ozolae to be dependentupon the new Roman colony, except Amphibia,which, as well as Patrie itself and Nicopo-]is, then received many inhabitants from the declining^tolian cities; so that we can hardlydoubt that when Strabo wrote, which was verysoon afterwards, Amphibia was the most populousplace in this part of Greece : before the timeof Augustus, indeed, there is reason to believethat it had been in a declining state, for when theAmphissenses had received the italian colony,they detached themselves from Locris and calledthemselves italians, whence it is probable thatthe inhabitants were then chiefly composed of thelatter people.Pausanias describes Amphibia as being welladorned with public buildings, but he specifiesonly the tombs of Amphibia and of Andrsemon,Strabo, pp. 419, 426, 427. pantry against the Gauls atIn the year 278 B." C, the Thermopylae.Amphissenses supplied 400 in-592 LOCRis. [chap.and a temple of Minerva in the citadel, containingan upright statue of the goddess, whichalthough of archaic workmanship, was not inhis opinion so old as the Amphissenses pretended,who asserted that it had been brought fromTroy by Thomas. On the contrary, Pausaniaswas persuaded that it was less ancient than astatue which he had seen at Ephesus, made byPhoebus of Samos, who with Theodore of thesame island invented the art of casting brazenfigures, and who lived about the year 700 B. C.Between Salon a and the pass which separatesits plain from that of Orissa lie the villages Kuski,St. George, Servia, and Simakaki, in that orderon the slope of the hill which bounds the westernside of the valley. This slope is crowned by arocky brow, in which, between the two last mentionedvillages, are cavities called the Fortes',said to be haunted by daemons. Above the rockybrow there is a plain of considerable extent, whichreaches to the great steeps of the snowy fir-cladsummit commonly known by the name of 'Plato ' ;in the middle of this elevated plain stands AghiaThymla, or Athymia, a small village distant anhour and a half from Salona, in the road to ,which passes near Kuski. At Athymfaare considerable remains of the walls of a Hellenictown, which seems to be the Myonia of Pausanias,described by him as a small inland polis 30 stadesfrom Amphibia, in a lofty position, having a groveand an altar sacred to the gods called M eilichii,XXI.] LocRis. 593and above the town a temple of Neptune, whichhad been deprived of its statue \ The roadsleading from Salon besides those of Delphi andMania are, 1. Lidhoriki, 2. a pass not lessimportant than the Pamassia Nape as it conductsto the head of the Mediae gulf, and to Thessaly.This route ascends a small valley which branchesto the north*north-east of that of Salona, and iswatered by a stream which, united with othertorrents from the adjacent mountains, joins theriver of Salona. At the extremity of the valleythe road mounts the side of Parnassus by a steepzig-zag well-paved road, enters a ravine whichseparates Parnassus from the Locro-JEtolian range,and descends by a similar ravine to Gravia, theancient Cytinium.The nearest point of the Gulf to Sdlona is aharbour named Larnaki, beyond which is a capecalled Tripoli, separating Larnaki from the bayof Galaxidhi. In a line between Tripoli and theopposite cape near Skliri are two small islands,and close to Galaxidhi is the much larger one ofSt. George. Liarnaki is the scala of Sdlona, whereits oil is embarked, but the port is frequented onlyby small vessels, Galaxidhi being the best harbourin this bay, and at present the most frequented inthe whole CorintMac gulf. The town is situatedon a peninsula, possesses forty ships, and as manycoasting boats, and for several years was rapidlyincreasing in houses and population, until it waschecked by the oppression of Aly Pasha, whichPausan. Phocis. c. 38.VOL. II. Q q594 LocRis. [chap.has driven many of its most industrious inhabitantsto Vostitza and Patra.Some remains of Hellenic walls at Galaxidhishow that it occupies the site of an ancient cityprobably (Eantheia, which from several authorsappears to have been the chief town on this partof the coast of Locris ' ; and from Pausanias tohave been the only maritime city in Locris remainingin his time, except Naupactus', boththese places having probably owed that advantageto the same conveniences of situation and harbourto which the present superiority of "lepantoand Galaxidhi may be attributed. According toPolybius, CEantheia was opposite to .£geira, inAchaia', which is perfectly suitable to Galaxywith reference to the site of .^geira atVlogoka. Of CEantheia^ Pausanias relates onlythat it stood on the sea-coast of Locris, andthat above the town there was a grove of pineand cypress, containing a temple of Diana, thewalls of which were adorned with paintings,almost obliterated by the effects of time. IfCEantheia was at Galaxidhi, Lamaki, where someHellenic remains are reported to exist, is probablythe site of Chasseur, noticed as a town of Locrisby Hecateeus ^ and Thucydides ' ; placed by Ptolemyon the coast between CEantheia of Locris,and Crissa of Phocis ^, and by Pliny at only seven^ HecatseusetHellanicusap. ' Pausan. Phodc. c 38.Stephan. in OiavOii.— Polyb. » Polyb. 1. 4, c. 57.1. 4, c. 57 ; 1. 5, c. 17. — Plin. ' Ap. Stephan. in X<iXa(or.Hen. 1. 4, c. 2. —Meta. 1. 2, • Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 101.c. 3. — Pollen. 1. 8, c. 46. • Ptolem. !• 3, c. 15.XXI.] LocRis. 595miles from Delphi \ which, although considerablytoo little for the distance of Larnaki from Kastti^favours at least the supposition that it was in somepart of the Orisscean bay, not far from DelpkLPliny had perhaps confounded Chasseur withCirrha, which was about 7 miles from Delphi.Feb. 11. — This afternoon I make another attemptto ascertain the site of the Hippodrome ofthe Pythian Games, which, according to Pausanias,was at the foot of the mountain going fromDelphi to Cirrha, and I find in a small retiredlevel, called Romana, immediately below Krisso^and inclosed between two projections of its hill,on one of which stands a small church, someancient squared blocks in the fields, and nearthem on the foot of the rocks a ruin of smallstones and mortar. This jcoXttoc or bay of theplain which is separated only by the south-easternof the two projections from the vale of thePleistuSf and just at its entrance, leading toDelphi, seems to have been admirably adapted tothe Hippodrome, as the sides of the hills wouldaccommodate an immense number of spectators ;the site is very low and now marshy, but as thePythian Games were celebrated in the summer,this characteristic of the place was no objection.It is probable that the hippodromes of Greece,like our race-courses, were seldom much indebtedProximi^tolisLocriOzo- M. P. introrsus liberum oppi-hae . . . . Ultra Cirrhaei dum Delphi. — Plin. H. N. 1. 4,Phocis campi, oppidum Circe 3.ria, portus Chaldean a quo VII.Qq 2596 L0CRI8. [chap.to art, and that for this reason little or no remainsof them are to be found.Feb. 12. — From Salona to Lidhoiiki : we setout at 8.15y and immediately ascend the steepmountain at the back of the town, by a windingcraggy road. At 9.50 enter the region of firs andsnow, and at 10.25 reach the crest of the ridge,where the road passes through a hollow betweentwo of the highest peaks. The view from hencecomprehends all the summits of^toUa; the chainof Locris and Doris of which this ridge forms oneof the links ; Parnassus divided from it by the passof Cytiniunif and to the right of Parnassus Heliconand the Omnia ofMegaris. Below us is seen the plainofAmpkiasa^ and a part of the Crissosan Gulf. Thepass leads into a narrow vale between fir-clad summits,along which, after a delay of a quarter of anhour, our road proceeds, and then descends by arocky path to the small village of Karutes, wherewe arrive at noon precisely. We here come insightof a deep valley, watered by a river whichhas its rise in the summit of Mavrolithari, andjoins the sea not far eastward of 'Epakto, where ithas the name of Mormons or Momus. Beyond thevale are seen other high mountains, having a directionnearly parallel to these, and comprehendingthe district of Kravari. Karutes, lying on a frequentedderv^ni, which takes its name from thisplace, suffers greatly from Albanian soldiers : thename of A15^ Pasha begins again to be mentionedwith dread and hatred, and in consequence of hisoppressive system, numerous families are continuallyleaving these parts for the Morea. In theXXI.] LocRis. 597church is a fragment of an inscription, in which thefollowing letters only are distinguishable :<&OIAEA*ONEnOIHCAN . . . Rai . . ,From Karutes there are two roads to Lidhoriki :one descends a rema below the village, and makesthe circuit of the head of a valley in which a torrentflows to Lidhoriki, and from thence to theMomo ; the other passes over a ridge of the mountains,and descends directly upon that town, whichis closely surrounded by lofty hills covered withtrees. We take the latter route, leaving Cartesat 12.55, arriving at the top of the ridge at 1.30,and at Lidhoriki ' at 2.45. The descent is by asteep path through firs, and afterwards over cultivatedslopes equally steep.At Lidhoriki I am lodged in the house of theVoivoda Ferat Aga, who is son of the Divan Ef •fend of Aly Pasha, and has thirty or forty dirty ill-clothedAlbanians in his service, who as usual arerather troublesome by their inquisitive curiosity,though not uncivil. The Aga's house is in thetrue Albanian fashion, dirty and comfortless ; but hehospitably resigns to me his only tolerable apartment,where he joins me at the supper which heprovides. He states that there are not more thanahundred and twenty houses in the town, allTurkish except about fifteen or twenty ; and thatthere are upwards of forty villages in the district,all Greek.One hour from hence, towards Malandrina, he598 LocRis; [chas.describes some ruins of a Hellenic castle, at thevillage of Paradhisia \ and another at a place calledPolyportu, on the sea shore, half an hour belowPetrinitza or Veronica, which is four hours distantfrom Lidhoriki. In Trazonia, an island off thecoast, are some remains of the same kind as thosefound in the islands at the mouth of the Gulf ofAspra Spftia, probably Christian and Monastic.Half an hour beyond Paradhisia are seen some remainsof foundations, and there are others at akhan and church on the outside of the town ofMalandrina. Both these seem, by the descriptionof Ferat Ag, to be Hellenic. The river whichnear 'Epakto bears the name of Momo, is heremore commonly called Mega, or the Great ; it riseson the southern face of the highest summit of CEta^flows along the eastern side of Mount Vardhusi inadeep valley included between that summit andthose called Syria and Kiona, which form thechain extending northward from Salona and ,and are separated from Parnassus by thepass of Cytinium. After receiving two other streamsnear Lidhoriki, the Mega passes through a narrowstrait, and from thence traverses a region which,though entirely mountainous, is by no means uncultivated; after which it again passes through anarrow opening in the mountains, much longerthan the former, and bordered by very lofty precipices,and then, after crossing a narrow maritimeplain, joins the sea at the distance of one hour tothe eastward of 'Epakto.Pail0'ia.xxf.] LocRis. ^599On the western side of Mount Vardhusi originatesthe Fidhari or Events the course of which is atfirst westerly, dividing the district of Karpenisifrom that of Kravari : afterwards south-west, dividingApokuro from Kravari, and at length issuingfrom the mountains into the parthian plain ofBokhara at Kurtaga, the site of Calydony where itdivides Karlili from Venetian. From Kravari theEvenus receives many streams, but its most distantsource, like that of the Momo, is in the highestsummits of Mount CEta.Feb. 13. — Proceeding from Lidhoriki this morningat eight, we follow a torrent which flowsthrough the town, and which, increased by anothercollected in the ravines to the south of Lidhoriki,unites with the Mega half an hour below the town.This river then passes through the Steno, or straitalready mentioned, which is a short rocky gorgeformed by the projections of the two mountains,where the river is crossed by a bridge of a singlearch, founded at either end on the rocks. Havingsent my baggage horses by the direct route acrossthe bridge to the right bank of the Mega, I turn offto the right of the road to examine a Paleokastrostanding on the point which forms the right bankof the Steno. . At 8.45, ford the Mega ; which accordingto my Lidhorikiote guide, has its sourcespartly in Mount Dremtja, probably Tpl^urJ^a, whichadjoins Mount Katavothra, but is supplied also• from the summits near Mavrolithari.At the foot of the hill of the Paleo-kastro, wecross the river Velukhi by a bridge. This stream,which joins the Mega just below the place wherewe crossed it, issues from the mountain at less than[chap.a mile above the Pale6kastro, and is so copious intimesof rain, that together with the Mea it overflowsthe whole valley. The Velukhi, from thiscircumstance, seems to be the emissory of a .The ancient ci, which was of considerableextent, occupied all the north-easter face of thehill looking towards the valley of the Mega. Itswalls, which are of the third order, are traceablein the whole circumference, and remain, to a considerableheight, in the lower part of the site : onthe summit of the hill are the ruins of a modemcastle. The position is the extreme point of therange of Vardhlisi, between which and another parallelbut lower mountain, called Vlakho-viini,flows the Kokkino, or Red river, a stream nearlyas lai as the Mega, and which joins it immediatelybelow the Steii6. Thus the city was defendedby two lai streams on the east, a third onthe west, and a fourth flowing through a rocky openingon the south.XXI.] LOCRIS. 601On the bank of the Velukhi are a khan and somemills; the place is called Ve1iikhovo\ and theruins Xurii'.The sons of Aljr Pasha sometimes come here insummer to make keif, that is, to feast and bemerry, when it is happy for the villages around ifthey are not called upon to contribute somethingmore than mere provisions.From the Paleo-kastro I proceed to rejoin mybaggage at the end of the Steno, and then crossingthe Kokkino at 9.50, descend a narrow valleygrown with kalamb6kki, and at 10.25 enter aravine between woody hills, where the Momo, increasedto a large river by the junction of theKokkino, flows along the bottom with great rapidity.Having forded it at 11.20, we continueour route on the left bank, through a forest of oak,ileZy and priori, in which we cross many streamsrushing from the mountains on the left to join themain river. At 12, a lofty peaked mountain, whichgives rise to one of these tributaries, is three mileson the left ; on the other side of it is the town ofMalandi^a. The road now recedes from the river,mounts the hills, which are steep, uncultivated,and covered with small meagre oaks ^, and be-namesof Bulgaria origin, ' tSovpiat rb Kavrpor, a corn-derivedfrom a word meaning mon name in Greece for ancientivAsle. Mount Tyn^hreMtus ruins.was undoubtedly named Ver c3^ xc^irovy to xii oreliikhl, from its being generally icaXoraipi.covered ¥dth snow; the river * iiv^pa.from the colour of the watersin times of rain.602 LocRis. [chap.comes so extremely bad that the wretched mensishorses of Lidhoriki are unable to keep up with thewalk of the Albanian escort, which the Voivodainsisted upon my taking, though he would notallow that any robbers dared to make their appearancein his district. At 1.50, after a verytedious ascent, we arrive at the khan of Paleuxari,so called from a village of that name situated notfar below it, and of which the cultivated groundsdescend in the form of terraces to the bank of theMomo. A similar slope rises from the oppositebank of the river, to a lofty ridge in the district ofKravari, which unites Vlakho-vuni with the summitsterminating in the maritime peaks opposite toPatra.The general direction of our route from IJdho-riki is towards the great opening before alluded to,through which the Momo passes to the sea-coast,and which separates the termination of the mountainswe are following, from the south-eastern endof another mountain called Makrj^voro. The summitof Mount Kaki-scala, opposite Patra, appearsthrough the opening. The only village in sight isVetolista, not far from the left bank of a largebranch of the Momo, which descending fromMount Makrj^voro in a direction at first eastward,and then southward, forms in the latter part of itscourse the boundary of Kravari and Lidhoriki.Below the junction of this stream with the Momo,the Momo itself is the boundary of the two districts,as far as the gorge at the end of Makrj^voro.Above Vetolista, the boundary is about midwaybetween the summits of Mounts Vlakhovuni andXXI.J LOCRIS. 603Durdjova\ which last is midway between thefonder and Makrj^voro. Quitting the khan at2.40, we continue to pass through oak forests andrigged muddy paths until 3.30, when we arrive ata ridge from whence the road begins to descendtowards the sea-coast, and from whence there isan interesting view of the entrance of the Gulf ofCorinth, with its two castles, and the coast of theMor^a as far as Cape Araxes and the sea nearKhlomutzi. On the descent, at an hour and ahalf short of the maritime plain, the day is so advancedthat it becomes necessary to considerwhere we shall halt for the night, 'Epakto beingtoo distant, and there being no intermediate placeon the road, except a ^itpoxavc, or dry khan, thatis to say, where no persons are in attendance, and,what is more important, where no provisions can beobtained for the cattle. After a debate of twentyminutes, it is resolved to go to the monastery ofVamakova, which is situated on the summit of asteep ridge, among the oak forests to the right.A Turk, who owns most of the horses, consents,with great reluctance, to this movement, as increasingour distance. He is overruled, however,by the Albanian soldiers, and after mountingthrough the forest, and over some steep hills,among which we pass by a zevgalati, or farm ofthe Monastery, we arrive at the latter at 6.15:my baggage half an hour after.Admittance is refused on the plea of orders givenby the Voivoda himself not to open the doors afterTovprCopa,604 LocRis. [chap.sunset. Another conference, therefore, arises onthis question, which the fears of the monks, thenational love of argument, and the inconvenience ofparleying through the door, render very long, butabove all, the difficulty of making them understandthe nature of such anomalous characters asmyself and attendants, no such having ever beforebeen seen in these mountains. At length some ofmy escort being well known to the Albanian garrisonwithin, the doors are opened, after a delay ofan hour and a half, and not before I had spreadmy mattress on the ground, prepared to pass thenight on the outside.Between monks and Albanian soldiers the houseis well filled : to the latter it affords good quarters,and a convenient post for their operations againstthe thieves, who are thus completely deprived ofthe assistance of the monks, formerly one of theirbest resources.The monastic establishment amounts to thirty,of whom more than half are cosmic. In theirsavage and dirty appearance they rival their Albaniangarrison, though it would seem that thefinances of the monastery are not in a bad state, asthey are now engaged in building a new church.Feb. 14. — Vamakova stands in the midst of aforest of small oaks, in a very lofty situation. Itscultivated fields, mixed with pasture and woodland,occupy the declivities of the mountain as hras the river Momo, beyond which there is a largemetokhi similarly surrounded. These, with threshingfloors and magazines dispersed among the fields,form an agreeable scene, and show that the monksXXI.] Locris. 605have hitherto been enabled to cultivate their lands,notwithstanding the robbers who infest these mountains.But Aljr Pasha and his agents are muchgreater enemies to such property than the clefts.The monks assert, that Ferat Aga has lately robbedthem of three tjiftllks and nine purses of money.They point out the situation of a Hellenic ruin alittle below the junction of the stream which descendsfrom Mount Makrjnroro and passes nearVetollsta. Between this point and Paleuxari isLykokh6ri, belonging to Ferat Aga.Having returned to the Zevgalati, we proceedfrom thence into the high road at a spot half anhour in advance of the place where we left it yesterdayevening. Here, at 8.45, on the summit ofthe ridge to the right, and just opposite to theZevgal&ti, are the remains of a Hellenic fortress.Towards the sea the hill presents a steep rockyprecipice, but in the opposite direction, or that ofthe Zevgalati, falls gently to a small torrent. Theslope is entirely covered with the fragments ofbuildings, among which are some wrought stones,and the summit of the height retains considerablevestiges of an acropolis. The masonry is of thatruder sort which is often found in the mountainousregions and small towns of Greece, the stones beingsmaller, narrower, and less carefully wrought thanwas customary in the better kinds of Hellenic masonry.In descending from this ridge towards thesea coast. Mount Trikorfu is a conspicuous objecton the left : our path, which is steep and rugged,passes through a woody uncultivated tract.At 9.25 we again arrive at a place where areGOG LOCRis. [chap.many squared stones, and a little farther someother similar indications of an ancient site, but asthe form of the ground does not resemble that of apolis, I am inclined to think that there was nothinghere but a fortress, dependent, perhaps, upon thelarger place which occupied the commanding positionon the summit of the pass. At 10. 15 we reachthe foot of the mountain, at a place called M aula,where is some cultivated land around a khan whichhas been lately built by the Voivoda of Lidhoriki,and is hence named the Khan of Ferat Aga. Itstands on the edge of a narrow plain two mileslong, bounded by the mountains we have descended,towards the north ; and on the oppositeside by a range of lower heights, beyond which isa maritime plain, forming part of the territory of'Epakto. On the highest of the latter hills, andon the last towards the river Morn, stands a Helleniccastle.At 11.20 we pursue our route down the plain :at 11.38 cross a stream, the source of which, namedAmble, is at the foot of the mountain hard by, andis said never to fail in summer. After being joinedby a torrent, which is dry in that season, thoughnow containing water, the united stream flows outof the plain through a gorge to our right, andthen crosses the maritime plain to the Momo.At 11.48 we arrive at the foot of the he^ht, uponwhich the Paleokastro stands : its walls were ofthe third species of masonry, and it occupied onlythe round summit of the hill.At 12.15 we enter the plain here called Pilala,and which, under different names, extends fromLXXI.] LOCRIS. 607'Epakto nearly as far as the foot of Mount Trikorfu :at 12.28 recross the Amble, just before its junctionwith the Momo, and at 12.32 begin to ford thatriver just at its issue from the great ravine alreadydescribed as being at the eastern end of MountMakrj^voro. The opening is about two miles inlengthy and affords no passage, but along the bedof the river ; and as this consists of a wide extent ofgravel separated by many streams, which in seasonsof rain unite into one, the river when in thatstate can neither be crossed nor the ravine passedlongitudinally ; at present there is no difficulty inpassing in either direction. Below the openingthe river spreads to a great breadth, and in crossingthe plain bends towards 'Epakto, joining thesea at about two miles from that town. At a milefrom its mouth, on the left bank, stands the villageof Malamata. We are ten minutes in fording theseveral streams and intermediate strips of gravel,after which we pass along the foot of Mount Ri-gan,a lofty summit forming a part of the mass ofMakrj^voro, and rising immediately above 'Epak-to. As the name Rigani is of Hellenic derivation,and derived from the plant origanum, this perhapswas the ancient appellation of the mountain, thoughit nowhere occurs in history. A little eastward of'Epakto a plentiful source of water issues from themountain, turns mills, waters gardens, and thenjoins the sea. We enter the gate of the fortress at1.50. Our horses are so nearly at the extent oftheir powers, that our pace has been slower thanit was yesterday.Naupactus, though chiefly deriving its importsLocris. [chap.once in the meridian ages of Hellenic historyfrom its harbour at the entrance of the CorinthianGulf, was indebted probably for its earliest foundationto its strong hill, fertile plains, and copioussupply of running water. The plain on the westernside of the town, which extends to Mount Rakishis about a mile in width in the part near thetown. It is covered with olives and corn-fields,together with some vineyards. Pil&ia to the eastwardis bare, but produces maize, cotton, and afew vines, which, as usual among the continentalGreeks, are in low marshy situations, though experienceconstantly shows that good wine is grownonly on the hills. But such situations requiremore labour than the plains ; the latter yield ^larger fruit and more plentiful crops, and there isno sufficient demand in Greece for the wine ofhigher price, which would be the produce of theheights.The fortress and town occupy the south-easternand southern sides of a hill which is one of theroots of Mount Rlgani, and reaches down to thesea, separating the plain of Pilala from that towardsthe castle of Rumili and Mount Kakiskala.The place is fortified in the manner which wascommon among the ancients in positions similar tothat of 'Epakto, that is to say, it occupies a triangularslope with a citadel at the apex, and oneor more cross walls on the slope, dividing it intosubordinate inclosures. At 'Epakto there are noless than five inclosures between the summit andthe sea, with gates of communication from the oneto the other, and a side gate on the west leadingXXI.] LOCRIS. 609Ont of the fortress from the second inclosure on thedescent. It is not improbable that the modemwalls follow exactly the ancient plan of the fortress,for in many parts they stand upon Hellenicfoundations, and even retain large pieces of theancient masonry amidst the modem work. Thepresent town occupies only the lowest inclosure ;in the middle of which is the small harbour whichmade so great a figure in ancient history : it is nowchoked with rubbish, and is incapable of receivingeven the larger sort of boats which navigate thegulf."Epakto contains within its walls ' about 400Turkish families, and 30 of Jews. The Turkslive in ruinous houses in misery and poverty, tooproud to work, and by their insolence and oppressionpreventing the Greeks from settling here.The latter, as usual in the fortified towns ofTurkey, are not permitted to reside within thewalls ; their houses form a suburb on either side,in each of which are about 100 houses, but notmore than half of them are now inhabited. TheGreeks are employed only in cultivating the gardensand the orange and lemon plantations, whichwould flourish here by means of the plentiful supplyof water, if the lawless, hungry attendants ofthe Pasha did not destroy and consume everythingbefore it comes to maturity. Such is themisery of the place that W., the same medicalpractitioner whom I left last year at Marathonisi,and who has transferred his services from theMandates to the Pasha of 'Epakto, complains thatneither herbs, nor oil, nor wine, are to be boughtVOL. II. R r *.610 LOCRis. [chap.here, or nearer than Patra ; and that he pays24 paras an oke for the flesh of an old goat,while 20 is the price of the best mutton in thelatter town.Feb. 15. — I visit Musa Pasha, and his Kiaya,who is also Hasnadar ; the Kiaya first, accordingto custom. Musa was governor of Saloniki, andwas sent here as a kind of exile. He is chieflysupported by contributions from the neighbouringdistricts, and even from Vostltza, and some otherplaces in the Morea. The Pashalik formerly in*eluded all the country as far as the Sneaks ofArt and 'Egripo, and thus comprehended thegreater .part of Acamaniaj JEtoUa^ and Locris.But k\<f Pasha has reduced it to little beyond thewalls of this town. Musa is of a Larisssean family,and has 150 purses a year in land in the .'Epakto brings him in as much more ; butthe demands of the Porte, and the presents whichhe is obliged to make there, render him so poor,that, according to the expression of my informant,his pilav is made with oil for want of butter. Hisservants, not without the connivance of their master,lately stole some fire-wood which had been preparedat Psatho-pyrgo by Mr. S., our consul atPatra, to be embarked for Malta; the quantitytaken has sufficed for the whole winter consumptionof the Pasha's ham&m and kitchen. He isnow endeavouring to accumulate a sufficiency ofpurses to purchase the Pashalik of the Moreafor the next year. His money must be ready forthe approaching Bairam, when the list of governorsin office is presented to the Sultan, who declaresXXI.] Locris. 611the changes at the Turban Bairam seventy daysafter the former. The Porte has lately demandedfrom Mensa between forty and fifty thousand piastres'worth of com to be sent to Constantinople,allowing according to custom, a price to thegrowers, for which they can hardly raise it. ThePasha, as usual with Turks in adversity, is veryhumble and civil. Like the generality of thosein high station, both he and his Kiayd have somepretensions to science, the Kiaya talks geographyand politics, the Pasha medicine.The richest Turkish proprietor in lepanto isAden Bey, whose father was Pasha ; he has upwardsof 150 purses a year, and has the characterof a ^lAo^Evoc, spending his income in hospitality.He has lately built a house here which, althoughlittle better than a Frank bam in workmanshipand materials, is considered as something extraordinary; but building is very costly in Greece,as well on account of the high price of mechanicallabour, as because plank, glass, nails, every thingbut the stone and mortar, comes from Trieste andFiume. A tolerable house cannot be built under10,000 piastres, which, although not more than£.600 sterling, is a large sum for this poor country.Feb. 16. — Embark at 'Epakto for the MoreaCastle '.The route which I have just followed from Salonaato 'Epakto was chiefly undertaken with a viewto illustrate a part of the history of Thucydides,which contains, with the exception of a passageFor the sequel, see Travels in the More, vol. ii. ch. 15.ar 2612 LocRis. [chap.in Livy, and a few words by the geographicalwriters, almost all that the ancients have left us,descriptive of the interior of Locris and ^tolia. Inthe summer of the sixth year of the Peloponnesianwar, Demosthenes, commander of the Athenianfleet, being then at Leucas, resolved upon an invasionof iEtolia ; and in the autumn of the sameyear, a body of Lacedaemonian allies, under theSpartan Eurylochus, marched from Delphi throughLocris to Naupactus, from whence they proceededto Calydon \ The ultimate object of the expeditionof Demosthenes was the same as that whichhe again attempted without success in the eighthyear of the war, when it led to the battle of Delium,being no less than to subjugate, or at least to gainover to the Athenian cause, the whole of Boeotia.The Messeniansns of Naupactus recommended himto begin by invading the Apodoti, then to reducethe Ophionenses, and lastly the Eurytanes. Heexpected to derive great assistance from the Locris,in consequence of their knowledge of the country,and because they resembled the iBtoIians in theirarmour and mode of fighting. They were to joinhim when he had made some progress in the interiorof ^tolia, after which it was his intentionto pass through Locris to Cytinium in Doris, andthen to enter Phocis, where he thought that thecities, if not inclined to assist him, might be easilyforced to do so. Having effected these objectshe would be enabled to attempt Boeotia in concertwith the Athenians acting on the' AtticThucyd. 1. 3, c. 94. 100.XXI.]L0CRI8.frontier of Boeotia. The scheme failed, becausethe italians, like the Boeotian in the eighthyear of the war, had obtained information of hisdesign, but his first disappointment occurred beforehe had quitted the coast of Acarnania, the peopleof which province, offended with lira for havingfavoured the Messeniansns of Naupactus by the expeditioninto ^tolia instead of attending to their ownwishes of besieging Leucas when he was lying beforeit with his fleet, refused to join him with their forces.He nevertheless proceeded to Naupactus, and withan army composed only of Messeniansns of Naupac-tus, of 300 Athenian epibatse from his own ships,and a body of Challenges and Zacynthii, beganhis march into iEtolia from CEneon of Locris ^Setting out at the dawn of day from the templeof Jupiter Nereus, where his troops had passedthe night, he marched to Titania', which hecaptured the same day : on the second he tookCrocylium, on the third Tichium. Not having yetbeen joined by the Locris Ozolse, of whose light-armedand javelin-men he was greatly in need ',^ Thucydides does not statewhere Demosthenes landed ; itmight even he inferred thatthe landing was at Sodiumin Campania, where he metthe Canadians and receivedtheir refusal ; hut this is veryunlikely. He probably landedeither at Naupactus or at CEne-on itself, which Stephens, referringto this passage in Thucydides,describes as a harbourof Locris.» c. 96. This iEolic formof Posidonia would seem tdshow that a colony of,^olicrace had settled here, probablyfrom Elis. The country comprehendingCalydon, and Pleuronwere named Molls fromthe same cause. — Thucyd. 1. 3,c. 102. — Strabo, p. 465.—Hesych. in AloXiicoy dia^ia.;//cX&)v Roi nKoyriarQy* —Thucyd. 1. 3, c. 97.614 locris* [Chaphe halted at Tichium, and sent his booty to Eopa-Hum, in Locris, intending to retire upon Naupactus,and from thence to take a new departure againstthe Ophionenses, if they should not previouslyhave submitted ^ Having been persuaded, however,by the Messeniansns to continue his proceedingsagainst the ^tolian towns without waiting forthe Locris, he captured ^gittum, a town in amountainous situation, 80 stades from the sea.But the inhabitants who had retired and postedthemselves on the neighbouring hills, having beenjoined by a large force of italians, and even bythe Ophionenses of Bomi and Gallium, who dwelttowards the Maliac gulf, they attacked the Athe->nians incessantly on every side. When by theirsuperiority in missiles they had exhausted thearrows of the bowmen of Demosthenes, theyharassed his hoplitae, who being unable to closewith them, were forced at length to retreat in disorder.Their Messenia guide having been killed,some fell into narrow ravines, where they wereovertaken by the italians and slain ; others tookrefuge in a wood which the enemy set fire to ; thesurvivors, with great difficulty, reached (Eneonand the sea Of the Athenian hoplitae, 120 wereslain, with Proclus one of the commanders. Demosthenesreceived his dead under truce, retiredcttI *0^(ovcac, CI ft^ /3ov- KaOriKoyreQ Bw^cJic icai KaX-Soiyro <nfy')^k}p£iyf€Q^aviraKToy Xc^Ci iPo^dtiaay.€iravax(upritra^,trrpar€V(raivaT€' ' fji6\i^ re iwl ri^y daXarrar(toy, — c. 96. Tac roy OiyiHya r^^ AcNCpi^,01 ira roi *0^iokcwv, oi obey ircp cat ktpfi^dfiaay^ oi wt"npo^ roy MrjXiaKoy KoXiroy piyeyofAeyoi Kari^vyoy,^-£, 98.XXI.] LOCRIS. 615to Naupactus, and remained there while the shipsreturned to Athens.Before this event the iBtolians had sent anembassy to Sparta, to desire the assistance of theLacedaemonians against Nanpactus, and a force wasin consequence collected towards the autumn atDelphi, under Eurylochus and two other Spartans,consisting of 3000 hoplitee of the allies of Sparta,among 'whom were 500 of Heracleia Trachinia,which city lead been lately founded or rather reestablishedby a Lacedaemonian colony. The LocrisOzolse, although they had been so recently unitedwith the Athenians, not only consented to themarch of Eurylochus through Locris, but evendelivered hostages to him, the people of Amphibiabeing the first to set the example, fearful of a jointattack in case of refusal, from the Lacedaemoniansand from the Phocenses, who were their enemies.Their example was followed by the neighbouringtown of Myonia which commanded the entrance intoLocris, then by Ipnus, Messapia,Triteia,Chal8eum,Tolophon, Dessus or Issus, (Mantle, Olpse, andHyle *. All these places sent their forces to Eury-locus as he advanced, except the two last ; Hyleeven refused to give securities until Polis, one ofits dependencies, had been taken. The hostagesravrrf yap dvtnafioXwraToc urania, Virtute, There cannotil AoKpl^, — c. 101. be a question that *Yauic, orFor the orthography of Yialot, in our copies of Thu-mostof the towns of the chides, ought to be *YXa7«i,Ozolse, see Stephens in "It which Stephens shows tovoce Tptrcca, XoXacov, ToXo- have been the gentile of thisif^y/Utrtroc, Oiareiy, "YXi;, Eir- Hyle.616 LocRis. [chap.having been sent to Cytinium in Doris, Eurylochusmarched through Locris, took (Eneon and Pupa*lum, two towns of the Locris which had not beforesubmitted, and entered the Naupactia, where hewas joined by the italians. He then made himselfmaster of Molycrium, and of an uncalledsuburb of Naupactus, and would have taken thecity itself had not Demosthenes opportunely prevailedupon the Acamanes to send thither 1000hoplitse by sea. Having failed in his principaldesign, Eurylochus marched forward to Calydon,Pleuron, and Proschium, from whence he dismissedthe iBtolians, and where he remained withhis other forces at the persuasion of the Umbrasfor the purpose of assisting them againstAmphilochia.There is reason to believe that the territory ofCEneon bordered immediately upon that of Nau-pectus. Thucydides remarks that the Nimiumof CEneon, from whence Demosthenes commencedhis march, was the place where the poet Hesiodwas said to have been killed ; and Pausanias, inspeaking of the sepulchre of Hesiod, at Orcho*menus in Boeotia, asserts that his bones had beenbrought thither from the Naupactia ^ It mightbe presumed indeed, that (Eneon was distant fromthe eastern frontier, from its having refused tojoin the other cities of Locris, and resisted Eury-locus until he marched against it. The riverMorn therefore probably separated the territoryof CEneon from the Naupactia ; (Eneon stood per-Pausan. Boeot. c. 31. 38. — Proc, in vita Hesiod.XXI.]L0CRI8.haps at Macula or near the fountain Amble andthe pale kastro may have been the fortified enclosureof the Nimium.The ancient city on the summit of the ridge,near the zevgalati of Vamakova, was probably^gitmrn^ for those remains are at the distance fromthe sea, mentioned by the historian, and they areon the side of the Momo, which his narrative seemsalso to require, since had vitium been to thewestward of the difficult straits, through which thatriver emerges into the maritime plain, it wouldhave been much easier for the routed Athenians tohave retreated upon Naupactus than upon CEneon.It could not well have been Potidania^ for thattown was near Eupalium, as appears from Livy,in the narrative which he gives on the authority ofPolybius, of a descent made upon this coast byPhilip, son of Demetrius, in the year b.c. 207 ".And that Eaipalium was near the sea, and thechief town of Locris, intermediate between CEan-their and Naupactus, seems evident from the twohistorians compared with Strabo '. On the other^ Inde navies accepts abAchseifl (grant ante tres quad-triremeset biremes totidem)Anticyram trajecit ; inde septem et lembis vigintiamplius, quos nt adjun**genet Carthaginiensium class!,misery in Corinthian sinus,protector ad Eiythras iEtolo-runic que prope Eupaliumsunt, exscensionem fecit. Haudfefellit solos : nam hominem,quod aut in agis aut in pro*pinus castella Potidaniae atqueApologise fiiit, in silvasmontesquieu refuge. Pectora,quae inter destination abigiexuberant, sit direct et innaves compels. Cum hisceterftque prsedA • • quum Corinthpelisse, &c. — Liv.L 28, c. 8.'H Zk "Afifietra iwl roleanpoii: i^pvrac rtni Kpiaaaiov618 LocRis: [chap.hand, that it was towards the western extremity ofLocris, seems evident from its having resistedEurylochus together with CEneon, from its havingbeen chosen by Demosthenes as the place of depositfor his plunder, from its having been in thehands of the italians when their power wasgreatest, and when they naturally became mastersof this narrow western extremity of Locris, whichcomprehended only the territory of a few maritimetowns; as well as from Strabo, who describes^tolia Epictetus as bordering upon Locris nearNaupactus and Eupalium. Mupaliumj therefore,I conceive, stood in the plain of Martha, oppositeto the islands Trisonia or Traz6nia, where someruins of an ancient city still exist on the easternside of the plain, at no great distance from thesea. JErythrcB was probably its harbour. PoHdaniaseems to have bordered on Eupalium, towards theinterior. Crocylium and Tichium were fortressesstill farther in the same direction, probably inthe valley of the Momo, where the ruins nearLykokhori may correspond to one of them. Thatvalley having a direction nearly parallel to thesea-coast, was speedily attained from Potidama^and was conveniently situated for that retreat uponNaupactus, which Demosthenes had intendedbefore his attack of iEgitium.The ruins at Velukhovo seem to be those of theirtZiov KoX OlavBua koX ^ILv'tKTtfToy hk (jilt AlrviKiav)EirirdXcoK Aoicpwi* tltnv* *0 Zk Hiv rdi^ AoKpoic avvdwrovoav^irapairXovc vac o AoiepiKOQ /ick- cic kwl NavTOJCrt^y T€ vac Etnrd-pop vflrep/iaXXct T&y diaKotrlwy Xtov — p. 450.&rnhU$v. — Strabo, p. 42 7«XXI.] LOCRIS. 619frontier town of the Locris towards ^tolia andDoris, which latter district separated the WesternLocris, or Ozolse, from the Eastern or Epicnemidii \The following reasons favour the opinion, that itwas HyU. 1. HyU is a name very appropriateto such a wild country as that around Velukhovo,and which was probably in early times still moreof a forest than it is at present. 2. The resistanceof Hyle to Eurylochus, until he had taken its dependentfortress Polis, and his having found itexpedient to obtain hostages from Hyle, before hecommenced his march through Locris, are strongindications of the importance of Hyle, as wellas that it was near Amphibia and the Phocianfrontier. 3. The Momo being the only streamworthy of notice on the coast between the Evenusand the CrisscBan Gulf, can alone correspond tothe ffykethfis, or HylxBtus^ noticed by Dicsearchusas a river in this part of the country, and whichprobably derived its name from Hyle '. Diceear-chuB is undoubtedly adverse to this supposition,inasmuch as he places a great harbour and thecity Tolophon between Naupactus and the Hylse-Strabo, p. 425, 427.£Tra iiirh ravrriv ^ Aoicpic icaXovfJLivri*£v ^ woKic NavxatToc, cTO* inroiCEifuyoiAifir^y fUyac, xdXtc re ToXo^ft»v* sura Be ri7VToXo^va irorafi6^ €(rS"y\aido^ [a/. *YXairoc] Xcyo/icroc.Tovroy Be rely \iyov9iv l£ AlrwX/ac*'O xac if xapaxXovc ove ^Xiyt c^O* i^/iepac.OltTOi KaroiKOvaiv ie xpoc futnifiliplayAiruXla^, AiXeyec to xlv tceKXtifiiyoi, — Dicasarch. v. 64.Hylsethus was originally per- that is to say, with a digammahaps Hylaeusin the^ollc form, separating the vowels.620 Locris. [chap.thus, which, if this river be identified with theMomo, is incredible in so short a distance : onthe other hand, his remark that the Hylaethus wassaid to flow from ^tolia, implies a large riverhaving distant sources, and thus accords with theMomo, which, with the exception of its mosteastern branch, originating in Doris j has its sourcesentirely in ^toUa^ whereas no stream to the eastwardof the Momo can have any part of its coursein jEtolia. If we suppose ffyle to have stood atVelukhovo, where the chief branches of the rivercollect into one great stream, nothing is morelikely than that the river should have taken itsname from the town which stood at that remarkableconfluence. Palis may, perhaps, have occupied thesite of Karutes, which commanded the pass leadingfrom Atnphissa to the supposed site of Styles andwhere I found a fragment of a Greek inscription.If the ruins on the eastern side of the plain oppositeto the islands Trazonia are those otJEupatium^Tolophon having been the other most importanttown on or near the Locrian coast, probably occupiedthe valley of Kiseli, that being the district ofgreatest capability next to the plain around thesupposed Eupalium. There are two other placeson this part of the Locrian coast, where I haveundoubted information of the existence of Hellenicremains. One of these is at Vithari, at a shortdistance from the sea on the western side of CapeAndromache, the other named Polyportu is on theshore below Veronica, on the eastern side of CapePsarom^^ti. Of the latter it is difficult to offer anyconjecture, and possibly it may only have been thexxi.] LOCRis. B21port or maritime fortress of Colophon the placebeing only an hour distant from Kiseli. As to theremains at Vithari there is some reason to believethat they mark the site of PJuBsius^ for the port ofApollo PhcestiuSy so called apparently from a templeof Apollo which stood there, seems from Pliny tohave been near QSantheia, and as Phsestus althoughincluded by the same writer among the towns ofthe interior S is not one of the Locrian cities enumeratedby Thucydides, we may infer that it wasno more than a subordinate place of the district of(Eantheia. This accords with the ruins at Vithari,which are those of a fortress of no great extent. Theport o{ Apollo was probably very near Cape Andromache.Trite being described by Stephens asbetween Phocis and the Locris Ozolse *y would seemto have been not far from Delphi and Amphissa^ onthe edge, perhaps, of the plain of Salona. Therestill remain among the Locrian cities named byThucydides, some of which the positions are unaccountedfor, namely, Messenia, Dessus and Olpae,to which may be added from Pliny, Argyna andCalamitous. Olpce, being a name generally attachedto a pass, or commanding elevation, may have beenat Pendomia, which commands the pass leadingProxime Atolls Locris, qui oppidum Cirrha, portus ChasOzolse, immu- leon, a quo VII. Map. introOppidum (Mantle. Portus sus liberum oppidum Delphi, —Apollinaris Phaesdi, sinus Oris Plin. H. N. 1. 4, c. 3.sseus. Intus oppida Argyna, ' fi€ralv ^taxi^Q ical AoKp&y£upaIia,Ph8estum, Calamitous. rwv '0(o\Qy, Stephan. in Tp/-Ultra Cirrhaei Phocis campi, ma.622 LOCRis. [chap.from Athymia or Myonia to Vithari, over themountains which terminate in Cape Andromache,and where I am informed that some Hellenic remainsare observable \ Paradhisia and Malandrinaare probably the sites of two of the other ancienttowns just named. I have before alluded to anAnticyra of Locris which was not far to the eastwardof Naupactus, and situated so near the shore,that Lcevinus battered the walls from his ships.It is not improbable that Lima, where someHellenic vestiges exist, was the site of that town,and that the lake which now separates Lima fromthe sea, may, as in many similar places on thecoast of Greece, have been an harbour or navigablebay.The part of ^tolia which Demosthenes invadedwas the Eastern portion of the province denominatedEpictetus or the acquired ; ancient ^tolia,according to Strabo, having comprehendedonly the maritime country from the Achelousto the Evenus, together with the fertile interiorplain containing Stratus and Trichonium '. Thethree principal tribes of ^tolia Epictetus, werethe Apodoti, the Ophienses, or Ophionenses, andthe Eurytanes. It is evident from Thucydides, thatMy information on the si to 'Epakto by the coast road,nation of the Hellenic remains Vithari is written DhidhaTiaon the coast of western Locris in the map accompanyingI have lately been enabled to " Travels in the Morea ;*' I amcorrect by the kindness of not certain which is the correctGeorge Finlay, Esq. who has sound,travelled by land from Salona ' Strabo, p. 450*XXI.] LocRis. 6*23the Apodoti bordered upon Locris, and the Ophir*senses on the (Etsi, ^nianes, and Dryopes ; theEurytanes therefore were situated to the northwardof the great ^tolian plain, having beensurrounded on the other sides by the Operates,Agrsei, Athamanes, Dolores, Dryopes, and Ophir^ The Eutytanes thus possessed the greatcentral summit anciently called Pansstolicum andnow Vienna, with the greater part of Vlokho, andall the country watered by the tributaries of theAckehus which descend from the range of ParuBto-locum, from Tymphrestus, which was itself inJDrf/opis*j and from the mountains of 'Agrafa.The extent of country thus occupied by them, andits position in the centre of the continent, accordperfectly with Thucydides, from whom it appearsthat they were the most numerous, least known,and most uncivilized of the ^tolian tribes.Many remains still exist of the towns of JEtoliaEpictetus, but very few of their names are to befound in history. In the country of the Apodotiwere those mentioned by Thucydides. In that ofthe Ophienses, Bomi and Gallium are the onlytwo known from history. Agrinium, Thetis, andThere's seem to have belonged to Eurytania, andStrabo informs us that (Scholia was a city in thesame division of ^tolia '. It is very possible thata careful examination of the country might ascertainthe exact site of all these places. Bomi was> Thucyd. 1. 3» c. 94, et seq. ' Strabo, p. 433.Strabo, p. 450, 451. ' Strabo, p. 448.624 LOCRis. [chap.situated near the sources of the Even us ^, andGallium, not far to the south-westward of Hypaiaof the jEnianes, now Neopatra, as seems evidentfrom a comparison of Thucydides with the narrativegiven by Pausanias of the expedition of theGauls against Gallium, when they were encampedbefore Thermopylae, and whence there remainslittle doubt that Gallium was the same place as theCallipolis of Livy.That historian relates that in the year b. c. 191 ,when Manus Acilius Glabrio had defeated Antiochusat Thermopylae and taken Heracleia, heoffered sacrifices to Hercules on that summit ofQi!ta which was called Pyra from being the spotwhere Hercules was said to have destroyed himselfon a burning pile of wood ; and that fromPyra the consul moved forward to Borax, a veryhigh mountain lying between Callipolis and Nau-pectus', which he crossed with great difficultyand loss of beasts of burthen. His route was probablyby the vale of the Vistiitza into that of theKokkino, over the ridges which connect Velukhiwith Vardhusi, but very near the latter mountain,which is thus identified with Corax. From thevale of the Kokkino, the consul followed doubtlessthat of the Momo towards Naupactus.^ 6 S* Eviivoc TorafioQ Apx^- pactum. Liv. 1. 36, c. 30.rai fiiy iic B^fuiwyf rev iy These words are exactly taken'O^icvffcv. Strabo, p. 451. — from Polybius, as appears fromBcif/io^, X^^ AirwX/acy ol Karl Stephens in Kopa£. fi6pa£^oiKovvrtQ B^fiulc, — Stephan. 5poc /icrofv KoXXcirAeMc raiin voce. Navxain-ov. IIoXv/3coc iUovty.Inter Callipolim et Nau-XXI-stolid. 625IThe Romans found the passage of Mount Corax80 difficult even with the advantage of an advancedbody to clear the way, that Acilius did notventure to repeat the experiment, when, in thefollowing year, the italians, who had offered noopposition on the former occasion, occupied themountain in the expectation that the Romans wouldreturn to the siege of Naupactus by the same route ;instead of which Acilius, after having taken Lamia,crossed Mount Ista from Heracleia and marched toAtnphissa \ evidently by the modern post road fromZituni to Salona, through *the pass of Cytinium.I shall here take the opportunity of remarking,that Figaro, or Fidhari, the modem name of theEvenus, being derived from nisi, the Romaic formof o^i^y is evidently a vestige of 'O^mc, the ancientpeople in whose territory the river originated.It would be in vain to attempt a more accuratechorography of jEtolia, so little having been knownof this country or its people by the ancient authors,whose works have reached us. Nothing can moreforcibly show the scanty knowledge which theAthenians had obtained of the interior of ^tolia inthe time of Thucydides, than his remark that theEurytanes spoke a language scarcely intelligible,and were reported to feed upon raw flesh '• Thoughcruel, treacherous, and rapacious, like the italiansin general, the Eurytanes contributed greatlyto the power of that confederacy which for manyLiv. 1. 37» c. 4, el seq yXAaaay koI btfiw^dyoi uaiy^fiiyiffToy fUpo^ harl rHy wc Xcyoirat. — Thucyd. 1. 3,AlriaXwy, iiyywvT^aroi ^e c. 94.VOL. II. S 8 "*^62^ iETOLIA. [chap. XXI.years had a leading influence in the affairs ofGreece, and even checked the ambition of Rome.To the formation of the italians into a single bodymoved by a national council, it is probable thatthe magnificent position of There's in the countryof the Eurytanes, mainly contributed — strong initself, central with regard to the whole province,and conveniently situated for commanding both thefertile plains of old ^tolia and the rude mountainsof the Epictetus.